A CANDID EXAMINATION OF Dr. MAYHEW'S Observations ON THE CHARTER AND CONDUCT
OF THE SOCIETY for the propagation of the Gospel in foreign parts.

Interspersed with a few brief reflections upon some other of the DOCTOR'S
Writings.

To which is added, A LETTER to a FRIEND, Containing a short Vindication of the
said SOCIETY against the Mistakes and Misrepresentations of the Doctor in his
Observations on the Conduct of that Society. By one of its Members.

Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. Out of
the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought
not so to be.

James iii. 16.10. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by THOMAS and JOHN
FLEET, in Cornhill; and GREEN and RUSSELL, and EDES and GILL, in Queen Street,
1763.

The CONTENTS.
THE reason why Dr. Mayhew's Observations were not fully answered before. page
1. The author's charitable design in the present publication. page 2. The
method he proposes in this examination. ibid. Does not purpose to confine
himself to the observations. ibid. The Dr's description of controversial
writers applied to himself. ibid. Instances of a candid temper in the Dr. page
3. Requests the candor of his readers. ibid. How far this is allowed. page 4.
The Dr's. design. ibid. Attempts to prove the Society have counteracted the
design of their institution. page 5. That they are guilty of a wilful abuse of
their trust. ibid. Denies it again. 6. Proved upon him. page 6. Charges the
missionaries with abusing the Society. ibid. This pretense refuted. page 7.
Will not allow the Society to understand the state of religion in the
plantations. ibid. This point examined and refuted. page 10. The Society proved
to understand the state of religion, etc. and also their charter. page 16. The
Dr. beholden to Mr. Hobart for most of his observations, page 19. Yet takes no
notice of Mr. Beach's reply to Mr. Hobart. page 20. The Dr's interpretation of
the Society's charter examined and shown to be inconsistent. ibid. His argument
from King William refuted. page 23. His other testimonies in favor of his
interpretation nothing to his purpose. e. g. The name and title of the Society
considered. page 39. Their common seal. 41. Their sermons. page 42. True design
of the charter, to which the foregoing testimonies are conformable. page 22.
And (...) the Society's conduct. page 43. The word orthodox not properly
applied to dissenters. page 25. In common use denotes the establishment. ibid.
Establishments examined. page 26. New England churches not established. page
27. Proved from their own confession. ibid. From a letter of the Lords Justices
to Lt. Govr Dummer. page 28. From the Dr's own method of arguing. page 32. The
church of England established in the colonies. page 33. This proved by several
acts of parliament and particularly by the act of union. page 34. An objection
answered. page 38. From the King's granting the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of
the plantations to the Bishop of London. page 30. Some farther reflections on
the extent of the charter and conduct of the Society. page 40. Why few
missionaries were early sent into New England. ibid. Objections against the
Society for neglecting the Indians and the other colonies answered. page 44.
Much hindered by a party spirit. ibid. Two or three instances mentioned. page
45. In many of the colonies religion supported by the civil government. page
46. Account of the first adventurers to N. E. with their character. ibid. The
Dr. no right to plead their merit, who has departed from their principles. page
47. Early adventurers of two sorts. page 51. Massachusetts Bay settled by
church of England men. page 49. Proved from their own letter dated on board the
Arabella at their leaving England. page 50. Rev. Mr. Prince's testimony to the
same purpose. page 51. Did not leave England on account of persecution. page
52. The Dr. accuses the Chapter of England as a persecuting church. page 53. This
examined and replied to. page 54. Recriminations would be easy. ibid. Two or
three instances hinted at. page 55. The Dr's writings have a tendency to beget
a persecuting spirit. page 57. Labors to prejudice people against Bishops by
speaking rudely and contemptibly of that Order. page 59. The indecency of this
as they are an order of men established from the beginning of Christianity, and
received or venerated by foreign protestants at this day. page 60. Calvin's
testimony in favor of that order. 60. and Beza's. page 61. The Dr's. ridicule
of the liturgy of the Chapter of England shown to be indecent by the opinion of
foreign churches. page 62. Summary representation of the controversy. page 64.
The Dr's. no proper method to rectify mistakes, if the Society have committed
any. page 66. The publishing an open account of the success of the other
Society more proper to effect this. page 67. Rev. Mr. Wheelock's Indian charity
school recommended. page 68. The Dr. has no right to complain of any severe
expression used by the author. page 69. This shown from a specimen of his own
language, taken from his observations and sermons. page 70. A serious address
to the rev. Gentlemen of the ministry at Boston. page 77. The Dr. drolls upon
the Song of Solomon. page 79. Gives countenance to the doctrine of
annihilation. ibid. Ill consequence of his writings to civil government. ibid.
This not the general temper of people in the colonies. page 80. Conclusion.
ibid.
A Candid Examination of Dr. MAYHEW'S Observations on the Charter and Conduct
of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, etc.
IT is a long time since Dr. MAYHEW published his modest observations, on the
charter and conduct of the Society for the propagation of the Gospel in foreign
parts; and as no person hitherto has thought it worth his while to enter into a
special examination of his principal argument, he probably concluded that his
performance would not have met with a full reply. And in truth if he had drawn
this conclusion from the nature and manner of his writing, as being too
intemperately managed to deserve the notice of either a Gentleman or a Scholar,
he had thought as other men do; for this, it has been said is the true reason,
why he has been suffered to triumph thus long in his performance, and to boast
of it as unanswerable. Every gentleman who has had a liberal and polite
education, thinks it beneath his character to enter the lists with one who
observes no measures of decency or good manners, nay who does not scruple to
sacrifice the meek and gentle spirit of the Gospel to the gratification of a
licentious and ungovernd temper. Nor does the author of the present remarks
pretend to rival him in this unbecoming talent; herein he is allowed to reign
without a competitor. But since he is liable to "think more highly of himself
than he ought to think," and is already unhappily "wiser in his own conceit,"
than in any ones else; it may be esteemed an act of charity to give him juster
notions both of himself, and of his writings in general, but especially of his
late performance, than he seems to have entertained.

THE method which will be used in discharging this charitable office, will be
to represent the Doctor sometimes in the meek and benevolent light in which he
affects to be considered; at other times, and by way of contrast to this, he
will be produced in the light in which he has really exhibited himself: For
although these are toto coelo different, yet without a just and impartial
representation of him in both these respects, it will be impossible to give him
a true knowledge of himself, which is a point the author is very solicitous of;
and is not without reasonable hopes of accomplishing.

TO this purpose the author proposes to consult the Doctor's writings in
general, which, as they are sufficiently voluminous, will afford abundant
matter for such a representation, and being all of them corrected with his own
hand, and sent abroad by his own appointment, may fairly be conceived to be a
genuine picture of the man.

IT will be proper to begin with his last and highly boasted piece, entitled
Observations on the charter and conduct of the Society, etc. The Introduction
to which begins with these remarkable words, There are some men who write --
controversy merely from a wrangling disposition, without any regard to truth,
right, or the importance of the matters contested. Now one may defy any man who
shall read this passage, and especially if he has read two or three volumes of
sermons published in Boston since the year 1754, and some occasional
thanksgiving discourses, in almost every one of which matters of controversy
have been dragged in, though for the most part as it were by head and shoulders;
I say, I defy any such man, not to think of one who styles himself pastor of
the west church in Boston. And no doubt every one will be ready to join with
the Dr. in the words immediately following, "that this is a turn of mind
unbecoming a christian." And had he not been too unhappily inattentive to his
own maxim as before cited, doubtless he would here have dropped his pen. But
some of his friends too "partial" indeed "in his favor" injudiciously prevented
him from profiting by his own admonition, having it seems "expressed a desire
that" notwithstanding "his" great aversion to controversy -- he would --
communicate some of his thoughts to the public, on the point in question.
Observations p. 7.


IN the 8th page of his observations, the Doctor affects to be very candid and
ingenuous. He is sensible" he says, "that the Society are a very respectable
Body, and to be treated with all the regard that is consistent with truth and
justice -- he declares it is by no means his intention to charge that venerable
Body with any wilful known misconduct, or improper application of moneys. This
is very commendable, if he had but kept it in mind through the whole of his
polite inquiry; but as though he was sensible he should very soon break through
the aforesaid equitable rule, he requests the candor of his readers, that no
advantage may be taken of any incautious expression that may escape him in the
pursuit of his argument, even though it should at first view, have the appearance
of such an accusation. Observations P. 8.
This however is a reasonable postulatum, and therefore it is not proposed,
nay, the author hereby promises the gentleman that he will not take advantage
of one or even of two incautious expressions, that appear undesignedly to have
escaped him, if at first view only they have the bare appearance of such an
accusation; but then he cannot extend the same indulgence to very many
expressions importing a charge of wilful known misconduct, and improper
application of moneys; especially, if not only at the first view, but on a
second and third view, they do not appear to have merely escaped him, but were
manifestly intended to support such an accusation. Much less will he be
entitled to this indulgence, if it shall appear that the Society are directly
charged by him with misapplication of the moneys committed to their trust, in
numerous passages of his book, but moreover, that the general design of it was,
an attempt to prove this very point.

THE Dr.'s book is entitled Observations on the charter and conduct of the
Society, etc. designed to show their nonconformity to each other. In support
of this title, after sometimes contracting, then stretching and wire-drawing
the sense of the charter, seal, etc. of the Society, he concludes that the sole
design of their institution was to propagate the gospel among the heathen, or
in those colonies whose religious state was, and according to him, now is,
little better than heathenism. But this which he asserts to be the laudable and
only design of their institution, they have, he says, grossly perverted and
abused.

THUS in page 55, he says the Society have manifested a sufficient forwardness
to encourage and increase small disaffected parties in our towns, upon an
application to them. And in the 57th page he represents the Society as hoping
that these small parties will by their influence gradually bring on a general
submission to an episcopal sovereign; and affirms that this has long been the
formal design of the Society, and is the true plan and grand mystery of their
operations in New England.

IN his 106th page he tells us that the affair of Bishops in America, has been
a favorite object with the Society," and in the next page, that the Society
spare neither endeavors, applications, nor expense, in order to effect their
grand design of episcopizing all New England, and a few lines further, The
Society have long had a formal design to dissolve and root out all our
New England churches. -- This (he says) fully and clearly accounts for their
being so ready to encourage small episcopal parties all over New England, by
sending them missionaries. In page 110 he affirms that the Society have been
expending large sums every year in New England, quite beyond the design of
their institution, to support and increase the episcopal party as such. In the
same page he charges the Society with robbing the heathen to ease and gratify
the episcopalians here, and forms this conclusion upon his foregoing
representations, that the Society are guilty of a flagrant abuse of a noble
institution. And in the 112th page, that they have alienated their revenues
from a truly noble to a comparatively mean, narrow, party design. After these
several direct and plain accusations of the Society as abusing their trust, and
misapplying the money put into their hands, he wipes his mouth again, and
absurdly enough assures his reader, that he would by no means be understood as
charging so respectable a Body with any wilful criminal abuse of power, or
misapplication of moneys. i. e. he would not have the reader believe him; for
that is the sense of his words, as they stand connected with what went before,
if indeed they have any sense at all in them.

WILL he now have the firmness to assert, that all the expressions and passages
which have been here quoted (and five times as many more might have been added)
are only incautions expressions, that inadvertently escaped him, that they are
not designed as matter of accusation, and that if possibly they have such an
appearance, it is only at first view? If he should assert this. I am persuaded
his friends at least must blush for him. Is the supporting small parties in
New England, in order to facilitate the affair of episcopizing the colonies,
the formal design of the Society, to which they give their chief attention, and
to which the largest part of their fund is applied? Can he assert all this, and
yet say that he does not charge that venerable Body with any wilful known
misconduct, or improper application of moneys?

PERHAPS this consistent reasoner will choose to say that the Society are
misled, and form their plan upon the misrepresentations of their wicked
missionaries. Something like this is asserted in a note upon a thansgiving
sermon on the reduction of Canada, preached and published by him in the year
1760. It is probable that they [the Society] have been grossly imposed upon by
false representations of the state of religion in these parts, which has been
the occasion of their employing so much of their charitable care about those
who so little needed it, to the neglect of those who were perishing for want of
it: For which impositions, abuses and misapplications, their deceivers are
answerable; if not to them, yet certainly to an HIGHER AUTHORITY. But surely
whatever representations these missionaries have made, the Society must judge
whether the complying with such representations was, or was not consistent with
their charter; so that notwithstanding his striving to palliate his accusation
of the Society, by casting the odium of a pretended misapplication of their
charity on the missionaries, the slander will still remain where he at first
placed it, on the Society themselves. Besides, the members of the Society are
not all of them utterly unacquainted with the plantations; some of them have
heretofore, and others do even now reside in most of the governments upon the
continent, (New England not excepted) many of them not inconsiderable for their
station, wisdom and integrity. These gentlemen must therefore be also in a
combination with the missionaries to abuse the world, and misapply the moneys
entrusted with them. This seems to be the consequence of his general accusation.

IF the Dr. would say any thing further to soften the odium of this accusation
which he has cast upon the Society, it must be by asserting that they did not
understand their own charter; this, if true, may serve in some measure to take
off the charge of wilful abuse and misapplication; and that he supposes it true
is clear from hence, that he has spent many pages and employed his great
learning and penetration in explaining this intricate charter, that the Society
may no longer misapply their charity for want of understanding the real design
of their institution. It may be questioned however, whether his refined
criticism and curious explanation will merit the thanks of the venerable board.
That untoward word orthodox, which so much raises his indignation wherever he
meets with it, will not perhaps after all his learned pains, sairly comprehend
the dissenters from a national establishment. However that be, there is
certainly no method of reconciling his candid professions of justice, decency
and respect toward the Society, or his solemn declaration that it is not his
intention to charge that venerable Body with wilful known misconduct: I say, it
is impossible to reconcile these things, with the numerous abuses, accusations
and indecencies which have been already produced, and with which he has treated
that respectable Body directly or implicitly, in almost every page of his book.

IN short, the Society either have, or have not acted contrary to the meaning
and design of their charter; that they have not, is at least highly probable
from the character of wisdom, honor and piety, which the world will generally
allow to those of them at least, who are chiefly active and interested in
managing their affairs. If they have acted contrary to the design of it, as the
Dr. affirms (and pretends to think he has proved) they have either done so
wilfully, or through ignorance. That they have not done it wilfully, the Dr.
himself allows; it remains then, according to him, that their misconduct is
owing to ignorance: Either they have misunderstood the true and real design of
their charter, or have not a competent knowledge of the state of religion in
the plantations, or how their affairs are conducted there, being imposed on by
the representation of their missionaries, or that both these things concur to
mislead them, into an abuse of their institution. The latter seems to be his
sense of the thing, viz. that they are ignorant both of the true meaning of
their charter, and also of the state of religion in the plantations; for he
says in the close of his introduction, that the professed design of his
observations is to show, that they (the Society) have in some respects
counteracted and defeated the truly noble ends of their INSTITUTION, however
contrary to their intention. Whether they have done so or not, will fall under
examination hereafter. In the mean time I shall take leave of his introduction
with this single remark, that from the passages already quoted, as well as from
many others that might have been produced from this curious book of
observations, it appears that the professions of candor and ingenuity which the
Dr. set out with, and his declaration of respect for so venerable a body as the
Society, are mere affectation and grimace, and tend only to prove that he
"knows not what manner of spirit he is of."

It was observed before, that according to the Dr's representation the Society
are ignorant of the true sense and meaning of their charter, and also of the
state of religion in the plantations; for the asserts that they have greatly
perverted the design of their institution, and yet will not allow their
misconduct to be wilful; it remains therefore that their misapplication of the
trust they have undertaken, is owing to ignorance.

It will be proper therefore to inquire first, Whether the Society must not be
supposed to have a competent knowledge of the state of religion in the
plantations, so far at least as relates to the design of their incorporation.
And,

2. Whether they may not also reasonably be supposed to understand the true
sense, meaning and design of their charter; for it these two things can be
proved to the satisfaction of disinterested and unprejudiced people, it will
follow, either that the Society are not chargeable with misconduct and
misapplication of their charity, or if they are so, that such misconduct is
known, wilful and intended, which the Dr. does not allow.

The first thing to be examined is, Whether the Society have not a competent
knowledge of the state of religion in the plantations. Dr. Humphries in his
history of the Society page 22d, acquaints us, that upon their first engaging
in this work the Society presently perceived it consisted of three great
branches, the care and instruction of our own people, settled in the colonies;
the conversion of the Indian Savages, and the conversion of the Negroes. The
English planters had a title to their first care" etc. -- "The Society began
therefore with the English, and soon found there was more to be done among
them, than they had as yet any views of effecting. He then proceeds to give a
small sketch of the state and condition of each colony, formed from accounts,
the Governors, and persons of the best note, sent over to the corporation. I
shall omit what is said of the southern heathenish colonies as Dr. Mayhew
modestly calls them, because these he allows to be proper objects of the
Society's charity, and proceed to the state of religion in New England as
represented in the history before mentioned. After speaking of the first
settlement of the country, and the state of religion in the early days of it,
Dr. Humphries proceeds to say, -- Since that time great numbers of people,
members of the church of England, have at different times settled there, who
thought themselves surely entitled, by the very New England charter to a
liberty of conscience in the worshipping of God after their own way. Yet the
Independents (it seems) were not of this sentiment, but acted as an
establishment." "The members of the church of England in Boston met with so
much obstruction in attempting to set up that form of worship, that they were
obliged to petition the King for protection. Their petition was granted, and a
Church thereupon erected, which occasioned the members of the church of England
in many other towns in New England to declare their desire of the like
advantage, and accordingly wrote very zealous letters to bishop Compton, for
ministers; and now it appeared they were a very considerable body of people.
Hemph. Hist p. 39.
From these several passages, it appears that the Society did not proceed
hastily and without due caution and information of the state of religion in the
colonies which they proposed to assist. Dr. Humphries goes on and sums up the
religious state of the colonies in a brief representation of it, from the
memorials of Governor Dudley, Col. Morris, and Col. Heathcote. I shall pass
over the southern colonies for the reason before mentioned, and come to
New England. -- In Connecticut colony in New England there are about 30000
souls, of which when they have a minister among them. about 150 frequent the
church; and there are 35 communicants. In Rhode Island and Narraganset, which
is one government, there are about 10000 souls, of which about 150 frequent the
church, and there are 30 communicants. In Boston and Piscataway governments,
there are about 80000 souls, of which about 600 frequent the church, and 120
the sacrament.

After such particular information from the memorials of these honorable
persons, perhaps no man except Dr. Mayhew and his voucher, will suppose the
Society could be ignorant of the state of religion in this part of the world,
nor consequently where it was most proper to employ their charity. Agreeably
Dr. Humphreys acquaints us that the Governors of several colonies, and other
Gentlemen of character abroad, and merchants here in London, having given such
a particular description of the religious state of the plantations; the Society
found it was high time to enter upon the good work" Humph. Hist. p. 44, 45.
especially as "great numbers of the inhabitants of various humors, and
different tenets in religion, began to contend with great zeal, which should be
first supplied with ministers of the church of England, and wrote very earnest
letters to the Society -- They (the Society) thought any further delay now
would be inexcusable, after the people had pressed so earnestly for their
assistance. Yet as if all this care was insufficient, and that the Society
might leave no method unattempted, for gaining a more perfect knowledge of the
state of religion in the colonies, before they proceeded to appoint
missionaries to particular places, (they) resolved to send a traveling
missionary, who should travel over, and preach in the several Governments, on
the continent of the British America. Ditto 73.74.
Accordingly they did send the Rev. Mr. Keith, who landed at Boston on the 11th
of June 1702. and in the course of two years traveled over and preached in all
the Governments betwixt Piscataway river and North Carolina inclusively, when
having finished his mission he returned to England, and published a full
account of his labors. Humph. Hist. p 74.
One thing in his narrative I shall just mention, viz. That in diverse parts of
New England, he found not only many people well affected to the Church, who had
no church of England ministers, but also several New England ministers desirous
of episcopal ordination, and ready to embrace the church worship, some of whom
both hospitably entertained Mr. Keith and Mr. Talbot (who had joined Mr. Keith
as an assistant) in their houses, and requested them to preach in their
congregations, which they did, and received great thanks, both from the
ministers and from the people. Ditto 78, 79.


Mr. Keith in the conclusion of his narrative represented to the Society, the
want of a great number of ministers for a people dispersed over such large
countries, and among others makes mention of Narraganset, Swansey, Little
Compton and Rhode Island in New England, which Places had engaged him to
present their humble requests to the Society, to send ministers among them.
Ditto.


Yet notwithstanding this particular information, supported by many carnest
petitions from the plantations for ministers of the church of England, the
Society through the whole management of the trust, have been so far from
obtruding the church of England worship upon any sort of people abroad -- that
they have not been able to give any assistance to great numbers of people, who
have in very moving terms, with a true christian spirit requested it; and whom
they knew to stand very much in want of it. There remain upon their books
numerous petitions of this sort. -- I shall omit those from the southern
colonies, for the reasons before mentioned, and proceed to that of New England,
which as Dr. Humphreys acquaints us (page 61) though before provided with an
independent and presbyterian ministry, yet had great numbers of inhabitants,
who could not follow that persuasion, but were exceeding desirous of
worshipping God, after the manner of the church of England. I shall give the
reader (says he) a few petitions which show plainly the Society did not concern
themselves here, till they were loudly called upon; and that the inhabitants in
many places, did not only fend petitions for ministers, but also built churches
before they had any ministers, which is an uncontrollable evidence -- that the
people themselves desired to have the church of England worship, with a hearty
zeal and true sincerity. The Dr. then proceeds to specify as petitioners
several inhabitants of Rhode Island, Narraganset, Newbury, Marblehead,
New Hampshire, Little Compton and Tiverton, Braintree near Boston, and
Stratford in Connecticut. Humph. Hist. p 61.62.
The case of these two last towns he tells us was also further recommended to
the Society's care, by gentlemen of considerable figure and interest. Colonel
Morris pressed very earnestly for a minister for Braintree, and Colonel
Heathcote, for another, for the people of Connecticut colony; great numbers of
whom were very earnest to have a minister of the church of England. Robert
Hunter, Esquire Governor of New York, in the year 1711, writes thus to the Society,
concerning the people at Stratford: When I was at Connecticut, those of our
communion at the church at Stratford, came to me in a body; and then, as they
have since by letter, begged my intercession with the venerable Society, and
the right reverend the Lord bishop of London, for a missionary; they appeared
very much in earnest, and are the best set of men I met with in that country.

How these several testimonies which have been produced will operate upon Dr.
Mayhew, it is not easy to say; but to the sober, judicious and unprejudiced,
the following conclusions may perhaps be thought fairly drawn, viz. That the
Society have omitted no proper means of information concerning the state of
religion in the colonies -- That their religious state must therefore be
competently known to that venerable board -- And that if they have been guilty
of any notorious misconduct or misapplication of their charity, it could not be
owing to ignorance of the true condition of things abroad, but must be
attributed to some other cause: For allowing what the Dr. has most uncharitably
intimated, that the missionaries have misrepresented the condition of things
among us, and by that means endeavored to mislead the Society to an improper
application of the moneys lodged in their hands; yet can any modest person
suppose that Governors of colonies, merchants, and other gentlemen of
character, have all along combined with the said wicked missionaries, to abuse
and mislead the Society into a wrong disposition of their charity? Or is it
probable that their own members, several of whom do reside in the colonies,
should conspire with the worthy persons before mentioned to carry on the
deceit? It is hoped the Dr. himself is not so far involved in a party spirit as
to affirm the probability of this, if he is, without doubt he is alone in such
an uncharitable censure. And therefore this point may be left without any
further remarks, to the public opinion.

The second Inquiry is; Whether the Society may not reasonably be supposed to
understand the true sense, meaning and design of their Charter.

To those who examine the list of members of which the Society is composed, as
it is exhibited in the yearly abstract of their proceedings, the present
inquiry will appear very extraordinary. That a Set of Gentlemen, many of them
highly distinguished in the world for their great parts, and extensive
knowledge, should mistake, or be at a loss about the true meaning of a charter,
which has nothing at all in it that is intricate or obscure, is what no
reasonable person will admit. And notwithstanding the Dr's refined criticism,
some may perhaps imagine that it must argue no small measure of
self-sufficiency in any person to oppose his single sentiment, to that of so
learned and respectable a body. Few besides the Dr. himself, will really
believe that they needed his assistance for acquiring a right understanding of
their charter. If we should suppose, that those very learned divines, who from
the beginning have composed a considerable part of that body, should be less
acquainted with the phrase and purport of an instrument in some measure foreign
to their profession; yet doubtless the Lord Chancellor, the chief Justices of
the King's Bench and common pleas, whose peculiar profession it is, may be
supposed to understand the nature of instruments of this kind. And as the
Society are obliged to exhibit an annual account of their proceedings to these
very learned and worthy persons, it is surprising that they should suffer them
to proceed above 60 years, without once acquainting them that their conduct was
not agreeable to the Letter and Spirit of their charter. That the Society
should at last be obliged to a profound critic in New England for an
ellucidation of this kind, after having so many years stood the test of an
annual examination, by those whom the royal wisdom thought proper to appoint as
their supervisors -- Believe it they that can --

Some friend of the Dr's may possibly here cry our, what would this remarker be
at? The Dr. has plainly proved that the Society have been guilty of great
misconduct, have acted quite inconsistent with the intent and design of their
charter, and from a principle of charity is willing to impute it to
misinformation, or ignorance; while this writer who affects to be the friend of
the Society is laboring to defeat the Dr's benevolent purpose, and seems as
though he designed to prove their misconduct to be wilful.

After thanking the candid Dr. for his good intention, the author confesses it
is his opinion, and he thinks it has in some measure been proved; either that
the Society have not acted inconsistent with their charter, or if they have
done so, that it was knowingly, wilfully and designedly done. The author
thinks, as all reasonable men must think, that the Society do very well
understand the design and meaning of their charter -- And also that they have a
competent knowledge of the state of religion in the plantations.

If these two things are allowed, the conclusion will unavoidably be what was
mentioned before, viz. either that the Society have wilfully misconducted, of
else, that there has been no misconduct in the case -- That they have wilfally
misconducted the Dr. difallows, therefore, there has been no miseconduct at
all. -- Here then the argument and imputation which the Dr. has cast upon the
Society, drop of course.

However, though the Dr. has been candid enough to clear the Society from any
intentional abuse of their charter, possibly others may not be so ingenuous.
Besides it may be esteemed unfair to take this advantage of the Dr's
concession, to the neglect of those many curious arguments he has brought to
prove what he had before given up; for notwithstanding the inconsistency of it,
he has throughout his book labored to prove (that which he gave up in the
beginning;) that the Society have really been guilty of wilful and designed
abuse of their trust. And therefore the author hopes the Dr. will forgive it,
if upon a general view of the observations, he is led to question the sincerity
of that declaration before mentioned, viz. That it is not his intention to
charge that venerable body (the Society) with any wilful known misconduct or
improper application of moneys.

Mr. Noah Hobart (whom by the way the Dr. has dubbed a bishop, for his heroic
exploits in this controversy) has plainly spoke out, and directly charged the
Society with a designed abuse and perversion of their trust, at least since the
first ten years after their incorporation, Hobart's 2d Address, p. 126.
compared with following pages.
though indeed like the Dr. he afterward seems disposed in some measure to
retract the charge, and chooses rather to impute it to their ignorance of the
state of religion in New England, and to the imposition and misrepresentation
of their wicked missionaries. Vid. Hob. 2d Address, p. 145.
But the author conceives it has already been proved that their conduct cannot
be imputed to a want of knowledge, and whatever the disposition of Mr. Hobart
or his copier may be, it is presumed that an accusation of the Society as
wilfully betraying their trust, will be received by the impartial world, with
the resentment it deserves. It is not the Society alone, who are thus unjustly
arraigned by these licentious pens, but the integrity and honor of their
inspectors also, the Lord chancellor and the chief justices of the King's
bench, who yearly examine and approve their transactions, do of consequence
suffer impeachment by their calumny; nay the extensive abuse reaches to every
benefactor to that Society, who, as an annual account of their proceedings is
published and put into their hands, must be supposed to approve them, since
otherwise it is more than probable they would have withdrawn their assistance.

As for the learned and ingenious Dr. Mayhew, he certainly descended very low,
when he vouchsafed to become the transcriber of Mr. Hobart's address, for
(excepting some personal reflections upon his antagonist) there appears little
else throughout his observations, besides a servile copying of that curious
piece of defamation. The method indeed he may claim to himself, and sometimes
the phrase and manner of expression. The Dr. owns "the book has been of service
to him," and promised to "make proper acknowledgments wherever he should make
use of it" yet has not perhaps always been so good as his word; nor will the
empty honor of a bishop which he arbitrarily confers on him, be allowed a
sufficient compensation for the liberties of this kind which he has taken. He
asserts that "Mr. Hobart wrote so solidly, and judiciously upon the subject,
that it was hardly needful for him to say any thing," this is granted, unless
he could have advanced something new, which the other had not offered before;
especially as Mr. Hobart's piece received as solid and judicious an answer,
which the Dr. thought proper wholly to neglect. In truth, had the Dr. but
carefully read the Rev. Mr. Beach's dispassionate but masterly reply to Mr.
Hobart's second address, he might have seen a full and complete answer to all
he has written (except what is merely personal) without breaking in upon that
peaceable disposition which gives him such "an aversion to controversy."

The Dr. affirms p. 18. That nothing is to be supposed the object, or any part
of the object of this charitable and royal institution, but what plainly
appears to be really so, from the very words of the charter" -- and a little
after "the words of the charter itself must determine and limit the sense of
the royal Grantor, and consequently the legal power conferred on the --
Grantees. We shall see presently how far the Dr. adheres to his own invariable
rule of interpretation. He confesses that the British plantations or the King's
subjects were really the primary, more immediate object of this institution.
And pray why not the sole and entire object of it? There is certainly no other
object "particularly expressed" in the charter, besides that of the King's
subjects. Has he forgot what he had asserted but a few lines before, that
nothing is to be supposed any part of the object of this institution, but what
plainly appears to be so from the very words of the charter. Why then are the
King's subjects said to be the primary, more immediate, and not the sole object
of their institution? since they are the only object expressly mentioned in the
very words of the charter. It was a strange oversight in this great critic, to
depart so suddenly from his invariable rule; or perhaps there was a design to
be served in interpreting the charter by way of implication, though expressly
contrary to his own rule of a literal interpretation; and that was to persuade
the world, that this society was erected chiefly for propagating the Gospel
among the Indians. To this purpose he has conveniently contrived two objects of
this institution, the one primary and immediate (the Kings subjects) the other
the grand ultimate object which is the Indians bordering on the colonies. But
because the express words of the charter, which he had represented as the sole
rule of their conduct, unluckily make no mention of "this grand ultimate
design", therefore he found himself under a necessity of departing from the
rule himself had contrived, in order to adapt one of greater latitude. Indeed
the Dr. assures us that this phrase "the propagation of the gospel in those
parts," necessarily "includes the grand ultimate design" before mentioned "of
christianizing the Indians." But pray Dr. why so? Is not the design of that
phrase the propagation of the gospel fully answered, by preaching it to those
of the King's subjects who seem to be abandoned to atheism and infidelity, and
to those other "inferior subjects the slaves"? many of whom even in New England
are yet in a state of Heathenism. Does not the royal Grantor say expressly, "we
think it our duty to promote the glory of God, by the instruction of our people
in the christian religion?" Is there a single word about the heathen bordering
on our colonies? Why will he then force upon us a design which the charter does
not mention?

What is here said is not intended to prove that the Society have not a power
by their charter to propagate the Gospel among the heathen, for they really
have such a power, and have accordingly made use of it, whenever opportunity
has offered to do it with success; and will continue to do so notwithstanding
his endeavors to misrepresent, and lessen the merit of their pious labors.
But the author's intention is to show the Dr. the sophistry of his argument,
and that the rule he lays down for interpreting the charter, would, if
admitted, exclude the Society from this good work, and consequently that his
argument by proving too much, proves nothing at all.

The truth is, the Society have by their charter, not only a legal power of
propagating the Gospel among such of the King's subjects as are in danger of
losing their christianity through atheism or infidelity, and among the heathen
who have not so much as heard of the name of Christ: But (as ministering greatly
to these purposes) of supporting the means of religion among those who have
already, or who incline to receive it according to the legal establishment and
provision of the church of England. In short whatever legal means are found
necessary or conducive to secure or propagate the profession of christian
religion as it is established in England, and all other his Majesty's dominions
(Scotland excepted) and made a part of the constitution of the English nation;
the Society have a right by their charter to make use of, understood in that
generous view, originally designed and intended by the Grantor.

But to this the Dr. further objects, that the Grantor King William himself was
bred up in the calvinistic principles and discipline, quite opposite in some
respects to the episcopal, and is generally supposed to have retained a regard
for the principles of his education all along; though as King of England and head
of that church, there was a necessity of his externally conforming to its rites
and discipline -- The reader is desired to stop here for a moment, and indulge
his astonishment. Was this glorious deliverer then a finished hypocrite? Was he
under a necessity of acting contrary to his conscience? of conforming
externally to the church of England while his heart was not in all this? What
blacker picture could he have drawn of those whom he calls "the infamous race
of the Stewarts" Vid. Than. Sermon. 1758 p. 48.
than he has here given of this excellent prince? A Prince for whom he pretends
a respect, at least as much respect as he is capable of paying to any crowned
head: For he assures us in a very solemn manner, that the greatest part of
mankind now are, and almost always have been oppressed by wicked tyrants,
called civil rulers, Kings and Emperors Vid. Sermon 12. p 426 Vol. ^
So this perhaps is to pass for a light censure upon the memory of our glorious
deliverer. And this suppositious reflection upon King William was introduced it
seems to prove that he could not look upon the ministry in the church of
England as orthodox, in opposition to those who dissent from the establishment.
But he might have sound a better argument to prove that he could and did look
upon it in that light; for certainly better evidence could not be given of his
regard for the church of England, and his desire to see it take place and
flourish in New England, than his giving a hundred pounds sterling per annum
out of the privy purse for supporting a minister of the church of England in
Boston, and his bestowing a valuable library of books on King's chapel in that
town; to which (though not immediately relative to N. England) gratitude will
oblige all true sons of the church of England in America to add, his royal
foundation of a college at Williamsburg in Virginia for the same noble purpose.
If the King himself could so liberally part with his own money to support what
the Dr. calls the peculiarities of episcopacy; it can hardly be doubted but
that he would readily encourage the charity of others in doing the like. So
that it is not quite so "unnatural" as the Dr. imagines to suppose that that
noble spirited Prince had such an intention. Indeed it would be unnatural to
suppose the contrary, viz. that in making a grant in favor of a corporation of
the church of England, he should make use of a word in some peculiar sense of
his own, and different form that in which he knew they had been accustomed to
understand it. It may therefore very reasonably be admitted that by orthodox
ministers in this charter, the Grantor did intend those of the English church,
not in distinction from all other churches in the world, but in distinction
from all those churches in the English dominions, (Scotland excepted) who
dissent from the legal constitutional establishment of England.

As pertinent to what has been here said, the following passage is inserted,
with which Dr. Humphries worthily concludes his history of the Society. In
gratitude to the memory of the founder of this Society King William the third,
it may not be improper to conclude this treatise with remarking to the reader,
the erecting of this corporation, was among the last public actions of his
heroic life. After having rescued the protestant religion in Europe, and saved
the church of England here, he did by this last act, as it were bequeath it to
his American subjects, as the most valuable legacy, and greatest blessing. But
the Dr. adds -- to say that the Grantees understood the term orthodox in this
narrow exclusive sense, is to reflect upon their understandings. As to their
understandings, it would become him to speak with reverence of them, as what he
is not qualified to take the measure of: Nor is it any reflection upon them,
that they should understand the term orthodox in such a limited sense. For as
the words orthodox and heterodox do in their literal signification import, the
one a right, and the other a wrong or different opinion, in matters relative to
religion, so, they who adhere to the legal established provision, are usually
termed orthodox, or persons who hold a right opinion, and they who dissent from
such establishment are said to be heterodox, that is, persons who hold a wrong
or different opinion, whether their dissent arises from doctrinal points, or
ritual injuctions. Nor had the Dr. any occasion to wonder that his antagonist
should understand the word orthodox as well capable of the sense he had put
upon it, since it is used in the same sense in the historical account of the
Society as quoted by himself. (...). 104.
With as little reason does he charge that gentleman with not distinguishing
between heresy and schism, for he was not talking of heresy, but of heterodoxy,
between which it seems this learned critic knows no difference.

AND this seems to be a proper place to take notice of another mistake that
both the Dr. and his voucher have gone into, relative to establishments. The
Dr. does not indeed seem quite so clear as his voucher, that congregationalism
or independency are established in New England; yet he has said enough to show
his inclination that the reader should believe it. Thus in his 16th page he
calls the ministers and churches of New England, the "established ministers and
churches;" and a notable proof of their establishment he gives us at the 42d
page, where he says, that the government of the Massachusetts Bay made a law
for the support of a learned and orthodox ministry, and this the Dr. calls a
"civil establishment of religion." I suppose the government will scarcely thank
Him for this interpretation of that law, which really is charging them with
invading the King's prerogative and establishing themselves: No says the Dr. in
the next page, for the acts which relate to the settlement and support of the
gospel ministry here, received the royal sanction, and therefore our churches
seem to have a proper legal establishment. I believe if the Dr. held an estate
upon a title so precarious, as that of its being merely overlooked, he would be
solicitous of obtaining a better confirmation of it. Indeed he is so modest as
only to assert that "they seem to have a legal establishment;" but since he
knew that this was no establishment at all; it was perhaps not quite ingenuous
to tell his readers that it seemed to be one.

IN his 72d page he asserts, that the Church of England "is not established
here," which appears to be introduced as another reason why the New England
churches are established. But now if it should appear, that the church of
England really is established here, and has been so from the first settlement
of the country; and that the churches (as he affects to call them) of New
England subsist here as the dissenting congregations do in England, upon no
other foot than that of a toleration: I suppose the world will not look upon it
very modest in him to speak of the church of England in these colonies, as a
party, a faction, little episcopal parties, small disaffected and discontented
parties. Vid. Observe. p. 55. 56. 57. 110. and in many other places.
-- It will be proper therefore to show, 1. THAT what the Dr. calls the
churches of New England are not established in the colonies. And 2. THAT the
Church of England is, and all along has been established here.


THAT the New England churches had no establishment till the act of toleration
took place, is evident from their own confession; for such I take to be their
sending an address of thanks to King James the 2d. for a toleration of
religion. Thus the affair is related by Dr. Douglass. Anno 1687. The ministers
of Massachusetts Bay colony, jointly sent an address of thanks to K. James 2d.
for his indulgence, or general toleration of religious opinions and
congregations; this was sent over and presented to K. James by Mr. Increase
Mather, he and his constituents, were not politicians, sufficient to penetrate
into the wicked and pernicious contrivance of that toleration. The Dr. adds in
a note that by this general indulgence popery was craftily to be introduced;
the colony of Plymouth unadvisedly sent an address of the same nature. Sum.
hist. and pol. p. 410. vol. I.
If previous to this they had apprehended themselves to be an establishment, we
can hardly suppose they would have sent a person a thousand leagues to
compliment that prince upon his granting the blessing of a toleration.

A second reason to prove that the New England churches are not established
here, shall be taken from a letter of their Excellencies the Lords Justices to
the Hon. William Dummer, Esquire which is handed down to us by the historian above
mentioned, Sum. hist. and pol. vol. II. p. 337.
and is as follows.

Whitehall, Oct. 7. 1725. Sir,
THE Lords Justices being informed from such good hands, as make the truth of
this advice not to be doubted, that at a general convention of ministers, from
several parts of his Majesty's province of the Massachusetts Bay, at Boston, on
the 27th of May last, a memorial and address was framed, directed to you as
Lieut. Governor and commander in chief, and to the council and house of
representatives then setting, desiring that the general assembly would call the
several churches in this province to meet by their pastors, and messengers, in
a synod, which memorial and address, being accordingly presented by some of the
said ministers, in the name, and at the desire of the said convention, was
considered in council, the 3d of June following; and there approved, but the
house of representatives put off the consideration of it to the next session,
in which the council afterward concurred.

Their Excellencies were extremely surprised, that no account of so
extraordinary and important transaction should have been transmitted by you,
pursuant to an article in your instructions, by which you are directed upon all
occasions, to send unto his Majesty, and to the commissioners for trade and
plantations, a particular account of all your proceedings, and the condition of
affairs within your government. As this matter does highly concern his
Majesty's royal prerogative, their Excellencies referred the consideration of
it, to Mr. Attorney and Solicitor General, who after mature deliberation, and
making all proper enquiries, reported, That from the charter and laws of your
colony, they cannot collect that there is any regular establishment of a
NATIONAL or provincial church there, so as to warrant the holding of
convocations or synods of the clergy, but if such synods might be holden, yet
they take it to be clear in point of law, that his Majesty's supremacy in
ecclesiastical affairs, being a branch of his prerogative, does take place in
the plantations, and that synods cannot be held, nor is it lawful for the
clergy to assemble as in synods, without authority from his Majesty." They
conceive the above mentioned application of the said Ministers, not to you
alone, as representing the King's person, but to you, and the council and the
house of representatives, to be a contempt of his Majesty's prerogative, as it
is a public acknowledgment, that the power of granting what they desire,
resides in the legislative body of the province, which by law is vested only in
his Majesty. And the Lieut. Governor, council and assembly intermeddling
therein, was an invasion of his Majesty's royal authority, which it was your
duty as Lieut. Governor, to have withstood and rejected, and that the consent
of the Lieut. Governor, the council and house of representatives, will not be
sufficient authority for the holding of such a synod.

Their Excellencies, upon consideration of this opinion, of the attorney and
solicitor general, which they have been pleased to approve, have commanded me
to acquaint you with, and to express to you their surprise, that no account of
so remarkable a transaction, which so nearly concerns the King's prerogative,
and the welfare of his Majesty's province under your government, has been
received from you, and to signify to you their directions, that you do put an
effectual stop to any such proceedings, but if the consent desired by the
ministers above mentioned, for the holding of the synod, should have been
obtained, and this pretended synod should be actually sitting, when you receive
these their Excellencies directions, they do in that case, require and direct
you, to cause such their meeting to cease, acquainting them that their assembly
is against law, and a contempt of his Majesty's prerogative, and that they are
forbid to meet any more; but if notwithstanding such signification, they shall
continue to hold such an assembly, you are then to take care that the principal
actors therein be prosecuted for a misdemeanour. But you are to avoid doing any
formal act to dissolve them, lest it be construed to imply that they had a
right to assemble. This Sir, is what I have in command from their Excellencies
to signify to you.

And I must observe to you, that the precedent quoted in the above mentioned
memorial of such a synod being held 45 years ago, falls in with the year 1680,
and that the former charter, upon which the government of your province
depended, was repealed by scire facias in the year 1684, and the new charter
was granted in the year 1691, from whence it appears, that if such synod was
holden as is alleged, it happened a short time before the repealing of the old
charter, but none has been since the granting the new one.

I am Sir your most humble servant. CHARLES DELAFAYE.


LET us now compare Dr. Mayhew's opinion with that of the attorney and
solicitor general as given us in the foregoing letter; and to make the matter
more plain to the reader, I will place them opposite to each other (as they are
truly in themselves) in separate columns thus,

Dr. Mayhew's assertion that the New England churches are established here.

1. The government of the Massachusetts Bay, in the 4th of William and Mary,
made a law for the support of a learned and orthodox ministry; it is needless
therefore to look any farther back, for a civil establishment of religion here.
Obsv. p. 42. 2. The acts which relate to the settlement and support of the
gospel ministry here, received the coyal sanction, and therefore our churches
seem to have a proper legal establishment. P. 43.
The Attorney and Solicitor General's opinion, and the determination of the
Lords Justices thereupon.

1. From the charter and laws of your colony (viz. Massachusetts Bay) they
cannot collect, that there is any regular establishment of a national or
provincial church there. 2. The acknowledgment of such a power in the
legislative body of the province is a contempt of his Majesty's prerogative.
IT is really surprising, that after such a letter as this (of which it is
supposed the Dr. could not be ignorant) he should notwithstanding assert that
the New England churches are established. What becomes of his argument for a
civil or legal establishment, founded on certain acts of assembly, not formally
set aside, and therefore supposed to be confirmed by royal sanction, when the
foregoing letter declares that the attributing such a power to the legislative
body here is a direct invasion of his Majesty's prerogative. Whether the Dr.
will incline to dispute this point with the Lords Justices, and prove that the
Attorney and Solicitor General did not understand the colony charter, as he has
attempted to prove that the Society do not understand theirs, I am not able to
say. I shall leave him to determine that matter with himself, as he shall think
best.

BUT perhaps the Dr. may be better satisfied by an argument in his own way. --
He lays it down as a rule for interpreting the charter of the Society, that
nothing can be supposed the object or any part of the object of that
institution, but what plainly appears to be so, from the very words of the
charter, even though it were certain that those persons to whom it was granted,
had at the very time, some farther views and ends in obtaining it, besides
those which are expressed, or plainly implied; yet the words of the charter
itself must determine and limit the sense of the royal Grantor, and
consequently the legal power conferred -- It was only for those purposes that
are particularly expressed, not any private or secret ones, which they might
possibly have had in their own minds, that they were incorporated. Let us now
apply this rule to the charter granted to the Massachusetts Bay. Nothing can be
supposed the object or any part of the object of this constitution, but what
plainly appears to be so from the very words of their charter, which very words
must determine and limit the sense of the Grantor. It was only for those
purposes that are particularly expressed -- Let the Dr. now read and examine
the present colony charter, bearing date 1691, and point out to us the passage
or passages where in express words a power is granted of instituting an
ecclesiastical establishment, or to use his own words, a civil establishment of
religion; but if nothing of this kind is to be found in it; if such a power be
neither the object, nor any part of the object of the colony charter, it is
more than probable that there is no such establishment as the Dr. contends for
existing.

IF any thing further should be thought necessary to confute the pretense of
the New England churches being established in the colonies, I shall refer the
reader to a letter sent from her Majesty and the Privy Council to the colony of
Connecticut, Oct, 11th, 1705. See Doug. Sum. Vol. 2. p. 339.

IT has been now sufficiently proved that the New England churches are not
established here. We will therefore inquire whether the church of England be
not established in the colonies. -- This was before affirmed. -- I shall now
attempt to prove it. One would imagine indeed that there should be no occasion
to enter upon the proof of a thing so plain and evident as this is; since
whatever difficulty there might be in determining this matter before, yet
certainly there can be none at all since the union of the two kingdoms,
because, says Dr. Douglas, by the act of union of Scotland and England, it is
provided that the church of England government in all the English colonies was
for ever established. Doug. Sammary, vol. 1. p. 440, 441.
The same author observes in another place, that by the articles of union of
the two nations of Great Britain, May 1707, the church of England is
established in perpetuity, in all the territories at that time to England
belonging. Do. p. 443.
I am a loss how the Dr. should overlook so plain a case as this, so as to deny
the establishment of the church of England in these colonites, and to affirm
that of the New England churches. Possibly the Dr. never examined the point
himself, but took it upon trust from his voucher.

BUT though it is undeniably manifest that the church of England is established
in all the English colonies by the act of union beforementioned; yet it may
not be so clear, that this establishment actually took place before that time;
and although it is sufficient to the present argument, that the church of England
has been established here from the time of the union aforesaid; yet for the
sake of such as have not had opportunity of examining this matter, I shall lay
the case before the reader, as I find it already done to my hands by a learned
and judicious writer, in a letter to the Rev. Mr. Thomas Foxcroft, printed in
the year 1745.

THE christian religion (says this ingenious author) as by its evidence and
intrinsic excellency it recommended itself to the English government, so it
became by law the religion of the English nation; and the church of England
likewise became by law their national church; and when any part of the English
nation spread abroad into colonies, as they continued part of the nation, the
law obliged them equally to the Church of England and to the christian
religion. And the statutes for the establishment of the service ordination and
articles of this church, made and confirmed before and at the union of the two
kingdoms, settle and establish it alike in the dominions of England, and in the
realm it self.

IN the reign of Edward VI. certain bishops and learned men by the appointment
of the King, composed an order and rite of common prayer, and administration of
the sacraments, in a book entitled, the book of common prayer, and
administration of the sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies, after the use
of the church of England. In the 3d year of his reign, an act of parliament was
made (2d and 3d of Edward VI. c. 1.) entitled the penalty for not using
uniformity of service and administration of sacraments, whereby it was enacted
-- That all ministers in any parish church, or other place withing the King's
dominions, should be bound to say and use the celebration of the Lord's Supper,
and all their common and open prayer, in such order and form as is mentioned in
this book, and none other, or otherwise.

IN the sixth year of his reign, this book of common prayer, was by order of
parliament (5th and 6th of Edward VI. c. 1.) explained and perfected, and a
form of making and consecrating, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons was
added to it; and by an act of parliament (entitled, uniformity of prayer, and
administration of sacraments shall be used in the church) it was enacted, that
the former act should stand in full force and strength, for establishing this
book of common prayer, etc. as it was for the former book, and that if any
manner of person inhabiting within his Majesty's dominions, should willingly
and wittingly hear and be present at any other manner or form of common prayer,
etc. he should suffer imprisonment, etc.

IN the first year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth a few alterations and
additions were made in this book of common prayer, and by an act of parliament
(1 Eliz. c. 2.) entitled there shall be uniformity of prayer and administation
of sacraments, it was enacted, that all ministers in any parish church, or
other place within the Queen's dominions, should be bound to say and use the
celebration of the Lord's Supper, and administration of each of the sacraments,
and all the common and open prayer, in such order and form, as is mentioned in
the 5th and 6th of Edward the sixth, with these alterations and additions, etc.
and that every person inhabiting within the Queen's Majesty's dominions, should
diligently and faithfully endeavor to resort to the parish church, or some
usual place, where common prayer and such service of God should be used upon
every sunday, etc.

IN the 13th year of Elizabeth, by an act of parliament, entitled reformation
of disorders in the ministers of the church: The preamble of which is, that the
churches of the Queen's Majesty's dominions, may be served with pastors of
sound religion, it was enacted that no person be admitted to any benefice with
cure, except he shall first have subscribed the 39 article.

IN the 14th year of Charles the IId the book of common prayer, etc. was by the
appointment of the King reviewed, and in convocation altered and added to, and
presented to his Majesty, and being approved and recommended by him to the
parliament, was substituted in the place of that appointed in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and the parliament by an act (entitled an act for the
uniformity of public prayer, etc.) reciting that whereas the 36th of the 39
articles, is in these words, viz. That the book of consecration of Archbishops
and Bishops, and ordaining of priests and deacons, lately set forth in the time
of King Edward the sixth, and confirmed at the same time by authority of
parliament, does contain all things necessary to such consecration and
ordaining, etc. and therefore whosoever are consecrated, or ordered according
to the rites of that book, since the 2d year of the aforenamed King Edward unto
this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated, or ordered according to the same
rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly and lawfully consecrated and
ordered, enacted that all subscriptions hereafter to be made unto the said
articles -- shall be construed and taken to extend, and shall be applied for
and touching the said 36th article, and unto the book containing the form and
manner of making, ordaining, etc. in such fort and manner as the same did
heretofore extend unto the book set forth in the time of King Edward the sixth,
mentioned in the said 36th article. And by another paragraph in said act, it is
enacted, that the beforementioned statutes, for the uniformity of prayer and
administration of sacraments, should stand in full force and strength to all
intents and purposqdes whatsoever, for the establishing and confirming this
book.

IN the 5th year of the reign of Queen Anne, by an act of parliament (5. A. c.
5.) entitled, an act for securing the church of England as by law established,
it was enacted that all acts of parliament then in force, for the establishment
and preservation of the church of England, and the doctrine, worship,
discipline and government thereof, should remain and be in full force for ever;
and that every King and Queen succeeding to the royal government of the kingdom
of Great Britain, at his or her coronation should take and subscribe an oath to
maintain, and preserve inviolably, the said settlement of the church of
England, and the doctrine, worship, discipline and government thereof, as by
law established within the kingdoms of England and Ireland, the dominion of
Wales, and town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the territories thereunto belonging.
And by the act of union of England and Scotland (5. A. c. 8.) this act was made
an essential and fundamental part of the union.

I have now cited seven statutes for the establishment of the Church of England
in the dominions. -- These statutes are all now in force, and do equally
establish and confirm the Church of England, her worship, articles and
ordination, in the plantations and in England it self. The force of the
argument which has been drawn from them will doubtless prove satisfactory and
convincing to every one who observes, that every subsequent statute that has
been cited refers to and confirms those that preceeded, and by that means throw
their united strength upon the point here affirmed; so that if plain direct
positive acts of parliament have any force in framing and confirming an
establishment, the Church of England is beyond controversy established in all
his Majesty's colonies and plantations, and therefore in the Massachusetts Bay
and Connecticut.

THE author does not recollect any thing that can reasonably be alleged
against this conclusion, unless the passage which was quoted before from the
Lords Justices letter, viz. that from the charter and laws of this colony it
does not appear that there is any regular establishment of a national or
provincial church here, should be thought an objection. If this passage should
seem to any one, to exclude the plantations from any establishment at all,
whether of the church or congregational denomination: It may be answered; It is
not the intention of the said letter to assert that there is no establishment
of religion at all in the plantations; but that such an establishment is not to
be collected from any powers granted in the Massachusetts charter, nor
consequently in the laws founded upon that charter. And since no special power
or privilege of this kind was conferred by the charter, it is evident that the
state of religion in respect to establishments must and does in fact rest upon
those acts of parliament which relate to this subject, and especially as they
directly include all his Majesty's dominions; it being moreover an allowed
maxim not only that all laws made in the plantations contrary to the laws of
England are ipso facto void, but also that where a case occurs for which the
laws of any colony have made no provision, such case shall be determined by the
laws at home. It appears then from all the acts of parliament that ever were
made relative to establishments, that there is an establishment of the Church
of England in the plantations, and that authority allowed and ratified by the
reigning prince, was the proper authority to make an establishment. The King
(under God) is the supreme head of the church of England, and if he had not
appointed an ordinary over New England, it would have remained under his own
immediate ecclesiastical jurisdiction as supreme head. But it is well known
that his late Majesty, in the first year of his reign, did empower the Bishop
of London, under the great seal, to exercise jurisdiction over the clergy in
the plantations, which were not in any Diocese, but remained under the
immediate jurisdiction of the King. Vid. Letter abovementioned, 1745.


WE may now quit the subject of establishments, and proceed to consider the
Dr.'s fourth section, which contains sundry "other things tending" (as he
imagines) to explain and confirm the sense of the charter. The first is, the
name by which this corporation is distinguished, viz. The Society for the
propagation of the Gospel. This has been spoken to before; it will only be
necessary to add here, that the Society have in their conduct acted agreeble to
the import of this title, by sending missionaries into those colonies which the
Dr. allows to be proper objects of their institution, by sending others to the
Indian natives, and by appointing catechists to the Negroes. In short, they
have so far complied with the import of this name or title, and with the design
of their institution, that the Dr. himself is forced to confess, however
unwillingly, that the Society have chiefly sent their missionaries into those
British plantations where they were much needed, according to the true design
of their institution, and that they have thereby served the interest of
religion. Observe. p. 51.
But then he says, they have deviated from the plan of their charter in some
other respects, that is to say, they have sometimes endeavored to preserve men
from falling into infidelity by providing for them the means of religion, --
forgive them this wrong -- Doubtless every candid person will allow that their
institution admits of the preservation as well as the extension of the gospel,
and whether the one or the other be done, it must be done agreeable to the
particular profession and sentiments of those who are the undertakers of this
work. The Dr. adds, for several years, he thinks about eight or nine, after the
Society was founded, they sent no missionary into New England, which may
naturally be looked on (he says) as one argument that it was not originally
considered among those plantations which were supposed to stand in need of
their charity. But it is imagined that a better reason may be given why few or
no missionaries were early sent into New England, and that is, that few or no
societies or congregations, appeared at that time to ask their charitable
assistance. But afterward frequent accessions of people of that communion from
abroad, together with the effect of reading and enquiry at home, joined with
the enthusiasm which at times prevailed, especially after Mr. Whitefields
appearing among us, and which drove many of the more serious and considerate
people into the bosom of the church; these things occasioned such an increase
of the church of England, that the Society found it necessary, to allow a
greater proportion of their assistance, as it was now earnestly called for, and
more apparently needed.

2. The next thing which the Dr. advances as limiting the design of the
charter, is the common seal of the Society, which besides a sun in the upper
part of the circle, has a ship within the circle under full sail; on the prow
of which stands a clergyman with a bible in his hand which he extends to a
company of naked savages on the shore, thronging to receive the blessing, just
over whom is a scroll implying these words come over and help us. It is not
easy to imagine what this proof was alleged for, since it either proves too
much, or else nothing at all to his purpose. If it was designed to prove that
the sole business of the Society according to their charter, was to carry the
gospel to the savages, this would directly contradict the charter, which
declares the primary object of their institution to be the King's subjects, but
if it was brought to prove that the conversion of the natives was one part of
the design of their institution, this is no more than what we allow, and is
agreeable to the conduct of the Society as well as their charter. Taking
therefore the design of the charter in that sense, in which the society have
all along understood it, and agreeable to which they have practiced, applying
themselves both to the King's subjects and the natives, and it very well agrees
with the seal under consideration, but if applied wholly to the natives which
is the use the Dr. seems to have bro't it for, insread of agreeing, as he says
it very well does, with the charter, it really is a flat contradiction to it.

3. The next thing alleged by the Dr. in sixing the sense of the charter, is
certain anniversary sermons preached before the venerable Society, some
passages of which he has quoted, in support of his opinion; but this like the
former instance produced by him, either justifies the Society, or else is
nothing at all to the purpose. For does not the Dr. himself represent the
design of their institution to be that of preserving and propagating
christianity among the King's subjects, and extending it also to the Heathen?
And has not this been the very practice of the Society from the beginning? And
what do the anniversary sermons imply but certain exhortations to pursue the
several objects of their institution; those which the Dr. has quoted insist
chiefly upon one topic, while other sermons preached upon the same occasion
enlarge on some other branch of the general design? As to the particular
passages cited by the Dr, he himself allows, that they do rather coincide, with
the ultimate, than the more immediate design of the institution, and so
harmonize rather more perhaps with the seal and name of the Society, than with
the charter. What now are we to learn from hence, but that the seal and name of
the society, which a little before he had produced to explain and support his
sense of the charter, do really not harmonize with it at all, but only with the
sermons he has quoted. So all he had been offering before by way of proof, from
the name and seal of the Society is now given up again, as being (what indeed
it was) nothing to the purpose. This gentleman has a very strange method of
proving and disproving, of asserting and giving up again. Sure he could never
expect to arrive at any solid conclusion, by this wanton method of arguing. The
truth is, those worthy gentlemen, who have preached the anniversary sermons
before the Society, have not all of them consined themselves to the same
topics, but as the institution of the Society comprehended several objects,
some have enlarged more particularly upon one object, and some upon another, as
they severally thought proper, but all within the general intendment and design
of their charter; and if the Dr. had intended to have drawn an argument from
these annual sermons, in proof of the original design of their institution, he
should have formed an abstract from them all, so far at least as they have
enlarged upon different topics, and have given us the collective sense of the
whole. But this indeed would not have served his turn; for he himself says he
is not insensible, that some of these sermons, especially within the last
twenty years, have expressions in them of a much less catholic strain; that is
to say, they do not so well suit his purpose; and in truth he has taken the
liberty to treat them accordingly, that is with great indecency, as will appear
to any one who consults his 13th, 14th and 15th sections, as well as many other
passages of his book.

The author has now gone through the Dr's representation of the Society's
charter, together with the several arguments he has advanced, to support the
sense he has put upon it, and has endeavored to prove that they are
altogether inconclusive; whether he has succeeded or not, must be left to the
judgment of the candid unprejudiced reader. In the mean time if the account
which has now been given of the charter and institution of the Society be just;
all the Dr's accusations of that venerable body, his charges of misconduct,
misapplication of moneys, and perversion of the trust which they have taken on
themselves, fall to the ground; and he has only to consider what reparation he
ought in conscience to make, or endeavor to make, for the indecent liberties,
and various abuse he has been guilty of toward them.

Here therefore the present examination seems to to conclude; but as there are
yet many things in the Dr's book, which the author conceives to be extremely
exceptionable, he thinks it proper to take notice of at least some of them.

It is a frequent subject of complaint with him, that the Society have not done
enough toward the conversion of the Indians, though by their public accounts it
appears that they have omitted nothing in their power to promote that good
work; nor have they been entirely without success. He is likewise much
displeased, that more missionaries have not been sent to those colonies, whose
religious state he thinks to be but little removed from heathenism. What
colonies he here refers to, we can be at no loss about, since he excepts none
but those of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Bay. He allows for instance that
the Society might have supported missions in the colony of Rhode Island with
propriety enough; and indeed they have done so, and possibly might have done
more than they have, if they had not met with too much opposition from a party
spirit. For instance, The Society upon a representation of the great necessity
of a missionary in the Narraganset, particularly in South and North Kingston,
at a time when there was no settled minister of any denomination; sent thither
Mr. Guy, Mr. Bridge, and afterward Dr. Macsparran to officiate among them. To
give a check to these gentlemen's success, and lest the inhabitants should
receive religion, as it is taught in the church of England; one Mr. Torrey was
dispatched thither, who had so little pretensions, and so few adherents, that
he could not find five persons to give him a call (which I think the platform
requires) and yet is officiously continued there to this day, though his
congregation, as I am informed by those who live in the neighborhood, usually
consists of scarce twenty people.

Again, The Society opened a mission at Providence about the year 1722 or 1723,
where at that time there was no settled minister of the congregational
persuasion. But for fear those people should receive the benefit of religion
agreeable to the church of England, a congregational minister was soon sent
thither, and as it is said, even forced upon the people, who refused to pay any
thing toward his support.

Once more at Charlestown in the Narraganset, an attempt was made by several
church families in that town, to establish a mission for the benefit of
themselves, and the tribe of Indians in that neighborhood (at that time about
400) to which attempt the Indians were so well disposed, by the labors of Dr.
Macsparran a neighboring missionary, that the Sachem gave a piece of ground to
erect a church upon, and a considerable quantity of land besides, as a glebe
for a missionary. Accordingly a church was set up, and the laudable design in a
promising way, when one Mr. Parks was sent thither, to give a check to the
attempt, who by drawing off a party, and kindling a spirit of enthusiasm among
both English and Indians in that town, totally disappointed and frustrated the
above design. This list might have been greatly enlarged but it is an invidious
subject, which the author by no means delights in; nor would have mentioned at
all, if the Dr had not cried out so much about a party spirit, and saulted the
Society for neglecting this colony.
Let the Dr. now reflect whose fault it is, that this colony has been no better
provided with missionaries, and lay his hand upon his mouth, when it appears
how indefatigable some people have shown themselves to frustate the Society's
attempts, even in those places where he allows they might laudably have
employed their charity. Let it farther be observed in answer to the Dr's
principal objection, viz. that the Society do not allow a due proportion of
their charity to the southern heathenish governments, nor to the Indian
missions. As to the former, several of those governments, heathen as they are,
to their great honor be it spoken, have made a handsome provision among
themselves for the public worship of God, and therefore do no longer need the
Society's help. And as to the latter, he is certainly a very improper judge
what obstructions and discouragements they have met with in their attempts to
convert the Indians; he therefore speaks at random, and with great want of
charity when he says they have neglected that part of their institution in
order to propagate the church in N. England.

The Dr's fifth section contains his account of the state of religion in N.
England, before and since the the incorporation of the Society. But this
account in many things, can by no means be approved.

It is not the author's intention to call in question the religious character
of the first adventure s to N. England, he doubts not in the least but that
they were serious well meaning people, and although laboring under some mistakes
and prejudices, yet many of them persons of great wisdom and understanding as
well as piety. Nor will it be disputed that they made "early provision for the
public worship of God": Ob^. p. 40.
But how far their coming hither was occasioned by their sufferings and
persecutions at home, as also what their sentiments were as to religious
matters may deserve farther inquiry.

In the mean time it may not be improper to take some notice of the great
veneration the Dr. professes for the memory of these our pious forefathers,
who first came into this country, for the sake of enjoying (as he says) purity
of faith and worship. Could the Dr. have mentioned these good fathers without
blushing, if he had reflected how widely he has departed from the faith which
these good men professed, and that as to the most essential doctrines of
christianity? See his sermons, on the terms of salvation -- Of being found in
Christ -- Of justification by says -- and particularly his 2d ser. on
christian sobriety -- Compare these with the doctrines taught by the early
writers and divines of N. England.
Or must we take his appeals and harrangues of this kind to be mere grimace, or
rather a design calculated ad captum vulgi, to raise a ferment in the minds of
the people, who cannot help retaining, and that very justly, a value for the
memory of their progenitors? Whatever their notions of liberty, or purity of
religion amounted to, they certainly had no great opinion of the learned
Socinus; they entertained those orthodox opinions, at least concerning the
divinity of the Son of God, which the Dr. has treated in so bold, as well as
ludicrous a manner; and had he lived in their days, he must either have
enlarged his creed, or selt the effects of their honest resentment. But though he
has no right to take shelter under the merit of those good men who are supposed
to have first come hither for the sake of enjoying a pure religion according to
their consciences, since he is departed from that purity of says, whatever it
was, which they professed, as far as darkness is from light. Yet because this
stale pretense concerning the design of the first adventurers as to religious
matters is artfully and industriously propagated among the common people who
have not sufficient opportunities of examining this matter, it will be
necessary to give it a more particular consideration.

Dr. Douglass acquaints us that Robert Brown, a hotheaded young enthusiastical
clergyman, began anno 1580, to preach against the ceremonies and discipline of
the church of England; he was perseacuted or baited and teazed by the bishops
courts, he with some disciples left England, and formed a church at
Middleborough of Zealand in the Dutch low countries; after some time this
effervescence or cbulition of youth subsided, he returned to England, recanted,
and had a church of England cure bestowed upon him, and died in that communion,
anno 1630.

A congregation of these Brownists was formin Yarmouth 1602, being harrass'd by
the established church of England, with their pastor they transported
themselves to Leyden in Holland; here they became more moderate under the
direction of their pastor Mr. Robinson; and from Brownists changed their
denomination to that of Independents: Being of unsteady temper, they resolved
to remove from amongst strangers after ten years residence, to some remote
country in some wilderness, where without molestation they might worship God in
their own devotional way. Sum. Hist Polit. Vol I. p. 369. See also p. 53, 60.
Dr. Douglass adds, that they obtained an instrument from K. James I. for the
free exercise of their religion in any part of America; but in this article he
is contradicted by Mr. Prince in his chronology; who says the utmost they could
obtain was that the King would connive at them, and not molest them, provided
they carry peaceably: but to tolerate them by his public authority, under his
seal would not be granted. Prince's Chronolo p. 57.


Thus the first effectual settlement in N. England was clearly made upon a
religious account: But as to the first settlers of the colony of the
Massachusetts Bay, understood as posterior to, and distinct from that of
Plymouth, they plainly acted as other men usually do upon like occasions, from
hopes of increasing their estates, and providing an ample inheritance for their
children. Having for these purposes negotiated a settlement for some time, by a
Governor and Company residing in England, they at length thought it most for
the interest of the propriety, that the seat of government should be removed to
the country they were settling. Accordingly Mr. Winthrop was chosen Governor,
and he with his associates embarked on board sundry ships, of which the
Arabella was admiral, with a design to proceed to America.

As it was now pretty generally known, that the Plymouth adventurers had set up
a way of worship different from the public establishment of the nation, it
began to be suspected and reported, that this new company had a purpose of the
same nature, as soon as they should arrive in America. This came to the cars of
Governor Winthrop and his associates, while they lay wind-bound at Yarmouth,
and it gave them great uneasiness, as well it might, to lie under the odium of
this slander, and occasioned their writing the following letter for their own
exculpation before they put to sea, viz.

Extract of a letter directed to the Bishops and Clergy and people of the
Church of England, from on board the Arabella, April 7, 1630.
For obtaining their prayers, and the removal of suspicions and misconstruction
of their intentions. Prince's Chron. p. 205.


WE beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of the Lord Jesus, to
consider us as your brethren, standing in very great need of your help, and
earnestly imploring it. And however your charity may have met with some
occasion of discouragement through the misreport of our intions, or through the
disaffection, or indiscretion of some of us, or rather among us; (for we are
not of those that dream of perfection in this world) yet we desire you would be
pleased to take notice of the principals and body of our company, as those who
esteem it our honor to call the church of England, from whence we rise, our
dear mother; and we cannot part from our native country, where she specially
resideth without much sadness of heart and many tears in our eyes; ever
acknowledging, that such hope and part as we have obtained in the common
salvation, we have received in her bosom, and sucked from her breasts. We leave
her not therefore as loathing that milk, wherewith we were nourished there, but
blessing God for the parentage and education, as members of the same body,
shall always rejoice in her good, and unfeignedly grieve for any sorrow that
may ever betide her, and while we have breath-sincerely desire and endeavor
the continuance, and abundance of her welfare, with the enlargement of her
bounds, in the kingdom of Christ Jesus. -- Be pleased therefore rev'd fathers
and brethren to help forward this work now in hand -- etc.

Signed by, JOHN WINTHROP, Govr. THOMAS DUDLEY, Dep. Gov. Sir RICHARD
SALTONSTALL. ISAAC JOHNSON. Rev. GEORGE PHILLIPS. WILLIAM CODDINGTON, Esq'r.
CHARLES FINES, Esq'r.



Previous to any application of the foregoing letter it may be proper to
observe, that Mr. Prince in his chronology gives testimony that these pious
people were professed members of the church of England. For the information
(says he) of the present age as well as posterity, they (this colony of pious
people) were of a denomination somewhat different in those early times from
them of Plymouth -- they were 'till now, (that is, after their arrival in N.
England) professed members of the church of England. Prince's chronol. p. 313.


From the foregoing letter and testimony it is evident, that whatever the case
was at other places, and with regard to other adventurers, the first settlers
of the Massachusetts Bay at least, those pious good men, who left the fair
cities, villages, and delightful fields of Britain, for the then inhospitable
shores, and deserts of America did not do it from any disgust they had taken at
the established religion of their country; but from quite other motives. --
They positively declare their veneration for the established church, that they
esteem it their honor to call her their dear mother, that they cannot part
from the place of her special residence without much sadness of heart, and many
tears in their eyes, they acknowledge that the hope they have obtained in the
common salvation, they received in her bosom, and sucked from her breasts. They
declare they do not loath the milk with which they have been thus nourished,
but bless God for this their parentage and education, that their intentions
have been misreported; that while they have breath, they will SINCERELY
endeavor the continuance and abundance of her welfare, with THE ENLARGEMENT OF
HER BOUNDS, in the kingdom of Christ Jesus.

After such an explicit declaration as this, written and signed with their own
hands, how can the Dr. pretend that these men were aggrieved at home, that they
came hither chiefly on account of their sufferings for nonconformity, that
they fled hihither as to an assylum from episcopal persecution Obs. p. 39.
? Is the foregoing the language of the perseacuted, of men suffering for
conscience sake? In an honest and serious view, what foundation had he for
calling upon people to reflect on what their forefathers suffered from the
mitred lordly successors of the fishermen of Galilee? What truth in saying that
this occasioned their flight into this western world"? Did our pious
forefathers throw themselves into the arms of Savages and Barbarians, to be
delivered from the unholy zeal and oppressions of these lordly men,
countenanced by sceptered tyrants? Obs. p. 155.
And would they at the same time earnestly ask the assistance and prayers of
these lordly oppressors, and openly acknowledge the spiritual benefits they had
received from them? Read my dear countrymen, read the words of our pious
forefathers, in the above letter, and compare them, with this author's
licentious harangue, and pretended vindication of them, and see with your own
eyes whether the spirit of the one and the other have the least similitude. In
short either these pious good men, were honestly attached to the church of
England, and serious members of her communion, or they were not; the Dr.
affirms they were dissenters, they themselves declare, that they were faithful
sons and children of the church, educated in her bosom, nourished at her
breasts, blessing God for this their education, promising to seek her welfare,
with the enlargement of her bounds: From hence then one of these two things
must unavoidably follow; either that they were dreadful prevaricators with God
and man, or else that they are sadly abused and slandered, when contrary to
their own express declaration they are said to have been dissenters, driven
hither by the oppressions and persecution of the church of England. If the
former was the case, let us no more boast of them as pious good men; If the
latter, let the Dr. consider, what recompense he can make to the memory of
these men, for abusing them with the opprobious charge of sectarism and
hypocrisy.

And this seems to be a proper place to take notice of a reflection which the
Dr. very liberally bestows upon the established church of England, which he
calls "a cruel persecuting church" Obs. p 40
and says the first settlers of the country were perseacuted out of England by
the established church. p 46.
And again, is it not enough (says he) that they perseacuted us out of the old
world? will they pursue us into the new? p 156.
And a few lines after he speaks of the danger of being consumed by the flames,
or deluged in a flood of episcopacy. A stranger would perhaps be led by this
manner of expression to conceive, that not only fire and faggot were
plentifully employed in England for extirpating dissenters, but also that the
Dutch method of knuting was used toward them for the same purposes. These that
have been mentioned are but a few, out of many, very many bitter terms he has
thought proper to bestow upon a protestant church, universally venerated
abroad, and generally esteemed the bulwark and glory of the reformation; a
church remarkable for its tenderness, and kind reception of foreign
protestants, when these have been obliged to fly from their native countries on
account of real persecution.

I am sorry the Dr. has made it necessary to enter upon a subject so invidious
as this, and which lies so open to abundant recrimination. The author is
unwilling to renew the memory of those severities, that were too commonly
practiced by all parties in the last century, and which seem rather owing to
the temper of the age, and the mistaken maxims of policy then prevailing, than
to have been the consequence of religious principles. The church of England,
considered as such, has nothing in its constitution, that either necessicates
or warrants a persecuting temper; and if any improper severities have at any
time been used by the government, in supporting the established religion of the
nation; they certainly were as foreign to the principles of that church, as
they are to christianity in general. Will this gentleman allow that the
persecutions and oppressions exercised by the Presbyterians, Independents, or
by what name soever he chooses to have them distinguished, at a time when they
had the government in their hands, were the natural and proper effect of the
religions principles of those denominations? And yet a great number of the most
celebrated preachers of those times, warmly inveighed against allowing even a
toleration to such as professed the church of England, expostulating with the
civil government upon that account, representing such an indulgence as a great
sin, a betraying the cause of Christ, and frequently using, or rather
perverting that expression in the Gospel, compel them to come in. Nay did not
the violation of liberty and the rights of conscience rise to that height, as
to prohibit by an ordinance under the penalty of five pounds sterling, the use
of the common prayer, even in the most private manner, in a person's own house?
For a second offense ten pounds, for the third one years imprisonment. And it
is further hereby ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that if any person or
persons whatsoever shall at any time or times hereafter use, or cause the
aforesaid Book of Common Prayer to be used, in any Church, or Chapel, or
public Place of worship, or in any private place or family. within the
Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, or Port and Town of Barwicke, that
then every such person so offending therein, shall for the first offense
forfeit and pay the sum of five pounds of lawful English money for the second
offense the sum of ten pounds, and for the third offenses shall suffer one
whole year's imprisonment without bail or mainprize. Vid. Ord. of Lords and
Commons 23d August 1645. printed at the end of the Directory. The not using or
depraving the said Directory is by the same Ordinance made penal. And it is
further hereby obtained that every minister which shall not henceforth pursue
and observe the Directory for public worship, according to the true intent
and meaning thereof, in all exercises of the public worship of God within
this Realm of England, etc. shall for every time that he shall so offend, lose
and forfeit the sum of forty shillings of lawful English money. And that
what person soever shall with intent to bring the said Directory into contempt
and neglect, or to raise opposition against it, preach, write, print, or cause
to be written or printed any thing in the derogation or depraving of the said
Book, or any thing therein contained, or any part thereof, shall lose and
forfeit for every such offense, such a sum of money, as shall at the time of
his conviction, be thought fit to be imposed upon him, by those before whom he
shall have his trial. provided that it be not less than five pounds, nor
exceeding the sum of fifty pounds.
Should the severities exercised toward the Quakers in the Massachusetts Bay,
(whom by the way the Dr. by an awkward piece of slattery endeavors to
complement with his good opinion Obs. p. 50.
) when by fines, imprisonment and death of some, Aneo 1656 By a law of the
province of Massachusetts Bay it was enacted; None of that cursed sect of
heretics lately risen up in the world, which are commonly called Quakers, are
to be imported: Penalty upon the master L. 100 per piece, and 40 s. per hour
for any other person harboring or entertaining them. 1058 a Quaker convicted
shall be banished upon pain of death. Sum. Hist. Polit Vol. I. p. 436. Again in
p. 448 Some laws were made against the importation of Quakers and their
proceedings -- they were subjected to fines, imprisonments, whipping, cropping
of ears (1658 three Quakers had their ears cropped) and banishment, and by act of
assembly upon their return from banishment 1659 and 1660, three or four Quakers
suffered death. This in course occasioned a national clamor, and the peins of
death were exchanged into these of being whipped, only through three towns at the
carts tail: But upon further complaints home King Charles II in Council, by
order. Sept. 9 h 1661, required the accused to be sent home for trial, and all
penal laws relating to Quakers to be suspended.
the rest were obliged to take refuge in a neighboring government; should
these severities be attributed, not to particular indiscrete men, but charged
as a consequence of congregational principles, would this be thought a fair or
generous conclusion? yet these and a thousand instances besides, the effects of
an indiscrete and wrong pointed zeal, might be mentioned by way of
recrimination. Will the Dr. allow that if any of the denominations,
Presbyterian, Independent, or Congregational, had now the power of government
in their hands, they would put on the same oppressive temper? -- surely he will
not. -- Nor does he find the church of England at this day practicing any of
those severities wherewith he labors to affright and prejudice people against
her. No establishment in the christian world, is more gentle, or allows greater
liberties to those who dissent from it, than the church of England. Even the
Dutch, who are thought to afford as great liberty to conscience as any
christian state, are never known to admit any persons into civil offices, who
do not conform to the legal worship, which, although it be a reasonable caution,
is yet more than the English government are nice in exacting.

WHATEVER may be the temper of particular men, it is pretty certain that at
this time of day, all parties disclaim those severities which have formerly
been too much indulged; the people of New England in particular, have special
reason to be careful how they countenance those who would promote such a
disposition (to which some may think the Dr's manner of writing upon this
occasion has no small tendency) lest the same effect should result from it,
which has once been the consequence of such a conduct in the province of the
Massachusetts Bay; persecution of their fellow christians having been one
principal article which occasioned the vacating their former charter. Sum.
hist. and pol. vol. I. p. 412.
It was observed, that this Gentleman's writings have a tendency to stir up
misaffection and a party spirit (which are the natural forerunners of
persecution, where there is power to execute it) this was not spoken at random,
as will appear from the following passages -- When we consider -- what might
probably be the sad consequence, if this growing party (the church of England)
should once get the upper hand here, and a major vote in our houses of
assembly: (in which case the church of England might become the established
religion here; tests be ordained as in England, to exclude all but conformists
from posts of honor and emolument; and all of us be taxed for the support of
bishops and their underlings) Observe. p. 155, 156.


Now not to mention that the Church of England is already established here, and
tests already ordained and in many cases required, as they are in England;
without any of those frightful consequences with which he labors to terrify the
vulgar; let it only be observed that the plain import of this whole passage is
to persuade people to unite in excluding those of the Church of England, not
only from all posts of honor and emolument, but even from the common rights
and privileges of natural born subjects; a scheme so notoriously factious and
unjust, so evidently tending to divide and alienate the minds of his Majesty's
good subjects from each other, that all wise and good men must look upon it
with indignation and contempt.

Dr. Douglass tells us in his Summary, that by an ancient law of the
Massachusetts province, none were allowed to be freemen but those who were
church members, that is (says he) of the independent or congregational
religious mode; and that only freemen were capable of voting in civil
assemblies. Upon which he remarks. This was too narrow and consigned, perhaps
more severe than ever was practiced by the Church of England in its most
bigoted and faulty periods. Sum. hist. and pol. p. 432.
To be sure a greater infringement upon English liberty was never attempted;
such a law might well therefore be repealed, as it soon was upon the King's
letter in 1662. Though the Dr. says no acts of uniformity ever took place here,
so far as he has learnt, p. 94 of Observe.
And yet this is the very thing which the Dr. in the foregoing passages seems
desirous of establishing, not by a law indeed, the legislature are too wise and
just to hearken to insinuations so fatal to liberty, but by raising such a
violent spirit of opposition in the people as may answer the same end. Let any
man read the virulent passage now under consideration from page 155 to 157, and
having weighed the temper and spirit of it, let him turn to page 175, and
observe the same man declaring, that he is far from desiring to inflame the
passions of any one sect or party against another: and when he has done this
let him wonder. It is not expected he should reconcile them, the author would
not put the Dr. himself upon so impossible a task as this.

SHOULD the Church of England prevail in New England he is afraid we should all
be taxed for the support of Bishops and their underlings. This was certainly
too weak an insinuation for one who writes himself D. D. and rather discovers
the writer's passion than his judgment. Even the lowest of the people, are too
much of philosophers and divines, to be taken in at this time of day, by such
mean artifice as this; but it was designed to beget a prejudice in the minds of
the people against episcopacy, at which he takes all occasions to express his
dislike; and indeed his best friends must wish that he had done no more; but
when he suffers himself to treat that whole venerable order, with an indecency
of expression, which would be quite unbecoming if it were offered to the lowest
of mankind, let the impartial reader judge from what temper it must proceed.

THE Dr. could not be ignorant that episcopal government generally obtained
through all ages of the christian church; that it takes place at this day in
almost all the christian world; that the protestant churches abroad, who are
not so happy as to live under this form of church government, do yet express
the highest reverence and esteem of it; it would therefore doubtless have been
more becoming to have expressed his dislike in terms of greater modesty than he
has usually done in this and many other of his writings, of an order so
generally held in veneration. Even the admired Calvin and Beza have highly
applauded the episcopal hierarchy of England, as appears by their letter to
Queen Elizabeth, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others. They pray heartily
to God for the continuance and preservation of it, bewail their own unhappiness
in the want of it, and mention it as their unavoidable misfortune to be without
it. As to Calvin, although he justly objects to that universal supremacy claimed
by the sea of Rome, as usurping the prerogative of Christ, he would not believe
that any man could oppose the episcopal hierarchy; but (says he, speaking of
the Romish church) If they would show us such an hierarchy, in which the
Bishops might so preside, as not to refuse subjection to Christ, but depend
upon him as their only head, and refer themselves to him, then truly I will
confess that they deserve to be anathematized, if any such men shall be, who
refuse to reverence it, and submit to it with the utmost obedience. Talem si
nobis hierarchiam exhibeant, in qua sic emineant episcopi, ut Christo subesse
non recusent, et ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant, et ad ipsum referantur,
tum vero nullo non anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt qui non eam
revereantur, summaque obedientia observent. Calvin de necessitate eccles.
reform.
To the same purpose also does Beza express himself. But if any there be (which
truly you will scarce persuade me to believe) who reject the whole order of
Bishops; God forbid that any man in his right mind should assent to their
madness. Si qui sunt autem (quod sane mihi non facile persuaseris) qui omnem
episcoporum ordinem rejiciant, absit ut quisquam satis sanae mentis furoribus
illorum assentiatur. Beza ad Tractat. de minist. ev. Grad. ab Hadrian. Sarav.
Belga editam. c. 1.
And particularly declares that it was never his intention to oppose the
hierarchy of the Church of England which singular blessing of God he desires
she may enjoy, and wishes it may be perpetual. Fruatur sane ista singulari Dei
beneficentia, quae utinam sit illi perpetua, ibid c. 18.
If foreigners could speak with so much respect and reverence of this venerable
order; how great a want of decency does it imply in a subject of this nation,
who owes his liberty and every privilege he enjoys to the indulgence of that
very constitution which appoints them, how indecent is it, I say, to speak of
them in such opprobious terms as he has done in these observations, and in many
other of his writings, of which the reader will hereafter find a specimen?

NOR is it the venerable order of Bishops only, which this writer has treated
with such unbecoming freedom. Every part of the established ecclesiastical
constitution seems to provoke his displeasure; but nothing raises his anger
more, than that the Society should encourage the use of the liturgy in New
England; his contemptuous ridicule of which, makes the greatest part of his
14th section.

THIS, so far as it is an argument has been urged by him, oftentimes before,
and implies that he thinks the Society, have no right by their charter to
support a public religion in New England, especially to the neglect of the
Indians and the southern heathenish governments; for if they have a right to
support religion in New England at all, he allows it is natural to expect they
should do it in their own way, and according to their own sentiments. Observa.
p. 1^.
To this it has already been replied, that New England containing a great many
negro slaves that are still heathen, a great many freethinkers and other
misbelievers, besides a great number of people from Europe educated in, and
seriously attached to the Church of England, is directly in the most literal
sense, one object of the Society's charity agreeable to their charter. And that
they have also given their attention to the bordering heathen, and to those
other governments which he esteems little better than heathen, in such
proportion as they (whom he allows to be proper judges in this case) have found
encouragement to hope for success.

As to the liturgy considered in another light, and as the object of his
particular aversion, without entering into any direct vindication of it; it may
be no improper rebuke to his licentious freedom upon this subject, to remark,
that the whole christian church from the beginning has made use of liturgies in
the public worship of God, as appears from the several forms of this kind which
are still extant: And the foreign reformed churches at this day, have not only
each of them a public liturgy, but have given ample testimony to the excellency
of that in use in the church of England; In the year 1661 Dr. Durell published
a sermon in defense of the English liturgy, some copies of which he sent to
several the most eminent ministers of the reformed churches in France. From
whom he received the following answers. From Monsieur do l'Angle, minister at
Rouen.
Rouen, ce 5. December. 1661. Monsieur et tres honor friar,
Je ne sai si je vous ai remercie de vostre excellent sermon -- c'est un
excellent present que vous m'aves fait, vous le deves fair imprimer en mesme
volume que vostre Lithurgie Francoise afin qu'il lui serve d'Ange Tutelaire, et
qu'il Paccompagne, in secula seculorum.

From Monsieur Bochart, minister of Caen.
De Caen, ce December. 1661. Monsieur and tres honor friar,
Je vous suis tres oblige des exemplaires de vostre sermon -- Vostre text est
tres bien choisi, bien explique, bien applique.

From Monsieur Gaches, minister of Paris.
A Paris, ce 8. December. 1661.
-- Je pass a vostre sermon, qu'on m'apporta il y a trois jours, et que je leu
d'abord avidement. Si vous avies besoin d'approbation apres celle du Chappelain
de vostre Evesque, j'y joindrois tres volontieres la mienne.

From Mr. de l'Angle, minister at Rouen.
Rouen, December 5. 1661. Sir, my most honored brother.
I know not whether I have thanked you for your sermon -- it is an excellent
present you have made me; you ought to have it printed with your Liturgy in
French of the same volume, to be as its Angel Guardian, and to accompany the
same forever.

From Mr. Bochart, minister of Caen.
Caen, December 1661. Sir, my most honored brother,
I am very much obliged to you for the copies of your sermon -- your text is
very well chosen, very well expounded, very well applied.

From Mr. Gaches, minister of Paris.
Paris, December 8. 1661.
-- I pass to your sermon, which was brought to me three days ago, and which I
forthwith read with great greediness. If you stood in need of an approbation,
after that of your Bishop's Chaplain, I would most willingly add mine to the
same.

These were followed by letters of the same purport from Messieurs Daille, the
father and son, both ministers of Paris, from Monsieur Tricot, Monsieur Rosel,
and Monsieur du Vidal, all three ministers of the reformed church of Tours.


which considerations ought at least to have checked his unseasonable ridicule,
and have taught him to mention with an air of greater seriousness, a subject
which the christian world have agreed to venerate.

THE author has now gone through every thing in the Dr's book which he looks upon
to be material, i. e. which relates to the professed design, or principal
argument of it. If any thing has inadvertently escaped him, which the Dr.
thinks to be of consequence to his main argument, upon proper notice of it, he
will readily wait upon him agin. There are indeed sundry incidental reflections
to be met with, but as they are foreign to the general argument, and especially
as they have been honored with some proper remarks in a pamphlet lately
published at Portsmouth in New Hampshire, the author does not at present think
it worth his while to take notice of them.

To sum up the argument on both sides -- The Dr's book is entitled Observations
on the charter and conduct of the Society, etc. designed to show their
nonconformity to each other. In prosecuting this design the Dr. has given us
his, or rather Mr. Hobart's sense of the charter; this sense he has endeavored
to support, by adducing the title and seal, and sundry sermons of the Society
in consimation of it. After which, comparing the conduct of the Society with
the design of their institution, as he has planned it, he sinds them to be
inconsistent, or to disagree with with each other. This is a short (and it is
supposed) a just representation of the Dr's management of the present argument,
which if he had pursued in a modest manner, without scurrility or abuse, no
body would have blamed him? he would have been entitled to a modest and genteel
reply. Whether he has observed this method, let the unprejudiced reader judge.

THE present reply is intended to show that the conduct of the Society is not
inconsistent with their charter, nor yet with the title or seal, or the
anniversary sermons preached before them. To prove this the author has
endeavored to show, First, That the Society have always had such means of
information, both in respect to the true meaning of their charter, and also in
regard to the state of religion in the plantations, that it is morally certain
they could not have been deceived in regard to these points. 2dly. The members
of which that Society is composed, are in general persons of so respectable a
character, that it is utterly improbable they would act contrary to their
institution with design; and further that if they were inclined to do so, it
would have been impossible to have succeeded in so iniquitous a purpose,
because their charter obliges them annually to submit their whole transactions,
to the examination of the Lord chancellor and chief justices of the King's
bench and common pleas, who are purposely appointed by the Crown to see that
the true intent and meaning of the grant be complied with. 3dly, The author has
examined the charter itself, and compared the same with the actual conduct of
the Society, and finds that they have pursued the several objects therein
recommended, agreeable to their title and seal, and to the general purport of
their annual sermons.

In examining the charter he thinks it appears, that the Dr's interpretation of
it cannot be just, inasmuch as it renders it inconsistent with itself; so also
his explanation of the seal and title of the Society militates with his
interpretation of the charter, and serves to prove his mistakes as to both. His
quotations from the anniversary sermons of the Society, as they relate to one
object only of their institution, must be looked upon as a partial
representation, however they do not at all interfere with what is allowed to be
the sense of the charter, or with their general conduct, and consequently are
nothing at all to the purpose for which they were introduced.

Besides this, the author has made a few casual strictures upon some of the
Dr's incidental reflections, as they happened to fall in the way of the
principal argument; and he was the rather inclined to do this, because the Dr's
quarrel with the Society, seems really to take its rise, not so much from any
thing he saw amiss in their conduct, as from his inveterate hatred, and
unreasonable displeasure toward the church of England, which he slatters
himself could not subsist long in the country without the Society's countenance
and support. And yet in this perhaps he is mistaken, since the providence of
God has more ways than one of supporting his own cause; so that if the Society
should think fit to withdraw their assistance (which they will hardly do the
sooner for such observations as his) it is not doubted but that God would raise
up other helps, or some way direct to sufficient means for the preservation of
his church. It was the advice of a wiser man than perhaps cither of us, to the
jewish council, when they were consulting how they should put a stop to the
preaching of the apostles, and the early propagation of the gospel; Refrain
from these men, and let them alone: for if this council, or this work be of
men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest
happily ye be found even to fight against God.

If the Society, either through misrepresentation, or by any other means, have
been led into any mistake in the management of any part of their trust, no man
will think that the Dr's indecent and abusive treatment of them is the way to
incline them to amend it. Had it not been better to have improved upon the hint
which he has quoted from bishop Burnet, and by this means have excited their
emulation? or as the bishop expresses it "have provoked them to jealously"? Mr.
Hobart referring to the same passage mentions some great things that have been
done in regard to the conversion of the Indians by the Society in Scotland for
propagating christian knowledge, (it is supposed by the care and management of
their commissioners at Boston) with a small expense. Mr. Hobart's Is It Address
p. 129.
Supposing the truth of this, (which the author has no inclination to call in
question) every good christian will sincerely rejoice at it, and pray God that
they may still meet with more abundant success. But then would it not have been
infinitely more useful, and have discovered more of a christian spirit, if the
Dr. instead of abusing the Society for the propagation of the gospel, had
employed himself in giving a particular account of that other Society which has
been thus remarkably successful, e. g. What has been their certain fund, what
their casual benefactions, from whom they receive their money, and how it is
expended, what missionaries they employ, at what places they are fixed, and what
are their respective salaries, and lastly, what accounts have been received
from them as to the fruit of their labors: Had he done this, in some such
plain open and honest method as the Society for propagating the gospel have
done, it might possibly not only have provoked them to emulation, but have
opened to them some new or more effectual methods for rendering their pious
designs successful. Certain it is, that no Society, whether incorporated or
merely voluntary, whose single aim and intention it is to promote the glory of
God, in enlarging the kingdom of the Redeemer, have any reason to be ashamed of
publishing their transactions to the world: On the contrary it seems to be a
duty to do so, not only to prevent suspicion of ill and improper designs, but
also that their light shining out with a clear unsullied brightness before men,
others may be induced either to join with them and strengthen their hands, or
be led to set on foot some other pious and charitable work of a similar kind to
the further advancement of God's glory.

As to Indian conversions the author's opinion is, that the Rev. and worthy Mr.
Wheelock's judicious scheme of educating such of the younger Natives, as may be
obtained, among the English at a distance from their own homes, and then
sending them back to their friends and countrymen, whether as missionaries or
otherwise; if it may be done in any considerable numbers, would have the best
influence in civilizing the savage temper of those people, and preparing them
for the reception of the gospel; This good design therefore, as it deserves all
encouragement, so it is pity but it should be universally known. Mr. Wheelock
has indeed published an open and undisguised, as well as a modest account of
his plan, and of the progress he has hitherto made in it, but since it has not
yet circulated so far as it might be wished, this little intimation is designed
to promote its being more generally known. The pamphlet referred to is
entitled, A plain and faithful narrative of the original design, rise, progress
and present slate of the Indian charity school at Lebanon in Connecticut.
Printed by R. and S. Draper, Boston, 1763.


But to return from this short digression. -- If the Dr. should complain, or
rather (since he has no right to complain) if his friends should complain in
his behalf, that in the foregoing remarks, the author has sometimes used too
great a severity of expression, let them consider the provocation; let them
reflect on the indecent language, and various abuse, that the Dr. has poured
out, not on single persons only, but upon public bodies, upon the most
respectable characters, upon the established religion of the nation, upon those
who come over to, or embrace it in N. England in general as men void of all
piety and geodness, Obs p 98.
upon the most sacred doctrines of our holy religion -- let them I say reflect
upon these things, and then say whether there was not an occasion for some kind
of rebuke. The author is very far from being fond of harsh and severe epithets,
he had infinitely rather examine subjects of controversy with that meekness and
fear which is preseribed by the apostle; but even the meek and gentle spirit of
the gospel not only allows, but also requires in regard to such licentious
freedoms, as the Dr. has thought proper to use, that they should be rebuked
sharply.

If any one shall still think that the Dr's foible is represented in too strong
a light, that he has not been guilty of all that indecent abuse in his writings
with which he seems here to have been charged; let such person examine the
following specimen taken from his own writings, most of them solemoly delivered
from the pulpit. It is hoped that it will serve to satisfy the most
incredulous, and besides it may serve to show the Dr. to himself, and let him
see how far he is departed, I will not say from the dignity of the sacred
office only, but from the spirit of the gospel.

And first observe the modesty of his expressions in regard to Kings whom he
calls Sceptered Tyrants. Obs. p. 155. and says that

The greatest part of mankind now are and almost always have been oppressed by
wicked tyrants, called civil rulers, Kings and Emperors. Vol. Ser. printed
1755. p. 426.

2ndly. Expressions in regard to the established church of England, its
constitution, Bishops and clergy

An enormous hierarchy ascending by various gradations from the dirt to the
skies. Obs. p. 155.

An hierarchy resembling that of the romish church, where one great prelate
presides over the whole, with all the inferior religious orders, the lowest of
which are as it were trodden in the dirt. Obs. p. 79.

He says that one of our Kings was wheedled and duped to his destruction by the
furious episcopal zealots of that day. Obs. p. 157.

And mentions the bishops before the revolution

The persecuting antichristian spirit of many prelates before the revolution.
Do. 157.

And in the foregoing page speaks contemptuously of Bishops and their
underlings. p. 156. In the page before they are styled

The mitred lordly successors of the fishermen of Galilee. Obs. p. 155. In the
39th page he says that before the revolution

Episcopal persecution was seconded by royal power; which condescended to be
subservient to the views of domineering prelates. Obs. p. 39.

In another passage he says that Their unholy zeal and oppressions, were
countenanced by sceptred tyrants, p. 155.

In which latter expression as well as many others of like kind he has reason
he says to think that

He speaks the sense of the far greater, wiser and better part of the people in
N. England. p. 154.

As to this I have better reason to think that he is widely mistaken, and that
the greater, wiser and better part of N. England do entirely disapprove his
censorious indecent and uncharitable temper.

Having thus treated the bishops, the church itself could not expect better
quarter, and accordingly he has uncharacterized the church of England, the
established church of the nation, of which the King himself is, under God, the
head, which he loves and has sworn to defend, to be,

A cruel persecuting church, -- Obs. p. 40. to which that he might preserve
himself from the censure of civil authority he subjoins,

As that was before the revolution.

We may now pass to some expressions delivered by him from the pulpit, as
contained in a sermon on the anniversary of King Charles's martyrdom. In the
preface to which he speaks of Bishops and the clergy in general under the title
of

Imperious Bishops and reverend Jockies.

And in the sermon itself they are styled

Reverend and right reverend drones; who preach but once a year, and then, not
the gospel of Jesus Christ, but -- some favorite point of church tyranny and
antichristian usurpation.

p. 21.22.

Speaking of the King, he says that

He supported that more than fiend archbishop Laud and the clergy of his stamp,
in all their church tyranny andhellish cruelties. p. 42.

There seems to have been an impious bargain struck up betwixt the scepter and
the surplice for enslaving both the bodies and souls of men. The King appeared
to be willing that the clergy should do what they would -- set up a monstrous
hierarchy like that of Rome -- a monstrous inquisition like that of Spain or
Portugal -- or any thing else which their own pride, and the devils malice
could prompt them to. p. 52.

Take a further sample of this Gentleman's meek spirit and temper.

Some contend and foam and curse their brethren for the sake of the athanasian
trinity till it is evident they do not love and fear the one living and true
God. Others you will see raging about their peculiar notions of original sin,
so as to prove themselves guilty of actual transgression. About election till
they prove themselves reprobates. About particular redemption till they show
that they themselves are not redeemed from a vain conversation. You will hear
others quarrelling about imputed righteousness with such fury and bitterness,
as to show that they are destitute of personal. About special grace, so as to
show that they have not even common. About faith while they make shipwreck of a
good conscience.

Sermon. XI. Vol. I. p. 403.

It will doubtless be disagreeable to the reader to be any longer entertained
with expressions and observations so utterly unbecoming a minister of Jesus
Christ, or in truth any other disciple of that divine master. The author will
here therefore put an end to the specimen with the mention of a trifling
inconsistency which this otherwise accurate Gentleman has fallen into in the
heat of his argument.

Mr. Apthorp had observed that the religious state of the country is manifestly
improved as to its speculative doctrines, notwithstanding the immoralities we
lament and wish to reform. After spending several pages (viz. from 83 to 92.)
to confute this position, the Dr. concludes as in the opposite column --

It is not improper to observe that the Dr. is sometimes in a better temper
than what is implied in the opposite column particularly when he declares that
he would not willingly and unnecessarily give offense to any persons of that
persuasion (the church of England) Obs. p. 175.

That the main end he had in view (in writing his Observations) was -- that of
serving the cause of truth and rightcousness -- in distinction from all private
party opinions whatsoever. Obs. p. 174.

He declares that he is far from desiring to inflame the passions of any one
sect or party against another: so far from it that he would sincerely rejoice
to be in the least degree instrumental of uniting them in the bonds of
Christian charity, on the true plan of the Gospel. Obs. p. 175.

Has a great aversion to controversy. Obs. p. 7.

When once providence shall have put it in our power to live thus (peaceably
that is in respect to our enemies) -- we are wholly inexcuseable -- if we
should turn aside to vain jangling amongst our selves, doting about questions
and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil-surmisings,
and perverse disputings, instead of studying the things that make for peace,
and the things whereby we may edify one another.

If we should heneforth live as becomes fellow subjects and fellow christians,
in the fear of God, and brotherly love, etc. Sermon. on the reduction of Quebec,
p. 59, 60.

The opposite expressions are the language of one who says he would not bring a
railing accusation even against the devil, though he were contending with him,
much less would he bring such an accusation against his brethren.

Vol. I. Ser. X. p. 354.

I am far from intending (says the Dr.) to debase preaching by scolding, or
bringing a railing accusation, even against wicked and ungodly men. Nor will I
forget the apostle's admonition to Timothy, Rebuke not an elder [or aged
person] but entreat him as a father: as I hope I have not forgotten what he
immediately subjoins, and the younger men as brethren. Prac. Disc. on the
earthquake, Sermon. IX. p. 263, 264.

The opposite are strange expressions, to say no worse, for one who calls
himself a minister of Jesus Christ.

Would not any serious person imagine that the opposite passage would have been
full as descriptive (I know it would not have been quite so rhetorical) if the
words foaming, raging, quarrelling, fury and bitterness had been omitted, or at
least if some softer terms had been substituted to express his displeasure at
those who hold the doctrines he there mentions.

It has been too common for people in New England to express themselves in a
manner justly exceptionable upon these points (i. e. the principles he supposes
the Gentleman had referred to) Obs. p. 92. and in Sermon. I. Vol. I. p. 16. He
says it is one of the chief honors of the present age, that the principles of
religion, particularly of religious liberty, are better understood and more
generally espoused, than they have perhaps been since the days of the apostles;
it were to be wished that practical christianity, had made progress in the same
proportion.

THIS little contrast is left to speak for it self; but as to the forgoing
specimen the author presumes the Dr's. best friends, must seriously wish that
he had expressed himself, not only with more decency and respect, but more
agreeable to the temper of the gospel: Others perhaps who have less tenderness
for him, will also have less charity, and be liable to suspect that he deceives
himself, when he professes a regard for that divine religion which disclaims
all evil speaking, railing and reviling, and whose principal characteristic is
love or benevolence, a principle which they may think he notoriously violates
-- Be that as it may, the author is of opinion that the Dr. has no room to
complain of harsh or severe treatment, no not although it should be more
disagreeable than any he has yet met with; unless he will be pleased for the
future at least to treat mankind with more respect than he has usually done,
not only in his book of observations but even in many of his sermons.

THE author cannot persuade himself to conclude these reflections without
expressing his astonishment, that any gentlemen, though of congregational
principles, and much more that the reverend gentlemen who are the spiritual
guides of that denomination, overlooking the Dr's attempts to undermine the
fundamental principles of their faith, should express their approbation of this
his performance, which in the conduct of it discovers so little of the meekness
and gentleness of the gospel. Can you, gentlemen, be so far blinded by
prejudice or a party spirit, as tamely to give up those essential doctrines for
which you have hitherto laudably contended, and which once you esteemed your
glory? Can you, I say, cherish and flatter the man, who has been laboring from
pulpit and press to demolish the doctrines which your forefathers have handed
down to you? (while yet he pretends to venerate them) those doctrines, which by
way of eminence, you have been wont to style the doctrines of grace? Vol, of
Sermon. printed 1755, passim.
Are these things of less consequence than an opposition to the church of
England? How is it then that you have complimented the Dr. with your thanks
(for so I hear many of you at Boston have done) for his book of observations,
who by his other writings, has been destroying the fundamentals of your faith?
Has he not been undermining the dignity and divinity of the son of God? See
vol. I. sermon. IX. p. 267, 268, 291. Sermon. X. p. 341, 342, Sermon. XII. p. 417,
418. note, but particularly Sermon. II. on Christian Sobriety, from p. 57 to 68.
Does he not deny and ridicule the doctrine of justification by faith? calling
it confusion and an unintelligible rant, Sermon. VII. vol. I. p. 173, note.
nonsense, Sermon. VIII. p. 237.
gibberish, Sermon. VIII. p. 249.
mere jargon, Do. p. 251.
a means of beguiling unstable souls to their destruction, Do. p. 254.
an irrational unscriptural doctrine, of pernicious tendency with regard to the
lives and manners of men. Do. p. 255.
Does he not discard the notion of original sin, and brand the doctrine of
imputed righteousness with the reproach of nonsense? And have you not,
gentlemen, implicitly countenanced these, and the numerous other errors in
doctrine which are scattered up and down his writings, by your unseasonable
compliments for his late observations upon that venerabic Body of men the
Society for the propagation of the gospel, etc. Will not strangers, will not
every one who shall read the errors which this gentleman has published,
naturally conclude, that you, gentlemen, do abet and approve them, who have
thus given your sanction to this his last, but not least injurious performance?
-- I speak it with grief and concern, are you so carried away with a party
spirit as to countenance such abuse and misrepresentation of the church of
England, while you have not the courage to rise up in defense of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the truth of his gospel? -- Remember who has said, he that is
ashamed of me and of my words, etc. of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed when
he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.

BUT to return from this digression, if it may be called one. -- Besides the
errors in doctrine hinted at in the foregoing remarks, the Dr's reflection upon
the Song of Solomon is sufficient to show how easy it is for him to discard
even the sacred canon of scripture itself: Or perhaps it was introduced merely
for the sake of the witticism. It would discover however both more wisdom and
seriousness to reserve his drollery for some less important subject. But no
witticism, nor any thing else, will justify the pernicious tendency of the
doctrine of annihilation, to which he has given too much countenance in the
following passage. Speaking of such as die in their sins; The utmost they can
hope for (says he) is to be annihilated after suffering unutterable torments:
Though I do not assert, that they can, according to the scripture account, hope
for so great a favor as even this would be, viz. to be utterly blotted out of
being! However it must be consessed that some expressions of scripture seem, at
first view, to countenance this supposition. Ser. Vol. 1. p. 475.476. note.
This will too greedily be catched at by those who have lived in such a manner,
as to have no better hope in their death. It might not be amiss for the Dr. to
take a review of his works, and expunge this and many other passages which
certainly have a threatening aspect upon the religion of Jesus Christ.

BUT beside the ill consequences to religion, and especially among the rising
generation, which may not improbably follow from the principles he is laboring
to propagate: If the government enjoy any privileges by virtue of their
charter, which they are fond of retaining; one may be confident that the spirit
and temper of the Dr's writings, so far as it can be supposed they are
publicly countenanced, will be attended with no favorable impressions, where
it is the interest of the province to stand in a favorable light. It were to
be wished that this were more thought of by some well disposed people, who do
not appear to be aware of the consequences, which such improper liberties may
produce in regard to the civil interests and privileges of that province.

As the author firmly believes that this is not the general temper of people in
the colonies, so it is hoped it will be received at home as the effect of this
Gentleman's particular disposition only, and that of two or three of his
abettors.

To conclude, the author apprehends he has now shown the Dr. to himself (to use
his own phrase) and he hopes has also shown him to other people. The first with
a charitable view to his amendment, the latter with a design to caution others
against being misled. To these good purposes, it will not be improper to pray,
though in the words of the liturgy, that God would grant unto us all, that we may
both perceive and know what things we ought to do, and also may have grace and
power faithfully to fulfill the same.

A short Vindication of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. etc.
against the Objections, Mistakes and Misrepresentations of Dr. MAYHEW, in his
Observations, on the Conduct of that Society. By one of its Members. In a
LETTER to a FRIEND.
Dear SIR,
THE great difficulty I labor under in writing, must be my apology for writing
very briefly, and attending only to the most material things.

It is too evident from the general current of Dr. Mayhew's performance, That,
it is his aim to beget a prejudice, and an odium in his readers, against his
antagenist, and against the church of England, and the Society, from
considerations and reflections, either merely personal, or ludicrous, and often
trifling, and few of them, relating to the real merits of the cause; which is a
practice quite unbecoming a just writer, either in the critical, or moral sense
of that character.

There is one grand imposition upon his readers, which runs through the whole,
and is, as it were, the burden of his song, in which, there is not the least
truth, and for which, there never was the least ground, or foundation, as ever
I could learn, viz. That the chief view and endeavor of the Society has been
to convert presbyterians and congregationalists to the church, to the neglect
of Negroes and Indians, and the heathenish colonies, as he calls them.

If they, or their missionaries had done this, they would have had infinitely
more reason, and right in what they did, than the dissenters from the beginning
had, in using all possible endeavors, to promote factions, and disaffect
people, to the established church of England, in all quarters, and make all the
proselytes they could, from her commanion, to their confused parties and sects,
issuing in downright rebellion: So that this, is alleged with a very ill
grace, by one, derived from, and who is a violent abettor of that party.

It is true, every good churchman must rejoice, when any of our wandering
brethren, who have been drawn away, from the bosom and communion of the church,
or educated in prejudice against it, are reclaimed, and return to the unity of
the church, and be glad to be instrumental, as God in his providence gives them
opportunity, in reconciling any of them: But, as the Society was not
incorporated for that purpose, nor was it ever their principal aim. I believe
very few instances, if any, can be produced, of any missionaries beginning with
any dissenter, with a view at reclaiming him to the church. I have been long
knowing to the affairs of the Society, and know of no such instances.

We have indeed been treated bith great obloquy by dissentors representing us,
as little better than roman catholics, etc. On these occasions we have defended
ourselves, as well as we could: and can any body blame us for it? And can any
reasonable person wonder if this should sometimes prove the occasion of the
conversion of some sensible honest people? Or if the mere curiosity of others
attending occasionally on our beautiful and instructive service, should be the
means of their being reconciled, when they see, that it does not consist of
extempore human invention, but is a wise and judicious collection from the holy
scriptures? so that, their very love to the scriptures, has sometimes led them
to love the service of the church.

But it is said, That Dr. Bray, the father of the Society, reported, that in
the Massachusetts and Connecticut, there was no occasion for the Society to do
any thing, as they were provided for, in the dissenting way: -- I answer, I
knew Dr. Bray very well, he was doubtless a very good man, and I agree to his
report at that time, and should have made the same report myself: There was
then (except at Boston,) but here and there a member of the church of England,
scatrered about in these provinces; and according to the constitution of the
Society, while there was no congregation of the church in those parts, the
Society had no occasion to send any missionaries thither: But does it at all
follow, that when there came to be such numbers of conscientious members of the
church of England, as to make competent congregations for worship, being not
well able to provide for a minister themselves, that the Society had by their
charter, no right and business, to assist in providing for them, merely because
the dissenters in those provinces were already provided for? Can any reason be
given, why a conscientious body of church people in these provinces, should not
be provided for, as well as in any other province? -- You will say, let them go
to meeting, I answer, many of them were so candid, as to go to the meetings,
rather than no where, though it was very tedious and disagreeable to them, till
they grew in numbers, so as to make competent congregations.

Yea, but it is represented, That the origin of the church, in these provinces,
has been generally owing to faction, discontent with ministers, and about
rates, pews, and the like, and though the church is the established religion of
our mother country, and in the act of union, is, (as Dr. Douglass, his
favorite author allows) established in all the plancations; he is pleased in
his great good manners, to speak of her in these governments, under no better
terms, than those of party and faction.

How much truth there may be in Dr. Colman's account of the origin of the
church, at Newbury and Brain-tree, I am not able to say, and that some
individuals have had little better motives in conforming, than those mentioned,
I will not deny, and perhaps some of the missionaries have not always acted
prudently, and possibly some may have been in a few instances too forward; such
things are common to frail human nature; however, this I know, that the general
rule and practice where I am acquainted, have been, to send malcontents, and
persons liable to censure, back, to make peace at home, before they came over
to us. But, suppose some things a little wrong, is it fit, that so respectable
a body, as the Society or the church, should be reproached, with the
forwardness, or misconduct, of a few individuals?

Let me, however, give what I know to be generally a true account, of the
origin of the church in these provinces.

The true causes, and occasions, of the being and growth of so many
congregations of the church of England, in these provinces, are these.

1st. As the country continued to increase, and there were many accessions from
Great Britain and Ireland, there were among others, many of the established
church, who came over to settle in these colonies, as well as others, so that
there was 50 years ago, scarce a town of considerable standing, but what had
some scattering among them, and in some there were several families: In
Straiford, for instance, the first in Connecticut that applied to the Society;
there were at the beginning of this century about fifteen families, and five or
six more in the nearest towns, that joined with them; and in 1722, when the
first mission was established, there were about thirty or forty; now, on
supposition that the first who settled in these provinces were dissenters
generally, yet I know no reason why these lands should be thought so sacred to
them, as to exclude the church, nor, why church people should not be at
liberty, to settle themselves in these colonies, as well as in any others? And
if they do, who can deny, that they have as good a right to enjoy their way of
worship as their neighbors? And if they need, and obtain any charitable
assistance, can any thing but envy and malevolence, make such a clamor against
it? But,

2. So the case has been, ever since church people settled in these countries,
many dissenters have treated them with much clamor and contempt, and frequent
disputings have arisen, which occasioned many to procure books, wherewith to
defend themselves, such as arch bishop King's inventions of men in the worship
of God, the London cases, Hoadley against Calamy, arch bishop Potter on church
government, and some Hooker's ecclesiastical polity, and such like. And their
thus defending themselves, occasioned many inquisitive candid dissenters to
read those books, which reconciled them to the church; so that the dissenters
themselves by thus censuring, and disputing, have occasioned the increase of
the church, and I hope it may be truly said, in a judgment of charity, many
both of the original church people, and of the proselyted dissenters have been
sincerely conscientious. -- Dr. Mayhew indeed, and some other dissenters,
however differing in some things, as much, (if not more) among themselves, as
either of them from the church, seem so bigoted to their dissenting
principles, in one shape or other, and so full of themselves, that they scarce
know how to imagine, that church people, or any who differ from them, can be
conscientious; but surely, any candid and indifferent persons, that know any
thing of such great and good men, as Hooker and Chillingworth, must allow, that
it is possible, for a church man, upon the foot of Hooker's ecclesiastical
polity, and Chillingworth's demonstration of episcopacy, (to say nothing of
arch bishop Potter and arch bishop Sharp, and the many others) to be at least
as conscientious, as any dissenters in their way upon the foot of any of their
various principles.

3dly. Another thing and what has of late chiefly occasioned the accession of
multitudes to the church, was, the wild enthusiasm that long obtained among
themselves, on which occasion, their own managements were in many instances, so
extravagant and ridiculous, as tended vastly more, to drive their people into
the church, than any thing we ever did to draw them over to it. --
Particularly, that monstrous enthusiasm that was at first mightily encouraged
by themselves fifteen or twenty years ago, in consequence of Mr. White-field's
rambling over the country, once and again, who was followed by a great many
strolling teachers, who propagated so many wild and horrid notions of God and
the gospel, that a multitude of people, were so bewildered that they could find
no rest to the sole of their foot, till they took refuge in the church, as
their only ark of safety. And many of these wild notions (to say nothing now of
the opposite extremes of arianism, socinianism, and independent-whiggism)
continue among great numbers to this day, and have occasioned much hot
contention among them in settling ministers, and often the prostitution of
discipline upon the meanest trifles, which have occasioned many people to
conclude, that if they must separate from their former brethren, who are in
endless contentions and confusion, their best way must be to retire into the
church, which is in peace. -- Now, these are all known facts: Is not Dr. Mayhew
then very disingenuous to conceal them, and ascribe the being and increase of
the church, only to petts and quarrels about pews, rates, and such trifling
things, and to a mere spirit of faction?

But, it is pretended, great mischeifs have befallen the country by means of
the church, (of which however, he gives no proof); to this I answer, certain it
is, that great advantages have derived from it, even to the dissenters
themselves: it has occasioned a great increase of knowledge, by their reading
many of our excellent writers, from whom they have gained their best notion's,
and much greater correctness, than they had, both in writing and speaking; it
has provoked them to emulation, and it is certain, that many of them have much
better notions of God and the gospel now, than they had before, and have much
improved in the knowledge of the scriptures and the evidences of christitanity.
-- Certain it is, that they are now, much beyond what they were, fifty years
ago, and as certain that they are greatly beholden to the church, for every
thing of this kind, wherein they excel themselves.

And besides this, in proportion as they have become more acquainted with the
church, they have much dropped their great prejudices against us, and
malevolence, and uncharitableness toward us, and charity, and good
neighborhood have greatly obtained between us; so that, if it was not for now
and then, such abusive and uncharitable scribblings of a few zealots, full of
very injurious misrepresentations, we should soon coalesce, and come into a
friendly, benevolent and christian temper, of mutual forbearance toward one
another, and be united in our common weal -- I might add, that in truth the
church has been so far from meddling in the various contentions in which they
have been almost continually engaged among themselves, owing to the weakness of
their constitution, and their republican separating and levelling principles,
that, to my certain knowledge, it has in many instances been a great check
upon them, and much rather tended to heal and quiet, than exasperate them --
And as to immoralities, I am sure, the church has born as faithful a testimony
against them, in every kind, as any of the dissenters have done; so that, if
immoralities have increased, it is not owing to the increase of the church, but
to the increase of mankind here, in proportion to which, from the nature of
man, immoralities will abound; I believe however, it may be said with truth,
that in proportion to her numbers, the church can show, at least as many sober,
conscientious christians, as the meetings: I know it to be so, in many places
where I am acquainted.

Now, whether it was to give a specimen of the Dr's sine talent at ridicule and
declamation, or, from a studied design to fright his readers, with an hideous
spectre, that he might create in them all the odium and antipathy he could
against the church of England, or, whether it was a little fit of the old
distraction, or, whether after all, the true and principal cause of his
bitterness against that found branch of the christian church may not still be
artfully concealed, I will not take upon me to say; but in page 155 you have a
most hideous outcry, about persecution, hierarchy, tyranny and the like
terrible monsters, that made sad work, it seems, an hundred, or an hundred and
fifty years ago, from which, however he allows at last, we have now nothing to
fear since the revolution, from our present mild princes, and moderate
prelates. -- Pray, good sir, what then was the matter with you, when you made
this tragical outcry? Did you design to set a mob upon us? or what?

You know very well, that the constitution of the church is just the same now
as it was then, and yet she abhors persecution, and tyranny now, (at least) as
much as you do: Why should she then be charged with the doings of tyrannous
courts, or some persecuting individuals, so long ago? or how can she be
answerable for those things, which for almost these hundred years have had no
existence, nor are ever like to exist again? or, what sense or honesty can
there be, in raising these old specter, long since vanished and gone, never to
revive, merely to blacken the church, and render her odious to the present age
while in truth the church is no more concerned in them, than your party, who
you must needs know, have perseacuted and tyrannized in their turn, as much, at
least, as ever the government who then professed the church did: You know that
persecution and toleration are merely political things, in which the church, as
such, (being a spiritual society, a kingdom not of this world,) is in no wife
concerned: The church is the same; it is the policy of the state only, that
has altered, and I readily agree with you, that in putting an end to
persecution, it has altered much for the better.

But the good Dr. is still terribly distressed, about the hierarchy, least that
should obtain here, ascending (as he says, in his fine florid way, a-la-mode de
independent whig.) ascending by various gradations from the dirt to the skies!
But pray Dr, be sober a little -- We have no pope! There are with us but three
orders, bishops, presbyters and deacons, according to the model of the pure
primitive church, long before the least step was made toward popery. And we
know that we have stronger evidence from the facts both of scripture and
antiquity, for the most wise, apostolical, and consequently divine
establishment of these three orders, than you have for infant baptism, and the
first day sabbath, of which you are with us so justly tenacious. -- Your
reasoning upon these points, and ours for episcopacy, from the original facts,
is exactly the same, only we have vastly the advantage of you. -- If our
reasoning for episcopacy must fall, yours on those points must much more fall
with it; as might be abundantly and incontestably shown, if it was now before
us. -- And we do averr, we are certainly as conscientious in our attachment to
our episcopal form of church government, as you can be to your presbyterial, or
whatever you call it. -- In God's name, then, what reason can be given, why we
should not be allowed to enjoy our way, as well as you, yours? We do not envy
you, why should you envy and malign us? --

Pray tell me sir, why we should not be allowed in this country, to be as
perfect in our kind, as you, in yours? We do not want in the least to molest
or oppose you, in your way, why then should you so vehemently oppose our being
provided for in our's? You would think it a terrible thing indeed, (doubtless a
degree of persecution,) to be obliged to go a thousand leagues for ordination,
if it was your case: can you then have no feeling for us whose unhappy case it
is? In truth sir, we do not aim at any thing but to live with you in quiet and
charitable neighborhood: We have not the least desire of an episcopate that
should have any thing to do with you, or at all interfere with any of your
proceedings, or, make any alterations among you, in church or state: We only
want bishops, to ordain, and govern our own clergy, to visit our churches, and
to instruct and confirm our laity: And I desire to know, what harm, such an
episcopate could do you? Nay; we do not insist upon a bishop's residing in
either of your favorite governments: Let him live in one of your heathenish
provinces: We should be content to wait upon him for orders, two or three
hundred miles distant from you, rather than fail; Why then should you have such
terrible apprehensions?

But the Dr. is moreover in a dismal pannic, lest the church's obtaining in
this country, should be of ill consequence to it is political affairs. -- But
why should he? Pray sir be calm -- Is not this our country, and the native
country of most of us, as well as yours? Can it then be, that it should not be
as dear to us, as it is to you? Have we not all one common interest, as to our
country's weal, being embarked in the same bottom? It is not possible for us,
each one judging for himself, to abound in his own sense, as to matters of
religion, and yet live in love, and be united heart and hand, in promoting the
public weal, and our common interests, wherein we are all agreed, and equally
concerned? I can see no manner of reason to the contrary, or any more danger,
lest we should differ about these public affairs, than if we were all of the
same sentiments in religion: and have we not been as forward in our country's
cause in the late trying times as any of you? Disputes will sometimes arise;
But I cannot see, why they should more in one case, than in the other? You need
not be in the least apprehensive of the churches being any other wise
established, than it is already, or that any tests will obtain in such a
country as this. -- Pray sir be easy. We mean you no harm -- If you would be
only as charitable and peaceable toward us, and among yourselves, as we are
heartily disposed to be toward you, we might live very quietly and happily
together, and there would be no occasion for another Columbus, (as you cry out)
to explore any other country for you. We are neither French, nor Indians, nor
Serpents, nor Dragons: Why so dreadfully afraid of being consumed by the
flames, or deluged in a flood of episcopacy? I realy pity you, that you should
suffer your terrors and passions so miserably to run away with you! I tell you
again, dear sir, we mean you no harm; we would only provide for our selves --
Pray do not be so terribly frighted! -- But O my country, dear New England,
suffer me to assure you, that you have infinitely more reason to be afraid of
such as are no friends to a co-essential trinity, and the divinity and
satisfaction of Christ, (besides other misbeliever's, and unbelievers, of which
there are many.) than of those who without censuring or aiming to interfere
with dissenters, are only desirous for themselves to enjoy the church of
England, in its primitive purity! --

But the Dr. insists that Massachusetts and Connecticut come not within the
Society's limits by the charter: I answer, this cannot be maintained, since
they are not excepted by the charter, unless it can be proved that the
congregations of the church for which the Society provides in those colonies,
would not in the sense and words of the charter, want, or be destitute of the
administration of God's word and sacraments, if the Society did not assist
them: But this he does not, nor can he prove. Surely he cannot pretend that
King William, who introduced the toleration of dissenters, would leave his
loving subjects of the church untolerated, and under the necessity of receiving
God's word and sacraments contrary to their consciences, or of having none. --
It must therefore be his meaning to provide, that his loving subjects of the
church might enjoy God's word and sacraments in these colonies, when such there
are in competent numbers, for congregations, as well as in other colonies; and
so the Society (who must be supposed to be at least as good judges of the
meaning of their charter, as Dr. Mayhew) have ever understood it, and when
opportunity offered, have practiced accordingly, not for the purpose of
converting dissenters to the church, but of providing for conscientious people
of the church, and who without this provision would have been in danger of as
great errors and absurdities, as those of popery,, See Mr. Beach's Friendly
Expostulation, just published, page 30, 31, etc.
and not without danger even of infidelity itself, into which I fear many of
the dissenters have been tempted by the absurd notions of christianity which
have been disseminated amongst us.

Now lastly, the great objection is, that the Society neglects the southern
colonies, Negroes and Indians.

I answer, As to the southern colonies, First, The Dr. must know, that in
Virginia. Maryland and South Carolina, the church is well provided for by law,
so that they are out of the question -- In South Carolina they are withdrawing
their missions, as they become vacant. --

Secondly, As to Georgia, and the Babama Islands, provision is made and making
for them as fast as may be, and as their occasion and application call for. And,

Thirdly, As to North Carolina (over which he drops a pious tear) as far as I
can find, ever since their application to the Society, they have been providing
for them as often as they have been applied to, and as fast as they could find
gentlemen to undertake missions, in those tedious and unhealthy climates; and
it appears from the abstract of 1761, that a great progress there is made, and
making, and the Society is very much engaged to provide for them, so that I
imagine those must have been dissenters for whom he is so compassionate. And,

Fourthly, As to Pensylvania. New-Jersies and New York, I believe no instance
can be produced, where application has been made to the Society, that has ever
been neglected. Indeed, I am sorry to say, there are some few places, where no
provision is made for religion, of any sort, that have contracted such an
indifference to any at all, (two of which I myself have often urged and engaged
my endeavors for them) that they could never be prevailed upon to embody
themselves, to build a church, or take any step toward applying to the Society
for their assistance, who would undoubtedly do for them, even to the neglect of
New England. Now to such I could wish the Society to send missionaries without
being applied to, as they would to ab origin heathen, and I trust they will do
so, before long, if those people do not apply.

And now, as to Negroes, what could the Society do more than it does, and not
without some considerable success, as appears by the Abstracts -- Their
missionaries every where instruct as many as their masters will send, and do
instruct and baptize many, and have some communicants -- They have several
catechists, and Dr. Bray's associates, several schools (besides that at
Barbados) who constantly instruct their children with good success; and they
have sent one worthy missionary to Cape Coast Castle, who labored there, 'till
his health and constitution were very near ruined. -- And,

Lastly, As to the Indians -- Many missionaries have to my knowledge
endeavored to convert them, as they have had opportunity; and one in
particular placed near a considerable clan of them, endeavored to reconcile
them to christianity, 'till some dissenters so prejudiced them against him,
that he could do them no Good -- And it is well known, that the Society,
(always ready to take every opportunity) has sent several missionaries to the
Mohawks, one after another, from the beginning, and that the Rev. and worthy
Dr. Barclay was very laborious, with good success for ten years, instructed and
baptized many, and had a considerable number of communicants. It is true, he
labored at first under some difficulty, for want of an interpreter; but it was
not long before he acquired so good skill in their language, as to preach and
perform the service to their perfect understanding, and was going on with very
good success, till the last war, about 1745. threw them into such confusion,
and the influence of popish missionaries, and the wicked insinuations of a
certain great man in those parts, created such a disaffection in them, that his
very life was in much danger; so that he was obliged to desist. So partially
and injuriously, not to say falsely, does Mr. Smith in (...) history of New York
represent this affair.
-- However, the Society has still a number there not to be despised, and much
more will soon be done; one thing they intend in order to it, is, to maintain a
number of lads together at King's College in New York, to be qualified for
missionaries among them.

Upon the whole, It may be truly said, what could the Society do more, that it
has not done, and all entirely agreeable to the true intention and meaning of
their charter. I cannot therefore, imagine but that the candid and serious,
even among the dissenters themselves, must be sensible that Dr. Mayhew has most
unjustly charged the Society, and that his own friends can scarcely be able to
withold a blush for him, at his indecent, as well as injurious treatment of
that venerable body, and of the church, which is a part of the national
constitution; and also, at his mean and unworthy personal invectives against
the modest and very deserving gentleman, who has been the innocent occasion of
provoking his riotous pen. -- But I must have done. -- I would only add, that
the worthy Dr. Wigglesworth's letter in the 165th page of Dr. Mayhew's book,
much deserves the attention of the government both here and in England. --

I am, Sir, with much Esteem, Your very hearty Friend and humble Servant,


