MAN's Dignity and Duty as a reasonable Creature; And his Insufficiency as a
fallen Creature: REPRESENTED IN A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Anniversary DUDLEIAN
Lecture, IN THE Chapel of Harvard-College in Cambridge, MAY 11. 1763.

By PETER CLARK, M. A. Pastor of the First Church in Danvers.

IN homine optimum quid est? Ratio: hac antecedit animalia, Deos sequitur.
Ratio ergo perfecta, proprium hominis bonum est: caetera illi c^m animalibus
satisque commonia sunt.

(...). Epist. 76. BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL DRAPER.
1763.

MAN's Dignity and Duty as a reasonable Creature, and his Insufficiency as a
fallen Creature.
JOB xxxv. 10, 11. BUT none says, Where is God my maker, who gives songs in
the night? Who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us
wiser than the fowls of heaven.


THE subject that lies before me to be treated of, according to the method
directed to, by the late honorable, learned, and pious Founder of this
lecture, is that of Natural Religion. And that which is commonly so called
(though variously defined by learned men) I apprehend to consist in such laws, or
rules of moral conduct, as are founded on deductions from principles of mere
natural reason relative to divinity and morality, without the aids of any
supernatural revelation. This is natural religion in theory. The practice of it
consists in the due observance of those rules.

IT is the excellency of natural religion, that it has it is foundation in the
rational nature of man, and is therefore stable, fixed, and indispensable, and
no more capable of variation or change, than the reason of man, and the
relation he bears to his Maker, as his creature, subject, and servant; it is
fundamental to all civil order, the welfare of society, and laws of government,
all the laws and precepts of it being consonant to eternal truth and equity.

NEVERTHELESS, if we consider it, with respect to the great end of all
religion, the guiding men to God as their ultimate, supreme happiness, it must
be confessed, that the mere religion of nature, which was calculated for a
state of innocent, incorrupt nature, and could serve to this end only in such a
state, is now, in the present degenerate state of mankind, in many respects
defective, and insufficient to conduct him to his great end; and needs the
supply of such helps, means and advantages, as the scripture-revelation
furnishes us with.

YET the preaching of natural religion is highly useful to a christian
assembly, in respect both of it is excellencies, and deficiencies. In the former
respect, -- as it is adopted into the christian system, and makes a
considerable part of it, even the whole of christian morality; and it is for
the honor and commendation of our holy christian religion above all other
religions in the world, that it is allowed to be the highest and best
improvement of the religion of nature, as it comprehends and injoins the
precepts of the natural law, in the fullest extent and perfection, and settles
the practice of them on right grounds. And in the latter respect -- ( viz. of
it is deficiencies) as it shows us how seasonably the christian revelation comes
in to our succor, where natural light fails, and how aptly it corresponds to
the principles of incorrupt reason, and receives light and confirmation from
them; and how happily it falls in with, and crowns, the wishes and expectations
of nature in the wisest and best of men.

IT IS with some view to each of these, that I propose to consider these words
of Elihu (who is not without reason supposed by some to be the inspired penman
of this book of Job) who, having observed under the providence of almighty God,
the many evils, and calamities that mankind groan under, particularly the
oppressions, and wrongs they meet with from the great and powerful, which cause
them to cry, and complain; they cry out (says he) by reason of the arm of the
mighty: To vindicate the justice of divine providence in permitting this, and
not appearing immediately for the rescue of the oppressed and injured, he
introduces the words I have read; but none says, Where is God my maker, who
gives songs in the night? who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth,
etc. which intimate the reason, why their complaints and exclamations against
their oppressors were so little regarded, to wit, because of their irreligious
neglect of God in their troubles: they were not solicitous to acquaint
themselves with him, nor to apply themselves to him for relief, as reasonable
creatures ought to have done, whom God has distinguished from, and dignified
far above the brutes, by enduing them with the noble powers of reason and
understanding, whereby they are capacitated, and therefore obliged to know the
God that made them, to pay him homage and service, to reverence his majesty,
and repair to his mercy in their straits and difficulties.

THE words may be conceived as expressive both of lamentation and admiration.
It is to be lamented, that God should be so much forgotten and neglected in
this our world, that there should be so few, that do seriously enquire after
God our common maker, even when urged to it by their necessities and
distresses, and when he alone is all-sufficient to administer effectual succor
and solace to them in the darkest night of affliction. It Is also matter of
admiration that man, who by the bounty of his creator, is advanced to the rank
and dignity of an intelligent being, far superior in knowledge and wisdom to
mere sensitive animals, the beasts and fowls, should not yet go beyond those
irrationals, in their cries and moans, when pinched with hunger, or otherwise
afflicted with a sense of pain, and not rise up to any suitable
acknowledgements of their maker, to a dependence on him, enquiries after him,
addresses to him, and expectations from him; all which might reasonably and
justly be expected from man, in consideration of his rational capacities.
Strange stupidity! But not to take any further critical notice of the words, I
shall, from this general view, make these two observations, viz.

OBSERVATION I. THAT there is matter of duty expected and required of man
purely as he is a reasonable creature, whom God has taught more than the
beasts of the earth, and made wiser than the fowls of heaven.

OBSERVATION II. THAT men do yet generally fail in those duties which their own
reason, if duly attended to, would lead and oblige them to the observance of.
None says, Where is God my maker -- Though this is the main purpose for which he
has taught them more than the beasts and fowls, more than to groan and complain
under their calamities.

I SHALL endeavor, with as much brevity as I can, to speak to these two heads.

I. THAT there is matter of duty expected and required of man, purely as he is
a reasonable creature.

THE great creator, in the first constitution of man's nature, put within him a
principle of reason and intelligence, whereby he was dignified and exalted far
above the brute creation. For there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of
the Almighty gives him understanding. Job xxxii. 8.
Of him, who is our maker, and by whom all things were made, it is said, that
in him was life, and the life was the light of men. John i. 4.
A bright ray of intellectual light descended from the fountain-light into the
soul of man, when God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living soul. Genesis ii. 7.
And it is in respect of his reasonable soul, that man only of all the creatures
in this lower world, yea, of the whole visible creation, was made to bear the
image of his maker, not only in a perfect holiness and righteousness, his moral
image, but (in that which was fundamental thereto) to carry some finite
resemblance of his natural perfections in its spirituality, intelligence,
liberty of choice and action, self-consciousness, immortality, and capacity of
blessedness. And in these things lies the distinguishing excellency of man
above the beasts of the earth and the fowls of heaven, by which also he is made
their lord, and appointed to have the dominion over them.

THE capacities of the rational soul of man are vast and admirable: It is
capable of apprehending things past, present, and to come; whereas beasts are
intent only on things present to sense. It is capable of conceiving and
discoursing of such things as are abstracted from sense and matter, of
metaphysical propositions, of the nature, and perfections of God, of angels and
spirits, and of drawing conclusions about them -- capable of all arts and
sciences, and of many skilful inventions, in which it is divinely instructed.
Isaiah xxviii. 26.
The powers of this rational and intelligent mind of man are of vast extent in
the knowledge of nature. He is capable of ransacking the creation, and
surveying the works of God in the heavens, earth and seas, from the greatest to
the least, by the help of telescopes and microscopes, and of tracing the
footsteps and impressions of a Deity, in the plain marks discernable in them of
an infinitely wise and designing mind, the framer of them all. He is thereby
made capable of contemplating the heavenly bodies that roll above us, and of
observing their beauty, order, position, distances, motions, influences, and
uses; the harmonies, combinations, and confederacies of nature; the mutual
dependencies, and subserviencies of the various creatures among themselves; all
conducing to the good of the universe, and ultimately to the creator's glory.

OF this capacity and disposition of the nobler part of man, there are certain
signatures in the make or composition of his bodily part; in that when the rest
of inferior animals are made with a downward look toward the earth, man is
made (as the heathen Poet has observed Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera
terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, et erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
OVID.
) erect, of a sublime countenance, and a face toward heaven, being designed by
nature, and aptly disposed to contemplate the heavens, and to ascend in his
contemplations to an invisible creator, whose glory is above the heavens. And
though there are many things common to man and beast, in respect of the animal
life, which we here live, yet there is a vast difference between the spirit of
the one and the other, which appears especially at death, when (as Solomon
divinely notes Eccles. iii. 31.
) the spirit of a beast goes downward to the earth, but the spirit of man
soars above, and ascends to its native region of spirits, agreeably to the
superiority of its nature and faculties.

BUT, to come nearer our purpose, it is especially, by means of the rational
powers of man's soul, that he is capable of religion and morality, of the
knowledge of the great author of his being, and of presenting a reasonable
service to him. And herein especially God has taught us more than the beasts
and fowls. For though there are strange instincts in some of those animals, that
have a resemblance of reason in man, whence some have thought there is a lower
degree of reason pertaining to beasts; but were this granted, it must also be
confessed, that reason in man is of a diverse kind, as well as transcendent in
degree, as the instances now mentioned of the largeness and extent of man's
intellectual capacities, do abundantly demonstrate; [all the reasoning in
beasts (if it must be so called) being confined to sensible objects, may
equally be resolved into natural instinct] but from all that is observable in
the brute creatures, there appears not the least symptom, or shadow of any
approaches to religion, not the least affinity or resemblance to the human
nature in a religious disposition. And therefore many choose to place the
specific difference between man and beasts, in religion, rather than in
reason. Beasts, it is evident, have the knowledge of pleasure and pain, by
sense, and are thereby taught to pursue the one, and shun the other; but they
have no knowledge of virtue and vice, nor of the pleasure that attends on
virtue, nor of the pain that follows vice. This is peculiar to man, who by a
sort of rational instinct soon discerns the difference between moral good and
evil, and in some cases previous to all instruction and discipline; and
therefore is a subject capable of a moral law, and of government, by rewards
and penalties; and consequently accountable for his actions, good or bad. He
has a capacity for improving and enobling his mind by moral virtues, fitting
him for agreeable converse in human society; and more than this, a capacity for
religious converse with his Maker, of bearing his moral image in knowledge and
holiness, fitting him for blissful communion with him.

NOW do not these high and noble capacities of man's reasonable nature infer a
moral obligation he is under to proportionable duties? Most certainly they do;
otherwise man would be no more subject to blame for not enquiring, where is God
my maker, than the beasts themselves; which sufficiently verifies the
proposition I laid down, that man's duty may be argued from his reasonable
nature and capacities, though destitute of external revelation, (I mean his duty,
so far as lies within the compass of his understanding); and this is what I
propose to show in the further prosecuting this point, -- That God has put this
principle of intellectual light into the nature of man to discover his duty to
him, and to direct him in his whole moral behavior, and also given it the
force of a law to oblige him to the practice of it; the same which is commonly
called the light and law of nature, or the light and dictates of conscience:
For conscience is nothing else but the reason and judgment of man, as it is
peculiarly conversant about his religious and moral acts, in its reflections on
past actions, and directions of the future, and passing judgment on them, as it
is subject to the judgment of God.

I SHALL therefore endeavor to show, that God has given man reason for this
twofold end, 1st. to be a light to discover his duty to him; and 2dly, to have
the force of a law to bind his duty upon him.

1st. REASON is given man for a light to discover his duty to him, and to guide
him in the practice of it. There is a threefold object of our moral conduct
commonly known. God, our neighbor, and ourselves; and the principles of our
reasonable nature dictate our duty toward this threefold object, and our
whole duty as reasonable creatures may be reduced to these three heads,

(1.) THERE are in our reasonable nature or (which is the same) in the natural
law, principles of piety, which dictate our duty toward God. Here, the grand
fundamental principle of piety and of all religion, is the knowledge and belief
of the existence of a God. This great truth is prior to all revelation; for we
must first believe there is a God, before we can receive any revelation as from
him. And this must be first received by means of rational conviction, or by
such proofs as are adapted to the apprehension of our reason; though divine
revelation makes them more clear and strong. God has given abundant
demonstration of his existence to all mankind, to the whole world of rational
beings, partly, by the impressions of his being and perfections he has left on
the hearts and consciences of men, as the God of nature; partly, by the
external manifestation of himself in his works of creation: And this seems the
meaning of the apostle's word when, speaking of the Gentile world, he tells us,
That which may be known of God (his being and perfections as an object of
worship) is manifest in them, (i. e. by inward impressions, or the law written
in their hearts Romans i. 19. and ii. 15.
) for God has showed it to them; (i. e. by his external works, visible,
especially in the creation of the world,) and thereupon brings in this great
evidence of the being of an eternal, almighty God, -- For the invisible things
of him, from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. Romans i. 20.
The visible glories of the firmament, the sun, moon, and stars proclaim to all
the world the being and glory of that invisible power which formed them, and
presides over them. There is no speech or language where their voice is not
heard. Psalm xix. 1.3.
The silent language of these natural preachers is interpreted and understood
among all nations to the ends of the earth, by that portion of reason which God
has imparted to them. -- Men are compelled by the force of mere natural reason
to acknowledge a first cause which is eternally self-existent, for nothing is
more certain than that some being must have existed from eternity, otherwise
nothing could ever have been. But to exist from eternity is to be
self-existent, or to have no cause of existence; which is incompatible to every
finite being, and can agree only to a being that is infinite. As to the notion
of the world, or the matter of it, it is being from eternity, or it is being cast
into the present form by an eternal succession of causes and effects, it is so
shockingly absurd, that the reason of mankind cannot but reject it at first
sight. And it is scarce to be believed possible for the greatest atheist to
assent to it on clear and sure grounds. But when we say, God is a being
self-existent, it is to be understood negatively, not as affirming him to be
the cause of his own existence, but as excluding all other causes, and
asserting him to be a being of such a nature, as necessarily and eternally to
exist without any cause at all, by the mere prerogative of his own infinite
essence, in a manner to us, and all finite intelligences inconceivable; for
when we arrive at infinite, (in searching out a first cause) as by the impulse
of our own reason we must at last, whatever course of argument we pursue, there
all reasoning and dispute must cease, and give way to admiration.

WE say then upon principles of natural reason, it is an undoubted conclusion,
there is an all-glorious God, the creator and first cause of all things, being
himself uncaused, eternally existing, independent, a necessary being,
self-sufficient, having all fullness of being and perfection conceivable or
possible in himself, absolutely supreme in all perfection, in knowledge,
wisdom, holiness, power, justice, goodness, and love, every where present,
conversant with his reasonable creatures, observant of their behavior,
sustaining the relation of a father, governor, and judge to them. For there is
this principle of natural light further to be added, which dictates our duty
toward God, viz. the belief of a divine providence, which inspects and governs
all the affairs of the world, and of mankind especially. And as man is
constituted a subject of moral government, and therefore accountable to his
maker, it is rational, therefore, to expect, that he will call him to an account
for his behavior, and reward or punish him as his deeds require. But these
great articles of natural religion, being with equal evidence deducible from
the perfections of God, I shall not further insist upon them.

NOW what does reason teach us to be our duty toward God, in consequence of
these principles, but that we should acknowledge and adore him? that we should
love him superlatively, and reverence him in though it, word and deed; that we
should admire and praise him, and worship him with all the capacities of our
spirits and bodies; that we should give thanks for the innumerable benefits we
receive from him, and live in dependence on him; and have recourse to him by
prayer in all our wants, straits and dangers; and that we should in all things
obey his will, notified to us by our natural sentiments of the distinction
between moral good and evil, between right and wrong, truth and falsehood,
between what is pleasing and what is displeasing to our maker; that we should
place our chief felicity in his favor, and have the greatest dread of his
displeasure; that we should be humble and contented with all his wise
distributions, patient and submissive to the orders of his providence, in all
the chastisements he lays us under -- These, and such like, are the internal
acts of religion founded in the relation every reasonable being stands in to
his maker, considered singly, and apart.

BUT besides these, there are duties of piety owing to God from societies of
men, on the grounds of natural reason. God is the author and founder, the
patron and benefactor of human societies; and has, in the formation of our
natures, furnished us with faculties and organs suited to social converse, and
given us an inclination to unite in society for that purpose; therefore social
worship is a dictate of nature. That it is not good for man to be alone, is the
voice of nature, as well as revelation. God has therefore made us members one
of another, so as to have need of and dependence on one another help for our
subsistence; insomuch that our natural powers would fail of one end of their
creation, unless we were thus united in society; and it is a rational dictate
that God is to be glorified by all the capacities he has given us. Therefore
the joining together to worship God by prayer and thanksgiving in families, and
public assemblies, is a duty founded on the law of nature, as well as the
directions of holy scripture. But let this serve for a brief specimen of the
duties of religion we owe to God discoverable by natural light.

(2.) THERE are principles of justice and charity, proper to man's natural
reason, that go to make up the law of nature, as it regulates our carriage
toward our neighbor, which are such as these, viz. the joint relation we all
stand in to God, as fellow servants of the same Lord, as children of the same
father, who carries an impartial hand over them all: Which relation requires an
upright, just, and inoffensive deportment toward all our fellow men. And the
forementioned principle of piety, has place here as a principle of justice,
viz. that mankind is made with capacities for society, and for mutual converse
and assistance, and that as members of societies we have all some sort of
dependence one on another, which is the foundation of all friendly offices, and
of all equitable and obliging behavior toward our fellow members. To this let
me add that rational maxim, adopted by our Savior into his evangelical law, of
doing to others what we would they should do to us in like circumstances, both
the law, and the prophets, natural and revealed religion, conspire to recommend
and enforce this maxim, being founded on reason and nature. This requires that
we should wrong no man in though it, word, or deed. -- Not in though it by wishing him
ill, coveting what is his, or bearing envy or malice against him; -- not in
word by defamation, reproaches, or bearing false witness; -- not in deed by
doing any thing injurious to the person, life, estate, or reputation of our
neighbor, for no man could be willing to be thus dealt with by others. On the
contrary, it teaches us to deal justly with all, to be upright and honest in
our commerce, giving to every one his due, to be peaceable, and useful, as
members of societies, just and ^^ithful in the duties of our several relations,
which are founded on natural right.

MOREOVER, All the offices of charity, kindness, gratitude, and universal
benevolence branch out from these rational principles; that all mankind are
equal by nature, as the descendants of one common progenitor, and so we bear a
relation to all men as brethren; and that others have the same feelings of
humane nature with ourselves; and that there is implanted in our breasts a
natural sympathy and affection toward those of our own species, that prompts
us to acts of mercy and kindness to them in their indigence and misery; that we
have need one of another, and that we are obliged to do to others, as we would
they should do to us, which may be applied as a principle of charity, as well
as of justice: Hereby we are taught to bear good will to our brethren, and
neighbors, to be communicative to their necessities, to be friendly, loving
and sociable; for man is naturally disposed and made for this purpose. In a
word, God has so plainly interwoven this disposition to acts of charity, and
gratitude to our benefactor, into our nature, that we commonly call it
humanity, as if it was the distinguishing property of human nature, and the
contrary dispositions and actions we as commonly brand with the note of
inhumanity, as being sordid and base.

Let me add,

(3.) THERE are also in our reasonable nature principles that lead to sobriety
and temperance in the right government of ourselves. These are, that as
subjects and servants of our great Creator, and Lord, we ought to preserve the
powers and faculties both of our bodies and souls in a right temper, as fit
instruments of his service, that as vessels unto honor, we might be always
meet for the masters use; which principle is violated by all acts of
intemperance. Again, it is a rational principle, agreeable to the primitive
order, and constitution of nature (according to which reason and understanding
were made to lead and rule, and the will and inferior faculties to obey and
follow) that we should keep up the dominion of reason over brutal appetites and
passions, to check and control them, and not suffer them at any time to get
the ascendant in the soul, which is as great a disorder in nature, as that in
the state, which Solomon complains of, that of servants riding on horse back,
and princes walking as servants on the earth. Eccl. 7.10.
All intemperance proceeds from the unruliness of the bodily appetites and
affections, their transgressing the bounds of reason and moderation, and it is
the office of temperance, to restrain them within those bounds, and to
establish the authority of reason, which it has by divine right in the soul of
man, and to strengthen it against the usurpation of sense and appetite. This
document of nature (the bringing the body into subjection, and not suffering it
to usurp the dominion) was observed by the heathen moralist, I was born to
greater things, ( says Seneca Major sum, et ad majora genitus, quam ut
mancipium sim mei corporis.
) than to become a slave to my body. Further, there are diverse maxims of
reason, by which men ordinarily govern themselves in their civil affairs, which
may be applied to the law of temperance. To mention one or two. It Is accounted
a maxim of wisdom, to forego a less good, in order to obtain a greater, or to
deny ones self in a small matter of pleasure, or profit, when one has the
prospect of a very great advantage in so doing; and for the same reason, ought
we not to quit the pleasures of sense, in order to the more sublime, manly
pleasure of wisdom and virtue? Another, that bears some affinity to this is,
that we ought to submit to a lesser evil to avoid a greater, or of two evils to
choose the less, and does not this teach us, it is our wisdom to submit to the
pains of self-denial in laying restraints on the sensual appetite, and
mortifying a lust, rather than by an unbounded gratification, to incur the loss
of health, estate, reputation, and to become exposed to the stings and
reproaches of an injured conscience, which will follow such gratifications: To
say nothing of a future vengeance. Our blessed Savior has founded many of his
wise cautions, and admonitions upon such rational maxims: Particularly, that of
mortifying a beloved lust; it is better for thee, says he, that one of thy
members perish, than that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Matthew. V. 29.
By such easy and obvious rules, natural reason might lead men to discern their
whole duty, relating to self-government. The principles that have been laid
down carry their own evidence with them, and need not a train of reasoning and
discourse to beget assent, but may be reckoned among the first and radical
principles of the natural law. And hence we see our duty with respect to God,
our neighbor, and ourselves, discoverable by the clear light of reason.
Wherefore I proceed now to say --

2dly. GOD has given reason to man to have the force of a law to bind his duty
upon him. The light whereby reason discovers man's duty to him, infers an
obligation upon him to the practice of it. This will more plainly appear, if we
consider what things are requisite to give force to a law. There are these
three things especially. (1.) It must be an act of lawful authority in giving
commands. (2.) It must have a sanction of just rewards and penalties annexed to
those commands, to guard them against transgressions. (3.) There must be a
righteous judge to take an account of the observance of them, to acquit or
condemn as men shall be found on their trial. These are all the requisites to
the binding force of any law, and they all concur in the law of man's
reasonable nature. For,

(1.) ITS authority is of divine right. God, who is our rightful lord and
lawgiver, has given it this authority, which needs no other proof than his
being the author of the law of nature, which is therefore said to be written in
the heart of man. Romans ii. 15.
But by whom should it be written there, but by God alone, in the very
constitution of the nature of man, as endued with reason, to be the means or
instrument of his moral government over him? So that the dictates of reason and
conscience, which discover and determine what is sin, and what is duty, are to
be regarded as divine laws. Hence the understanding reasonable sprit of man, is
called by Solomon the candle of the Lord. Prove. xx. 27.
It is a candle lighted up in every man's soul by the author of nature, whose
inspiration gives him understanding, to enable him to discern between right
and wrong, good and evil. This light of nature, therefore, is a divine light,
and the authority of its dictates divine. Therefore to obey reason is to obey
God, who has dictated his will to us concerning our moral actions, by that
reason and understanding he has given us, as really as by his written word.

(2.) THESE natural dictates of reason have also a sanction. -- Those hopes and
fears of men's hearts, resulting from their moral conduct, may be regarded as a
natural sanction to the law of reason; as they have a sense of joy or pain that
follows on the doing good, or evil; men are naturally conscious to themselves
of the good or evil consequences of either acting up to the principles of
natural light, or deviating from them. The apostle observes, that the Gentiles
had a conscience that excused, or accused on the doing good or evil. Romans ii.
15.
And the natural presages and fears of a vengeance that pursues unrighteous
practices, and certain forebodings of a future state of rewards and
punishments, together with the present feelings of conscience, its comfort and
satisfaction on well doing, its reproaches, stings and remorses on the
commission of evil, serve instead of more positive declarations, to guard the
law of nature.

THERE is another passion of human nature very painful and disquieting,
consequent on vice, which may be, and often is, a restraint upon men from
vicious actions, and that is shame. After the commission of any vile, or wicked
act, men are affected not only with fear in a sense of guilt, but with shame in
a sense of the turpitude, dishonesty, and vileness of their behavior, their
having acted an unreasonable part, unbecoming themselves, and unsuitably to the
dignity and prerogative of their reasonable nature, which exposes them to the
severe reproaches of their own hearts, and self-upbraidings for their folly and
baseness, having no rational plea for their justification. The nature of man
was a stranger to this irksome disquieting passion till sin entered, by which
it was debased and despoiled of its dignity. Genesis ii. 25.
And this adds force to the obligation men are under to act becoming the honor
of their nature, by a strict conformity to the dictates of right reason.

(3.) THE binding force of these principles and dictates of nature do plainly
suppose and require a judge, to whom belongs the execution of the law which is
necessary to enforce the whole, to whom all men must hold themselves
accountable. And the same natural light that manifests a God that made and
rules the world, does also beget a persuasion of his being the righteous judge
of his reasonable creatures. There is naturally in all men's hearts an
indelible persuasion of a governing justice, that takes cognizance of the moral
actions and behavior of men, and measures out suitable punishments to men's
crimes. One plain evidence of this is the use of oaths, so frequent and common
among all nations, at least among all civilized nations, who discover any sense
of a God. And in all such oaths there is, in the very nature of them, a solemn
appeal to an invisible judge, with an acknowledgment and belief of his taking
cognizance of all that passes among men, and of his being the patron of truth
and innocence, and the righteous avenger of all injustice and perjury. And the
apostle Paul testifies of those, who were left only to the light of nature,
that they knew the judgment of God, condemning them to death for sins against
that light. Romans i. 32.
And since there appears no equal distribution of rewards and punishments in
this life, worthy of the righteous governor of the world, reason suggests that
it must be expected in a future state. And the sentiments and premonitions of
conscience (as an inferior judge) relative hereunto, do confirm this
persuasion. Nothing more, I think, need be added to evince the binding force of
the principles of man's reasonable nature. So I pass to speak in a few words to
the second observation,

II. THAT men do generally fail in those duties which their own reason duly
attended to would lead them to the observance of.

IF we speak of reason in its pure incorrupt state, in this regard, the
proposition might run in universal terms, -- There is none, (to use the
language of the text) that do seriously, suitably, and sufficiently enquire,
Where is God my maker? All men universally are more or less defective in their
practical compliance with the directions of right reason, in respect both of
their religious and moral conduct, chiefly the former; and if the most
circumspect and blameless liver, would examine himself by this test, he would
find that in many things he has swerved from this rule of conduct. To this the
royal preacher bears witness, in observing, there is not a just man upon earth,
that does good and sins not. Eccles. vii. 20
But even in this present state of frailty, under all the clouds and darkness,
and the mists of ignorance and error, that have overspread and obscured the
human faculties, God still imparts to men much more light and knowledge than
the generality of mankind ever reduce into practice. This candle of the Lord
(though it shines more dimly than when it was first lighted up in the soul of
man, yet) still affords men a great deal of light for regulating their moral
and religious conduct, more than they care generally to improve, for men love
darkness rather than light.

THE fact is notorious and undeniable, it is attested by the observation and
experience of mankind in all ages, that men do not always govern themselves by
reason; but, for the most part, live in the transgression of its laws. And the
inspired writer tells us of the heathen world in general, that they held the
truth (the knowledge of the truth perceivable by the light of nature, relating
to the being and perfections of God, his worship and service) in
unrighteousness. Romans i. 18.
They hold the truth a prisoner, being suppressed and restrained from exerting
its influence by overbearing corrupt passions, and unrighteous practices; and
further adds, that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, Ver 21.
etc.

NOW if we enquire into the reason, whence is this? To what cause is this so
great and general defect owing? -- In the first place, may we not, must we not,
impute it to the universal degeneracy of the human nature from its primitive
rectitude? This, be sure, is the prime doctrine of sacred writ (fundamental to
the whole system of scripture revelation) which testifies, in the language of
the Psalmist, that when the Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of
men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God, "the
unpleasing prospect" that presented itself to his eye was, that all are gone
aside -- there is none that does good. Psalm. xiv. 2, 3.
-- The great apostle alleging this passage in proof of this universal
defection, interprets it in the words of Elihu, in the text; there is none that
understands, there is none that seeks after God. Romans iii. 11
And does not nature and experience bear witness hereunto? for whence is it
that reason, which is quick-sighted, and penetrating enough in matters which
lie within its sphere, is so dull and stupid in the things of God and religion?
Whence is it, that the great masters of wisdom, who flourished about the age of
the apostles, who were so well skilled in matters of humane science, in
philosophy, oratory, poetry, and history, that they are set forth as patterns
to following ages, even to this day, should be so strangely bewildered in their
notions concerning God, and his worship, that the great doctor of the Gentiles
scruples not to censure them as fools, (and he had, we doubt not, good evidence
to support his censure) saying, that professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools; and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made
like to corruptible man, etc. and worshipped, and served the creature more than
the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Whence is this, I say? An horrid aversion
and alienation of mind and heart from God, is assigned as the cause, They did
not like to retain God in their knowledge. Romans i. 22, 23, 25, 28.
Which alienation from God, the fountain of life and being, of light and of all
blessedness, is expressive of the wretchedness and misery, as well as of the
sinfulness, of the condition of apostate man.

I WOULD only add, that the present disordered state of the human nature,
speaks a defection from it primitive state; for no rational man who has just
ideas of the divine perfections, can suppose, that such an inconsistent piece
of workmanship, as man now appears to be, could be the immediate product of an
infinitely wise, and good creator, made up, (as it were) of contradictions, the
passions, and faculties of his soul continually justling and jarring against
each other. Reason induces us to believe what divine revelation assures us of,
that God made man upright, Eccles. vii. 29.
body and soul in a state of perfection, every faculty in its right place and
order, with an harmonious surbordination of the inferior to the superior
leading faculties, the understanding and conscience; but that it is far
otherwise now with the generality of mankind, is a plain mark of degeneracy
from their original integrity.

SECONDLY, IT IS owing to men's inattention, and inconsideration: The not
attending to right reason, as a rule of conduct, in preference to interest and
passion, is the true cause of all or most of the errors and failures in the
duties of common life, and it is much more so in matters of religion.
Idolaters, particularly, are taxed with this stupidity, They consider not in
their hearts, Isai. xliv. 19.
(what one would think impossible for a being capable of thought and
reflection, not to consider) that none of the gods of which they themselves
were makers, could be God their maker. All irreligion and ungodliness has its
rise from the same source, the neglect of calling up reason into exercise, and
impartially attending its dictates. I shall only add,

THIRDLY, IT may be said to proceed from the insufficiency of natural light and
reason, in the present degenerate state of men, to recover them to a right
conduct. If it be said, though men have generally failed of their duty, and have
gone out of the way, yet it is not fair to argue fact, and thence conclude the
insufficiency of the religion of nature or reason to set them right. I answer.
Though there be other ways of proving the insufficiency of natural religion to
man degenerate, yet the solution of the case before us, as a question of fact,
will fairly infer the conclusion; for if it be true, if it may be fairly
gathered from all the observations of mankind, that men have universally
degenerated into impiety and vice, then they are fallen from the law of nature,
and are condemned by it, and fallen under a moral disorder; in this case
natural religion can bring no remedy. This must come from another quarter: In
many respects the insufficiency of the religion of nature, to recover mankind
from their degeneracy, and bring them back to God as their supreme felicity
might appear. I shall fix on one instance to our present purpose, that is, the
duty of repentance. Both natural and revealed religion agree in requiring this
duty of sinners, it is certainly the duty of a mere heathen, who has no other
light than that of nature, to repent of his sins. The conviction he has done
amiss, and the remorse he feels in his conscience thereupon, teach him without
any other monitor, he ought to repent, but here natural religion is defective,
as it cannot furnish a sinner with sufficient aids and inducements to
repentance. The aids and assistances it may be supposed to administer, must be
from nature itself, but the distempered nature of a sinner cannot heal itself
by any power it is possessed of, the cure must be derived from a supernatural
influence. The light and power of reason is too much darkened and debilitated
(especially being bribed by corrupt passions) to be able to throw off vicious
customs, and also to root out evil inclinations and reform the heart, which is
the work of true repentance: The only effectual relief and help in this case,
is that which the gospel of Christ propounds and offers, which is the
ministration of the Spirit. If such supernatural influences be supposed to
reach the minds of any bred up in heathenism, who never heard of the gospel of
Christ, it must be in an extraordinary method of vouchsafement quite unknown to
us, and therefore unsafe to be asserted by us.

AND then, natural religion affords no sufficient inducements to repentance, as
it gives a sinner no certain hope of pardon, if he does repent. The whole
doctrine of redemption, and particularly that of atonement and satisfaction for
sin, in order to settle the conscience of a sinner in peace and security,
against the fears of avenging justice, and the declarations and promises of
forgiveness to the penitent, consequent thereon, lie entirely out of its view,
being the peculiar subject of the gospel revelation. And though there are
general intimations of mercy to mankind in the course of providence, yet the
hopes of forgiveness founded thereon, are too weak and general to bear down
strong prejudices, and to break the force of inveterate customs of sin and
vice; and the important enquiry will still recur to the inquisitive mind, and
anxious conscience of a sinner, wherewith shall I come before the Lord? -- What
shall I do to appease offended justice? so that the mercies of God, in the
course of common providence, are no argument of forgiveness; for he bears with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath.

NOW will a sinner ever be induced to repent who has no certain hope or
persuasion, that God will thereupon forgive him? It is not rational to suppose
this; we might almost as reasonably suppose our first parents to have repented
in their despairing condition, immediately after their first transgression,
before any hopes were given them by the promise of the seed of the woman, as
that a sinner might be expected to repent before, and without all hope of
pardon, yet having once offended his maker, it is impossible, had he the
understanding of a seraphim, that he should know without a revelation, that he
would pardon the offense upon any terms whatsoever. This is one of the things
of God, which no man knows or can know, but the Spirit of God, who has
revealed it to us in the gospel of his Son.

THUS we see in this instance, the deficiency of the religion of nature and
reason, as a guide to man's duty and happiness in his fallen state. This is not
meant to throw the least disparagement on natural religion, the excellencies
whereof have been in part reported; but to show the necessity of revealed, that
the former might more effectually reach its end. There is an agreeable harmony
between both natural and revealed religion, they both befriend and support each
other, and receive light and confirmation from each other. Without the
principles of natural religion being laid as the foundation, we are incapable
of receiving any revelation from God; but these being laid, are of excellent
use and advantage, in our pursuit of the ends of revelation.

I shall close with a few inferences.

1. HENCE see our obligation to bless God for the gift of reason, which is some
participation of the image of our maker, whereby we are made capable of high
and glorious purposes; not only exalted to a rank in the creation of God
superior to beasts, but little inferior to angels, and by means of our
intelligent nature, are capable of fellowship with them, in the knowledge and
contemplation of the perfections of our Creator, and in glorifying him by
active service and homage. Hereby we are also capacitated to be useful to our
generation, and to attain happiness for ourselves, and to use the means
requisite thereunto, under the advantages of revelation. In giving us reason
and understanding God has given us the richest talent, of more value than all
external advantages; and in continuing to us the free and unclouded exercise of
this faculty, even when deprived of other interests, he may be said to give
songs in the night, matter of solace to ourselves, and of thanksgiving and
praise to our Creator, in the lowest and darkest outward condition: If this
candle of the Lord shine clear and bright within, it will open to us an inward
spring of refreshment and joy, for which we shall be obliged to be thankful to
God.

2. WE hence learn what great evil and guilt is contracted by counteracting our
reason, or neglecting its dictates, by debasing or abusing it to serve the vile
purposes of the flesh, and by suffering sense and appetite to get the dominion
over it: This is to degrade ourselves from our own species, unto a level with
the beasts that perish, yea, we become worse than they; they are irrational by
nature, we by choice, and so abolish as far as in us lies the difference nature
has put between man and beast. This highly dishonors God, and provokes his
wrath. When the apostle Paul had declared, the wrath of God was revealed from
heaven against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, he plainly
intimates what was the most provoking thing to the wrath of God, in their
ungodliness and unrighteousness, by immediately subjoining, -- who hold the
truth in unrighteousness. Romans i. 18.
They smothered and counter-acted the truths and precepts of the law of reason,
which would have controlled their vicious inclinations. This acting in defiance
of reason is plain rebellion against God; as it is a trampling on the ensigns
of his authority, which he has planted in the soul of map.

3. LET us hence see what cause we have to be peculiarly thankful for that
divine revelation we enjoy. It Is owing to the improvements of revelation that
our natural reason is so valuable a talent; its dimness brightened, its
weakness strengthened, its deficiencies abundantly and admirably supplied;
without which, however useful on other accounts, yet with respect to life and
happiness, the main end of all religion would have left us to wander in the
region and shadow of death. This is a privilege by which we are distinguished
from the rest of mankind; for as we are made to differ from brutes, and exalted
above them, by reason, so we are made to differ from, and priviledg'd above the
brutish people of the earth, (as the ignorant and idolatrous heathen are justly
styled) by revelation. Let us then be thankful for the light of reason, and
peculiarly so for the assistances afforded by the additional light of
revelation; and forever adore, and thankfully improve, the discriminating grace
of God toward us therein. Moreover,

SETTING aside supernatural discoveries, revelation is of vast advantage to the
bulk of mankind, with respect to moral duties, which it enjoins in the plainest
manner -- suited to the capacities of the vulgar, and in the fullest extent;
which moral duties, most men by far (I might say it of all men in some degree)
for want of ability, leisure, or patience, would never be able to collect for
themselves out of the principles of natural reason, though deducible from them
by the pains and studies of philosophers, and learned men. This merits our most
grateful acknowledgment of the condescension of God, to the infirmities of
mankind, in giving them such a revelation.

4. LET us hence learn the obligations we are under as rational creatures, to
make a due improvement of our reason for the right conduct of our lives. Men
readily apprehend the necessity and usefulness of their reason in all the
affairs of civil life: But let us improve it to higher and nobler purposes, and
be governed by its dictates in all duties of morality, in the several relations
we sustain among men, yea, and in matters of religion too, which is the highest
and best improvement of our reason, and yet is not a thing that transcends
reason; for God requires no more of us, than that we show ourselves men, Isai.
xlvi. 8.
by acting up to the dignity of our reasonable nature, and preserving its
dominion over corrupt affections, and passions; which if we do, especially
under the improvements of the christian revelation, we cannot fail of being
truly religious.

BUT of what use is reason in matters of pure revelation, which is
supernatural, and transcends reason?

I SHALL answer in a few Words:

(1.) CONSIDERING the insufficiency of the light and law of nature to guide
mankind in this their fallen state, to their great end, they being yet
evidently in a state of trial, under divine government; reason teaches, it is a
thing worthy of God, and becoming his rectoral perfections, to give them a more
perfect rule for that purpose, and to supply the defects of the natural law by
revealing his mind and will to them, as a rule of government.

(2.) IT IS the office of reason to examine the proofs and evidences both
internal and external, which are offered to authenticate the revelation, as
coming from God to us.

(3.) REASON is of great use in searching into, and helping us to understand
the sense and meaning of the revelation itself. And so a mere disciplinary
knowledge may be sufficient to give a right explanation of the words of the
revelation, both the language and sense, though the things contained therein
may need the illumination of the Spirit, in order to a right perception of them.

(4.) BEING satisfied in the sufficiency, clearness and conclusiveness of the
proofs and evidences of this revelation, reason teaches, we ought to receive
it, to believe it, and submit to it, as of divine authority, with as perfect
acquiescence of mind, as in the clearest dictates of natural light; though it
contains things beyond the grasp of our reason, things seemingly incredible,
and incomprehensible to our frail intellects, yet being assured of the
authenticness of the revelation, as coming from God, there is nothing in the
world more rational than that we should receive them as divine truths; or that
reason should submit to faith, resting on the authority and veracity of the
divine revealer. He that contradicts this must be led to say, I will not
believe what God speaks to be true, because I cannot comprehend it; which would
be a bold affront to a mortal man: In this case, frail depraved reason is no
competent judge of divine mysteries; both the principle and the object are
supernatural; the object, the things of the Spirit, or the things revealed by
the Spirit; and the principle, a spiritual discerning; for want of which the
mere natural man in his best improvements, is incapable of a true perception of
the things of the Spirit. 1 Cor. ii. 14.


5. WE see hence how vainly it is pretended, that christianity is nothing else,
but natural religion revived, with a few positive institutions annexed. It Is
readily granted that christianity contains the natural law restored to its
greatest purity; but to say, this is the whole of christianity, is only to give
a christian name to deism, and to deny an atoning Mediator to be a doctrine of
christianity. The christian religion in the strict and proper notion of it, may
be considered as a scheme of divine dispensations, designed to reduce apostate
man to the practice of natural religion, and to furnish him with right
principles for that purpose; as this latter is understood to import a system of
all the virtues requisite and conducive to the perfection and happiness of
man's reasonable nature: And in this strict acceptance, christianity is
plainly distinct from natural religion. If indeed we had been a race of
innocent beings, natural religion might have served our turn, we had needed
nothing more for securing our final happiness, than our continuing obedient to
the precepts of it: But a sinner needs a religion to teach him how to get
reconciled to an offended God, before he can entertain the least hope of
happiness. The religion of nature teaches him nothing of this: If you say, it
is an article of natural religion, that we ought to repent of our sins, and
thereby reconcile ourselves to God, after having offended him: This indeed, I
know is said; but upon what warrant? Perhaps, this is one of the refinements
christianity has made upon the religion of nature. But it is certain, the
original law of nature knows nothing of a sinner's repentance, but constantly
supposes the perfect innocence of it is subject; nor speaks a word of the method
of a sinner's reconciliation to an offended God. -- (This I say of the original
law of nature, allowing at the same time, that this natural law, as it has
place in the christian scheme, though it requires perfect obedience, yet does not
suppose the perfect innocence of its subject, because it admits atonement for
sin, upon repentance, and faith in a redeemer.) Wherefore, let those just men
who need no repentance, sit down contented with their natural religion, or
their refinements upon it; every true christian, who is conscious to himself of
his being a sinner, will esteem the revealed doctrine of a proper redemption,
and of the perfect righteousness and atonement of the redeemer, and of the
remission of sins, and justification through faith in his blood, the very heart
of christianity, and will find the life of his soul in these things.

6. WE hence also infer, that God expects duty and service from men, in
proportion to the degrees of knowledge and understanding he has given them. The
inferior creatures have only sense and instinct to guide them; and are not
capable of a moral command: But men whom God has taught more than the beasts
of the earth, being endued with rational capacities, from them he expects the
service of reasonable creatures, in obedience to a moral law; and among men God
has greater expectations of duty from christians, in proportion to their
greater privilege in having the light of revelation superadded to that of
nature, than from unenlightned Pagans: And among christians God expects more
duty and service from those who are more peculiarly privileged with means of
instruction; ministers, scholars, and persons of higher rank, who are favored
with singular advantages and opportunities for acquiring useful knowledge, than
from the illiterate vulgar; and accordingly must their account be, agreeable to
that equitable maxim of our Savior -- To whomsoever much is given, of them
shall much be required. Luke xii. 48.


AND here, if I might be permitted to address a word, agreeable to the subject
discoursed, to the students of this academy; (and surely it will not be deemed
impertinent to the design of the pious founder of this lecture;) I would only
say, as you have great advantages for cultivating and polishing your reasonable
powers by the liberal arts and sciences, which may be of manifold use in all
the affairs of life, especially in matters of religion and morality; so it is
to be hoped your improvements will be proportionable. And it may deserve a
serious thought, that your improvement or neglect of the special opportunities
you enjoy in your learning age, for enriching your minds with the various kinds
of useful literature, may furnish matter of either comfortable or sorrowful
reflection to you, all your remaining days. Happy youths, under your present
advantages, if you knew your own happiness!

TAKE care not only to store your understandings with principles of truth for
speculation, but let them be reduced to practice, by influencing your
affections and active powers, that your tempers and conversations may be
governed by principles of truth and reason. This will be the best commendation
of your learning. If you would be instructed in the art of pleasing, or know
how to behave, so as to be accepted of God, and approved of men, the best
advice that can be given in general is, show yourselves men, behave as
reasonable creatures ought to do, both toward God, and toward men. Study the
precepts of right reason, and aim at, and endeavor after a rational conduct in
all your relations, toward your superiors, equals, and inferiors: Such a
rational conduct, (as it will yield abundant satisfaction and pleasure to
yourselves in reflection) will appear highly decorous, amiable, pleasing, yea
charming to all the sons of wisdom and virtue; and you will be furnished for
acceptable service to your generation, whether in church or commonwealth.

AS to those of you who may have a view to the sacred ministry, let me
recommend an impartial regard to truth, especially to religious truth, in your
studies and disquisitions. Let nothing be admitted for truth, but what a
rational judgment shall pronounce such, upon solid convincing evidence. Guard
against prejudices and prepossessions of every kind; against prejudices arising
from education, interest or any corrupt passion. Let no opinion be embraced as
true and sound, merely because it is received by tradition from the fathers,
without impartial examination. To prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good and true, is the counsel of inspired scripture. 1 Thessalonians. v. 21.
However, there may be, I confess, no small danger of carrying this caution too
far. Young men taught by precepts, but not sufficiently by experience, through
the vivacity of their temper, affectation of novelty, or an over-weaning
conceit of their abilities, as superior to those of their predecessors, or
through a vain curiosity, or an humorous singularity, or the alurement of some
plausible, though false reasonings in a favorite author, are many times prone
too rashly to throw off the principles of their education. Their sprightly wits
account it a dull business, and too tedious to hold on in the same old path,
because it is old, though it be the good and right way; and are apt to strike out
into some untried and untrodden path, till by a more grave and mature judgment,
and sounder experience, they be convinced of their error. Extremes are
therefore to be avoided: Examine old principles as strictly as possible; this
we exhort, and urge you to, without all fear of the consequences; being well
assured, that the more deeply and thoroughly and impartially they are studied
and searched into, the more you will be confirmed in them; but cast them not
off, till it plainly appears they will not stand the test of reason or
scripture; and whatever opinions will not abide this test, though men of learning
and renown have been the abettors of them, reason warrants their abdication. --
Magis amica veritas. As truth is always uniform and consonant to itself, so
errors are various and often opposite to each other, as well as to the truth;
there is therefore this further caution to be observed, that upon the discovery
of the error of any particular opinion, you be not carried away through a spirit
of opposition, into the other extreme, no less disagreeable to truth, which is
no uncommon thing among men; and so through aversion to error fall into error:
And therefore a careful and dispassionate examination of principles is
requisite to your being steadily fixed in the golden medium of truth. -- Guard
in like manner against prejudices arising from interest, and worldly
advantages, whereby you may be in danger of being tempted to forsake the old
paths, wherein your pious progenitors have walked. But having by due enquiry
found out the truth, to the satisfaction of your own minds, stand steadfast and
inflexible to all temptations. -- Buy the truth (says Solomon Prove. xxiii. 23.
) buy it at any rate, whatever pains or study it cost you; and sell it not,
part not with it upon any terms, because no exchange, no equivalent can be
given for it: All secular interests, honors, preferments, power, or
reputation, are of no weight in counter-ballance to truth; therefore "hold fast
the form of sound words."

NOW though human instruction and discipline are a most valuable advantage, in
order to form and prepare the mind for religion and virtue, yet show I unto you
a more excellent way. Rest not in mere human teaching, though the best of the
kind; but submit your souls, with the meekness and humility of Jesus Christ, to
the teaching of the Spirit of God. "Who teaches like him?" Job xxxvi. 22.
especially in those doctrines and truths which are of his inspiration, whose
office it is to lead you into, and confirm you in the truth, and establish you
against error. Beg this gift, therefore, of the Father of lights, that he would
irradiate and warm your hearts with the heavenly light of his Spirit, that with
a better relish, and a better hope of success, you may apply your minds to
search into, and understand divine mysteries, and receive the impressions of
them on your own souls: In his light we shall see light; so that as you are the
hopes of the present, you may, through divine grace, be the blessings of the next
generation: that as the Jews were wont to call the sons of their priests, who
should one day succeed them in the priestly office, Pirchei chehunnah, (...)
Bux. Lex. Hebr. et Chaldaic.
the flowers of the priesthood; so we look upon our studious and pious youths,
the sons of the prophets, as the flowers of the ministry: May God grant you to
blossom and flourish in all divine and human literature, and in all virtuous
and religious endowments, and in due time to bring forth ripe fruit in the
service and edification of the church of Christ.

FINALLY (to add no more): Let us hence see the equity, the easiness and
pleasantness of the religion of Jesus Christ; which, as to the practical part,
is founded in the reason and nature of man, and so may in some sense be said to
be natural, as being adapted to the principles of light and truth in his
rational nature, though not to the inclinations and dispositions of his carnal
nature; and what is natural must be easy and pleasant: -- And why should not
the service of Christ be as pleasant to its votaries, having their rational
nature on its side, though it has corrupt passion and appetite against it, as
the service of sin is to its votaries, having their carnal nature on its side,
though it has reason and conscience against it; and much more so, as the manly
pleasures of religion and virtue vastly transcend the sordid pleasures of
brutal appetite? With good reason, therefore, has our blessed Savior left us
this recommendation of his religion, my yoke is easy and my burden is light.
Matt. xi. 30
And from the whole we see the folly, the unreasonableness and brutishness of
sin and vice; its disagreableness to the nature of man as a rational creature,
and its certain tendency to his ruin. And on the other hand, we see also the
wisdom of being truly religious, which is nothing else but giving free scope to
reason and conscience to exert themselves, under the directions of revelation,
in the right government of our tempers and lives. And this is the true wisdom
of man, according to the ancient oracle, which ever has been, and ever will be,
found of immutable verity, as long as man is man, to the end of the world. In
Job 28. ult. Unto man he said, behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and
to depart from evil is understanding.

THE END.

