Mr. Gay's SERMON AT THE ORDINATION OF Mr. BUNKER GAY.

The Evangelical Preacher.

A SERMON DELIVERED AT THE ORDINATION OF THE Rev'd Mr. BUNKER GAY, AT
HINDSDALE, August 17th. 1763.

By EBENEZER GAY, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Suffield.

Acts V. 20. Go, stand and speak in the Temple to all the People, all the Words
of this Life.....

Ver. 42. And daily in the Temple, and in every House, they ceased not to teach
and preach Jesus Christ.

BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL DRAPER, in Newbury-Street. 1763.

An Ordination Sermon.
COLOSSIANS I. 28. Whom we preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in
all Wisdom; that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus.


IN these Words of St. Paul, now read in your Audience, we have set forth one
principal and important Branch of the ministerial Office, and the grand Scope
and Design of it. What he here affirms, with Respect to himself and other
Ministers of the Gospel, is incumbent upon all who are solemnly set apart,
according to divine Appointment, to the Work of the Gospel Ministry. For
whatever Distinction there may be between the Office of an Apostle, and that of
an ordinary Minister in the christian Church, their Work, with Respect to
Preaching, is the same, as to the Subject Matter, complete Manner, and true
Scope and End of it: So that the Apostles, and first Ministers of Christ, were,
in this Point, Ensamples to all their Successors in the ministerial Office; and
it is now, as much as ever it was, the special Duty of those, who are put in
Trust with the Gospel, to preach CHRIST, warning every Man, and teaching
eve-Man, in all Wisdom; that they may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus.

Wherefore, in discoursing upon these Words, I shall, without any critical
Remarks upon them, immediately apply myself to the Consideration of the several
Things, clearly held forth in them, touching the Duty of Gospel Ministers, viz.

I. That they should preach Christ. II. That they should do this in a clear,
full and persuasive Manner, "warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all
Wisdom*" III. That their principal View and governing Aim herein should be,
"that they may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus."
I say then,

I. That Gospel Ministers should preach Christ.

I shall not spend Time to prove what is here supposed, viz. That Preaching is
a principal and important Part of the Work of Gospel Ministers. The Characters
by which they are described -- the Duties injoined upon and Directions given to
them in holy Scripture -- and the Examples of the first Ministers of the
christian Church, imply and show this to be a Duty specially incumbent on them,
-- a Business belonging to them, so as it does not to others, who are not
entrusted with the same Office. But the main Point here to be considered is,
What they should make the Subject Matter, the grand Theme of their Preaching:
And this is JESUS CHRIST. Christ is, by Way of Eminency, the great Subject of
the Gospel-Revelation, and Gospel Ministers, in their Preaching, should have a
special Reference and Regard to him; not merely glance at, but point directly
to him, so as to dispense and make manifest the Savor of the Knowledge of him,
and lead Men to a thorough, and, if possible, to a saving Acquaintance with
him. As they are Christ's Ministers by Office, so they should preach Christ, as
he is revealed and set forth in the Gospel, as they would faithfully discharge
their sacred Office, and answer the true End and Design of it. So did the
Apostles of Christ, notwithstanding the great Opposition and Ill-Treatment they
met with for it. Acts V. 42. Daily in the Temple, and in the House, they ceased
not to teach and to preach Jesus Christ.

This Phrase of Preaching Christ is several Times used in the New Testament:
And it is with a particular and immediate Reference to him, that St. Paul says
in the Text -- Whom we preach. Now to preach Christ, as the Apostles did, and
every one of his Ministers ought to do, is to preach the Doctrine or Gospel of
Christ; even the Mystery (as it is expressed ver. 26.) which has been hid from
Ages and from Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints. It is not
barely insisting upon, or frequently mentioning the Name of Christ, but
preaching the Truth as it is in Jesus; declaring the whole Counsel of God to
Mankind revealed by Christ; always, in the Course of their Ministry, making the
peculiar Doctrines of the Gospel, which immediately concern the Kingdom of God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, the principal Topics of Discourse; and teaching Men
to observe all Things whatsoever he has commanded; explaining and urging the
Precepts of Christianity in a Manner agreeable to the Nature, Spirit, and Genius
of it.

More particularly,

1. To preach Christ is to preach the personal Dignity of Christ: To set him
forth, in a scriptural Light, both in his divine and human Nature, as God
manifest in the Flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16.
This is one of those Mysteries of Godliness, which, however inconceivable by
us, is expressly revealed in the Gospel, and to be preached by the Ministers of
it.

The Divinity of Christ's Person is to be taught and maintained against those
who deny it. He is to be preached, that he is the Son of God: yea, the only
begotten Son of God by Way of Eminence and Distinction; not only fully
resembling, but also partaking of the Nature and Perfections of the Deity,
being the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his
Person: Heb. 1.3.
Who was in the Beginning with God, and was God, Joh. 1.1.
possessed of divine Excellencies, the Image of the invisible God, the
Firstborn of every Creature, or before all Creatures, and by whom all Things,
both in Heaven and in Earth, were created, and do consist, Cont: Ver. 15, 16,
17.
and to whom divine Titles are given, and divine Attributes and Works are
ascribed.

He is likewise to be represented in his Humanity, and preached, that he is the
Son of Man -- that he became incarnate, or was made Flesh and dwelt among Men
Joh. 1.14.
-- assumed the human Nature, and was made in all Things like unto his
Brethren, Heb. 2.17.
whom he came to redeem and save -- a most innocent and righteous Person, who,
although he really partook of the essential Properties of human Nature, was yet,
by his extraordinary Conception and Birth, exempt from human Sin and Guilt, and
was ever perfectly holy, harmless, and undefiled Heb. 7.26.
-- one who was filled with the Holy Ghost without Measure, John 3.34. Col. 2.9.
and in whom dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead bodily.

And it is of no small Importance that the Ministers of Christ should preach up
his personal Dignity and Excellency; not only to lead Men to just and worthy
Conceptions of him, but also to convince them of his Suitableness and Ability
to save them, and to show what solid Ground there is to hope and trust in him.

2. To preach Christ is to preach him in his Office-Character and Work, as the
only Mediator between God and Man, and the Savior of lost, guilty and
perishing Sinners.

The Gospel contains the glad Tidings of Salvation to fallen Men by Jesus
Christ, and in it we have the clearest and fullest Discovery hereof. Yea, it is
the special Business, and peculiar Glory, of the Gospel, to unfold this great
Mystery of sinful Man's Redemption by Christ. Herein the Lord Jesus Christ is
represented, not only in his personal Character and Dignity, as God manifest in
the Flesh, but also as being appointed and sent of God, to mediate between
himself and us, to effect a Reconciliation, and procure eternal Redemption and
Salvation for us; and, as acting in this noble and exalted Character,
performing the Business of a Mediator and Savior for us. And surely this,
which is so much the Business and Drift of the Gospel, should be made the
Subject and Scope of Ministers Preaching, to whom the Dispensation of it is
committed. Nor can they be said truly and fully to preach Christ, and to answer
the special Business and Design of their Office, if they wholly, or in a great
Measure, neglect to treat of those peculiar and important Doctrines of the
christian Revelation, which relate to Christ's Office-Character and Work.

They should not only treat of the human Apostasy and Guilt, which is supposed
in the Salvation of the Gospel, and upon which it is grounded, and labor, by
the Precepts and Testimony of the Law, to convince Men of their Sins and
Obnoxiousness to God's eternal Wrath and Curse, and of their own Inability to
obtain Righteousness, Justification and Life by the Deeds of the Law, and
consequently of their absolute Need of a Savior; but also be especially
careful to point out the glorious Remedy which divine Wisdom and Goodness has
provided, and testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the
World. 1 John 4.14.

They should endeavor, as distinctly as they can, to lay open God's eternal
Counsels of Peace, and saving Purposes toward apostate Mankind, and show that
he IS in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing unto them
their Trespasses, 2 Cor. 5.19.
and with how much Wisdom, Goodness, and Faithfulness, he has been, and still
is carrying on these Counsels and Purposes of his Love and Mercy.

They should discourse and reason upon the great Topics of the christian Faith
and Verity, and labor to prove the divine Mission and Authority of Christ,
from his miraculous Works, as well as from the Nature and Tendency of his
Doctrine; and also to show from the ancient Prophecies which relate to the
Messiah, and the punctual Accomplishment of them in him, that this Jesus whom
they preach is very Christ, the true Messiah and only Mediator, whom God has
anointed to this Office, and sent to redeem and save a perishing World.

Nor is it sufficient to represent him only in his general Character and
Office, as our Mediator and Redeemer; but they should also treat distinctly of
his particular Offices of a Prophet, Priest and King, with which he is
invested, and which are united in him; explain the Nature and Design of each of
them; and show his Faithfulness in the ready, diligent, and punctual Discharge
of them.

They should set him forth in his prophetic Office, as a Teacher sent from God,
to reveal his Will, and make the last Overtures of Mercy, Peace and Salvation
to Mankind; in whom were fulfilled the Words of the Prophet, Isaiah 61.1, 2.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach
the Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to heal the Brokenhearted, to preach
Deliverance to the Captives, and Recovery of Sight to the Blind, to set at
Liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable Year of the Lord.

They should preach his eternal and unchangeable Priesthood; -- That he was
ordained of God an High Priest for us, in Things pertaining unto God, to make
Reconciliation for the Sins of the People; and that he gave himself for us, an
Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor; and is passed into
the Heavens, now to appear in the Presence of God for us, as our perpetual
Advocate. The Cross of Christ was what the Apostles testified, and much
insisted upon in their Preaching. It was this Doctrine that was so peculiarly
offensive to Jews and Greeks, but which, however, was attended with remarkable
Power and Efficacy for the Salvation of them that believed. 1 Cor. 1.18. For
the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish Foolishness: but unto us
which are saved, it is the Power of God. Ver. 23, 24. But we preach Christ
crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks Foolishness;
but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the Power of God,
and the Wisdom of God. Yea, of such Excellence and Importance was this Doctrine
in the Esteem of St. Paul, that, even at Athens, the Seat of Philosophy, and of
all human Wisdom and polite Literature, he made it the grand Theme of his
Preaching, as being vastly preferable to all the Wisdom and Learning of Greece,
and necessary to Salvation. 1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any Thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And Gospel Ministers should
insist much upon this distinguishing and important Doctrine of Christianity,
whoever may be prejudiced against, or offended at it; and treat it not barely
as a Matter of Fact, but designed for our Reconcilement unto God; showing the
Virtue and Efficacy, as well as the Necessity, of Christ's atoning Sacrifice,
and the Power and Prevalency of his Intercession: That, as our great
High Priest, he has by his own Blood entered into the Holy-Place, even into
Heaven itself, having obtained eternal Redemption for us; Heb. 9.12.
and that he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them. Heb. 7.25.

They should also preach his Royalty and Dominion, as King and Head of the
Church; that this same Jesus who was crucified, is raised from the Dead,
exalted and seated at the Right Hand of God, and made both Lord and Christ, and
has all Things put into Subjection unto him: That he has on his Vesture, and
on his Thigh, a Name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS; Rev. 19.16.
and by his Power and Authority gives Laws and Ordinances to his Church;
subdues the Hearts of Men to a willing Obedience and Subjection by the
Influences of his Word and Spirit; leads and guides, protecteth and defends
them, and dispenses all spiritual and saving Blessings to them; restrains and
conquereth his and their Enemies, and over-ruleth all Things for the best Good
of his Chosen: And that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of
Quick and Dead, Acts 10.42,
and who will hereafter come again with Power and great Glory, and all the
Tokens of Royalty and Majesty, to raise the Dead, and to judge the World, and
to give unto every Man according to his Works, whether they be good or bad,
without Respect of Persons.

3. To preach Christ is to preach the precious Benefits of Christ.

Unto me, says St. Paul (Ephesians. 3.8.) who am less than the least of all Saints,
is this Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
Riches of Christ. And every Minister of Christ should do the same; by setting
forth his infinite Fullness, the manifold and inestimable Blessings that are
treasured up in him, purchased, offered, and dispensed by him; and showing what
is the Hope of his Calling, and what are the Riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints. Ephesians. 1.18.
Not only the external Privileges and Advantages of the Gospel, such as the
Word, Ministry, and Ordinances; but also the inward, spiritual, and saving
Blessings of it, such as the Redemption from Sin and the Curse of the Law --
effectual Calling -- Justification unto Life -- Sanctification of the Spirit --
being made the Sons and Heirs of God by Adoption -- Peace with God, and free
Access to and Acceptance with him -- Wisdom, Righteousness, and Strength --
Sure Guidance and Assistance, Protection and Support, under present Trials --
the Indwelling, Sealing, Witness and Comforts of the Holy-Spirit -- the Joy of
Faith and Hope, -- and future complete and everlasting Glory and Blessedness in
the Kingdom of Heaven, should be mentioned in their proper Place: -- The Nature
of these Benefits explained; the Preciousness, Excellency and Importance of
them illustrated; their Connection and Harmony shown, and each one its proper
Weight given it; and all of them considered as flowing from Christ, and the
Fruits of his mediatorial Offices and Works; who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30.

4. To preach Christ is to preach the Laws of Christ, or the Duties which he
has injoined.

The Gospel injoins Duties, as well as reveals Grace and Truth. It is eminently
the Doctrine of Grace, and yet, in the strictest Sense, a Doctrine according to
Godliness; containing Duties to be performed, as well as Truths to be believed.
In order to our being interested in Christ, and partaking of his saving
Benefits, it requires not only Faith in Christ, and Repentance of Sin, but also
universal Holiness of Heart and Life. It is so far from encouraging
Licentiousness, that it teaches us, that denying Ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World.
Titus 2.12.
And Ministers should preach and inculcate the Duties of the Gospel; teaching
Men to observe all Things whatsoever Christ has commanded them. Mat. 28.20.

They should testify Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ; Acts 20.21.
carefully explain the Nature of these Duties, and show the Necessity of them,
in order to the obtaining Pardon, Justification, and eternal Life: Nor should
they, by any Means, neglect to teach, and press Obedience to the Laws of Christ
-- to inculcate the Duties of Piety toward God, of Righteousness and Charity
toward Men, and of Sobriety and Temperance with respect to Ourselves, and to
urge Men to the sincere, steady, uniform, and persevering Practice of those
good Works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.
and which St. Paul did, and willed that Titus and all other Ministers should,
constantly affirm, that they which have believed in God should be careful to
maintain, Tit. 3.8.
as being truly pleasing and acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, and
necessary to the true Dignity and Perfection of our Nature, and to make us meet
to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Col. 1.12.
It is a very faulty Neglect in Ministers, not to insist much and strenuously
upon those Virtues of Mind and Life, those good Works of Piety and Charity.
Humility and Holiness, which the Gospel so strongly injoins and enforces, and
which it is so much the Business and Design of it to promote in us.
Christianity was never designed to subvert the Duties of Morality and natural
Religion, but to clear and enforce them; and our Obligations thereunto are
strengthened and increased, rather than diminished, by the Gospel-Revelation.
And it is the Part of Gospel Ministers to teach and enforce these Duties, with
all Clearness and Strength of Argument, as Matters of great Moment and
everlasting Concernment. In doing this they should not only have Recourse to
Reason and Conscience, and make use of all the Motives and Arguments that can
be fetched from thence; but also teach them in the special Reference they bear
to Christ, as injoined by his Authority, and performed by Grace and Strength
derived from him; and enforce them by the special Motives and Arguments of the
Gospel, the Authority and Example, the Grace and Love of Christ, the
Consideration of our Accountableness to him, and of those eternal Rewards and
Punishments of the next Life, which are brought to Light by the Gospel.

Having thus shown, that Gospel Ministers should preach Christ, and what is
implied herein, I pass on to say,

II. That they should do this in a clear, full, and persuasive Manner; warning
every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom.

These Expressions, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom,
may be considered as exegetical of the former, and intending the same Thing as
preaching Christ: Or rather, as referring to the Manner of doing it, i. e. in a
clear, full, and persuasive Manner, and with all the Wisdom and Prudence, and
Address, that a Man is Master of.

Ministers are set as Watchmen (...) 3.17.
to give Warning to the People from Christ, and to admonish them in the Lord of
their Sin and Danger. -- They are also Overseers of the Flock, whose special
Business it is, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
Blood; Acts 20.28.
by faithfully dispensing the Food of God's House, the Truths of his Word, for
their spiritual Nourishment and Growth in Grace: And they should take Heed to
do both in a clear, full, and persuasive Manner, so as, if possible, to take
Effect.

They should in Christ's Name, and from his Word, give clear and faithful, full
and timely Warning of every threatening Evil and Danger -- cry aloud and spare
not to show unto Men their Transgressions and their Sins -- caution and warn
them against an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God --
against persisting in their Impenitency, and hardening themselves in their
Disobedience to the Gospel -- against all vicious Affections and fleshly Lusts
-- against Hypocrisy and Self-Righteousness -- against grievous Errors and
Heresies, Backsliding and Apostasy, Schism and Divisions, vain Janglings and
Disputings, and whatever is prejudicial to their spiritual Interests, and tends
to subvert their Souls; and endeavor to set the evil Nature, the great Folly
and Danger, and fatal Tendency and Consequences of these Things in a clear and
striking Light.

They should teach Men in all Wisdom, -- in all the Truths and Duties of the
Gospel, which is, by Way of Eminency, the Word of Wisdom, and is able to make
them wise unto Salvation -- instruct them plainly and fully in all the
important Articles of the christian Faith, and necessary Virtues and Duties of
the christian Life -- declare the whole Counsel of God, -- and omit nothing
that is requisite for them to know, believe, and do, in order to their pleasing
God, and being accepted and approved in Christ. In treating of the deep Things
of God, the great Mysteries of Godliness, they should be specially careful to
use Plainness of Speech; speaking of them, not in Words which Man's Wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual Things with
spiritual: 1 Cor. 1.13.
Not soaring above the Capacity of their Hearers in airy Speculations, lofty
Expressions, or obscure Phrases, which tend rather to amuse and puzzle, than to
inform the Understanding, to please the Fancy and raise the Imagination, than
to win the Will and Affections to a Compliance with the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and excite a rational Devotion: Nor yet grovelling far beneath the
Dignity of their Subject, or making use of uncouth Phrases, odd and awkward
Expressions, or such party Terms, as are rather grating and offensive, than
pleasing, to a sober and judicious Ear, and minister Questions and Strifes;
rather than godly Edifying in Christ Jesus; but always endeavoring to preserve
a clear but manly Style and Diction, becoming the Dignity and Importance of the
Truths delivered, and that has the greatest Aptitude to convey them in the
most plain and forcible Manner. And in treating upon the plainer Truths and
Duties of Religion, they should be concerned to use Uncorruptness, Gravity,
Sincerity, and sound Speech, that cannot be condemned; setting them forth, not
altogether in the Dress of human Wisdom and Oratory, and the Flourishes of
Rhetoric; but representing them in their own true, naked, and scriptural
Light, that they may come with their native Force, and make a more deep and
lasting Impression upon the Hearts and Consciences of their Hearers.

And all this is to be done in the most affectionate and persuasive Manner. Men
are to be compelled to embrace Christianity, not by external Force and
Violence, but by the gentle and constraining Methods of Reason and Persuasion.
Impenitent Sinners are to be warned in the Bowels of Christ of the Danger they
are in of perishing everlastingly; persuaded by the Terrors of the Lord, to
flee from the Wrath to come; and entreated by the Love of God, and the
Gentleness of Christ, and all the indearing Motives of the Gospel, to repent
and turn to God, and be reconciled unto him. Believers are to be admonished of
their Defects and Failings in the Spirit of Love and Meekness; urged to
continue steadfast in the Grace of God, encouraged and confirmed in the Faith
and Hope of the Gospel; exhorted, comforted, and charged (as a Father does his
Children) to walk worthy of God, who has called them unto his Kingdom and
Glory. 1 These. 2.11, 12.

Furthermore, This Care is to be extended to all of every Age, Character, and
Denomination, without any partial Respect to Persons. All have sinned and come
short of the Glory of God: All are obnoxious to eternal Condemnation: All have
Souls to save, and are equally concerned in the common Salvation of the Gospel:
And Ministers should preach Christ to All -- invite All to come unto him for
Life -- warn and instruct every Man in all Wisdom, according to his particular
State and Circumstances, and as the Exigencies of the Case require -- and, as
good Stewards of the Mysteries of God, rightly divide the Word of Truth, and
prudently distribute to every one his Portion in due Season; that none, through
their Partiality or Neglect, may remain in woeful Ignorance, and perish for Lack
of Knowledge; but that all, being enriched by them in all Wisdom and spiritual
Understanding, may be furnished unto every good Work, and stand complete in the
whole Will of God, lacking nothing. --

I proceed to show,

III. That their principal View and governing Aim herein should be, "That they
may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus." For in him (says St. Paul, Col.
2.9, 10.) dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete
in him, which is the Head of all Principality and Power. To be complete in
Christ may signify both our being completely justified through his perfect
Righteousness and Atonement, and also our being renewed and sanctified by his
Spirit, and so formed to his Image and Likeness, and gradually built up in a
Conformity to him, in all christian Graces and Virtues, unto final and complete
Glory and Blessedness in Heaven.

But this Expression of being perfect, as applied to the Saints in Scripture,
has, I think, a special Reference to their internal Sanctification, their moral
Character, or that holy Temper and Life they are of: In which Respect, indeed,
it can be strictly affirmed of none, that they are perfect in this Life; yet,
in a qualified and scriptural Sense, they may be said to be more or less so,
according to the Progress and Seize they make in christian Knowledge,
Grace, and Holiness, and those Virtues of Mind and Life, which resemble them to
God and Christ, and in which the true Dignity, Happiness and Perfection of
their Nature consist. And so, to present Men perfect in Christ Jesus, may
imply, not only, or simply, winning or espousing them to him, by a cordial
Faith in and Subjection to him, as their Lord and Savior, but also training
them up in the Knowledge of Christ, and a growing Conformity unto him in all
christian Graces and Virtues, that they may be meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light, and finally presented, without Spot or
Wrinkle, before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy.

This is the grand Design of the Gospel Ministry. Ephesians. 4.11, etc. He gave some,
Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ: Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of
the Stature of the Fullness of Christ: That we henceforth be no more Children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the
Sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in Wait to deceive:
But speaking Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all Things, which is the
Head, even Christ. And this is what the Ministers of the Gospel should aim at,
and make the grand Scope and End of their Preaching. -- Love to Christ, and a
compassionate Concern for the Welfare and Salvation of precious Souls, should
be the animating Principle and Motive in the Whole of their ministerial Work.
Whatever other subordinate Views they may lawfully have, their principal and
governing Aim should be, to win Souls to Christ, and to present them perfect in
him. With this View and Design should they engage, and constantly proceed in
their great Work; preaching Christ, not out of Envy, but of good Will; not
seeking for themselves, as their ultimate End, secular Honors and Profits, but
the Honor of Christ, the Advancement of his Kingdom, and the spiritual Profit
of the Souls committed to their Care, that they may be saved; travailing, as it
were, in Birth, by earnest Concern and Prayer, for them, that Christ may be
formed in them; laboring to build them up in all Things, and to perfect that
which is lacking in their Faith and Obedience; affectionately warning and
admonishing, counselling and exhorting, comforting and charging them, and
becoming all Things to all Men, as far as is allowable, that by all Means they
may save their Souls.

Not that the most faithful Preaching is always attended with desired Success:
So far from it, that the wisest and best Ministers often have Occasion to
complain and say, We have labored in vain, and spent our Strength for Naught,
with Respect to many, if not the Bulk of their Hearers. But notwithstanding all
Discouragements of this Nature, they should proceed in the steady and faithful
Discharge of their Duty; as knowing that their Judgment is surely with the
Lord, and their Work with their God: and though Israel be not gathered, yet
they shall be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, and their God shall be their
Strength; and that whether many, or few, are saved by their Ministry, yet, if
they are faithful in the Discharge of it, they shall deliver their own Souls,
and their Labor shall be accepted in the Lord, and meet a divine and
everlasting Reward.

The Discourse we have been upon suggests several useful and important
Reflections.

1. How illustrious is the Divine Wisdom and Goodness in the Institution of the
Gospel Ministry?

The Gospel is, by Way of Eminence, a Dispensation of Grace, and the Divine
Wisdom and Goodness are illustriously displayed, in the Whole, and in the
several Parts and Branches of it. The Gospel Ministry, in particular, is a wise
and gracious Institution, and shows the tender and faithful Care of Christ
toward his Church, in providing so well for its spiritual Instruction and
Support, Edification and Comfort. It was one of the great Blessings which God
promised to his People of old, I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart,
which shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding. Jer. 3.15. And
Gospel Ministers are to be acknowleged, with all Thankfulness, as precious
Gifts of our ascended Savior; bestowed for most important Uses and beneficial
Purposes, even for the Propagation and Defense of Religion, for teaching,
explaining, and inculcating the great Truths and Duties of it, and perfecting
Men in the Knowledge and Practice of them. And however the Preaching of Christ
by weak and frail Men, may, by some, be accounted Foolishness, and treated with
Contempt; yet the Wisdom, Power, and Grace of God are clearly manifested, in
pitching upon, and making Use of such Means for effecting the Salvation of them
that believe. And very conspicuous is the Care of divine Providence, in
continuing the Gospel Ministry in the Church, and in raising up a Succession of
Men in every Age and Place of it, whom he is pleased to qualify for, and to
employ in this sacred and important Office, and in succeeding their faithful
Labors and Ministrations, for saving Good to many precious Souls.

2. What has been discoursed shows something of the Dignity, Importance, and
Difficulty of the ministerial Office.

Mean and contemptible as this may appear in the Eyes of some, it is an Office
of high Dignity, and a great Honor to be employed in it. The Son of God
himself, who surpasses the Angels of Heaven in Dignity, and is far more
excellent and glorious than they, was a Teacher sent from God, anointed to
preach the Gospel to the Poor -- to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord:
And Gospel Ministers are his Servants by Office, his Ambassadors, authorized
and sent by him, to officiate in his Name and Stead, and to manage in the
Affairs of his spiritual Kingdom. The Embassy they are charged with is of the
noblest Kind, and greatest Importance: They are sent to deliver his Messages of
Grace and Salvation to sinful Men, and to persuade them, through him, to be
reconciled unto God. And those, upon whom Christ conferreth this distinguishing
Honor, are to be esteemed very highly for their Work's Sake: 1 These. 5.13. They
are to be received with Gratitude and Joy, and treated with a hearty and
welcome Respect; suitable to the Dignity and Importance of their Office. How
beautiful are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad
Tidings of good Things. Romans 10.15.

And the Importance of the ministerial Office bears Proportion to the Dignity
of it. They, who are called to it, have assigned them a Work of a most
interesting Nature, and of the greatest Concernment both to themselves and
others: They have the Care of precious and immortal Souls committed unto them,
for which they are to watch, as they that must give an Account: -- They are
entrusted with the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, which they are
intimately concerned, as far as in them lies, to preserve pure and entire, and
with Fidelity and Prudence to dispense unto others: -- That Gospel, the
Preaching of which is attended with the most awful Consequences to them, to
whom it is dispensed: To some it proves a Savor of Life unto Life; but unto
Others a Savor of Death unto Death; according to the different Reception it
meets with from, and the different Effects, which, in Consequence thereof, it
has upon them. A Business this, O! how weighty, solemn, and important! The
Thought hereof, joined with a proper Sense of their own Insufficiency for it,
may well check the Forwardness, and Presumption, of those, who are eager to run
before they are sent, and influence those who are regularly called unto it, to
undertake it with pious Fear and Trembling.

And the Difficulties, attending this honorable and important Work, are very
great: They are best known to those who have had most and longest Experience of
them. Besides the Study and Labor, Prayerfulness and Vigilance, requisite to
the due Performance of it; the Opposition and Discouragements, that are
commonly to be met with in it, from the Ignorance and Corruptions, the
Prejudices and Lusts of Men; and the Unkindness and Ill-usage occasioned
thereby, render it peculiarly difficult: And it requires no small Degree of
Wisdom and Meekness, Fortitude and Patience, to discharge it aright, so as to
be pure from the Blood of all Men, Acts 20.26.
and unto God a sweet Savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish. 2 Cor. 2.15.

3. They who engage in the Work of the Ministry, or are introduced into it,
should be, in some good Measure, qualified for it.

It is not every one, that is furnished for, or fit to be employed in the Work
of the Ministry. This is a Business too great, difficult, and weighty, to be
safely committed to, or well managed by, weak, unskilful, and wicked Hands.
They who enter upon, and are set apart to this sacred Employment, should be Men
of good Parts and Learning, sincere Piety, and universal Integrity and Virtue;
holding Faith, and a good Conscience. 1 Timothy 1.19.
They, whose special Business it is to preach Christ unto others, ought to be
well acquainted with him themselves, and have his Glory, the Interest of his
Kingdom, and the Good of precious Souls at Heart.

They should have a good Understanding, a competent Knowledge of those
important Truths of Christianity, which they are to teach and inculcate. In
this Respect, they should be as Scribes ready instructed to the Kingdom of
Heaven -- as good Householders, who from that Fund of christian Knowledge,
which they have acquired by Study and Experience, are able to bring forth
Things new and old -- skilful to divide the Word of Truth aright, and to give
to every one his Portion in due Season; so as to approve themselves to God, and
to the Consciences of their Hearers, Workmen, that have no need to be ashamed.

They should have that supreme Love to Christ, and affectionate Concern for the
Souls of Men, predominant in them, which will cause them to love their Work, to
engage in it with Delight, and to perform it with becoming Fervor and
Diligence, and enable them to surmount the Difficulties and Discouragements
that lie in the Way.

And they should be Men of such blameless Behavior, and good Conversation in
Christ, as to adorn their christian and ministerial Character, and, by the
Influence of their Example, to recommend and enforce the holy Religion of the
blessed Jesus, which it is their Duty, in all suitable Ways, to promote.

Persons of this Stamp and Character only are duly qualified for the Office of
the Evangelical Ministry: Nor should any but those, who are visibly, and in the
Judgment of Charity such, ever be introduced into, and dignified with it. The
Want of these Qualifications renders Persons utterly unfit for it, and
incapable of performing it in a right and acceptable Manner. And it is doing
great Injury to Religion, and to the ministerial Character and Office, to put
ignorant, or vicious Men into it: Such, I mean, as are apparently so; whose
weak Heads, and woeful Ignorance, render them incapable of instructing others in
the important Principles and Duties of Christianity; or, whose ambitious and
worldly Views lead them to seek their own Things, and not the Things which are
Jesus Christ's; or, whose corrupt Hearts and perverse Dispositions prompt them
to corrupt the Word of God, and speak Things which they ought not, to the
subverting of the Hearers; or, whose immoral Behavior is a Scandal and
Reproach to the Gospel of Christ, and has a direct Tendency to defeat the
glorious Design of it, and to obstruct the Influence and Efficacy of the most
pertinent and wholesome Instructions.

4. We may infer from the preceding Discourse, the distinguishing Privilege,
and peculiar Obligations of a People, who statedly enjoy the Gospel Ministry
and Ordinances.

As the Gospel Ministry is a most wise and gracious Institution of Heaven, and
designed for the greatest Good to Men; so they who statedly enjoy it, are
greatly privileged and advantaged above others. Happy, in this Respect, is that
People, to whom Christ is preached, by those who are qualified for, and
appointed to this Business -- Happy is the Church and People of God in this
Land, who, from the earliest Days of our Fathers to this present Time, have
enjoyed the Gospel in so great Purity, and been favored with a Succession of
able and faithful Ministers, that have gone forth into the several Parts of it,
and been statedly employed in teaching and preaching Christ to their respective
Charges, with a View to instruct, establish, and perfect them in the
Principles, and Practice of his holy Religion. This is, with all Thankfulness,
to be esteemed a great and distinguishing Privilege, as, by Means hereof, a
People are put under the best Advantages for knowing the Things of their
everlasting Peace, and securing all spiritual and saving Blessings. And great
are the Obligations lying on such a People diligently to improve the Privileges
they enjoy to the good Ends for which they are granted, and to walk worthy of
them unto all well-pleasing.

It greatly concerns them, in particular, to receive, and treat with a
cordial Affection and Respect, those who are sent to them in Christ's Name,
with the important Messages of Grace and Salvation -- to reverence them as the
Messengers of Christ -- to esteem them very highly in Love for their Work's
Sake -- and to do what in them lies to encourage and strengthen them in it, by
showing an affectionate Regard to them, liberally supporting them, and, above
all, by their friendly Counsels, fervent Prayers, and diligent and profitable
Attendance on their Ministry. If it be the Duty of Ministers to preach Christ,
it is the Duty of those, to whom he is preached, to receive with Faith and Love
the important (...): Without this, the preached Gospel will have no saving
Efficacy upon them: It is only to them that believe and obey the Gospel, that
it becomes effectual to Salvation. It Is not in the Power of the most skilful,
holy, and zealous Preacher to impress the Truths, which he delivers, in a
saving Manner upon his Hearers. Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it
is God only, by the Energy of his Spirit, that gives the Increase.

And happy is it when the preached Gospel reaches its true End, and has its
designed Effect upon the Hearts of those that hear it. Success in the Ministry
affords abundant Support and Consolation under the Burdens and Difficulties of
it. 1 Thessalonians. 3.7, 8. Therefore, Brethren, we were comforted over you, in all
our Affliction and Distress, by our Faith: For now we live, if ye stand fast in
the Lord. It gives a most delicate and sensible Pleasure and Joy to faithful
Ministers, to reap this Fruit of their Labors. -- To see those, for whose
eternal Welfare they are deeply concerned, sensibly touched with the important
and very interesting Truths, which they preach to them, earnestly concerned
about the Salvation of their own Souls, sollicitous to learn, and ready to obey
the Truth in Christ, and with all Humility embracing the Offers and Tenders of
a compassionate Savior, an all-sufficient Redeemer, and to behold the
Foundation Principles of Religion hereby laid, and fixed deep in their Hearts,
branching out in all the excellent Graces and manly Virtues of the christian
Temper and Life, and growing up toward Perfection.

And nothing certainly can be of greater Advantage to the Persons themselves,
who are thus wrought upon by the Ministry of the Word: For such are entitled to
the important Blessings of the new and everlasting Covenant: They are restored
to the Image, Favor and Friendship of God, and shall have solid Peace and
Comfort, Hope and Joy in this Life, and hereafter be presented perfect in
Christ Jesus, before the Presence of God's Glory with exceeding Joy.

But sad and awful, beyond Expression, is the Case of those, who despise the
Ministers of Christ, and reject the Word of the Lord spoken by them, and, after
all the good Instructions and faithful Warnings given them, remain obstinate
and impenitent: Such remain under Guilt and Condemnation, lie open to, and
shall inherit the tremendous Curses denounced in the Gospel against unbelieving
and disobedient Sinners: They are ever subject to the Terrors of Guilt here,
and shall hereafter be doomed, in righteous Judgment to the everlasting
Torments of Hell: And those Means of Grace, which were designed, and ought to
have been improved by them to prevent their future Ruin, will serve, through
their wicked Abuse of them, to aggravate their Sin and Guilt; and sink them the
deeper into the Abyss of eternal Woe and Misery.

And now, my Fathers and Brethren, Let these imperfect Hints serve to remind
us, whom it has pleased God to put into the Ministry, of the important
Business of our Office, and the solemn Bonds we are under to the faithful
Discharge of it. The Work assigned us is most sacred and honorable, important
and difficult. A principal Part of it is to preach Christ, especially to the
People of our respective Charge; warning every Man, and teaching every Man in
all Wisdom, that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus: To set him
forth in a scriptural Light, in his personal Dignity, divine Mission,
mediatorial Characters, Offices, and Works, and the unsearchable Riches of his
Grace, and Benefits -- to explain the Doctrines and Duties of Religion, as
taught by Christ, and his Apostles -- to show the Truth and Importance of them
-- and to persuade, if possible, our Hearers to the sincere Belief, and uniform
Practice of them, by the most powerful Arguments and Motives which the Gospel,
and Reason, furnish us with. And although ye know these Things, yet it is meet,
so long as we are continued in this Office, to be put in Mind of, and
frequently to reflect upon them; the more to affect and impress our Minds with
them, and to excite us, in a humble Dependence on divine Grace and Help, to the
vigorous and faithful Discharge of the Duties incumbent on us, and so to take
Heed to the Ministry, which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to fulfill it;
as that we may save our own Souls, and the Souls of them that hear us.

But what shall I say unto you, my dear Brother, whom we are now assembled
solemnly to dedicate and set apart to the Work of the Gospel Ministry in this
Place? It is a faithful Saying, If any Man desire the Office of a Bishop, he
desires a good Work. 1 Timothy 3 1.
This is the Office, in the scriptural Sense, which you desire to be invested
in. And it is with Pleasure, that I see you this Day consecrating yourself to
the Service of Christ in this good and excellent Work, for which, I hope, he
has in some good Measure qualified you; yet I cannot but feel a tender and
trembling Concern for you, knowing the Difficulties of the Work, and
considering the infinite Importance, and awful Consequences of it. -- Suffer me
therefore, my Dear Brother, both in the Flesh, and in the Lord, suffer me, I
say, in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, and with all the Tenderness of fraternal
Affection, to impress upon your receptive Mind the Things, which have been
offered in the preceding Discourse, with a special View to your Instruction and
Assistance in the Work you are engaging in.

One principal Part, though not the Whole of your Business, is to preach Christ,
even the everlasting Gospel -- the unsearchable Riches of Christ, unto Men, for
their spiritual Instruction, and eternal Salvation. -- A Work, O how excellent,
solemn, and weighty! It is not the Bodies and Estates, but the Souls of Men,
that you are principally to be concerned with -- not so much their secular and
temporal, as their spiritual and eternal Interest, that you are to labor, to
your utmost, to promote: Your great Concern, I say, lies with the Souls of Men
-- with the Souls of this Church and People, in special, who have invited you
to take the pastoral Care and Charge of them. And although your Care and
Labors are not to be wholly confined to them, yet are they to be chiefly
employed for and among them; in diligently instructing, and training them in
the Knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ, and in the Belief and Practice of the
holy Religion of the Gospel. And however small the Vineyard is, in which you
are called to labor, you will find Work enough to be done in it, to employ all
your Time, and Talents. You have more Souls than your own to take Care of; and
you greatly hazard your own, by taking upon you the Care of others. Not more
strict and awful was the Charge given to the Man, mentioned 1 Kin. 20.39. to
whom one Man brought another, saying, Keep this Man; if by any Means he is
missing, then shall thy Life be for his Life, than that which is now to be
given unto you. -- To your Custody are to be committed the Souls of this
People, with a solemn Charge to keep them with all possible Care, that none of
them may be lost, and perish eternally, through your Fault; each of which is of
infinite Value, and for each of which you must watch, and give an Account unto
Him, that shall judge the Quick, and the Dead, at his Appearance. And, O, how
happy will it be, both for your Self and Them, if you faithfully keep this
Charge. But alas! How sad and dreadful, if you neglect it, to the Loss and Ruin
of your own, and their Souls!

You will therefore take Heed unto your Ministry to fulfill it. You will, from
Love to Christ, and a tender, compassionate Concern for the Souls committed to
your Care, endeavor, in the most full, clear, and persuasive Manner, to preach
Christ unto them, in his personal Character and Dignity; in his mediatorial
Offices and Works; in his saving Benefits; and in his Laws and Ordinances;
warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that you may present
every Man perfect in Christ Jesus. With this View you will enter upon your
Ministry: This you will make your principal End, and governing Aim, in the
cursory and stated Discharge of it. To this End, you will be concerned to know
Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and to gain, not only a competent and
thorough, but also an experimental and saving Acquaintance with the Truths,
which you are to preach unto others: And in order hereunto, you will give
yourself continually to Reading, Meditation, and Prayer; and in this Way,
labor after those noble Seize in christian Knowledge, Grace, and
Holiness, whereby you may be well furnished, and disposed, to every good Work,
both as a Minister, and a Christian, and become an able and skilful Instructor,
a faithful Guide to others, in the Matters of their Salvation, and approve
yourself unto God, a Workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the
Word of Truth. You will diligently improve all your Gifts and Talents in
promoting the Honor and Kingdom of Christ, and the Salvation of precious and
immortal Souls; and willingly spend, and be spent for them, though the more
abundantly you love them, the less you be loved. For you must expect,
notwithstanding you are engaged in so friendly a Work and Design, to meet with
much Difficulty and Opposition in it: And it may be, the more faithful you are
in warning, reproving, and instructing Men, the more you will displease them,
and provoke them to oppose and treat you ill. But let none of these Things move
you, to desert your Work, or to Sloth and Negligence in it; but do thou endure
Hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, and so speak the faithful Word
committed to your Trust, not as pleasing Men, but God, who tries your Hearts,
and shun not to declare the whole Counsel of God, so as to be pure from the
Blood of all Men: Withal making it your constant Care to go before them in the
steadfast Profession, and uniform Practice, of those Truths and Duties of
Religion, which you teach, and inculcate upon them; that by your Example, as
well as Doctrine, you may forcibly recommend Christianity, and hold forth the
Word of Life, so as not to run in vain, or labor in vain.

And under a deep and abiding Sense of your own Weakness and Insufficiency for
this great Work, you will always have your Eye and Heart to Christ, your humble
Dependence upon Him, who is the Head of all divine Influences, for his gracious
Presence with you, his all-sufficient Grace and Aids to be afforded you, and
his effectual Blessing upon your Ministry; as knowing that without him you can
do nothing, and that neither he that planteth, nor he that waters is any
Thing; but God, that gives the Increase. -- So doing thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ, and may hope for Success in your Ministry: This, at
least, you may be sure of, that you shall be unto God a sweet Savor of Christ,
in them that are saved, and in them that perish, and shall in no wise lose your
Reward.

May Christ Jesus, the Savior and Head of the Church, who puts you, in his
ordinary and appointed Way, into the Ministry, abundantly enrich you with all
ministerial Gifts, and Graces, afford you his special Presence, and effectual
Blessing, and make you the spiritual Father of many spiritual Children here;
that when you shall be called to give up your Account to him, you may appear at
the Head of a numerous Progeny, whom you have begotten by the Gospel, and, to
your and their complete and everlasting Felicity and Joy, present them perfect
in him, saying, Here, Lord, am I, and the Children which thou have given me.

I would now address the Church and People of God in this Place.

Brethren beloved, The Wisdom and Care of our ascended Redeemer is thankfully
to be acknowledged in sending forth Laborers into vacant and distant Parts of
his Vineyard: And it is Matter of Joy and Praise, that they are come as far as
unto you, and even beyond you, preaching the Gospel of God: How beautiful, how
pleasant to behold, are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and
bring the glad Tidings of Salvation in these Borders of the Wilderness, which,
not long since, ecchoed with the horrid Rumors of War, and the hideous Yells
of roaming Savages, more fierce and cruel than the wild Beasts of the Wood, in
quest of Prey? Will the Lord make the Wilderness like Eden, and the Desert like
the Garden of the Lord; wherein shall be found Joy and Gladness, Thanksgiving,
and the Voice of Melody. Isai 51.3.
May this Place, in particular, be as a well watered Garden, and a fruitful
Field which the Lord has blessed.

We rejoice to see a Church of our Lord Jesus Christ planted here, and that,
pursuant to your Desires and Endeavors, he is, this Day, sending you a Pastor
and Teacher, who, we hope and pray, may be a great Blessing unto you. May you
esteem this a signal Favor, and with becoming Joy and Thankfulness receive
this Servant of Christ, as one of his precious Ascension Gifts unto you; --
sent upon this kind, noble, and important Business, to preach Him unto you;
warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that he may present
every Man perfect in Christ Jesus. And may you testify your sincere
Thankfulness herefor, by always esteeming and loving him highly for his Work's
Sake, and doing every Thing, on your Part, to render his Life comfortable, and
his Ministry happily successful among you.

Ever remember, that it is your Duty to minister to him that teaches you, in
all outward good Things, for his Support, Comfort and Encouragement: And this,
not merely as a Matter of Bounty and Charity, but as a just Debt -- a due
Reward of his Labor: For so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. -- 1 Cor. 9.14. -- He has a Right to an
honorable Support from you, so long as he ministers to you in holy Things;
and it concerns you to make suitable and stated Provision for it, and to see
that he has it, lest you incur the Guilt of Fraud and Injustice, and lay not
only a Temptation before, but also some Kind of Necessity upon him, to neglect
the Care of your Souls, in order to take Care of himself and Family.

Consider, although his Office is sacred and honorable, that he is a frail
Creature, a Man of like Passions with you, and therefore liable to like
Failings and Imperfections, which it concerns you, not severely to mark, and
aggravate to his Disadvantage, but heartily to bear with, and to cover with the
Mantle of Charity.

Brethren, pray for him; always bearing him upon your Hearts in your Families,
and Closets; and pouring out your Souls in fervent affectionate Intercession to
God, that he may be assisted and prospered in his Ministry, and made a rich and
lasting Blessing to you, and to your Children.

Above all, you will be careful not to despise and forsake, but diligently to
attend upon, and to profit by his Ministry. For if it be his Duty to preach
Christ unto you, warning and instructing you in all Wisdom, it is yours to
hear, and receive Warning and Instruction from him, so as that you may be
presented perfect in Christ Jesus.

Sad and awful indeed will be your Case, if under his faithful Warning and
Instruction, you remain deaf, obstinate, and finally impenitent: For so shall
you be found missing at the Right Hand of Christ in the great Day of Accounts,
and doomed to an aggravated Condemnation, and mourn at the last, yea mourn
everlastingly, under these stinging Reflections, saying, How have I hated
Instruction, and my Heart despised Reproof? And have not obeyed the Voice of my
Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that instructed me? Prove. 5.12, 13.

But happy will it be for yourselves, as well as for your Minister, if you
diligently, seriously, and prayerfully attend upon his Ministry, so as by it to
be instructed in, and persuaded sincerely to embrace, the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and edifyed and built up in the Knowledge of, and a Conformity unto him
in all Things, who is the Head -- till you come to a perfect Man, unto the
Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ: For so shall you be his Hope,
Comfort, and Joy here; and his Glory, and Crown of Rejoicing hereafter, in the
Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his Coming; when, together with him, you
shall be presented perfect in Christ Jesus before the Presence of God's Glory
with exceeding Joy.

NOW the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his Sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be
Glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

