Mr. Haven's SERMON On Joy and Salvation By Christ: His Power and Grace
Displayed in the Protestant Church.

Joy and Salvation by Christ; his Arm displayed in the Protestant Cause. A
SERMON Preached in the South Parish in Portsmouth; Occasioned by the remarkable
Success of His Majesty's Arms IN THE Late WAR, AND BY THE happy PEACE of 1763.

By Samuel Haven, A. M. Pastor of the South-Church in Portsmouth.

PORTSMOUTH, in New Hampshire: Printed and Sold by DANIEL FOUL, 1763.

Salvation by Christ, and his Arm displayed in the Protestant Cause.
ISAIAH LII. 9 -- 10. Break forth into Joy, sing together ye waste Places of
Jerusalem; for the Lord has comforted his People: He has redeemed Jerusalem:
The Lord has made bare his holy Arm in the Eyes of all Nations, and all the
Ends of the Earth shall see the Salvation of our God.


GREAT and incomprehensible is Jehovah the sovereign of heaven and earth; his
greatness is unsearchable, nor can the brightest Seraph in his presence declare
the full extent of his wisdom, power and goodness. Yet part of his ways are
made known to us both in his word and in his works: He has been displaying the
moral perfections of his nature from the moment he first spoke into being moral
creatures, whether angels or men, down to the present day. The divine
dispensations toward the angelic hierarchy, those sublimer spirits who
ministered before the throne of God, declare the glorious excellence and
infinite perfection of their supreme Lord: Some indeed are the awful monuments
of divine justice and omnipotence, being, for their disobedience, "reserved in
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day;" others in loud
acclamations of praise ascribe righeousness unto the Lord, "and cry one to
another, saying, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God almighty."

But we are more acquainted with the divine dispensations toward the sons of
Adam, and much more interested in the discoveries which God has made of his
being and perfections in relation to the human, than the angelic nature. When
we reflect on the divine memoirs as they respect our sinful race, what abundant
reason have we to break forth into joy, and sing anthems of praise to him who
has visited us with his mercy, after we had shamefully violated the most
sacred engagements, broke his covenant, and justly might have been cast off
forever! All praise to him who laid the great plan of our redemption, and gave
early intimations of his grace, and promised the deliverer in the very sentence
he pronounced on our arch foe: All praise to him who has made all things
subserve this most gracious design, in which every moral perfection of the
deity is illustrated; and none can say whether his justice or his mercy, his
holiness or his love shine with more distinguished luster. All praise to him
who has planned and executed this gracious method in a manner every way uniform
and consistent, that all the parts which have been disclosed in the respective
periods of the church, coincide to the grand purpose, and form one beautiful
whole.

Known unto the Lord are all his works from the beginning, he has directed the
whole to promote the honor of his great name and the welfare of his church, in
a manner which speaks his universal government, and declares that he is the
most high over all the earth.

Thus, his dispensations to the Israelites, were designed to illustrate the
honors of his name, being abundant proof of his supreme authority, of the
holiness of his law, and the gracious purposes of his love: As the jewish
polity was designed to exhibit lively representations of the divine purposes
toward his people; so the most material and leading dispensations in their
government were typical of events which have their fullest accomplishment in
the gospel church. While the prophets, therefore, addressed the Israelites in
the name of the Lord, whether in the way of admonition or consolation, their
language was abundantly significant, and well adapted to throw some light on
the grand plan of divine grace which respects not the jews only, but the
gentiles also, even the true church of Christ in all ages.

Thus emblematical was the moral and political state of the Jews. Their being
carried captive into Babylon and God's dealings with them there, their
resettlement in their own land again, and the whole series of divine providence
toward them, down to the incarnation of the Messiah were all full of
instruction; so that while the prophets spoke on these topics, they were often
transported into far distant times, and discribed the important characters and
offices of Christ, and the state of the gospel Church.

Accordingly while Isaiah, the great evangelical prophet of the jewish
dispensation, was speaking of the signal deliverance of Israel from the land of
their captivity, and their resettling in the land of Judea, he is moved by the
Holy Ghost, to speak of the great Messiah's kingdom, and of that joy and
gladness which his gospel shall inspire, when it shall be spread through the
world, and the ends of the earth see his salvation. This divine Savior is the
comforter and redeemer of his people. He has, in an emphatic sense, peculiar to
himself, assumed this amiable character; and his works evince that he has a
just right to it. For this purpose he has made bare his holy arm from age to
age, while he has maintained the cause of his church, and made the ends of the
earth see his salvation.

Were we to trace the history of his church from Adam to the present time, we
should find the visible footsteps of this divine Savior, through the whole, and
a most happy coincidence with the promises and prophesies relating to him on
sacred record.

Accordingly the passage before us leads us to consider the words as they had
reference,

I. To the great salvation wrought for the Jews when they were redeemed from
their babylonish captivity, and put into the full enjoyment of their invaluable
liberties under Jehovah their king.

II. As particularly pointing out the great salvation wrought by Christ, and
the joy of the gospel church.

We shall view them,

III. As accommodated to the remarkable interpositions of God's holy providence
in favor of the Protestant church, in it is rise and progress down to the
present day. Particularly in the late war.

We are to consider the words,

I. As they describe the great salvation wrought for the Jews when they were
redeemed from the babylonish captivity, and put into the full enjoyment of
their invaluable liberties under Jehovah their King.

The prophet Isaiah foretold the captivity of Judah for their idolatry and
rebellion against God; he likewise predicted their restoration, after they
should be humbled in the land of their distress. As the threatening took place
upon them, and their land was laid waste 70 years; so the promise likewise,
received a punctual accomplishment. For at the end of 70 years the decree went
forth under the hand of the great Persian monarch, to release the jewish
captives and rebuild Jerusalem. "Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, the Lord God
of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has charged me
to build him an house at Jerusalem which is in Judah: Who is there among you,
of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem which is
in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel (he is the God) which
is in Jerusalem: And whosoever remains in any place where he sojourneth let
the men of his place help him with silver and with gold and with goods." To
this important event the words of my text primarily refered. Then Zion's waste
places rejoiced, because they were surprizingly replenished and greatly
comforted. Those parts of Jerusalem which had been forsaken and appeared most
desolate, "broke forth into joy and sang together." For God "turned again the
captivity of Judah as the streams in the south. They repented of their idolatry
and God forgave them their transgressions: he remembered them in the land where
they were led captive and delivered them from their oppressors. He made those
who had led them captives, help them with their substance in their journey to
Jerusalem, in rebuilding the walls of the city, and the house of the Lord.
"They had sold themselves by their transgressions, and the Lord redeemed them
without money." He enriched them with the treasures of the Persian court, owned
them his people* and rebuked princes for their sake. He planted them in
Jerusalem, and made them once more a flourishing state, a respectable nation.
He comforted them with his presence and promises: He re-instated them in the
free enjoyment of their religious as well as civil privileges which were
granted them as the seed of Abraham, the children of the covenant, and in a
peculiar sense subjects under Jehovah their king. The history of these things
we have particularly related in the books of Ezra, Nehemiah and the lesser
prophets, who were sent to encourage the Jews in rebuilding the temple, etc.
and to declare unto them the word of God unto the coming of Christ. And thus
God was both the savior and comforter of his people.

In accomplishing this great salvation for the jewish church, the holy arm of
the Lord was made bare in the eyes of all nations. For, beyond all dispute it
was his arm, his uncontroled influence over princes, and his universal
providence in the government of the world which effected all for Judah, and
wrought this great salvation for his inheritance; could they ascribe any thing
to their own power or policy with regard to this remarkable event? Alas! they
were broken and scattered through the whole Persian monarchy, and were a people
hated of all nations. They were on the brink of total ruin, in the days of
Ahasuerus. But God prevented the fatal blow. (This account you have, at large
in the book of Esther.) As they were weak and contemptible in themselves, they
were likewise without all hope from other nations. They had no powerful Ally to
rise up, espouse their cause, and compel their conquerors to resign their
conquests and captives. Nay, so very far from that, the nations around them
laughed at their calamity, and shook their head's in scorn, deriding the seed
of Abraham under the awful rebuke of the Most High, saying, ha, ha, so would we
have it. When the Princes of Judah were rebuilding Jerusalem and the temple,
the neighboring nations united their power and policy to hinder the work, and
prevent Judah from being any more a distinct body. But, behold the arm of the
Lord is revealed, blasting all the designs of Sanballat and Tobiah, and
carrying forward this great work by a series of remarkable providence, which
abundantly demonstrated his supreme government and peculiar care of his church:
He turned the heart of Cyrus and Ahasuerus as the rivers of water are turned,
and made them nursing fathers unto his Jewish church; he removed obsticles
insuperable to all human power, and spoke to his people in this comfortable
language. "Not by might nor by power; but by my spirit says the Lord of hosts:
Who art thou O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and
he shall bring forth the head stone with shouting, crying, grace, grace unto
it:" Israel and all the nations around were taught thus to ascribe the
restoration of Judah, the rebulding of Jerusalem and the temple, to the power
and grace of the most high: Thus he redeemed Jerusalem, comforted his people,
revealed the arm of his power and grace in the eyes of all nations, and the
ends of the earth then saw his salvation.

But all this was emblematical of a far more important event, in which divine
power and grace have illumined the world, and shone with the benign beams of
salvation unto the ends of the earth: We accordingly proposed to consider the
words,

II. As pointing to the great salvation wrought by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the joy of the gospel church. That this is no forced construction of the
passage before us, but agreeable to the design of the Holy Ghost, is evident
from the manner in which the whole passage is refered to, in the New Testament:
The introduction to the text in hand, is quoted by St. Paul and applied to
gospel times: And truly it is admirably adapted to express the glad tidings of
salvation by Jesus Christ. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of
him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good
tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Zion thy God
reigns"! How joyful is the voice of him, that declares this message to a
lost world, that the deliverer is come out of Zion,..... that he is come a "
light unto the Gentiles and the glory of his people Israel" -- that he is come
not to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved?" In what
loud acclamations of praise should a sinful world, exposed to unutterable and
everlasting punishment, welcome this divine Savior, and the tidings of peace
which his gospel proclaims? Surely, they should brake forth into joy, they
should sing together in consort with the angelic choir, "Glory to God in the
highest, peace on earth, good will toward men." To this most joyful event the
whole jewish economy had a very material and principal reference. Indeed so
great is this gospel salvation, that the deliverance of the Jews from their
captive state, was but an imperfect emblem of the deliverance accomplished by
Jesus Christ for all that believe. The messengers sent express by Cyrus to
publish the gracious edict, and proclaim his royal favor, were not so welcome
to Jews inslaved in a strange land, as the messengers of the gospel, and the
gracious designs of the Lord Jehovah to such as have any proper sense of their
moral state.

For,

The case of the Israelites in Babylon did but imperfectly represent the
deplorable state of mankind led captive by their own lusts and the prince of
darkness: Jerusalem all in ruins was a faint emblem of the ruin which sin had
introduced into the world; and the bad state of the jewish polity, while the
whole head was sick, and the whole heart faint, was but a weak representation
of the moral state of the world. For, all had rebelled against their rightful
sovereign, broke covenant with God, and incurred the penalty of his holy law:
all had sinned, and were cut off from all reasonable hopes of justification by
the deeds of the law. All were concluded under sin, both the natural and
judicial consequence whereof were darkness, despair, and death: Thus all
mankind had destroyed themselves; but in Christ Jesus was their help: When
there was no eye to pity, no human or angelic arm that could save, the Lord
pitied, and his omnipotent arm wrought salvation: Our help was laid on one
mighty to save, who was revealed first, in promises and prophesies, in types
and figures under the jewish ritual. But when the fullness of time was come, he
appeared in our nature -- fulfiled all righteousness -- confirmed his divine
mission by a series of miracles -- taught the way of God in truth; and made his
soul an offering for sin: For "he was wounded for our transgression, and
bruised for iniquities, the chaistisment of our peace was upon him, and by his
stripes we are healed." "He once suffered for sins the just for the unjust that
he might bring us unto God." And as he was delivered unto death for our
offenses, so he rose again for our justification; and ascended into the highest
heavens as our advocate and intercessor. God has accepted this satisfaction,
and peace is preached in his name: All that believe "obtain redemption through
his blood even the forgiveness of their sins, and an inheritance among them
that are sanctified." Thus the glorious Lord Jesus has redeemed his people. He
has paid the full price of their redemption -- wrought out perfect
righteousness, and prepared the way for their restoration to the divine favor.
He has likewise purchased for them the renewing and sanctifying influence of
the holy spirit. He is the glorious head of divine influence, and of his
fullness they receive, and grace for grace. In a word, "he is made of God unto
them that believe, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption." Thus
he has made bare his holy arm, and saves his true Israel from their sins, and
from wrath to come.

He not only redeems, but comforts his people; and this is one of those amiable
characters under which he is represented in the text. Nor is it among the least
of the glories of his gospel that it is calculated to minister the most
rational consolation, where consolation was most wanted; -- that it throws the
full blaze of day on a subject which before was either totally hid, or at best,
seen only in the faint gleam of imperfect light: For "life and immortality are
brought to light by the gospel:" "and God in Christ is evidently reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing unto men their trespasses." So that with
the strictest propriety, our gracious Savior may be styled the comforter of
his people.

Accordingly the great Immanuel opened his public commission, by applying to
himself those very memorable words in the 61st of Isaiah: Jehovah anointed him
to preach good tidings unto the meek, -- he was sent to bind up the broken
hearted......to proclaim liberty to the captives.....and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound -- to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord --
to comfort all that mourn...... to give unto them the oil of joy for mourning.
What matter of infinite joy and consolation is it to a soul under a deep sense
of sin, to hear that there is pardon purchased for sins of the deepest
dye!.....that the everlasting Father is well pleased with the mediatorial
character of his Son our Savior...... that he has accepted his righteousness
and sufferings; that Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and "the end of
the law for righteousness unto every one that believes!" O how welcome to a
self-judging, self-condemned sinner, must be the pure gospel of Jesus, removing
at once all distinctions among sinners in point of justification, and assuring
that the blood of Jesus cleanses from all iniquity,.......that God justifies
the ungodly merely on account of the perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to
all such as believe -- that Jesus Christ is passed into the heavens, a great
high priest, and is indeed "able to save unto the uttermost all them that come
unto God by him!" Truly these "are glad tidings of great joy," with which our
gracious Lord is comforting his people.

But with these must necessarily be connected, the promise of the holy spirit
to impress on the mind the truth and infinite importance of these
doctrines,...... to renew and transform the soul and to "unite us to Christ in
our effectual calling." How comfortable, how joyful then, must be the gospel of
Christ to such as are properly convinced of their impotence, as well as their
guilt! To hear that he is the Lord our strength, as well as our
righteousness,.......that "he is exalted to God's right hand to give repentance
and the remission of sins" -- that whosoever comes unto him is drawn of the
Father, John VI, 44, --
and shall in no wise be cast out. 37.
....... That if men being evil, know how to give good gifts to their children,
much more will our Father in heaven give the holy ghost to such as ask;......
"ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, etc." "Behold I will pour
out my spirit upon you, and I will be your God and ye shall be my people."
Surely, here is all the encouragement, we can reasonable desire; and such
passages rightly apprehended, must preserve the soul from sinking into despair
under a sense of it is moral impotence. They are powerful motives to human
endeavors, while at the same time, they teach us that, "all our sufficiency is
of God."

Thus the gospel of Christ is indeed matter of great joy to a guilty helpless
world, as it points us to one, whose perfect righteousness justifies, whose
powerful spirit sanctifies..... Who has fully atoned for our sins, and "Works
in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure."

Moreover, he comforts his people with his gracious presence and the
consolations of his holy spirit. He is with them not only as his image is
portray'd on their souls, and his word committed unto them; but also by the
special comforting influence of his spirit. When we are regenerated by his
spirit, and have entered upon the divine life, we are received into the family
of Christ, are children of the Most-High, and coheirs with Christ Jesus unto
an eternal inheritance: We receive the earnest of this inheritance in the
sanctifying, and comforting influence of the spirit: "And because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba
Father:" By this divine spirit believers are sealed unto the day of more
perfect redemption. By this, they are not only formed to a divine temper, but
assisted in the trial of their state by the word, and enabled to apply the
exceeding great and precious promises of the gospel to their own souls; and so
are comforted, strengthened and established through the word. By the presence and
spirit of Christ they are animated in all their conflicts with their spiritual
enemies, and "endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ;" for he has
said, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee": through Christ strengthening
them they can do all things.

In fine, he comforts all true believers, with the sure hopes of eternal glory.
For he is risen from the dead in our nature and ascended into the heavenly
world as our forerunner. And it is his will that where he is there his
faithful servants shall be also. He is at the right hand of God to discover
unto us the heavenly glory, to convince us of the reality of the invisible
state, and to attach us to that spiritual world. He rose from the dead and
ascended into heaven, that he might support our hopes, and console us while we
are walking through the valley of the shadow of death; and inspire us with the
joyful hope of a glorious immortality: For we are to consider his resurrection
as a pledge of our resurrection, and the glory which he has received as a
bright example of that glory, with which he will crown all his faithful
subjects in his Kingdom above. For his gracious language is, "be thou faithful
unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life;" and "to him that
overcomes will I grant to set with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and am
set down with my Father in his throne."

Thus the words may be considered as pointing to the great salvation wrought by
Christ Jesus, and the gracious manner in which he redeems and comforts his
people.

They may likewise be considered,

III. As accommodated to the remarkable interpositions of divine providence in
favor of the protestant church, in its rise and prgress down to the present
day, and particularly in the late War.

Among all the remarkable events since the commencement of the christian Era,
such as have had respect to the protestant church are very considerable. The
great governor of the world, and savior of his church, has marvellously
displayed his holy arm in the eyes of all nations, in spreading protestant
principles and carrying forward a great work of reformation, in so many states
and nations at once, with such surprising rapidity, contrary to all human
probabilities; and then, in defending the protestant church, when it has been
threatened from every quarter, with immediate and total destruction.

To give a particular detail of all the remarkable displays of divine power and
grace on this subject, would far exceed the limits of a sermon, and soon swell
into volumes of church history. As some of the following historical hintsly
scattered in large tracts of political and church history, not lately in the
author's power to peruse, it is hoped the candid reader will excuse their not
being more accurately and circumstantially related.
I must only hint a few, which ought never to be forgot, and should, on every
remembrance of them, excite our gratitude to him, who has called his church
from mystical Babylon....delivered his chosen, from the chains of Rome.....
enlightened and comforted his people with the uncorrupted word of life, and
defended them, from age to age, with the protecting arm of his universal
providence.

If we consider the state of the christian world under the great papal
apostasy,....the general corruption both in doctrine and manners, which spread
through all orders, and ranks of men, in all nations and kingdoms which bore the
name of christian.....the dark abyss of ignorance and superstition in which all
were immerged.....the unlimited influence of the great roman pontiff,....the
pernicious blending of the civil and ecclesiastical polity,...the immense
treasures of the papal clergy... if we add to all these, the genius of their
religion, adorned with all external pomp and magnificence, suitable to strike
the senses with peculiar energy, and flatter all the false hopes of a corrupt
heart, surely we shall observe no human probability could presage a
reformation: But "all things are possible with God." He poured out his spirit
on those whom he had ordained instruments in his hand of effecting a glorious
reformation: He raised up, qualified and spirited Luther, Calvin and others, to
cast off the papal yoke under which all Europe was at that time,
subjugated,....to declare the pure gospel of Jesus, and to assert the liberty
which believers enjoy in Christ their only Lord.

The first reformers were, both defended from the rage of their enemies, and
succeeded in a manner truly wonderful. So that the period from 1560, to 1650,
is filled with accounts little short of miraculous, in which a worthy author
observes, Dr. Dodderidge on Rev.
it is more than probable that the "fifth angel poured out his viol on the seat
of the beast, and his Kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their
tongues for anguish." During this period several nations renounced subjection
to the Pope, and have continued free unto this day; and in other nations his
power has been greatly abridged and restrained. This appears more remarkable by
considering, how numerous and formidable were the enemies of protestants in the
infancy of the reformation.

For,

The Pope claimed authority over all christian princes* and this authority had
long been ceeded to him by universal consent. By this means, he had the most
powerful nations under his dictatorial influence, and wholly at his command.
Nor did he fail to make use of this usurped authority over all catholic
princes, to extirpate this new heresy, (as he was pleased to term the pure
religion of the gospel.) When the british monarchs dared to assert the
independent rights of their crown, and throw off their subjection to his
pretended holiness, that great deceiver arrogated to himself the right of
dethroning princes, and of releasing subjects from all allegiance to their
rightful sovereigns. Accordingly after thundering out his anathema's against
those powers who refused obedience to his bulls, he exhorted and commanded
those deluded princes, whom he still retained under his influence, to unite all
their endeavors to carry his anathemas into effect. (But, the curse causeless
shall not come,) "he that sets in the heavens laughed, the Lord had them in
derision." He made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all these nations; he
appointed his salvation around his church, and protestants were daily
increasing. Again,

Do we consider the many persecutions which have been carried on, with infernal
rage by catholic princes in France and Spain, in Portugal and Germany, surely,
in a view of the sword, the gibbet, the halter, the stake, and all the dreadful
apparatus of tortures and deaths in a thousand other forms, the highest
probability suggests that these will put a final stop to the progress of the
reformation, and the very name of protestants cease from the earth. But behold
and adore the wisdom and strength of his holy arm, who can frustrate all human
probabilities and bring to naught the deepest designs of the wicked! He
supported those holy martyrs.... He gave them a mouth which none of their
adversaries could gainsay...He inspired them with true christian Heroism, while
they made one entire sacrifice of all things on this side of eternity to the
honor of Christ and the great cause of truth: The eye of their faith too
keenly penertrated the thin veil which seperates time from eternity, to suffer
them to tremble at the impotent wrath of mortals; and their hopes were too
precious to be resigned in exchange for a momentary life: They endured all the
agonies of death as "seeing him who is invisible," not accepting deliverance on
so dishonorable terms as might in the least be construed into a recantation of
their protestant principles. Thus the scaffold and stake were consecrated to
the service of the true church, and the martyr's, (Sampson-like,) were honored
with more success against the enemies of Christ and his true church, at their
death than in their life; while the very means which were designed by
antichrist, to suppress the protestant faith were overruled for the greater
increase and spreading of it. Hence it became a proverbal saying that the
"blood of the martyrs was the feed of the church." The church like the sacred
bush of old, has been long burning, yet not consumed. The protestant cause has
been supported under every disadvantage; and many at this day, in those
persecuting nations embrace the protestant faith, risquing all that this world
calls good and great. The power of the beast has been visibly declining for
more than two centrys, while the stone which is cut out of the mount without
hands, has been prevailing, and there have been many remarkable overtures in
these foreign nations in favor of the Messiah's kingdom.

Or, shall we consider the dispensations of providence toward our own nation,
which as it has long been the grand Bulwork, and principal support, under
Christ, of the protestant church, has been the principal object on which the
enemies of Christ and his church have endeavored to take a final revenge? About
the Year 1758.
Witness the catholic league, as it was called, in the reign of Elizabeth: many
roman catholic princes had formed the execrable design of exterpating the
protestant church, and of recovering Britain to the obedience of Rome. To this
purpose they leagued together,....and many attempts were made to dethrone queen
Elizabeth, and to place on the British throne the queen of the Scotts who was a
bigoted papist. "Accordingly toward the close of the sixteenth centry, the
king of Spain prepared the greatest fleet the world had ever seen, which was
impiously called the invincible armada." This fleet put to sea, and actually
moored in the british channel. Then british liberties and the protestant church
were (to human apprehension) on the very confines of total destruction: This
fleet came equipped with all the dire implements of torture and death; and
England was to have no other alternative, than death or the papal yoke: But God
made bare his holy arm, and in a most remarkable manner disapointed their
designs; This grand Event is circumstantially related in the Naval History of
Great Britain: vide Vol. I. P. 22.
The truly invincible Jehovah fought against them, destroyed them with the
breath of his mouth, and the arm of his strength: he inspired Drake with
wisdom, and first stamped his mind with the plan of the well contrived fire
ships,.... he succeeded the attempt, so that of this formidable Armada, many
were consumed by the flames, some were taken, and others were dashed in pieces
on the rocks. While England sung an anthem in language like that in the 46th
Psalm, "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble:
therefore will we not fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains
be carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rore and be
troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof....Come behold the
works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth... The Lord of
hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge."

But we have not been in danger only from foreign enemies and combined princes
abroad;.... Alas! my brethren, we have sometimes been a kingdom divided against
it is self, and Britain's monarch's have not always been Britain's friends. Time
would fail me to recount the steps which have been taken by such as have been
in power, to sap the foundation of our religious liberties, and crush the
protestant faith. The british throne has sometimes been filled, either with
professed catholics, or with such as have been shamefully under the influence
of catholic courts. Can we say, that the british throne has never been stained
with the blood of protestant martyrs? what then mean the annals of persecuting
Mary,...? why did Smithfield burn with such raging flame? or what occasion was
there for the happy revolution? The papal party at home has improved every
opportunity to increase their strength, and regain their supremacy. And when
they have been favored with the countenance of the prince, they have not failed
to acquaint protestants, with the persecuting genius of their religion, and
make them feel the force of the fire and the ax, those inhuman arguments by
which they indeavor'd to prosylite England to the catholic faith. But God has
mercifully cut short Queen MARY died in the sixth year of her reign, and JAMES
II, who went publicly to Mass abdicated the throne in the fourth year of his
reign.
the reign of such princes, blasted the triumphs of papish, and saved his
church when it has been on the brink of ruin. By a series of kind
interpositions, he has saved his church both from the secret plots, and open
outrage of british catholics, by raising the Brunswick family to the throne,
and settling the crown in that illustrious house so propitious to liberty and
protestants, and the happy instrument in the divine hand of putting a period to
our fears from popish recusants. The same glorious hand of divine providence
has been the defense of protestants in crushing the repeated attempts which
have been made in favor of a popish pretender; and clothing the enemies of
Brunswick with shame; in protracting to an unusual length the late happy reign
of George II; and placing upon the throne of his father's our present
illustrious monarch, George III. so distinguished for his royal
accomplishments, so inspired with the divine principles of british liberty and
the protestant religion:................................................ long
may he live. Joy to the realms where slavery was designed, A Brunswick reigns,
the guardian of mankind. Pietas et Gratulatio.
In all these important instances God has made bare his holy arm, redeemed his
Israel, and comforted his protestant church.

But in this review we cannot fail to observe the dispensations of divine
providence toward this country. "We have heard with our ears, O God, our
fathers have told us what works thou did, in their days, in the times of old,
how thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantest them, how thou
did afflict the people and cast them out. For they got not the land in
possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them; but thy
right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had
a favor unto them." When a cloud was gathering over England and began to
discharge itself upon our father's, hither the divine hand of providence led
them... here they sought an asilum, and took their abode among savage beasts
and more savage men.

They left their dear native country, their pleasant habitations, and endured a
train of hardships, scarce credible to their posterity, that they might worship
God according to their consciences, and maintain the protestant religion free
from those corruptions which the high-church party had introduced at home.

When we reflect on their design, it appears truly noble, becoming the
disciples of Christ, who has taught his followers, "to call no man master on
earth," nor to receive for "doctrines the traditions of men;" but when we
consider the difficulties which were opposed to this design, mere reason surely
represents it altogether impracticable. For a handful of men, poorly
accommodated to come into an howling wilderness....on a dangerous coast in a
difficult season...into a wilderness, not desolute indeed....but far
worse....full of cruel men, void of humanity, subtle, inured to want, expert in
cruelty, etc. what surprising attempt is this! yet the most High succeeded it;
he prepared room for this his British vine, swept away thousands of Indians by
an epidemical sickness the proceeding year, and overuled those that survived;
so that many of their tribes assisted the new settlement of our fathers, when
(humanly speaking) it was in their power to have frustated the whole design,
and cut all off at one blow.

Then the pure gospel of Jesus the savior visited this new world and the
glorious sun of righteousness arose on these benighted ends of the earth: then
the waste places of America broke forth into joy, "the wilderness began to
blosom as a rose" and "the trees of the forest sang together."

But these tranquil scenes soon closed, and numerous tribes combined together,
(many of them in open violation of their plighted faith) to make an utter end
of the English in America. So few and defenseless were our settlements at that
time; and so remote from their mother country, that human probability devoted
them an easy prey to their adversaries: and surely our fathers "had fainted had
they not believed to see the salvation of the Lord," But the puisiant Jehovah
was on their side. He taught their hands to war, and their fingers to fight; so
that in them the promise made to Israel, was almost literally verified, viz.
that "five shall chase an hundred, and an hundred put ten thousand to flight."
Then the holy arm of the Lord was made bare in the eyes of all these Indian
nations; and the infant church of Christ in America saw the salvation of God.

The righteous sovereign, in whose hand the wicked are often the rod of his
anger," has indeed suffered the savages to shed much English blood, and sorely
scourge the British colonies, even as the Canaanites afflicted Israel of old;
yet HE has greatly restrained their rage, deminished their numbers, and
enlarged the borders of his church. nor can we reflect without astonishment on
the happy change this land has undergone in the course of one centry: the
aboriginals have been most remarkably declining: they have melted away, as snow
before the southern breaze and scorching sun; while the churches of Christ have
been greatly increasing, and are now become numerous in these teritories of the
Prince of darkness. The Lion of the tribe of Judah has displayed his strength,
and the holy arm of Jesus has bound "the strong man armed" and spoiled him of
much of his armory wherein he trusted; so that our colonies have long since had
little to fear, from the unassisted natives.

But while the Indian tribes were diminishing, a more dangerous enemy has been
increasing, and incroaching upon us. Canada has been the Carthage of New
England; and the French have long endeavored both by artifice and arms to
drive us from this good land which the Lord God gave unto our fathers.

How have they fomented strife, and sent forth their Indians on our frontiers!
while they have been fostering new claims, and drawing a chain of forts around
us. Together with these, they were incircling us with the chains of France and
the superstition of Rome.

What just apprehensions of danger spread through our land, when (besides land
forces) a formidable fleet of French ships under the command of Duke D' Anville
actually arrived on our coast, and according to human probability, were within
a few days of executing their bloody design, and spreading desolation and death
all along our sea coasts.

But God blew with his wind and discomfited them: the stars in their courses
fought against them. Our God broke their ships, and sent his destroying angel,
who slew thousands of them; then, the arm of the Lord was made bear before the
enemy, while the language of divine providence to us was, in a strain like that
to Israel under the hand of Moses (that eminent tipe of Christ) "stand still
and see the salvation of God:" this is an event never to be forgot: so
remarkable was our deliverance, that even our popish enemies were obliged to
confess the finger of God in it. Then the Lord redeemed his Israel and
comforted his people, while his salvation was appointed instead of walls and
bulworks around our coast. This great deliverance was wrought for us Oct. 1745.


These are all remarkable interpositions in favor of the protestant church,
and glorious displays of the holy arm of the Almighty in our defense....

But later than these demand our attention, and should excite our gratitude*

For

At the commencement of the late war, the dangerous union of the two houses of
Burbon and Austria; Who likewise called to their assistance Russia and Sweden,
might well alarm England and Prussia against whom this powerful alliance was
formed. The grounds of our alarm must have risen much higher, on a view of the
internal state of our nation at that time* our reigning principles and manners
being such as in a great measure destroyed the natural strength of the nation.
To behold Brittons sinking all their natural prowess, and loosing the true
British spirit, in effeminacy....wisdom and integrity forsaking the
great,....love of money and party interest reigning where true patriosm should
have glowed in the most fervent manner,....our officers unskilful....our troops
irresolute, and the main body of the nation by almost every kind of
abomination, calling aloud for the righteous vengeance of heaven, to behold, I
say, all this was dreadful indeed! I surely such a view of our public character
might well presage the event of war. Accordingly, what a melancholy prospect
did more than two years of the war General Braddock's defeat and death, and the
great slaughter the Indians made on his troops, as they were marching to
besiege Fort d' Quesne, happened July 9. 1755. The disgrace of the English flag
under the command of Admiral Byng, was May 20 1756. and Minorca surrendered the
June following. -- the 14 of August the same year, Oswego surrendered to the
French. -- Our troops, under the command of the duke of Cumberland were beat by
the French, under the command of (...), and (...) was in eminent danger of
falling totally into the hands of the French July, 1747, the 9th. of Aug. the
same year, Fort William Henry is taken by Montcalm. October following our grand
fleet returned from Rochford without success.
present before us, while our fleets were inactive,....our armies flying....our
men slaughtered....our forts surrendering.... America and Hanover in danger of
being totally conquered....and England threatened with an invasion? How black
was the cloud which then hung over the protestant church! how solemn, how
tremendous the view! how did the many, who wantoned in their liberties and
luxuries, turn pale through fear; and the few who love our Lord Jesus Christ, and
are praying for the prosperity of his Zion, (with good old Eli) tremble for the
Ark of the Lord?

But God surprised us with his mercy, and suddenly shifted the important scene.

He presides in all human Affairs, and will be acknowledged as supreme Ruler in
the kingdom of providence. He turned to us the brigh side of the cloud, which,
like the pillar of fire and cloud of old, afforded light to us, but was
portending blackness and despair to our enemies: He, inspired our ministry with
wisdom, our officers with military skill and braveness, and our armies and navy
with true valor. He divided the councils of our enemies, spread darkness
before them, and "turned back the weapons of war in their hands." He has, in a
manner which will surprise posterity, and is indeed, little short of
miraculous, supported the cause of our ally of Prussia: that little
principality had to meet three of the most powerful states in Europe in the
field, who, trusting to their great superiority in numbers, forstalled the
pleasures of entire conquest, and cantonned his dominions among them. But he
who was with Prussia is the God of armies, who always preponderates the
doubtful scale of victory, and claims all the praise. The famous battles of
Rosback and Lissa, of Crevelt and Zorndorff The battle of Rosbach was fought
Nov. 5. 1757. in which the king of Prussia gained a complete victory over the
united force of France and Austria: the same prince beat Count Daun at Lissa,
Dec. 5. 1757. Prince Ferdinand beat the French at Crevelt, June 23 1758. and
the king of Prussia quite defeated the Russians at Zorndorf Sep. 25 1758.
greatly display the holy arm of God in favor of our Allies, and the
protestant church. By a series of remarkable interpositions and signal
victories Prussia has been delivered from the very brink of ruin, and is at
this time in very respectable circumstances.

The same divine hand is visibly displayed, in saving our nation from the
ambitious designs of our enemies: "the Lord has been our shield and buckler,
our high tower and rock of defense." Nay! he has much more than saved us: he
has made us every where victorious; so that we, who were destined by Burbon and
Austria to be the tail, are, by the holy arm of our God, become the head of the
nations; and our English monarch shines with distinguished luster among all the
crowned heads in Europe.

To recount the particular instances of our success in the late war, and point
out the remarkable circumstances and wonderful interpositions of divine
providence in our favor, is too copious a subject to fall within the compass
of our present design: it is hoped, some able hand will do justice to this
agreeable subject; that our children's children may be taught the loving
kindness of the Lord toward his British Israel, in these memorable years, and
"talk of all his wonderful works."

Our success in both the Indies, and on the Affrican coast, the destruction of
the Fench shipping at Cherburge and of their fleet at Villain, the demolishing
of Luisburg, and total reduction of all Canada, are such instances of divine
goodness to us, and such displays of his holy arm, as must have made the most
lasting impressions on such as have any proper regard for liberty, religion,
and their country.

Nor may we omit, in our review, the merciful hand of God toward us in regard
to the court of Spain, who, unprovoked opened a war with us; leagued with our
enemies; and afforded them all the assistance in their power. But, the most
high has brought their councils to naught; and given into our hands the vast
riches and strength of the Havannah, and the Spanish navy there: so that Spain,
after augmenting our fleet with a considerable part of their navy, and
enriching us with milions in the compass of one year, is glad to accept such
terms of peace as Briton generously proposes. May we not, without arrogating
any merit to ourselves, speak on this occasion, in the language of inspiration
and say, "the Lord is known by the Judgments which he executes": the kings of
the earth set themselves, and the rulers took council together, against the
Lord, and his English Israel; but the Lord had them in dirision: "the Lord of
host has been with us, the everlasting Jehovah has been our refuge:" all
praise to him who has thus maintained our right....frustrated the designs of
these powerful popish states, comforted his people, and defended the cause of
his protestant church.

As God is to be acknowledged in these remarkable successes, which have raised
the british glory to an unusual hight, and will mark the Annals of England with
the most resplendent lines; so we are likewise to adore his governing
providence in the present happy and glorious PEACE.

Whatever conquests we have made, you well know, all might have been lost by
treaty; and a dash of a miss-guided pen might have blotted all the glory of
Britain, and resigned the price of so much blood and treasure. But, as the
Most-High presides over all states, makes war, and creates peace; as it is by
him that "Kings rule and princes decree justice;" so it is by his governing
providence that we have so wise a King, and so faithful a Ministry, through
whose wisdom and fidelity, we have presented before us a hopeful prospect of
reaping very essential advantages from the late bloody and expensive war.

He that beholds every one that is proud, and abases him," has very greatly
humbled the pride of France and Spain. These AMBITIOUS powers have gained
nothing....They have lost very MUCH. Besides advantages ceeded to Britain in
other parts of the world, how much have France and Spain lost,....how much have
WE gained in this?...Truly a territory more than sufficient for three kingdoms.
We have ceeded to us all that we can reasonably wish on the continent: a large
field indeed, for argiculture; our trade much enlarged; our fishery on a better
footing than before the war; the savages necessarily allied unto us; and a vast
extended country before us: so that God, in his holy providence, semes to be
saying to us, as once to Abraham his friend, (O that we were indeed the
children of Abraham, and imitated his faith and holiness) "Lift up now thine
eyes and look from the place where thou art, northward, and southward, and
eastward, and westward. For all the land which thou see, to thee will I
give it, and to thy seed forever."

Considering the very material advantages, which will accrue to our
mother country, from this great enlargement of her colonies, and will become
more and more sensible, as our land is filling with inhabitants; considering
the uncertain event of protracting the war; the danger Portugal (our ally and
correspondent in trade,) was in of being overrun by the Spainards; And the
human principles which ought to govern the conduct, and bound the ambition of
all christian princes,....in this view, notwithstanding our British Sovereign
has restored some of these places which were his by conquest, his crown shines
with an additional luster; while He so apparently unites in his conduct, the
principles of true policy, and the benevolent spirit of the gospel.

Truly, "the Lord has done great things for us whereof we are glad." He has
wonderfully shifted the scene, which opened upon us in the first years of the
war: Is not the change in our circumstances so surprising, that we may, with
great propriety, adapt the language of the 126 psalm to our case? "when the
Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream: then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing, etc." or speak in
the strain of our text, "break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of
Jerusalem, for the Lord has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem;
the Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all nations."

We shall now conclude with a few Inferences and serious reflections suggested
by our subject.

1. What comfortable evidence may be deduced from the dispensations of divine
providence, in favor of the truth, and importance of the protestant religion!

This is far from being the only proof that protestanism is the true religion
of the gospel, and the cause of God. It Is purity, its spirituality, its
simplicity, its divine force on the hearts of thousands, their dying testimony
in favor of it, and above all, its being agreeable to the uncorrupted word of
God, are the main basis on which it is supported, and by which it must carry
conviction to all impartial judges. But methinks, when we reflect on the
wonderful providence of God, in support of the protestant faith; and observe,
that God has all along interposed to prevent the total extirpation of it, even
when earth and hell have been combined against it; when we consider how papal
powers have been weakened; and the protestant nations from time to time,
preserved and increasing in their numbers, and respectibility; and especially,
when we review the hand of God in the late war; such reflections must afford a
devout mind some singular satisfaction. Verily, God has been in the midst of
protestants, "a very present help": he has confessed the cause his own, and
been as a "wall of fire around us, the glory in the midst of us, and on all our
glory he has created a defense."

2. What infinite gratitude should inspire our hearts? all honor and glory be
to Him, who has not left us without a witness of his infinite mercy and
loving kindness toward our nation and land. "Not unto us, not unto us, but to
the Lord most High be all praise and glory:" God is the sovereign judge: he
puts down one and sits up another: "he pours contempt on princes, and
gives the kingdoms of the earth to whom he pleases."

Allowing all due honor to our British Sovereign, and ministry, to our
officers and soldiery, (and much honor is surely their due, yet) laying all
circumstances together, it was never more evident than in the late war, that,
"the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but victory
is from the Lord." Let our hearts bound, then, to Him, who has made us to
triumph with a very great disparity of numbers, and brought our enemies to
submit themselves. Let our hearts bound in gratitude to him, who directed the
councils of our nation, and afforded his divine influence in forming and
succeeding the plan of the present peace; which, considering the high
precedence of the British Sovereign above other princes; his regard to the
interest of his subjects; his tender concern for the common good of mankind;
and the truly benevolent and generous principles on which he proceeds, renders
him as respectable in PEACE as he is revered in war.

3. How humble should we be under a sense of our great unworthiness of such
signal interpositions?

When we consider our moral state, surely we cannot arrogate any merit to
ourselves. What a reverse of providence have we deserved? how justly might God
have delivered us to have been devoured by the sword, or sold us into the hands
of our enemies, as he did, backsliding Israel? let pride and vain glory then,
be forever hid from our eyes, and banished from our hearts. What shame and
blushing must cover our faces before the holy one of Israel, while we reflect
on the number and aggravations of our iniquities? not for our righteousness has
the Lord wrought this great salvation for us, for we are a people laden with
iniquity, but for his name sake. Surely he is speaking to us in the language he
once spoke to Israel Ezekiel xxxii (...)
"ye shall remember your own evil ways and your doings which were not good, and
shall loathe yourselves in your own fight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations: not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known
unto you, be ashamed and confounded for your own ways O house of Israel."

4. How greatly does it concern us as a people to make a right improvement of
these mercies?

All our advantages are tallents entrusted us by the supreme ruler of all. It
behooves us to be faithful in our stewardship, to improve public mercies to the
honor of Jehovah, and the advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom; least our
prosperity should prove to be the "prosperity of fools which destroys them."
Let us not (Jesurun like) "wax fat and kick,"....Let us not wanton under divine
smiles, and riot on the undeserved favor of the most high. For "the righteous
Lord loves righteousness and hates iniquity," all nations shall He summons to
his dread tribunal, and every man shall receive according to his works.

5. Of what vast importance is it to each one of us: to obtain a part in that
great gospel-salvation, which extends its influence beyond the limits of the
present life; and to be interested in his favor who governs all human affairs
with a special reference to the highest interest of his chosen?

However important the fate of kingdoms may be in the present state, as they
are made up of individuals, and have a greater or less influence on the general
state of the church; yet, in the most interesting case, we are to consider
ourselves detached from all political bodies, and remember, that to our own
master we must stand or fall. Let us realize this solemn truth that we are,
each one for himself, a Probationer on the great Theater of the world, and
acting a part for eternity. Nothing will stand us in any stead, when we are
called off the stage, but faith in Christ and obedience to his gospel. We must
all appear before his judgment seat, and render an account, every man singly
for himself, of the talents entrusted him, and the gospel privileges he has
enjoyed. Then there will be no reference had to our being of this, or the other
nation, our living in this or that age, any farther than we have thereby, had
greater or less advantages to serve the Lord. Oh! important, solemn Day! when
we must lay aside all our present worldly connections; when it will no more
avail us to plead, that we have been visible members in the protestant church,
or lived under the happy reign of GEORGE the third; than for Jews to plead,
that Abraham was their father, and Moses their lawgiver. All must then be
determined by this single Qestion, " art thou a sincere disciple of Jesus
Christ, and interested in the great salvation which he has wrought for his
people? O my brethren; let nothing hide this solemn day from our view; let
nothing divert our chief attention from this, of all others the highest concern
of mortals: let us lay hold on the gospel-hope set before us, -- build our
hopes for eternity on our interest in the adorable savior, -- live up to the
dignity of our calling and the sublimity of our hopes, -- and so "lay up in
store a good foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on
eternal life."

To conclude,

How ardently should we pray for the enlargement of the redeemer's kingdom? how
much should we desire and endeavor the spreading of his glorious gospel through
the world, and particularly among the Aboriginals of this land; that these ends
of the earth may, in a yet more perfect manner, see the salvation of our God?
in how distinguishing a manner are we favored by the great Lord of nature and
of grace? Surely it should be our hearts desire and prayer to God that the
ignorant nations may be acquainted with the glorious light of the gospel which
has long been shining around us with such divine brighteness. We are waiting,
and we should be praying, in the most fervent manner, for the Day of the
church's greater enlargement, and divine glory -- when nations shall beat their
swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks -- when men shall
learn war no more -- when the wolf and the lamb shall lie down together, -- And
PEACE and universal righteousness shall reign triumphant through all the Earth.
Even so, Lord Jesus come quickly. Amen.


