THE DEFINITIVE TREATY OF PEACE AND FRIENDSHIP, etc. Concluded at PARIS Feb.
10th, 1763.

THE DEFINITIVE TREATY OF PEACE AND FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN His BRITANNICK MAJESTY,
the Most CHRISTIAN KING, and the KING OF SPAIN. Concluded at PARIS, the 10th
Day of February, 1763. TO WHICH, The King of PORTUGAL acceded on the same Day.

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.

LONDON: Printed by E. OWEN and T. HARRISON, in WARWICK LANE: CHARLESTOWN:
Reprinted by ROBERT WELLS, and sold at his Shop on the BAY, 1763.

The DEFINITIVE TREATY OF PEACE AND FRIENDSHIP between His BRITANNICK MAJESTY,
the Most CHRISTIAN KING, and the KING OF SPAIN. Concluded at Paris, the Tenth
Day of February, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-three.
In the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. So be it.
BE it known to all th^se to whom it shall, or may, in any manner, belong.

It has pleased the most High to diffuse the spirit of union and concord among
the Princes, whose divisions had spread troubles in the four parts of the
world, and to inspire them with the inclination^ cause the comforts of peace to
succeed to the misfortunes of a long and bloody war, which, having arisen
between England and France, during the reign of the most seren and most ^otent
Prince George the Second, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, of (...),
continued under the reign of the most serene and most potent Prince, George the
Third, his sucessour, and, in it progress communicated itself to Spain and
Portugal: Consequently the most serene and most potent Prince, George the
Third, ^y the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Duke of
Brunswick and Luxembourgh. Arc^ re^er, and Elector, of the Holy Roman Empire;
the most serene and most potent Prince, Lewis the Fifteenth, by the grace of
God, most Christian King; and the most serene and most potent Prince, Charles
the Third, by the grace of God, King of Spain and of the Indies, after having
laid the foundations of peace in the preliminaries, signed at Fontainbleau that
third of November last; and the most seren and most potent Prince, Don J^seph
the First, by the grace of God; King of Portugal and of the Algarves, after
having acceded thereto, determined to complete, without delay, this great and
important work. For this purpose, the high contracting parties have named and
appointed their respective ambassador^ extraordinary and ministers
plenipotentiary, viz. His Sacred Majesty the King of Great Britain, the most
illustrious and most excellent lord John duke and earl of Bedford, marquis of
Tavistock, etc. his minister of state, lieutenant general of his armies, keeper
of his privy seal, knight of the most noble order of the garter, and his
ambassador extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to his most Christian
Majesty; His Sacred Majesty the most Christian King, the most iliust^ous and
most excellent lord Caesar Gabriel de Choisoul, duke of Proslin, poor of
France, Knight of his orders, lieutenant general of his armies, and of the
province of Britanny, counselor in all his councils, and minister and
secretary of state and of his commands and finances; His Sacred Majesty the
Catholic King, the illustrious and most excellent lord Don Jerome Grimaldi,
marquis de Grimaldi, knight of the most Christian King's orders, gentleman of
his Catholic Majesty's bedchamber in employment, and his ambassador
extraordinary to his most Christian Majesty; His Sacred Majesty be most
Faithful King, the most illustrious and most excellent lord Martin de Mill^ and
Castro, knight prosessed of the order of Christ, of his most Faithful Majesty's
council, and his ambassador, and minister plenipotentiary, to his most Christ
an Majesty. Who, after having duly communicated to each other their full
powers, in good form copies whereof are transcribed at the and of the present
treaty of peace, have agreed upon the art^s, the ^our of which is as follows.

ARTICLE I.
THERE shall be a Christian, universal and perpetual p^^c^^a a^ well by sea as
by land, and a sincere and constant friendship shall be re-established between
their Britannick, most Christian, Catholic and most Faithful Majesty's, and
between their heirs and successou^, kingdom, dominions, provinces, countries,
subfects, and vassls, of what quality or condition soever they be, without
exception of places, or of persons; So that the high comtracting parties shall
give the grea^t ^tion to maintzin between them (...) and their said domi^ions
and subjects, this re^iprocal friendship are correspord^ without permitting, on
either ^e, any kind o^ ^o^ilities by sea or by land, to be comu^tted. From
henceforth, for any case, or under any pretense ^fcever, and every thing shall
be carefully avoided, whi^ might, hereafter, prejudice the union happily (...)
applying themselves, on the contrary, on every occasion, to procure for each
other whatever may cont^b^e to their mutual glory, in ^t, and advantages,
without giving any assistance or protection, directly or indirectly, to those
who would cause any prejudice to either of the high contracting parties: There
shall be a general oblivion of every ^ing that may have been do^ or committed
^ore, or since, the commencement of the war, which is just ended.

II.
The treaties of Westphalia of 1648; those of Madrid between the crowns of
Great Britain and Spain of 1667, and 1670; the treaties of peace of Ni^^^guen
of 1678, and 1679; of R^swyck of 1697; those of peace and of commerce of
Utrecht of 1713; that of Baden of 1714; the treaty of the (...) alliance of the
Hague of 1717; that of the quadruple alliance of London of 1718; the treaty of
peace of Vienna of 1738; the definitive treaty of Aix la Chapelle of 1748; and
that of Madrid, between the crowns of Great Britain and Spain, of 1750; as well
as the treaties between the crow^ of Spain and Portugal of the 13th of February
1668; of the 6th of February 1715; and of the 12th of February 1761; and that
of the 11th of April 1713 between France and Portugal, with the guarantie of
Great Britain, serve as a basis and foundation to the peace, and to the present
treaty: And for this purpose, they are all renewed and confirmed in the best
form, as well as all the treaties in general, which subsisted between the high
contracting parties before the war, as if they were inserted here word for
word, so that they are to be exactly observed for the future, in their whole
tenor, and religiously executed on all sides, in all their points which shall
not be derogated from by the present treaty, notwithstanding all that may have
been stipulated to the contrary by any of the high contracting parties; And all
the said parties declare, that they will not suffer any privilege, favor or
indulgence, to subsist, contrary to the treaties above confirmed, except what
shall have been agreed and stipulated by (...) present treaty.

III.
All the prisoners made, on all sides, as well by land as by sea, and the
hostages carried away, o^ given during the war, and to this day, shall be
restored, with out ra^som, six weeks, at (...), to be (...) from the day of the
^h^ge of the ^tion of the p^ent treaty, each down (...) the (...), which shall
have been made for (...)tenance of their (...) of the country where they shall
have (...)ing to the (...) and (...) ^ and the other; And (...) for the payment
of the (...) which the (...) have contracted in the countries, (...) detained,
until their (...) and merchant (...) the expiration of (...) bona fide, with
all their crews, and cargoes; And the execution of this article shall be
proceeded upon immediately aster the exchange of the ratifications of this
treaty.

IV.
His most Christian Majesty reno^ all pretensions, which he has heretofore
formed, or might from, to Nova Scotia, or Acadia, in all its parts, and
guaranties the whole of it, and with all its dependencies, to the King of
Great Britain: Moreover, his most Chri^ Majesty cedes, and guaranties to his
said ^ri^ick Majesty, in full right, Ca^, with all its dependencies, as well as
the island of Cape-Breton, and all the other islands, and co^s, in the (...)
river (...) Lawrence, and, in general, every thing that dep^ on the said
countries, lands, i^ds, and co^, with the sovereignty, property, possession,
and (...) acquired by treaty or otherwise, which the most Ch^tian King, and the
crown of France, have had, till now, over the said countries, islands, lands,
pl^, (...), and their inhabit^, so that the most Chri^ King cedes and (...) the
whole to the said King, and to the crown of Great Britain, and that in the most
ample manner and form, without restriction, and without any liberty to depart
from the said (...) under any pretense, or to di^ Great Britain in t^ po^
abovementioned. His Bri^ Majesty, on his side, agrees to grant the liberty of
the C^ religion to the inhabitants of Canada. He will, consequently, give the
most precise and most (...) order, that his new Ro^ Catholic subjects may pr^
the worship of their religion, according to the ri^ of the R^ Church, as far as
the laws of Great Britain permit. His (...) agree, that the French in^, or
others who had been (...) of the (...) Chri^ King in Canada, may r^, with all
^ty and (...), wherever they shall think proper, and may sell their (...),
provided it be to (...) of his ^ick Majesty, and bring away their effects, as
well as the persons, without (...) in their ^igration, under any pretense wh^,
except that of debts, or of (...) prosecutions; The term, li^ted for this
emigration, shall be fi^ed to the space of eighteen months, to be computed from
the day of the exchange of the ratifications of the present ^eaty.

V.
The subjects of France shall have the liberty of fishing and drying, on a part
of the coasts of the island of New-^and, such as it is specified in the XIIIth
article of the treaty of Utrecht; which article is renewed and con^ by the
(...) treaty, (except what (...) to the i^ of (...) the mouth and in the Gul^h
of St. L^rence) And his B^itannick Mijesty conf^ to leave to the (...) of the
most Christian King the liberty of (...) gulf St. Lawrence, on (...) that the
(...) do not exercise the (...), but at (...) three (...) of the islands
situated in the said gulf St. Law^ence. And as to what relates to the fishery
on the co^ of the island of Cape-Breton out of the said gulf, the subjects of
the most Christian King shall not be permitted to exercise the said fishery,
but at the distance of ^teen leagues from the coasts of the island of
Cape-Breton; and the fishery on the coasts of Nova-S^otia or Acadi^, and every
where ^lse out of the said gulf, shall remain on the foot of former treaties.

VI.
The King of Great Britain cedes the islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon, in
full right, to his most Christian Majesty, to serve as a shelter to the French
fishermen: And his said most Christian Majesty engeges not to fortify the said
islands; to erect no buildings upon ^m, but merely for the convenience of the
fishery; and to keep upon them a guard of fifty men only for the police.

VII.
In order to re-establish peace on solid and durable foundations, and to remove
for ever all subject of dispute with regard to the limits of the British and
French territories on the continent of America; it is agreed, that for the
future, the confines between the dominions of his Britannick Majesty, and those
of his most Christian Majesty, in that part of the world, shall be fixed
irrevocably by a line drawn along the middle of the river Mississippi, from its
source to the river Iberville, and from thence, by a line drawn along the
middle of this river, and the lakes Maurepas and Pontchartrain, to the sea; and
for this purpose, the most Christian King cedes in full right, and guaranties
to his Britannick Majesty, the river and port of the Moblie, and every thing
which he possesses, or ought to possess, on the left side of the river
Mississippi, except the town of New-Orleans, and the island in which it is
situated, which shall remain to France; provided that the navigation of the
river Mississippi shall be equally free, as well to the subjects of
Great Britain, as the those of France, in its whole breadth and length, from
its source to the sea, and expressly that part which is between the said island
of New-Orleans, and the right bank of that river, as well as the passage both
in and out of its mouth; It is further stipulated, that the vessels belonging
to the subjects of either nation, shall not be stopped, visited or subjected to
the payment of any duty whatsoever. The stipulations, inserted in the IVth
article, in favor of the inhabitants of Canada, shall also take place, with
regard to the inhabitants of the countries ceded by this article.

VIII.
The King of Great Britain shall restore to France the islands of Guadaloupe,
of Mariegalante, of Des^ade, of Martinico, and of Belleisle; and the fortresses
of these islands shall be restored in the same condition they were in, when
they were conquered by the British arms; provided that his Britannick Majesty's
subject, who shall have settled in the said islands, or those who shall have
any ^me^ affairs to (...) there, or in the other places restored to France by
the present treaty, shall have liberty to sell their lands and their estates,
to settle their affairs, to recover their debts, and to bring away their
effects, as well as their persons, on board vessels, which they shall be
permitted to send to the said islands, and other places restored as above, and
which shall serve for this use only, without (...) restrained on account of
their religion, or under any other pretense whatsoever, except that of debts,
or of erimi^ prosecutions; And for this purpose, the term of eighteen months is
allowed to his Britannick Majesty's subjects, to be computed from the day of
the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty; but, as the liberty
granted to his Britannick Majesty's subjects, to bring away their persons and
their effects, in vessels of their nation, may be liable to abuses, if
precautions were not taken to prevent them; It has been expressly agreed between
his Britannick Majesty and his most Christian Majesty, that the number of
English vessels, which shall have leave to go to the said islands and places
restored to France, shall be limited, as well as the number of tons of each
one; that they shall go in ballast; shall set sail at a fixed time; and shall
make one voyage only, all the effects ^ionging to the English being to the
embarked at the same time. It has been further agreed, that his most Christian
Majesty shall cause the necessary passports to be given to the said vessels;
that, for the greater security, it shall be allowed to place two French clerks,
or gu^s, in each of the said vessels, which shall be visited in (...) landing
places, and ports of the said islands, and places, restored to France, and that
the merchandise, which shall be found therein, shall be confiscated.

IX.
The most Christian King cedes and guaranties to his Britannick Majesty, in
full right, the islands of Gren^dn, and of the Grenadines, with the same
stipulations in favor of the inhabitants of this colony, inserted in the IVth
article for those of Canada: And the partition of the islands, called neutral,
is agreed and fixed, so that those of St. Vincent, Dominica, and To^ago, shall
remain in full right to Great Britain, and that that of St. Lucia shall be
delivered to France, to enjoy the same likewise in full right; and the high
contracting parties guaranty the partition so stipulated.

X.
His Britannick Majesty shall restore to France the island of Goree in the
condition it was in when conquered: And his most Christian Majesty cedes, in
full right, and guaranties to the King of Great (...) the river Senegal, with
the sorts and factories of St Lewis, Podo^s and Galem, and with all the rights
and dependencies of the said river Senegal.

XI.
In the East Indies, Great Britain shall restore to France, in the condition
they are now in, the different factories, which that crown possessed, as well
on the coast of Coromandel and Orixa, as on that of Malabar, as also in Bengal,
at the beginning of the year 1749. And his most Christian Majesty renounces all
pretensions to the acquisitions which he had made on the coast of Coromandel
and Orixa, since the said beginning of the year 1749. His most Christian
Majesty shall restore, on his face, all that he may have conquered from
Great Britain, in the East Indies, during the present war; and will expertly
cause Nattal and Tapanoully, in the island of Sumatra, to be restored; he
engages further, not to elect fortifications, or keep troops in any part of the
dominions of the Subah of Bengal. And in order to preserve future peace on the
coast of Coromandel and Orixa, the English and French shall acknowledge Mahomet
Ally Khan for lawful Nabob of the Carnatick, and Salabat Jing for lawful Subah
of the Decan; and both parties shall renounce all demands and pretensions of
satisfaction, with which they might charge each other, or their Indian allies,
for the depredations, or pillage, committed, on the one side, or on the other
during the war.

XII.
The island of Minorca shall be restored to his Britannick Majesty, as well as
fort St. Philip, in the same condition they were in, when conquered by the arms
of the most Christian King; and with the artillery which was there, when the
said island and the said fort were taken.

XIII.
The town and port of Dunkirk shall be put into the state fixed by the last
treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, and by former treaties. The cunette shall be
destroyed immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the present
treaty, as well as the forts and batteries which defend the entrance on the
side of the sea; and provision shall be made, at the same time, for the
wholesomeness of the air, and for the health of the inhabitants, by some other
means, to the satisfaction of the King of GreatBritain.

XIV.
France shall restore all the countries belonging to the Electorate of Hanover,
to the Landgrave of Hesse, to the Duke of Brunswick, and to the Count of la
Lip Buckehourg, which are, or shall be occupied by his most Christian
Majesty's arms: The fortresses of these different countries shall be restored
in the same condition they were in, when conquered by the French arms; and the
pieces of artillery, which shall have been carried elsewhere, shall be replaced
by the same number, of the same bore, weight, and metal.

XV.
In case the stipulations, contained in the XIIIth article of the
preliminaries, should not be completed at the time of the signature of the
present treaty, as well with regard to the evacuations to be made by the armies
of France, of the fortresses of Clever, Wesel, Gueldres, and of all the
countries belonging to the King of Prussia, as with regard to the evacuations
to be made by the British and French armies of the countries which they ^
Rhine, the Upper-Rhine, and in all the Empire, and to the retreat of the troops
into the dominions of their respective sovereigns; their Britannick and most
Christian Majesty's promise to proceed, bona side, with all the dispatch the
case will permit of, to the said evacuations, the entire completion whereof,
they stipulate before the 15th of March next, or sooner if it can be done; and
their Britannick and most Christian Majesty's further engage, and promise to
each other, not to furnish any succors of any kind, to their respective
allies, who shall continue engaged in the war in Germany.

XVI.
The decision of the prizes made, in time of peace, by the subjects of
Great Britain, on the Spaniards, shall be referred to the courts of justice of
the Admiralty of Great Britain, conformable to the rules established among all
nations, so that the validity of the said prizes, between the British and
Spanish nations, shall be decided and judged, according to the law of nations,
and according to treaties, in the courts of justice of the action, who shall
have made the capture.

XVII.
His Britannick Majesty shall cause to be demolished all the fortifications
which his subjects shall have erected in all the bay of Honduras, and other
places of the territory of Spain in that part of the world, four months after
the ratification of the present treaty: And his Catholic Majesty shall not
permit his Britannick Majesty's subjects, or their workmen, to be disturbed, or
molested, under any pretense whatsoever, in the said places, in their
occupation of cutting, loading, and carrying away logwood: And for this
purpose, they may build without hindrance, and occupy without interruption, the
houses and magazines which are necessary for them, for their families, and for
their effects: And his Catholic Majesty assures to them, by this article, the
full enjoyment of those advantages, and powers, on the Spanish coasts and
territories, as above stipulated, immediately after the ratification of the
present treaty.

XVIII.
His Catholic Majesty desists, as well for himself, as for his successors,
from all pretension, which he may have formed, in favor of the Guipuscoans,
and other his subjects, to the right of fishing in the neighborhood of the
island of Newfoundland.

XIX.
The King of Great Britain shall restore to Spain all the territory which he
has conquered in the island of Cuba, with the fortress of the Havana, and this
fortress, as well as all the other fortresses of the said island, shall be
restored in the same condition they were in when conquered by his Britannick
Majesty's arms; provided that his Britannick Majesty's subjects, who shall have
settled in the said island, restored to Spain by the present treaty, or those
who shall have any commercial affairs to settle there, shall have liberty to
sell their lands and their estates, to settle their affairs, to recover their
debts, and to bring away their effects, as well as their persons, on board
vessels which they shall be permitted send to the said island restored as
above, and which shall serve for that use only, without being restrained on
account of their religion, or under any other pretense whatsoever, except that
of debts, or of criminal prosecutions: And for this purpose, the term of
eighteen months is allowed to his Britannick Majesty's subjects, to be computed
from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty: But as
the liberty granted to his Britannick Majesty's subjects, to bring away their
persons and their effects, in vessels of their (...) be liable to abuses, if
precautions were not taken to prevent them; it has been expressly agreed,
between his Britannick Majesty, and his Catholic Majesty, that the number of
English vessels, which shall have leave to go to the said island restored to
Spain, shall be limited, as well as the number of tons of each one; that they
shall go in ballast; shall set sail at a fixed time; and shall make one voyage
only; all the effects belonging to the English being to be embarked at the same
time: It has been further agreed, that his Catholic Majesty shall cause the
necessary passports to be given to the said vessels; that, for the greater
security, it shall be allowed so place two Spanish clerks, or guards, in each
of the said vessels, which shall be visited in the landing-places, and ports of
the said island restored to Spain, and that the merchandise, which shall be
found therein, shall be confiscated.

XX.
In consequence of the restitution stipulated in the preceding article, his
Catholic Majesty cedes and guaranties, in full right, to his Britannick
Majesty, Florida, with the fort of St. Augustine, and the bay of Pensacola, as
well as all that Spain possesses on the continent of North America, to the
east, or to the south-east of the river Mississippi: and in general, every
thing that depends on the said countries, and lands, with the sovereignty,
property, possession, and all rights, acquired by treaties or otherwise, which
the Catholic King, and the crown of Spain, have had, till now, over the said
countries, lands, places, and their inhabitants; so that the Catholic King
cedes and makes over the whole to the said King, and to the crown of
Great Britain, and that in the most ample manner, and form. His Britannick
Majesty agrees, on his side, to grant to the inhabitants of the countries,
above ceded, the liberty of the Catholic religion: He will consequently give
the most express and the most effectual orders, that his new Roman Catholic
subjects may profess the worship of their religion, according to the rites of
the Romish church, as far as the laws of Great Britain permit: His Britannick
Majesty further agrees, that the Spanish inhabitants, or others who had been
subjects of the Catholic King in the said countries, may retire with all
safety and freedom, wherever they think proper; and may sell their estates,
provided it be to his Britannick Majesty's subjects, and bring away their
effects, as well as their persons, without being restrained in their
emigration, under any pretense whatsoever, except that of debts or of criminal
prosecutions: The term, limited for this emigration, being fixed to the space
of eighteen months, to be computed from the day of the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty. It is moreover stipulated, that his
Catholic Majesty shall have power to cause all the effects, that may belong to
him, to be brought away, whether it be artillery, (...).

XXI.
The French and Spanish troops shall evacuate all the territories, lands,
towns, places, and castles, of his most Faithful Majesty, in Europe, without
any reserve, which shall have been conquered by the armies of France and Spain,
and shall restore them in the same condition they were in when conquered, with
the same artillery and ammunition, which were found there: And with regard to
the Portuguese colonies in America, Africa, or in the East Indies, if any
change shall have happened there, all things shall be restored on the same
footing they were in, and conformably to the preceding treaties which subsisted
between the courts of France, Spain, and Portugal, before the present war.

XXII.
All the papers, letters, documents, and archives, which were found in the
countries, territories, towns, and places, that are restored, and those
belonging to the countries ceded, shall be respectively, and bona fide,
delivered, or furnished at the same time, if possible, that possession is
taken, or, at latest, four months after the exchange of the ratifications of
the present treaty, in whatever places the said papers or documents may be
found.

XXIII.
All the countries and territories, which may have been conquered, in
whatsoever part of the world, by the arms of their Britannick and most Faithful
Majesty's, as well as by those of their most Christian and Catholic Majesty's,
which are not included in the present treaty, either under the title of
cessions, or under the title of restitutions, shall be restored without
difficulty, and without requiring any compensation.

XXIV.
As it is necessary to assign a fixed epoch for the restitutions, and the
evacuations, to be made by each of the high contracting parties; it is agreed,
that the British and French troops shall complete, before the 15th of March
next, all that shall remain to be executed of the XIIth and XIIIth articles of
the preliminaries, signed the third day of November last, with regard to the
evacuations to be made in the Empire, or elsewhere. The island of Belleisle
shall be evacuated six weeks after the exchange of the ratifications of the
present treaty, or sooner if it can be done. Guadaloupe, Desirade,
Mariegalante, Martinico, and St. Lucia, three months after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done. Great Britain
shall likewise, at the expiration of three months after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done, enter into
possession of the river and port of the Mobille, and of all that is to form the
limits of the territory of Great Britain, on the side of the river Mississippi,
as they are specified in the VIIth article. The island of Goree shall be
evacuated by Great Britain, three months after the ratifications of the present
treaty; and the island of Minorca, by France, at the same epoch, or sooner if
it can be done: And acoording to the conditions of the VIth article, France
shall likewise enter into possession of the islands of St. Peter, and of
Miquelon, at the end of three months after the exchange of the ratifications of
the present treaty. The factories in the East Indies shall be restored six
months after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner
if it can be done. The fortress of the Havana, with all that has been conquered
in the island of Cuba, shall be restored three months after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done: And at the
same time, Great Britain shall enter into possession of the country ceded by
Spain, according to the XXth article. All the places and countries of his most
Faithful Majesty, in Europe, shall be restored immediately after the exchange
of the ratifications of the present treaty; and the Portuguese colonies, which
may have been conquered, shall be restored in the space of three months in the
West Indies, and of six months in the East Indies, after the exchange of the
ratifications of the present treaty, or sooner if it can be done. All the
fortresses, the restitution whereof is stipulated above, shall be restored with
the artillery and ammunition, which were found there at the time of the
conquest. In consequence whereof, the necessary orders shall be sent by each of
the high contracting parties, with reciprocal passports for the ships that
shall carry them, immediately after the exchange of the ratifications of the
present treaty.

XXV.
His Britannick Majesty, as Elector of Brunswick Lunenbourg, as well for
himself, as for his heirs and successors and all the dominions and possessions
of his said Majesty in Germany, are included and guarantied by the present
treaty of peace.

XXVI.
Their Sacred, Britannick, most Christian, Catholic, and most Faithful
Majesty's, promise to observe, sincerely and bona fide, all the articles
contained and settled in the present treaty; and they will not suffer the same
to be infringed, directly or indirectly, by their respective subjects; and the
said high contracting parties, generally and reciprocally, guaranty to each
other all the stipulations of the present treaty.

XXVII.
The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good and due
form, shall be exchanged in this city of Paris, between the high contracting
parties, in the space of a month, or sooner if possible, to be computed from
the day of the signature of the present treaty.

In witness whereof, we the underwritten, their ambassadors extraordinary, and
ministers plenipotentiary, have signed with our hand, in their name, and in
virtue of our full powers, the present definitive treaty, and have caused the
seal of our arms to be put thereto. BEDFORD, C.P.S. (L.S.) CHOISEUL, DUC DE
PRASLIN. (L.S.) EL MARQUIS DE GRIMALDI. (L.S.)

Done at Paris the tenth of February, 1763.
SEPARATE ARTICLES.
I.
SOME of the titles made use of by the contracting powers, either in the full
powers, and other acts, during the course of the negotiation, or in the
preamble of the present treaty, not being generally acknowledged; it has been
agreed, that no prejudice shall ever result therefrom to any of the said
contracting parties, and that the titles, taken or omitted, on either side, on
occasion of the said negotiation, and of the present treaty, shall not be cited
or quoted as a precedent.

II.
It has been agreed and determined, that the French language made use of in all
the copies of the present treaty, shall not become an example, which may be
alleged or made a precedent of, or prejudice, in any manner* any of the
contracting powers; and that they shall conform themselves, for the future, to
what has been observed, and ought to be observed, with regard to, and on the
part of powers, who are used, and have a right, to give and to receive copies
of like treaties in another language than French; the present treaty having
still the same force and effect, as if the aforesaid custom had been therein
observed.

III.
Though the King of Portugal has not signed the present definitive treaty,
their Britannick, most Christian, and Catholic Majesty's, acknowledge,
nevertheless, that his most Faithful Majesty is formally included therein as a
contracting party, and as if he had expressly signed the said treaty:
Consequently, their Britannick, most Christian and Catholic Majesty's,
respectively and conjointly, promise to his most Faithful Majesty, in the most
express and most binding manner, the execution of all and every the clauses,
contained in the said treaty, on his act of accession.

The present separate articles shall have the same force as if they were
inserted in the treaty.

In witness whereof, we the underwritten ambassadors extraordinary, and
ministers plenipotentiary of their Britannick, most Christian and Catholic
Majesty's, have signed the present separate articles, and have caused the seal
of our arms to be put thereto. BEDFORD, C.P.S. (L. S.) CHOISEUL, DUC DE
PRASLIN. (L. S.) EL MARQUIS DE GRIMALDI. (L. S.)

Done at Paris the 10th of February, 1763.
His Britannick Majesty's full Power.
GEORGE R.

GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburg, ArchTreasurer
and Prince-Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, etc. To all and singular to whom
these presents shall come, greeting. Whereas, in order to perfect the peace,
between us and our good brother the most Faithful King, on the one part, and
our good brothers the most Christian and Catholic Kings, on the other, which
has been happily begun by the preliminary articles already signed at
Fontainebleau the 3d of this month, and to bring the same to the desired end,
we have thought proper to invest some sit person with full authority, on our
part; Know ye, that we, having most entire confidence in the fidelity,
judgment, skill, and ability in managing affairs of the greatest consequence,
of Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor, John Duke
and Earl of Bedford, Marquess of Tavistock, Baron Russel of Cheneys, Baron
Russel of Thornhaugh, and Baron Howland of Streatham, Lieutenant General of our
Forces, Keeper of our Privy Seal, Lieutenant and C^^^os Rotulorom of the
counties of Bedford and Devon, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter,
and Our Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to Our good brother the
Most Christian King, have nominated, made, constituted and appointed, as by
these presents, we do nominate, make, constitute, and appoint him, our true,
certain, and undoubted minister, commissary, deputy, procurator, and
plenipotentiary giving to him all, and all manner of, power, faculty and
authority, as well as our general and special command (yet so as that the
general do not derogate from the special, or on the contrary) for us and in our
name, to meet and confer, as well singly and separately, as jointly and in a
body, with the ambassadors, commissaries, deputies and plenipotentiaries of
the princes whom it may concern, vested with sufficient power and authority for
that purpose, and with them to agree upon, treat, consult, and conclude
concerning the re establishing, as soon as may be, a firm and lasting peace,
and sincere friendship and concord; and whatever shall be so agreed and
concluded, for us and in our name, to sign, and to make a treaty or treaties,
on what shall have been so agreed and concluded, and to transact every thing
else that may belong to the happy completion of the aforesaid work, in as ample
a manner and form, and with the same force and effect, as we ourselves, if we
were present, could do and perform, engaging and promising, on our Royal word,
that we will approve, ratify, and accept, in the best manner, whatever shall
happen to be transacted and concluded by our said plenipotentiary, and that we
will never suffer any person to infringe or act contrary to the same, either in
the whole or in part. In witness and confirmation whereof, we have caused our
great seal of Great Britain to be affixed to these presents, signed with our
Royal hand. Given at our palace at St. James's the 12th day of November 1762,
in the third year of our reign.

His Most Christian Majesty's full Power.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all who shall see
these presents, greeting. Whereas the preliminaries, signed at Fontainebleau
the 3d of November of the last year, laid the foundation of the peace
re-established between us and our most dear and most beloved good brother and
cousin the king of Spain, on the one part, and our most dear and most beloved
good brother the king of Great Britain, and our dear and most beloved good
brother and cousin the king of Portugal, on the other, we have had nothing more
at heart, since that happy epoch, than to consolidate and strengthen, in the
most lasting manner, so salutary and so important a work, by a solemn and
definitive treaty between us and the said powers. For these causes, and other
good considerations, us thereunto moving, we trusting entirely in the capacity
and experience, zeal and fidelity for our service, of our most dear and
well-beloved cousin, Caesar Gabriel de Choiseul, duke of Praslin, p^er of
France, knight of our orders, lieutenant general of our forces and of the
province of Britany, counselor in all our councils, minister and secretary of
state, and of our commands and finances, we have named, appointed, and deputed
him, and by these presents, signed with our hand, do name, appoint, and depute
him, our minister plenipotentiary, giving him full and absolute power to act in
that quality, and to confer, negotiate, treat, and agree, jointly with the
minister plenipotentiary of our most dear and most beloved good brother the
king of Great Britain, the minister plenipotentiary of our most dear and most
beloved good brother and cousin the king of Spain, and the minister
plenipotentiary of our most dear and most beloved good brother and cousin the
king of Portugal, vested with full powers, in good form, to agree, conclude,
and sign, such articles, conditions, conventions, declarations, definitive
treaty, accessions, and other acts whatsoever, that he shall judge proper for
securing and strengthening the great work of peace, the whole with the same
latitude and authority that we ourselves might do, if we were there in person,
even though there should be something which might require a more special order
than what is contained in these presents, promising, on the faith and word of a
king, to approve, keep firm and stable for ever, to fulfill and execute
punctually, all that our said cousin, the duke of Praslin, shall have
stipulated, promised, and signed in virtue of the present full power, without
ever acting contrary thereto, or permitting any thing contrary thereto, for any
cause, or under any pretense whatsoever, as also to cause our letters of
ratification to be expedited in good form, and to cause them to be delivered,
in order to be exchanged within the time that shall be agreed upon. For such is
our ple^e. In witness whereof, we have caused our seal to be p^t to these
presents. Given at Versailles the the 7th day of the month of February, in the
year of grace 1763, and of our reign the forty-eighth. Signed Lewis, and on the
fold, By the King, the duke of Choiseul. Sealed with the great seal of yellow
wax.

His Catholic Majesty's full Power.
DON Carlos, by the Grace of God, king of Castille, of Leon, of Arragon, of the
Two Sicilies, of Jerusalem, of Navarre, of Granada, of Toledo, of Valencia, of
Galicia, of Majorca, of Seville, of Sardinia, of Cordova, of Corsica, of
Murcia, of Jaen, of the Algarve, of Alg^ci^a, of Gibraltar, of the Canary
Islands, of the East and West Indies, islands and continent, of the ocean, arch
duke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, of Brabant and Milan, count of Hapsburg, of
Fl^nders, of Tirol and Barcelona; Lord of Biscay and of Molino, etc. Whereas
preliminaries of a solid and lasting peace between this crown, and that of
France on the one part, and that of England and Portugal on the other, were
concluded and signed in the royal residence of Fontainebleau, the 3d of
November of the present year, and the respective ^a^sications thereof exchanged
on the 22d of the same month, by ministers authorized for that purpose, wherein
it is promised, that a definitive treaty should be forthwith entered upon,
having established and regulated the chief points upon which it is to turn: And
whereas in the same manner as I granted to you, Don Jerome Grimaldi, ma quis de
Grimaldi, knight of the order of the Holy Ghost, gentleman of my bedchamber
with employment, and my ambassador extraordinary to the most Christian king,
my full power to treat, adjust, and sign the beforementioned preliminaries, it
is necessary to grant the same to you, or to some other, to treat, adjust, and
sign the promised definitive treaty of peace as aforesaid: Therefore, as you
the said Don Jerome Grimaldi, marquis de Grimaldi, are at the convenient place,
and as I have every day fresh motives, from your approved fidelity and zeal,
capacity and prudence, to entrust to you this, and other like concens of my
crown, I have appointed you my minister plenipotentiary, and granted to you my
full power, to the end that, in my name, and representing my person, you may
treat, regulate, settle and sign the said definitive treaty of peace between my
crown, and that of France on the one part, that of England, and that of
Portugal on the other, with the ministers who shall be equally and specially
authorized by their respective sovereigns for the same purpose; acknowledging,
as I do from this time acknowledge, as accepted and ratified, whatever you
shall so treat, conclude and sign; promising on my royal word, that I will
observe and fulfill the same, will cause it to be observed and fulfilled, as if
it had been treated, concluded and signed by myself. In witness whereof, I have
caused these presents to be dispatched, signed by my hand, sealed with my privy
seal, and counte^ sig^ed by my underwritten counselor of state, and first
secretary for the department of state and of war. Buen Retire, the tenth of
December, 1762.

(Signed)I THE KING. (And lower) RIDHARD WALL.


Declaration of his Most Christian Majesty's Plenipotentiary, with regard to
the Debts due to the Canadians.
THE king of Great Britain having desired, that the payment of the letters of
exchange and bills, which had been delivered to the Canadians for the
necessaries furnished to the French troop^, should be secured, his most
Christian Majesty, entirely disposed to render to every one that justice which
is legally due to them, has declared, and does declare, that the said bills,
and letters of exchange, shall be punctually paid, agreeably to a liquidation
made in a convenient time, according to the distance of the places, and to what
shall be possible, taking care, however, that the bills and letters of
exchange, which the French subjects may have at the time of this declaration,
be not confounded with the bills and letters of exchange, which are in the
possession of the new subjects of the king of Great Britain.

In witness whereof, we the underwritten minister of his Most Christian
Majesty, duly authorized for this purpose, have signed the present declaration,
and caused the seal of our a^ms to be put thereto.

Done at Paris the 10th of February, 1763.

CHOISEUL, DUC DE PRASLIN. (L. S.)

Declaration of his Britannick Majesty's Ambassador and Plenipotentiary, with
regard to the Limits of Bengal in the East Indies.
WE the underwritten ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary of the king
of Great Britain, in order to prevent all subject of dispute on account of the
limits of the dominions of the Sub^h of Bengal, as well as of the coast of
Co^omardel and Orixa, declare, in the name and by order of his said Britannick
majesty, that the said dominions of the Subah of Bengal, shall be reputed not
to extend farther than Y^n^on exclusively, and that Yannon shall be considered
at included in the north part of the coast of Coromandel or O^x^.

In witness whereof, we the underwritten minister plenipo^ntiary of his Majesty
the King of Great Britain, have signed the present declaration, and have cause^
the se^l of our a^ms to be put thereto. C. P. S. (L. S.)
Done at Paris the 10th of February, 1763.
Accession of his Most Faithful Majesty.
In the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. So be it.

BE it known to all those to whom it shall, or may belong; the ambassadors and
plenipotentiaries of his Britannick Majesty, of his most Christian Majesty, and
of his Catholic Majesty, having concluded and signed at Paris, the 10th of
February of this year, a definitive treaty of peace, and separate articles, the
tenor of which is as follows.

[Fiat Insertio.]

And the said ambassadors and plenipotentiaries having in a friendly manner
invited the ambassador and minister plenipotentiary of his Most Faithful
Majesty to accede thereto in the name of his said Majesty; the underwritten
ministers plenipotentiary, viz. On the part of the most serene and most potent
prince, George the Third, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Duke of Brunswick and Lunenbourg, arch-treasurer and elector of
the holy Roman empire, the most illustrious and most excellent Lord, John, Duke
and Earl of Bedford, Marquis of Tavistock, etc. minister of state of the King
of Great Britain, lieutenant general of his forces, keeper of his privy seal,
knight of the most noble order of the garter, and his ambassador extraordinary
and plenipotentiary to his Most Christian Majesty; and on the part of the most
serene and most potent prince, Don Joseph the First, by the grace of God, King
of Portugal and of the Algarves, the most illustrious and most excellent Lord,
Martin de Mello and Castro, knight professed of the order of Christ, of his
most Faithful Majesty's council, and his ambassador and minister
plenipotentiary to his most Christian majesty, in virtue of their full powers,
which they have communicated to each other, and of which copies shall be added
at the end of the present act, have agreed upon what follows, viz. His most
Faithful Majesty defiring most sincerely to concur in the speedy
re-establishment of peace, accedes, in virtue of the present act, to the said
definitive treaty and separate articles, as they are above transcribed, without
any reserve or exception, in the (...) confidence that every thing that is
promised to his said majesty, will be bona side fulfilled declaring at the same
time, and promising to fulfill, with equal fidelity, all the articles, clauses
and conditions, which concern him. On his side, his Britannick Majesty accepts
the present accession of his Most Faithful Majesty, and prom^es like wise to
fulfill, without any reserve or exception, all the articles, clauses, and
conditions, contained in the said definitive treaty and separate articles above
inserted. The ratifications of the present treaty shall be exchanged in the
space of one month, to be computed from this day, or sooner if it can be done.

In witness whereof, we, ambassadors and ministers plenipotentiary of his
Britannick Majesty, and of his Most Faithful Majesty, have signed the present
act, and have caused the seal of our arms to be put thereto. BEDFORD, C. P. S.
(L. S.). DE MELLO ET CASTRO. (L. S.)

Done at Paris the 10th of February 1763.
His Most Faithful Majesty's full Power.
DON Joseph, by the grace of God, King of Portagal, and of the Algarves, on
this side the sea, and on that side in A^ica, Lord of Guinea, and of the
conquest, navigation, commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia and India, etc. I
make known to those who shall see these my letters-patent, that desiring
nothing more than to see the flame of war, which has raged so many years in all
Europe, extinguished, and to cooperate (as far as depends upon me) toward its
being succeeded by a just peace, established upon solid principles: And being
informed, that great part of the belligerent powers entertain the same pacifick
dispositions, I am to nominate a person to assist, in my name, at the
assemblies and conferences to be holden upon this important business, who, by
his nobility, prudence and dexterity, is worthy of my confidence: Whereas these
several qualities concur in Martin de Mello de Castro, of my council, and my
envoy extraordinary plenipotentiary to the court of London; and as from the
experience I have, that he has always served me to my satisfaction, in every
thing I have charged him with, relying, that I shall, from henceforward, have
fresh cause for the confidence I have placed in him, I nominate and constitute
him my ambassador and plenipotentiary, in order that he may, as such, assist,
in my name, at any congresses, assemblies, or conferences, as well public, as
private, in which the business of pacification may be treated: Negotiating and
agreeing with the ambassadors and plenipotentiaries of the said belligerent
powers, whatever may relate to the said peace; and concluding what he shall
negociate between me and any belligerent kings and (...), under the conditions
he shall stipulate in my royal name: Therefore, for the above purposes, I grant
(...) all the full powers and authority, ge^e^al and special, which may be
necessary; and I promise, upon the said and word of a king, that I will
acknowledge to be (...) and valid, and will ratify within the time agreed
(...), whatever shall be contracted and stipulated (...) ambassador and
plenipotentiary, with the afores;aid ambassadors and ministers of the
belligerent ^ings and princes, who shall be furnished by them with equal powers:

In witness whereof, I have ordered these presents to be made out, signed by
myself, sealed with the seal of my arms thereunto affixed, and counter^ned by
my secretary and minister of state for foreign affairs and war. THE KING. Don
Lewis de Cunha.

Given at the palace of Our Lady of Ajuda, the eighteenth day of September, of
the year from the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1762. Letters patent whereby
your majesty is pleased to nominate Martin de Mello de Castro to be your
ambassador and plenipotentiary for the negotiation and conclusion of peace, in
the form above set forth.

For your majesty's inspection.



Declaration of his Most Faithful Majesty's Ambassador and Minister
Plenipotentiary, with regard to Alternating with Great Britain and France.
WHEREAS on the conclusion of the negotiation of the defintive treaty, signed
at Paris this 10th day of February, a difficulty arose as to the order of
signing, which might have retarded the conclusion of the said treaty, we the
unwritten, ambassador and minister plenipotentiary of his most Faithful
Majesty declare, that the alternative observed on the part of the king of
Great Britain, and the most Christian King, with the most Faithful king, in the
act of accession of the court of Portugal, was granted by their Britannick and
most Christian Majesty's, solely with a view to accelerate the conclusion of
the definitive treaty, and by that means, the more speedily to consolidate so
important and so salutary a work; and that this complaisance of their
Britannick and most Christian Majesty's shall not, be made any precedent of for
the future; the court of Portugal shall not allege it as an example in their
favor; shall derive therefrom no right, title, or pretension, for any cause,
or under any pretense whatsoever.

In witness whereof, we, ambassador and minister plenipotentiary of his most
Faithful Majesty, duly authorized for this purpose, have signed the present
declaration, and have caused the seal of our arms to (...) put thereto.
Done at Paris, the 10th of February 1763.
In order to make this edition as complete as possible, we have subjoined so
much of the XIIIth article of the treaty of Utrecht as is confirmed by the
present treaty, viz.
THE ^sland called (...) foundland, with the adjacent islands, shall from this
time forward belong of right wholly to Britain and to that end the town and
fortre^^ of Placentia, and whatever other places in the said island are in
possession of the French, shall yielded and given up, within seven months from
the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty, or sooner if possible, by the
most Christian King, to those who have a commission from the Queen of
Great Britain for that purpose. Nor shall the most Christian King, his (...)
and successors, or any of their subjects, at any time hereafter, lay claim to
any right to the said island and islands, or to any part of it, or them.
Moreover, it shall (...) be lawful for the subjects of France to forti^y any
place in the said island of Newfoundland, or to erect any buildings there,
besides stages made of boards, and huts necessary and (...) for drying of
(...); or to resort to the said island, beyond the time necessary for fishing
and drying of (...). But it shall be allowed to the subjects of France to catch
fish, and to dry them on land, in that part (...), and in no other besides that
of the said island of Newfoundland, which stretches from the place called Cape
Bonavista to the northern point of the said island; and from thence running
down by the western side, reaches as far as the place called Point Rich.


