THE Dreadful Visitation in A short Account of the Progress and Effects of the
PLAGUE, The last Time it spread in the City of LONDON in the Year 1665
extracted from the Memoirs of a Person who resided there, during the whole Time
of that Infection:

With some Thoughts on the Advantage which would result to Christianity, if a
Spirit of Impartiality and true Charity was suffered to preside amongst the
several religious Denominations, etc.

Deuteronomy. Chap. 32, 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter End. Germantown: Printed by Chr. Sower. 1763.

AMongst the many Calamities with which the Almighty is pleased to visit the
Children of Men, in order to reduce them to a just Sense of their own Weakness
and entire Dependence upon him, there is scarce any that are more productive of
true penitent Humiliation and of a Sight of what is really good and truly Evil,
than those contagious Distempers which, an offended God sometimes, suffers to
rage amongst the People. In the Year 1665 the City of LONDON was sorely visited
by the Plague: An Account of the Progress and Effects of that Visitation was
kept by a Citizen who remained there during the whole Time of the Sickness, and
appears to have been candid and judicious in his Remarks thereon. I trust my
Readers may, in a short Description of that memorable Judgment, meet with such
Lessons of best Wisdom, which nothing can so effectually produce, as a close
and serious converse with Death and the Grave. The Introduction of this
Contagion in LONDON was by some Goods imported from HOLLAND, which had been
brought thither from the Levant. It first broke out in the House where those
Goods were opened, from whence it spread to other Houses. In the first House
that was infected there died four Persons: A Neighbor who went to visit them
returning home gave the Distemper to her Family, and died with all her
Household. The Parish Officers who were employed about the sick Persons being
also infected, the Physicians perceived the Danger, and upon narrow Inspection
assured, that it was indeed the Plague with all is terrifying Particulars, and
that it threatened a general Infection. The People began now to be allarmed all
over the Town; the usual Number of Burials within the Bills of Mortality for a
Week were generally about 240 to 300, but from the 27th. to the 24 Jan. the
printed Bill was 474. However this went off again, and the Frost continuing
very severe, till near the End of February the Bills decreased again and People
began to look upon the Danger as good as over; but in May the Bills greatly
increased, and the Weather becoming hot, the Infection spread again, in a
dreadful Manner.

I lived, says the Author, without Aldgate, and as the Distemper had not
reached to that Side of the City, our Neighborhood continued easy; but at the
other End of the Town the Consternation was very great; and the Nobility and
Gentry thronged out of the Town, with their Families in an unusual Manner;
nothing was to be seen but Wagons, Carts, and Coaches, with Goods and People
and Horsemen attending them, hurrying away; then empty Wagons and Carts
appeared, who were apparently returning to fetch more People: Besides
innumerable Numbers of People on Horseback, fitted out for traveling. This was
a very melancholy Prospect; indeed there was nothing else of Moment to be
seen, it filled my mind with very serious Thoughts of the Misery that was
coming upon the City, and the unhappy Condition of those that would be left in
it. By the End of July the Contagion had spread and increased to a great
Degree: Sorrow and Sadness sat upon every Face; and though some Parts were not
yet overwhelmed, all looked deeply concerned. LONDON might well be said to be
all in Tears, the Mourners did not go about the Streets, for no body made a
formal Dress of Mourning for their nearest Relations; but the Voice of
Mourning, was indeed, heard in the Streets; the Shrieks of Women and Children
at the Windows and Doors of their Houses, where their dearest Relations were
dying, were so frequent to be heard, as we passed the Streets, that it was
enough to pierce the stoutest Heart in the World. Tears and Lamentations were
seen almost in every House, especially in the first Part of the Visitation; for
toward the latter End People did not so much concern themselves for the loss
of their Friends, expecting, that themselves should be summoned the next Hour.

It was a Time of very unhappy Breaches amongst us, in Matters of Religion,
Divisions and separate Opinions prevailed; the Church of ENGLAND was lately
restored, and the Presbyterians and other Professions had set up their Meetings
for worship, and apart, in which they were frequently disturbed, the Government
endeavoring to suppress their Meetings. But this dreadful Visitation reconciled
the different Parties and took away all Manner of Prejudice and Scruple from
the People. But after the Sickness was over, that Spirit of Charity subsided,
and Things returned to their own Channel again. Here we may observe, that a
nearer View of Death would soon reconcile Men, of good Principles, to one
another, and that it is chiefly owing to our easy Situations in Life, and our
putting these Things far from us, that our Breaches are fomented, and that
there is so much Prejudice and want of Christian Charity and Union amongst us.
A close View and Converse with Death, or with Diseases that threaten Death,
would scum off the Gall of our Temper, remove our Animosities, and bring us to
see with different Eyes. On the other Side of the Grave we shall all be
Brethren again.

The Inns of Court were now all shut up, there was but few Lawyers to be seen
in the City, indeed there was no need of them, for Quarrels and Divisions about
Interest had ceased; every Body was at Peace.

It was also worthy of Observation, as well as fruitful of Instruction, to
observe with what Alacrity the People, of all Persuasions, embraced the
Opportunities they had of attending upon the public Worship, and other
appointed Times of Devotion, as Humiliations, Fastings and public Confession
of Sins, to implore the Mercy of GOD and avert the Judgment which hung over
their Heads. The Churches were so thronged that there was, often, no coming
near, no, not to the very Door of the largest Churches. There was also daily
Prayers appointed Morning and Evening, at which the People attended with
uncommon Devotion.

All Plays and Interludes which had lately began to increase amongst us, were
forbid to act; the Gaming-Tables, public Dancing-Rooms, and Music-Houses,
which multiplied and began to debauch the Manners of the People were shut up
and suppressed; finding indeed no Trade, for the Minds of the People were
generally humbled and agitated with other Things, Death was before their Eyes,
and every Body began to think of their Graves.

The Infection still gradually increased till the Middle of August, when there
died a Thousand a Day, by Account or the weekly Bills, though they never gave a
full Account by many Thousands, many of the Parish Officers were taken sick
themselves and died when their Account was to be given in. The Parish of
Stepney alone had within the Year, one Hundred and sixteen Sextons,
Grave-Diggers and Carriers of the Dead etc. Indeed the Work was not of a Nature
to allow them leisure to take an exact tale of the dead Bodies, which were all
thrown together in the Dark in a Pit, to which no Man could come near without
the utmost Peril.

I had, says the Author, the Care of my Brother's House which obliged me
sometimes to go abroad. In these Walks I had dismal Scenes before my Eyes, as,
particularly, of Persons falling dead in the Streets, terrible Shrieks of
Women, who in their Agonies would throw open their Chamber-Windows, and cry out
in a dismal surprising Manner; it is impossible, to describe the variety of
Postures in which the Passions of the Poor People would express themselves.
Passing through Token House Yard, of a sudden a Casement violently opened just
over my Head, and a Woman gave three frightful Screeches, and then cried: Oh!
Death, Death, Death, which struck me with Horror and a chilness in my very
Blood. There was no Body to be seen in the whole Street, neither did any Window
open, for People had no Curiosity, now, in any Case. I went on to pass into
Bell-Ally, where there was a greater Cry than that, I could hear Women and
Children run skreaming about the Rooms like distracted; when a Garret Window
opened and some Body from a Window on the other Side, asked: What is the
Matter? Upon which it was answered: O Lord! My old Master has hanged himself.
The other asked again: Is be quite dead? And the first answered: Ay, Ay, quite
dead and cold. This Person was a Deputy Alderman and very rich: But this is but
one Instance; it is scarce credible, what dreadful Cases happened in particular
Families every Day: People in the Rage of the Distemper or in the Torment of
the Swelling, which was indeed intolerable, becoming raving and distracted,
often times laid violent Hands upon themselves, throwing themselves out of
Windows, or breaking out of the Houses, would dance naked about the Streets not
knowing one ecstasy from another; others, if not prevented, would run directly
down the River and plunge into the Water. Some dying of mere Grief as a
Passion, and some of Fright and Surprise, without having received the
Infection. It often pierced my very Soul, to hear the Groans and Cries of those
who were thus tormented; but this of the Swellings was accounted the most
promising particular in the whole Infection, for if these swellings could be
brought to break and run, the Patient generally recovered. Whereas those who
were struck with Death at the Beginning of the Distemper, and had Spots come
upon them, often went about indifferent easy, till a little before they died,
and some till the Moment they dropped down; such would be taken suddenly very
sick, and would run to some convenient Place, or to their own Houses, if
possible, and there sit down, grow faint and die. The Method the Magistrates
fell into of locking up the Doors of People's Houses where any had taken the
Distemper, and setting Watchmen there Night and Day, to prevent any going out
to spread the Infection, looked hard and cruel, as, perhaps, those who were
found in the Family might have escaped, if they had been removed from the sick;
but the public good seemed to justify such a Conduct, and there was no
obtaining the least Mitigation by any Application to the Magistrates. This put
People, who thought themselves well, upon many Stratagems to get out of their
Confinements. Going out one Morning, I heard a great Outcry, which prompting my
Curiosity. I inquired the Cause of a Person who looked out of a Window. A
Watchman had been employed to watch at the Door of a House, which was infected
and shut up, both himself and the Day Watchman attended there a Day and two
Nights. All this while no Noise had been heared, nor Lights seen in the House;
neither had they called for any Thing; it seems that two or three Days before,
the Dead-Cart had stopped there, and a Servant-Maid had been brought down to the
Door dead, wrapped only in a green Rug, which the Buriers had put into the Cart
and carried away: The next Day the Watchman heared great Crying and screeming
in the House, which he supposed was occasioned by some of the Family dying just
at that Time; upon which he knocked at the Door a great while, at last one
looked out, and said with an angry quick Tone, and a Voice of one that was
crying, what do you want, that ye make such a knocking? He answered: I am the
Watchman: How do you do? What is the Matter? The Person answered: What is that
to you? Stop the Dead-Cart. This was about one o'Clock; soon after, he stopped
the Dead-Cart, and then knocked again, but no Body answered: He continued
knocking, and the Bellman called several Times: Bring out your Dead; but no
Body answered, till the Man that drove the Cart, being called to other Houses,
would stay no longer, and drove away. In the Morning when the Day-Watchman came
in, they knocked at the Door a great while, but no Body answering, they got a
Ladder, and one of them went up to the Window, and looking into the Room, he
saw a Woman lying dead upon the Floor, in a dismal Manner: But though he called
aloud and knocked hard on the Floor, with his Staff, no Body stirred or
answered: This they made known to the Magistrate, who ordered the House to be
broken open, when no Body was found in the House, but that young Woman, who
having been infected, and past Recovery, the Rest had left her to die by
herself, and were every one gone, having found some Way to delude the Watchman,
and go out; as to those Cries, and Shrieks, which he heared, it was supposed,
they were the passionate Cries of the Family, at the bitter parting, which, to
be sure, it was to them all; this being the Sister to the Mistress of the
Family. Many more Instances might be given but these may suffice to show the
deep Distress of that Day. Death did not now hover over every one's Head only,
but looked into their Houses and Chambers, and even stared in their very Faces,
and though there was some Stupidity and Dullness of Mind; yet there was a great
Deal of just Alarm sounded in the inmost Soul: Many Consciences were awakened:
many hard Hearts melted into Tears; many a penitent Confession was made of
Crimes long concealed. People might be heared even in the Streets as we passed
along calling upon GOD for Mercy, through JESUS CHRIST, and saying: I have been a
Thief. I have been an Adulterer. I have been a Murderer, and the like; and none
durst stop to make Inquiry into such Things, or to administer. Comfort to the
poor Creature, who in the anguish both of Soul and Body thus cried out: Many
were the Warnings that were then given by dying Penitents, to others, not to
put off and delay their Repentance to a Day of Distress, that such a Time of
Calamity as this was no Time for Repentance. I wish, says the Author, I could
repeat the very Sound of those Groans and Exclamations that I heared from some
poor dying Creatures, when in the height of their Agonies and Distress; and
that I could make him that reads this hear as, I imagine, I now hear them, for
the Sound seems still to ring in my Ears. In the Beginning of September the
Number of Burials increasing, the Churchwardens of Aldgate Parish ordered a
large Pit to be dug, to hold all the Dead which might die in a Month, it was
about forty Foot long and sixteen broad; some blamed the Churchwardens for
suffering such a frightful Gulf to be dug; nevertheless in two Weeks they had
thrown more than eleven Hundred Bodies into it, when they were obliged to fill
it up, as the Bodies were come within 6 Foot of the Surface. My Curiosity drove
me to go, and see this Pit, when there had been near four hundred People buried
in it. I got Admittance into the Churchyard, by means of the Sexton, who was a
sensible, religious Man; he would have persuaded me not to go, saying: "That it
was, indeed, their Duty to venture, and in it they might hope to be preserved;
but that as I had no apparent call, he thought my Curiosity could not justify
my running that Hazard" I told him, I had been pressed in my Mind to go, and
that perhaps it might be an instructing Sight "Nay "Says "the good Man "If you
will venture upon that Score, in the Name of GOD go in; it will be a Sermon to
you, it may be the best that ever you heared in your Life" His Discourses had
shock't my Resolution and I stood wavering for a good while; but just then I
heared the Bell-Man, and the Cart, loaded with dead Bodies, appearing, I went
in. There was no Body, as I could perceive, at first, with the Cart but the
Buriers, and the Man that led the Cart, but when they came to the Pit, they saw
a Man mufled in a Cloak who appeared in great agony; the Buriers immediately
gathered about him, supposing he was one of those poor delirious or desperate
Creatures, that would sometimes run to the Pit, wrapped in Blankets, and throw
themselves in, and as they said, bury themselves. When the Buriers came to him,
they soon found he was neither desperate nor distempered in Mind, but one
oppressed with a dreadful Weight of Grief, having his Wife and several Children
all in the Cart, that was just come in with him, and he followed in Agony and
excess of Sorrow. He calmly desired the Buriers to let him alone, said he would
only see the Bodies thrown in and go away, so they left importuning him; but no
sooner was the Cart turned round, and the Bodies shot into the Pit
promiscuously, which was a Surprise to him, for he at least expected, they
would have been decently laid in, though indeed he was afterward convinced that
was impracticable, I say, no sooner did he see the Sight, but he cried out
aloud, unable to contain himself, and fell down in a Swoon; the Buriers ran to
him, and took him up, and when he was come to himself, led him to a Place were
he was taken Care of. He looked into the Pit again, as he went away, but the
Buriers had covered the Bodies, so immediately, with throwing Earth that
nothing could be seen. The Cart had in it sixteen or seventeen Bodies. Some
were wrapped up in Linen Sheets, some in Rugs, some little other than naked, or
so loose, that what Covering they had fell from them, in the shooting out of
the Cart, and they fell quite naked among the rest; but the Matter was not much
to them, or the Indecency much to any one else, seeing they were to be huddled
together into the common Grave of Mankind, for here was no Difference made, but
Poor and Rich went together; there was no other Way of Burials, neither was it
possible there should.

John Hayward under-Sexton, that is Grave-Digger and Bearer of the Dead, never
had the Distemper at all, but lived about twenty Years after it. His Wife was
employed to nurse the infected People; yet she herself never was infected. The
only Preservative he used, against the Infection, was holding Garlic and Rue
in his Mouth and smoking Tobacco; this I had from his own Mouth. His Wife's
Remedy was washing her Head in Vinegar, and sprinkling her Head-Cloths so with
Vinegar, as to keep them always moist; and if the Smell of any of those she
waited on was more than ordinary offensive, she snuft Vinegar up into her Nose,
sprinkled her Headcloths and held a Handkerchief weted with Vinegar to her
Mouth.

And here I must not omit mentioning the Disposition of the People of that Day,
with Respect to their Charity to the Poor, which indeed was very large both in
a public and a private Way. Some pious Ladies were so zealous in this good
Work, and so confident in the Protection of Providence in the Discharge of this
great Duty, that they went about themselves distributing Alms, and visiting the
poor Families that were infected, in their very Houses, appointing Nurses and
Apothecaries to supply them with what they wanted. Thus giving their Blessings
to the Poor in substantial Relief, as well as hearty Prayers for them. I will
not undertake to say, that none of these charitable People were suffered to die
of the Plague, but this I may say, that I never knew any of them miscarried,
which I mention for the Encouragement of others in Case of like Distress; and
doubtless, if they, "that give to the Poor, lend to the Lord, and he will repay
it" those that hazard their Lives to give to the Poor, and to comfort and
assist them in such a Misery as this, may hope to be protected therein.

From the Middle of August to the Middle of September the Infection still
increased and spread itself, with an irresistible Fury, it was reckoned that
during that Time there died no less than sixteen Hundred a Day, one Day with
another. It was then that the Confusion and Terror was inexpressible; the
Courage of the People appointed to carry away the Dead, began to fail them: The
Vigilance of the Magistrates was now put to the utmost Trial. At last the
violence of the Distemper came to such a height that the People sat still
looking at one another, and seemed quite abandoned to Despair. In a Word,
People began to give themselves up to a fear, that there was nothing to be
expected, but a universal Desolation. This Despair made People bold and
venturous, they were no more shy of one another, as expecting there was now no
avoiding the Distemper, but that all must go, this brought them to crow'd into
the Churches, they inquired no more what Condition the People, who sat near
them, was in, but looking upon themselves all as so many dead Corpse, they came
to the Churches without the least Caution, and crowded together, as if their
Lives were of no Consequence, compared to the Work which they were come about:
Indeed, their Zeal in coming, and the Earnestness and affectionate Attention
they showed to what they heared, made it manifest, what Value People would put
upon the Worship of GOD, if they thought, every Day they attended at the
Church, would be their last. It was in the Height of this Despair, that it
pleased God to stay his Hand, and to slacken the Fury of the Contagion, in a
Manner as surprising as that of its Beginning, and which demonstrated it to be
his own particular Hand above the Agency of Means; nothing but omnipotent Power
could have done it; the Contagion despised all Medicine. Death raged in every
Corner, and had it gone on as it did then, a few Weeks more would have cleared
the Town of all its Inhabitants. In that very Moment when thirty Thousand were
dead in three Weeks, nay, when it was reported three Thousand had died in one
Night, and an Hundred Thousand more were taken sick, when we might well say:
Vain was the Help of Man, it pleased God to cause the Fury of it to abate; and
by his immediate Hand to disarm the Enemy. It was wonderful! The Physicians
were surprised, wherever they visited, to find their Patients better, and in a
few Days every Body was recovering: Nor was this by any Medicine found out, or
any new Method of Cure discovered, but it was evidently from the Secret
invisible Hand of him, that had at first sent this Disease, as a Judgment upon
us. Let the Philosophers search for Reasons in Nature to Account for it, and
labor as much as they will to lessen the Debt they owe to their Maker; those
Physicians who had the least Share of Religion in them were obliged to
acknowledge that it was all supernatural. The Streets were now full of poor
recovering Creatures, who appeared very sensible and thankful to God for their
unexpected Deliverance: Yet I must own, that as for the generality of the
People it might too justly be said of them, as was said of the Children of
Israel, after they had been delivered from the Host of Pharaoh. "That they sung
his Praise, but they soon forgot his Works."

The Author who was preserved unhurt, with his whole Family during the Time of
the Sickness, gives, in his Memoirs, a particular Account of the many
Reasonings and Fears which affected his Mind, before he could come to a fixed
Conclusion, whether to stay, and (...) his Lot in the Station in which God had
placed him, or by leaving the City run the Hazard of unsettling himself, and
lose his Effects, which lay scattered amongst the Merchants. At the earnest
solicitations of his Brother he had concluded to go, but being always crossed
in this Design, by several Accidents, it came, one Morning, as he expresses it,
very warmly in his Mind, whether these repeated Disappointments, were not
Intimations to him, that it was the Will of Heaven he should not go, which was
succeeded by a farther Thought, that if this Suggestion was from God, he was
able effectually to preserve him in the midst of all Deaths and Dangers that
would surround him, and that if he attempted to secure himself, by fleeing from
his Habitation and acted contrary to these Intimations, which he believed to be
divine, it was a kind of flying from GOD, who could cause his justice to
overtake him, when, and where he thought fit.

But what finally fixed him in a Resolution to stay, and cast himself, entirely
upon the Protecton and good Pleasure of the Almighty, was, that at a Time, when
his Thoughts were more than commonly serious upon this weighty Subject, turning
over the Bible which lay before him, he cried out: Well, I know not what to do,
Lord, direct me! at that Juncture happening to stop and casting his Eye on the
Second Verse of 91st. Psalm, he read to the 10 th. as follows viz. I will say
of the Lord, He is my Refuge, and my Fortress, my GOD, in him will I trust.
Surely he shall deliver thee from the Snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome
Pestilence. He shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall
thou trust: His Truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler. Thou shall not be afraid
for the Terror by Night, nor for the Arrow that flies by Day: Nor for the
Pestilence that walks in Darkness: Nor for the Destruction that wastes at
Noonday. A Thousand shall fall at thy Side, and ten Thousand at thy right
Hand: But it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine Eyes shall thou behold
and see the Reward of the Wicked. Because thou have made the Lord which is thy
Refuge, even the Most-High thy Habitation: There shall no evil befall thee,
neither shall any Plague come nigh thy Dwelling etc.

THe Inspiration of God, and the clear Information of the Holy Scriptures
assures us, that God reserves his choicest Secrets for the purest Minds, and
that it is uncleanness of Spirit, not difference of Method in seeking after
God, that separates us from him; true Holiness being the only safe Entrance
into divine Knowledge. The Apostle Peter declares Act. 10, 34. That he
perceived of a Truth that God is no respecter of Persons: But in every Nation,
he that fears him, and works Righteousness is accepted with him. And the
Apostle Paul also tells the Galatians Chap. 6, 15. That in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any Thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature.
Nothwithstanding the Clearness of these and many more such Doctrines contained
in the Scriptures, Selfishness and Partiality, those inhuman and base Qualities
have been suffered to prevail even amongst such, as are esteemed the most pious
in the several Sects and Parties of the Christian Church: They have raised and
still raise in every Communion, a selfish partial Orthodoxy, which consists in
courageously defending all its Opinions and Practices, and condemning the
Doctrines and Practices of others; and thus every one is trained up in Defense
of their own Church, their own Truth, their own Opinion: And he often is judged
to have the most Merit, and the most Honor, who likes every Thing, and defends
every* Thing amongst themselves, and leaves nothing uncensured in those that
are of a different Communion. Now how can Truth, Goodness and Religion be more
struck at, than by such Defenders of it? If you ask why the great Bishop of
Meaux wrote so many learned Books against all Parts of the Reformation, it is
because he was born in France. Had he been born in England, had he been bred at
Oxford, he might have revall'd our great Bishop Stillingfleet, and would have
wrote as many learned Folio's against the Church of Rome, as he has done. And
yet I will venture to say, that if each Church could produce but one Man a
Piece, that had the Piety of an Apostle, and the impartial Love of that first
Christians, they would not want half a Sheet of Paper to hold their Articles of
Union, nor be half an Hour before they were of one Religion. If we loved Truth
as such; if we sought it for its own sake; if we loved our neighbors as our
selves; if we desired nothing by our Religion but to be acceptable to God; if
we equally desired the Salvation of all Men; if we were afraid of Error, only
because of its hurtful Nature to us, and our Brethern of other Communions, then
nothing of this Spirit could have any Place in us. For God is Love, and they
which dwell in God, they dwell in Love, 1 John. 4, 16. That universal Love
which gives the whole Strength of the Heart to God, and which makes us love
every Man as we love ourselves is the noblest, the most divine, and God-like
State of the Soul, and no Religion does any Man any good, but so far, as it
brings this perfect Love with it. Perfection can no where be found, but in a
pure disinterested Love of God and our Neighbor. There is therefore a
Commnuion of Saints in the Love of GOD, which no one can learn from that which
is called Orthodoxy in the different Sects, but is only to be had by a total
Dying to all worldly Views, by a pure Love of GOD, and by such an Unction from
above, as delivers the Mind from all Selfishness, and makes it love Truth and
Goodness, with an Equallity of Affection in every Man, let his Name and
Profession to Religion be what it may. And by thus uniting in Heart and Spirit
with all that is holy and good in all professions, we enter into the true
Communion of Saints, and become real Members of the true universal Christian
Church, though we are confined to the outward Worship of only one particular Part
of it. It is thus, that the Angels, as ministering Spirits assist, join, unite
and cooperate with every Thing that is holy and good in every Division of
Mankind, He that has been all his Life long used to look with great Slight upon
those of other Professions, whom he has called Superstitions, Biggots, canting
Enthusiasts etc. must naturally expect, they will be treated by GOD, as they
have been by him; and if he had the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, such People
woold find it hard, to get a Place in it. But it stands greatly in Hand to get
rid of this Temper before we dye; for if nothing but universal Love can enter
into the Kingdom of GOD, what can be more necessary for us, than to be full of
this Love before we dye?

We often hear of People of great Zeal declaring on their Deathbeds their
strict Attachment to the Church of England, and making solemn Protestations
against all other Churches, but how much better would it be, if such a Person
was to say: In this divided State of Christendom, I must conform to some
outward divided Part of it, and therefore I have chosen to live and dye in
outward Communion with the church of England; fully believing, that if I
worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth, in this divided Part of the Church, I shall
be as acceptable to him, as if I had been a faithful Member of the one whole
Church, before it was broken into separate Parts. But as I am now going out of
this disordered Division, into a more universal State of Things, as I am going
to the GOD of all Churches, to a Kingdom of universal Love, which must have its
Inhabitants from all People, Nations, and Languages of the Earth; so in this
Spirit of universal Love, I desire to perform my last Act of Communion joining
in Heart and Spirit with all that is Christian, Holy and Good in all other
Churches; praying, from the Bottom of my Soul, that every Church may have its
Saints; that GOD'S Kingdom may come, his Will be done in every Division of
Christians and Men, and that every Thing that has Breath, may praise the Lord.

AN Eminent Servant of GOD who had known Deliverance from the Dark Powers and
experimentally felt the Powers of the World to come, a few Hours before his
Death, expressed himself in the following Words: There is a Spirit which I
feel, that delights to do no Evil, nor to revenge any wrong* but delights to
endure all Things, in Hopes to enjoy its own in the End; Its Hope is* to
outlive all Wrath and Contention, and to weary out all Exaltation and Cruelty,
or whatsoever is of a Nature contrary to itself; it sees to the End of all
Temptations; as it bears no Evil in it self, so it conceives none in Thought to
any other; for its Ground and Spring is the Mercies and Forgiveness of GOD; its
Crown is Meekness; its Life is everlasting Love unfeigned, and takes its
Kingdom with Entreaty, and not with Contention, and keeps it by lowliness of
Mind; in GOD alone it can rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its
Life; it is conceived in Sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it, nor
does it murmur at Grief and Oppression; it never rejoiceth but through
Sufferings, for with the World's Joy it is murdered. I found it alone being
forsaken: I have Fellowship therein with those that lived in Dens and desolate
Places of the Earth, who through Death obtained Resurrection and eternal holy
Life.

FINIS.

