ON RELIGIOUS LIBERTY: A SERMON, PREACHED at St. PAUL's Cathedral, On SUNDAY
the 6th of MARCH, 1763. On Occasion of the BRIEF for the Establishment of the
COLLEGES of PHILADELPHIA and NEW YORK. Published at the Request of the MANAGERS
of the Charity. TO WHICH IS PREFIXED AN ADDRESS To the principal Inhabitants of
the NORTH AMERICAN COLONIES, On Occasion of the PEACE.

By JOHN BROWN, D. D. Vicar of Newcastle.

LONDON: Printed by DAVIS and REYMERS, Printers to the Royal-Society, Price 1s.
6d. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by ANDREW STEUART, at the Bible-in-Heart, in
Second-street, Price only 6d. 1763.

AN ADDRESS To the Principal INHABITANTS of the BRITISH NORTH-AMERICAN
Colonies. On Occasion of the PEACE.
SIRS, As the long-desired Time is at length arrived, when the Blessings of
Peace are happily restored, and his Majesty's American Dominions enlarged and
secured; give me leave (so far as relates to my particular Profession) to lay
before you some Observations, which may tend to the continued Security of the
Colonies which you inhabit; as well as to the proper Improvement and Progress
of true Christianity, in the several Districts of British America.

The general Truths, relative to these important Subjects, are delivered in the
following Discourse. The Observations which I beg Leave to offer in this
Address, are such as more particularly relate to yourselves. And as you are the
first great Barrier, on which your Mother Country must depend for the Security
of her Colonies, every Consideration which can add new Motives to your
well-directed Zeal, though they more immediately affect Yourselves, yet in the
End they must touch the Interests of our common Country.

As true Christianity cannot be either propagated or established, but on the
Principles of Christian Liberty; let me first, with all due Respect and Freedom
lay before you the peculiar Reasons, on which You, above all the Inhabitants of
the Earth, ought to be zealous in establishing the generous Principles of
religious Freedom.

In the following Discourse you will see a general Sketch of the gradual
Decline of religious Liberty, from that Perfection which it justly boasted in
the first Ages of Christianity. This Decline ended in it is total Extinction;
which was in Time followed by its imperfect Revival, in the Days of LUTHER. In
Europe, the Consequence of these Events has been, that the several Sects of
Christians dissenting from the established Religion of their respective
Countries, arose in small Numbers of Men: Hence, although mutual Dislike has
been too general among the several Denominations of Christians; yet the nascent
Sects have been but seldom of Force to control the leading Spirit of the
national Religion; which has generally been of Power to overbear them by its
legal Establishment. Thus, both the public Peace, and many good Effects of
Religion (though even in some Degree intolerant) have been in Part maintained,
though the true Spirit of religious Freedom has been but little attended to.
The Religion of the Country though imperfect, has still been able to
cooperate with the Wisdom of the State; and hence, at least a cansistent
System of Policy has arisen.

But on the Continent of British AMERICA, the Matter has been quite otherwise.
For here, the several Colonies, though united under one common King and
Country, were from their very first Establishment inhabited by Christians of
various Denominations, divided in Principle and Opinion; some of them driven
from their Country by this very Want of Religious Freedom; and all of them but
too much tainted with the same intolerant Spirit which they so justly condemned
in others; on an Equality with Respect to Property and Power; and too generally
possessed, I fear, with such a mutual Dislike and Jealousy, as must ever retard
many public Measures which may respect the common Good of All; unless the
genuine Spirit of Christian Liberty shall at length unite them in the perfect
Bonds of Charity and mutual Love. Hence, then, arises a peculiar Argument, on
which the Inhabitants of the American Colonies should zealously adopt the
generous Principles of Religious Freedom; because that uncharitable Disunion
and Dislike, which, in the European Countries, may not affect the public
Measures, must inevitably, in the American Colonies, where the contending
religious Interests are nearly equal, be attended with Consequences which are
bad; may possibly be attended with Consequences that are fatal.

Hence then arises a powerful Argument for your putting on the Spirit of
Moderation, and the Adoption of religious Liberty; without which, even the
temporal Interests of the Colonies must be often obstructed; without which, the
distant and out-lying Parts of the British Settlements must be doomed to live
in Ignorance and Error; and without which the native Indians must either
continue in their present deplorable State of Idolatry, Cruelty and Vice; or
must become your most dangerous Enemies, by the Adoption of the Principles of
Popery.

And this naturally leads me to lay before you the peculiar Circumstances which
attend your Situation with respect to the Popish Settlements which lie
contiguous to the Protestant ones; and to point out the Dangers that may and
must arise from that Quarter, unless a true Spirit of Christian Liberty and
Zeal unite and animate you to the effectual Civilization and Conversion of your
native Indian Allies.

And here, you will first pardon me, if I observe, that though a narrow,
intolerant, and persecuting Spirit has too frequently been found among the
several Protestant Churches; yet this false Zeal is not attended with the same
Eagerness for the Conversion of others, as is found in the Roman Church. The
Reason of this Difference lies here: That the Principle of Intolerance and
Persecution arises in the Church of Rome from a consistent Principle and
Belief, that there is no Salvation beyond the Pale of their Communion. This
Principle no Protestant holds: and therefore the false Zeal of a persecuting or
intolerant Protestant has not the same Foundation, nor is therefore attended
with the same steady Consequences, with that which is built on the Popish
Faith. The persecuting Zeal of the Papist is founded in Principle; and
therefore urges on to Conversion from a Motive of Charity: The persecuting Zeal
of a Protestant is only founded in Passion; and therefore goes no farther than
as it is urged by the Motive of Dislike As this may be thought not altogether
consistant with what is said in p. 15 of the following Discourse; it may be
proper to observe, that the Principle of Persecution there mentioned, is called
"the same" with that of Popery, with Respect to such Consequences only as arise
from Dislike.
Hence the Popish Colonies will always outdo the Protestant, in the Conversion
of Idolators; unless these last be strongly united by the Principles of
Christian Liberty, and animated by a generous Zeal for the real Welfare of
Mankind.

In Support of these Truths, I have formerly appealed to the State of Popery
and Protestantism on the Continent of America. There the different Genius of
these two Systems operates with Universality and Power. The Papists are
zealous, watchful and assiduous; the Protestants are cold, indifferent and
neglectful. The Spaniards, in Course of Time, will have converted one half of
the vast southern Continent, and murdered the other. The French join Policy to
Zeal; or rather, make Zeal subservient to Policy. They reason, they persuade,
they cajole, they terrify the poor Indian Nations; and by every Means of Truth
and Falsehood, draw them over to their Party. The Conduct of the English is the
Reverse of all this. Doubtless, many of our Missionaries are worthy Men: But it
must be acknowledged, as the natural Effect and Defect of the Protestant
System, that they are not generally impelled by Zeal, but compelled by
Necessity, to visit these remote and inhospitable Regions. In the mean Time,
the Inhabitants of our Colonies are, like ourselves, too generally given up to
Views of Gain and Pleasure: Thus Popery advances with dreadful Strides, while
Protestantism lies immersed in Indolence and Sleep Estimate, etc. Vol. II. p.
143.
.

Lest this should be regarded as an aggravated Representation; give me leave to
subjoin a strong Confirmation of the whole, contained in a Letter from an
Officer in North America, directed to Mr. Davis, Bookseller, in Holbourne; and
dated December 1758.

SIR,
"I Have read two Volumes, entitled, an Estimate of the Manners and Principles
of the Times; and as I think I have received Improvement by them. I offer the
Author my grateful Acknowledgments. But this is not the chief Motive which
leads me to trouble you with this Letter. In Vol. II. Part II. Section 4. this
Writer seems to me to have developed this Subject with so much Penetration, and
sound Reasoning, and thrown so alarming a Light upon it, that if it has not, or
should not rouse the Attention of his Countrymen in general, and of those in
particular who superintend the public Welfare, it will be a melancholy
Demonstration, that he has not colored his Picture up to the Life. As my
Absence from my native Country for some Years has deprived me of the
Opportunity of knowing many Facts this Writer asserts, though from a
Credibility of his Evidence, and a Variety of Circumstances, my Faith is not a
wavering one; so my Residence and Situation in this Part of the World has
enabled me to strengthen the Proof of his Subject in the above Section; I mean
with regard to the Growth and Influence of Popery over the North American
Indians: and it is the Knowledge of this Fact, and the very important
Consequences of it, which prevailed upon me to offer to this excellent Author,
additional Evidence to the Truth and Weight of his Reasoning. Throughout North
America the English have but one Chapel, and but one Missionary amongst the
Indians. The former is seldom opened, and the Zeal of the latter seems confined
to his Pension or Salary, from the Society in London. The French have many
Indian Chapels, and a great Number of very able and zealous Missionaries. Our
Indian Interest has been for Years decresing -- The French increasing. Though
on our Side the Want of a religious Attention to the Indians, or in other
Words, of a religiously-politic Conduct toward them, has not been the only
Instance of our Misconduct: yet I believe it has been the most fatal Instance.
To the religiously-politic Measures of the French toward the Indians, is the
Increase of their Interest among them almost owing. Without a Superiority of
Indian Interest, the French could neither have extended nor maintained those
Encroachments in this Part of the World, which occasioned the present War. A
considerable Number of the Indians are attached to the Interest of the French
by the Ties of Religion only; and this to such a Degree, that they are
themselves Missionaries amongst other Indians. These Papist Indians have
catched the persecuting and intolerant Spirit of Popery, and wage War against
the English upon the inveterate Principles of that bloodshedding Persuasion,
which is kept up and heightened by the infernal Applause of their Priests. The
superstitious and diabolical Spirit of Popery, by the unrighteous Acts and
indefatigable Zeal of their Missionaries, is extending itself amongst the
Indians in general, and is, I fear, too powerful for any merely political
Conduct of ours toward those People to resist. Without a superior Indian
Interest to the French, the British Colonies, though they were environed by the
ancient Wall of China, and their numerous Troops, may possibly be penetrated
and subdued by these American Taters Taters signifies Rovers.
; and the Event, under the Influence of French Ambition and Popish persecuting
Principles, would be infinitely more fatal. The Start Popery has got over the
Indians, and its peculiar Advantages, especially with respect to these Savages,
over the utmost Efforts of Protestantism, renders it very dubious, whether a
religiously-politic Conduct in the English toward those People will be able to
throw the Balance of Indian Interest into our Scale. Hence a Question arises,
Whether any Thing less than an absolute Conquest of the French in North America
can secure the British Dominions there? Some Papers have been transmitted to
England, which may probably be offered to the Perusal of the Public. Most of
these Strictures, with some others, would have had Place in those Papers, but
the Author thought they did not come within his Plan: if Leisure and other
Circumstances should conspire, those may make a Part of some future
Publication. But as that is at present a Matter of great Uncertainty, the
Writer of this Letter was desirous of contributing his Testimony to the
particular Part of Dr. Brown's Estimate as above referred to." I am, Sir, etc.


As this Gentleman hints at some further Publications on this important
Subject, it were much to be wished, that he would fulfill his salutary Purpose;
and if this Address should be so fortunate as to reach his Notice, whether in
Europe or America, I beg Leave to call upon him, in the Name of his Country, to
do this public Service; which may tend still farther to open the Eyes of every
Briton, on a Subject upon which the future Security of our North-American
Colonies, and therefore of Great Britain herself will depend.

In the mean Time, till more enlarged Evidences may arise, it happens to be in
my Power to corroborate this Gentleman's Observations, by the concurrent
Testimony of Captain Schomberg, another Officer, now in England.

It appears, by authentic Letters which I have seen in this Gentleman's
Possession, that, at the Beginning of the late War, the French had established
an able Missionary, Monsieur MAILLARD, in Acadia, with the Title of Grand
Vicar. This Person, after making himself Master of the Language, and
assimilating his Manners to those of the Natives, preached the Roman Catholic
Faith among them; and by removing his Habitation from one Place to another,
performed Mass and administered the Sacrament to more than ten Tribes of
Indians, whom by these Means he had gained absolutely over to his Command. His
Influence among them was so great, that in Reality he stood in the Place of his
Master, the French King: a Circumstance which is sufficiently confirmed by the
following Fact; that Captain Schomberg (then Lieutenant in the 40th Regiment)
having been sent into Acadia by General Whitmore, and understanding the
Language of the Country, gained Mr. Maillard to the Interests of Great Britain;
and solely through his Influence and Authority brought over these numerous
Tribes of Savages, from being the Enemies, to be the Friends of our Country The
Author with Pleasure lays hold of this Opportunity of doing a Piece of Justice
to Captain Schomberg; who with a Zeal uncommon in a young Officer, brought over
these Indian Tribes to the Interests of Great Britain, at a Time when they were
our most dangerous Enemies. This he effected at a considerable Expense, as well
as Fatigue and Hazard, to himself. Yet, through the Death of General Whitmore,
and some other unfortunate Incidents, he never has been re-imbursed; nor has
ever had any Acknowledgment, for this Service done to his Country. This Fact is
made public, not with a View of blaming any one; but solely in Hope, that some
noble-minded Person, who may have Power and Inclination, may also have the
Opportunity or redressing so uncommon a Grievance,
.

From these incontestable Facts, then, it appears, what a zealous and active
Enemy you have to oppose, in the Papist Missionaries who have been long and
powerfully dispersed among the Indian Tribes; and who, you may depend upon it,
will continue their unwearied Endeavors, to bring them over to the Principles
of the Roman Church.

Let me now conclude with another Circumstance of Danger, which must not be
omitted here. Before the Commencement of the late War, the Principles and
Ministers of Popery, though near, yet were not mixed with the Colonies of
Great Britain. But by the Terms of Capitulation, both at Quebec and Montreal,
the Roman Catholic Religion is tolerated in the several Settlements conquered
from the Crown of France. The Consequence of this must be, a frequent
Intercourse and Communication of Protestants with Bapists; a Circumstance so
pregnant with Danger, supposing Zeal on the one Part, and Remissness on the
other, that I think it were needless to enlarge upon it, in order to rouse you
into Caution.

What, then, is the proper Part for the Inhabitants of our Colonies to act,
under Circumstances so delicate and important? Extirpation, or even
Persecution, the Principles of our Excellent Religion, as well as the Humanity
of our Manners, and the good Faith of our Politics, do absolutely fobid:
Nothing therefore is left for you to do, but to combat false Zeal with Zeal
which is according to Knowledge: to be united and firm in maintaining, in
communicating, in establishing the great and essential Principles of
Christianity, throwing off the Sin which may so easily beset you, that of too
great Eagerness and unchristian Contention, about those secondary and
incidental Differences of Opinion which seem to divide you into various Sects,
while you all rejoice in one common Day, which the glorious Light of the Gospel
has spread over the British Dominions.

These salutary, great, and glorious Purposes, the Establishment of Colleges in
America can alone thoroughly effect. For in the first Place, the frequent
Communication and Intercourse, which this Establishment will naturally create
among Protestants of every Denomination in America, will of Course tend to wear
off that mutual Dislike, which often arises, and is always increased, by that
Distance and Reserve which different Sects of Religion commonly maintain
toward each other. By these Means you will often find your Principles the
same, where you before thought they had differed: By these Means, you will
often find you have wished each other well, when both Parties suspected the
contrary.

And lastly, the strong and powerful Establishment of American Colleges can
alone effectually produce the second great End above explained; I mean the
counter-working the Designs of Popery, and the Civilization and Conversion of
the savage Indians. While Things remain in their present Situation, there is no
Probability that ever a sufficient Number of able and zealous Laborers will
inlist in this discouraging Vineyard. Men bred up in the distant and alluring
Climate of Great Britain, will never be fond of quitting their native Country,
in quest of unknown and unprofitable Service: But when Seminaries shall be
established on the Spot, for this important Purpose; the youthful Minds, there
formed to this End, will take their bent accordingly: They will be early taught
to regard this as their peculiar Province and Destination; and hence, with due
Encouragements given, will proceed with Zeal to their appointed Task; and in
the End, where the rank Weeds of Violence and Idolatry now abound, will plant
and reap a noble Harvest of true Religion and Virtue.

Please to accept these Observations, as a sincere though imperfect Testimony
of that Respect with which

I am, Sirs, Your very faithful and obedient humble Servant, J. BROWN
London, April 20th, 1763.

