A THANKSGIVING SERMON FOR THE PEACE, WITH FRANCE AND SPAIN. 1763.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WEATHERSFIELD, JULY 6, 1763. Being the Day appointed by
AUTHORITY FOR A PUBLIC THANKSGIVING, On Account of the PEACE, Concluded with
FRANCE AND SPAIN.

By JAMES LOCKWOOD, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN WEATHERSFIELD.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED AY JAMES PARKER AND COMPANY.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
PSALM, L. 14, 15. Offer unto GOD Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the Most
High. And call upon me in the Day of Trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.
ALL Nature is full of GOD: He not only inhabits Eternity, but he fills
Immensity: He is intimately present with all the Works of his Hands; upholding,
superintending, ordering and directing all Things, through the immense
Universe: His all-ruling Providence extends to the vegetable and animal, as
well as to the rational Creation; and so it does to all the dead Parts of
Matter, through the whole created System; insomuch that there is not a Motion in
the natural, nor a Thought in the intellectual World, but what is subject to
his Control.

As it is a Matter of great Importance, that a deep Sense of this should be
fixed upon our Minds; the Holy Writings are admirably suited and adapted to
this Purpose: There is a remarkable Difference in this Respect, between the
holy Scriptures, and human Compositions; the latter are wont to relate Facts
and Events as they are; pointing us to the immediate Causes or Occasions of
them; whereas the holy Scriptures are perpetually introducing GOD in all the
Scenes of Nature, and the Affairs and Transactions of Men; and representing
Him, as the supreme Cause and Agent, "Who works all things according to the
Counsel of his own Will; without whom, not a Sparrow falls to the Ground; and
by whom the Hairs of our Heads are all numbered." At the powerful Call of his
Voice, the whole Universe of Things sprang into Being, into Regularity, Order
and Harmony; and his own almighty Arm perpetually sustains the universal Frame.
The Laws of Nature as they are called, are no other, than certain Methods or
Rules fixed by Himself; agreeably to which He governs the natural World. If it
rains, it is "God that sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust." If the
stormy Winds arise, in the Language of Inspiration, "The Lord has his Way in
the Whirlwind and in the Storms and the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet." Nahum
1. 3. If it thunders, "The GOD of Glory thundereth, He thundereth marvelously
with the Voice of his Excellency." Psalm xxix. 3. Job xxxvii. 4, 5. If there is
an Earthquake, "GOD shakes the Earth out of her Place, and the Pillars thereof
tremble." Job ix. 6. And if we go on to consider the Affairs of Men and
Nations; the same Remark holds good. Does a Nation or Kingdom rise, prosper and
flourish; or, is it brought down to Ruin and Desolation; still the Hand of the
supreme Ruler is to be acknowledged and adored. Is a Nation unsuccessful in
War; "It is GOD that pours Contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the Strength
of the Mighty." Or, does a Nation prevail in Battle, and carry on a War to a
successful Issue, a desirable and happy Peace; "It is GOD that fights for
his People; through him, they do valiantly; and he it is that treads down
their Foes." Of every Deliverance and Salvation we receive; particular public
and national Salvations; we are still reminded to acknowledge and adore GOD, as
the Author; and to render the Praise and Glory to Him. These Sentiments of
Piety and Religion the holy Writings unitedly tend to inspire; particularly
that Portion of them, I have now read to you; "Offer unto GOD Thanksgiving,
etc. -- " A careful Attention to the Works of Providence, and the Operations of
GOD's Hand, is ever our Wisdom and our Duty: And as we now have a particular
Call to it; it is to be hoped, our Attention will be particularly careful,
serious and devout.

The Words may be accomodated to the particular Occasion, of the present
Solemnity; and be thus treated and illustrated.

I. We have been in Trouble. II. We have called upon God, in the Day of
Trouble. III. GOD has delivered us. And now, IV. We are to offer unto GOD
Thanksgiving. V. We are to pay our Vows unto the Most High. VI. And we are to
glorify GOD. And then, VII. I would make some Improvement of the Subject.
I. We have been in Trouble; and who among Mankind have not? Into this apostate
sinful World, Men are born to Trouble and Sorrow as the Sparks fly upwards: All
the Individuals of the human Race, more or less drink of this bitter Cup. Aches
and Pains and Maladies without Number, Crosses and Disappointments, and
heartfelt Bereavements, are but some of the Sorrows and Troubles Mankind are
Subject to, in this Valley of Tears: And well would it be, very well, if these
Sorrows were met and endured as from the Hand of GOD, the wise and good
Governor of the World; with a calm and quiet Resignation to his Pleasure; and a
firm and steady Reliance on his Providence and Grace.

And as for Ourselves, us in this Colony, and in this Land, including our
Mother Kingdom; it is certain we have been in Trouble, great Trouble! -- have
been involved, for a long Time, in a bloody War with France and with the
Savages of the Wilderness; and for some Time, with Spain. War considered in
itself, is a sore and dismal Calamity; and not to be entered upon, but with good
Advice, and with a View to Peace: Nor does GOD willingly afflict his People,
with so terrible a Scourge, but their Iniquities separate between GOD and them,
and draw down his Judgments upon them. Sin is the Cause, the hated Cause and
Origin of all the Miseries and Calamities that overspread the Earth. It Is Sin
that contracts the Brow of Heaven into Frowns; and stirs up the Indignation of
an holy GOD. We are a sinful, guilty and degenerate People; and the GOD of our
Fathers has been angry with us, and has called for the Sword of our popish and
pagan Adversaries, to avange the Quarrel of his broken Covenant and violated
Law; and to chastise and punish us, for our many Land-defiling Sins and
Abominations.

If we look back to the Commencement of the late War, how illy were we prepared
for it? How low was the Nation sunk into Indolence and Lethargy? How little of
a martial Spirit, and the old British Bravery was to be found among them? How
sadly did this bode, and how discouraging and gloomy were our Prospects?
Accordingly, some of the Events of the first Year of the War were very
calamitous and disgraceful; such as will stain the British Annals, and must be
resented with Shame and Grief by every sensible Englishman.

The War opened in the Year seventeen hundred and fifty five, with the
ill-conducted and unsuccessful March of General Braddock, against Fort Du
Quesne; a Fort erected by the French, on the Territory of his Britannic
Majesty: This Disgrace and Overthrow was some what qualified by the Reduction
of Nova Scotia, by Colonel Monckton; and Sir William Johnson's Victory over a
French Army, near Lake George.

The Year fifty-six will not be thought honorable to the British Name or
History: The scandalous Behavior of Admiral Byng in the Mediterranean; and in
Consequence of that, the Loss of the Island of Minorca, cannot be recollected
but with Shame and Regret. And not long after this, (for I mean not minutely to
trace the several Steps of the War) what a melancholy and gloomy Period
followed, to Great Britain and her Provinces. At Home, what Uncertainty,
Darkness and Confusion attended the public Counsels? And how were they
embroiled by Divisions and Distractions? Whilst Defeat, Frustration and Shame
attended the British Arms, in the several Quarters of the World.

Let us fix our Attention for a Moment or two on America, the original Object
of the Contest, in which we are most intimately concerned, and to which
therefore, I intend principally to confine these Remarks. How were our
Fortresses and strong Holds demolished or burnt to Ashes? Our Countrymen and
Friends captivated and butchered? Our Troops repulsed and turned back with
Frustration and Shame? At that gloomy Period, what Trembling took hold on us,
and Confusion covered us? How did every Countenance gather Paleness, and the
Panic spread through whole Provinces?

Did not the People of this Land tremble for the Ark of GOD, and all our dear
Privileges? Apprehensive, fearful, whether GOD would not permit an exasperated
Foe, elated with Success and Victory, to carry the devouring Sword through the
Land, attended with Desolation and wide-spreading Ruin. This was a dark Day to
the British American Provinces; a Day of Sorrow and Trouble; a Day, on which,
we were loudly called upon, to look above an Arm of Flesh -- to look to the GOD
of Armies, the Supreme Ruler of the World, and our Covenant God, for
Protection, Deliverance and Salvation. And did we not take that Course? Which
leads me to say,

II. We have called upon God in a Day of Trouble. "Call upon me in the Day of
Trouble." In the Season of our Darkness and Distress, we poured out our
Supplications before the Most High. Prayer, daily Prayer to GOD, is a Duty
incumbent on every human Being, that understands what Prayer is: And for a
Christian, for one who names the Name of CHRIST to neglect Prayer, daily
Prayer, is quite inexcusable. In all our Ways we are to acknowledge GOD, and
maintain an humble, holy Intercourse with Him, through all the Transactions and
Affairs of our Lives. The Sense and Actings of our Hearts toward GOD, at all
Times, should agree and harmonize with the various Dispensations and Aspects of
his Providence toward us: This is to maintain and enjoy Communion with GOD, in
the Despensations of his Providence. Every Kindness and Smile of his Providence
should be met with correspondent Gratitude, Thanksgiving and Praise: So, for
every Thing we stand in Need of for Time or Eternity, we are humbly to call
upon God. In all the Sorrows and Troubles, Dangers and Distresses we are
incident to, in this (...) of Sin and Changes, we are still to make GOD our
Refuge and Dependence; deeply sensible, that without GOD in vain is the Help of
Man; that GOD is the exhaustless Fountain of all Good, of all Help -- the
Father of Mercy and of Lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect
Gift: And in our Seasons of special and imminent Distress and Danger, we have a
particular Call, to be very fervent and importunate in our Addresses to GOD:
And this, I hope, was, in some Measure, the Case during the Course of the late
War; and particularly at that gloomy Period abovementioned. Did not the
Churches and Congregations of GOD's People in New England -- did not we in this
Colony and in this Town, frequently and cheerfully meet in the House of GOD, to
offer up our Supplications, and pour out our Prayers before the Mercy-Seat, for
Protection and Safety, for Deliverance and Salvation? How did you then seem to
be struck with a Conviction and Sense, that if GOD did not appear for us, and
his own Arm did not bring us Salvation, we were a ruined and undone People? How
forward did you then seem to be to look above all created Help, to Him that
governs the whole World and orders all the Affairs of it as he pleases, and to
seek and cry to him for Deliverance? With what Freedom and Earnestness did you
crowd the Sanctuary of GOD, eager to unite in pouring out your Supplications
before his Throne, and to hear Instructions from his Word? You cannot have
forgotten, how cheerfully you united in setting apart Days for Fasting and
Prayer; and Weekly Seasons, for special and solemn Prayer, that GOD would
mercifully appear for us and deliver us. And I hope a Conviction is left upon
(...) Hearts, that He is a Prayer-Hearing GOD, and that it is not a vain Thing
to seek and pray to Him.

And though we have Reason to suppose, that many Persons did not pray, with such
a Sense of their own Unworthiness and evil Deserts, and the Power and Wisdom,
Grace and Mercy and All Sufficiency of GOD, and such a Dependence on his Power
and Grace through CHRIST, as they ought; yet, no Doubt, many Others were
graciously sincere and cordial in their Addresses to GOD. And I have thought
and still think, that a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, in some thing of an
uncommon Degree, was poured out on GOD's People in the Land: And when GOD gives
an Heart to pray, He is wont to find an Ear to hear. And did he not hear? Did
he not hearken to the Voice of our Supplications, and send us an Answer of
Peace? Did he not hearken to the Voice of Men, sinful, guilty Men? And in
Answer to the Supplications of his People, did he not make bare his own Arm,
and work Deliverance and Salvation for us? Yes, He is a Prayer-hearing GOD, and
has never said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye my Face in vain. And so I am led
to say,

III. God has delivered us. "Call upon me, in the Day of Trouble; I will
deliver thee." Yes, GOD has delivered us, with a Salvation never to be
forgotten.

GOD might justly, provoked by our Sins, have given us up a Prey, into the
Hands of those that hated us; and doomed us to a State of dismal Slavery, under
Gallic Chains and Popish Superstition and Tyranny: But of his rich and abundant
Grace he has delivered us. After a Period of Darkness and Perplexity; the
Darkness vanished, the Clouds scattered, and the Day dawned. "GOD'S right Hand,
and his holy Arm, and the Light of his Countenance, have brought us Salvation,
because he had a Favor for us." Suddenly the Scene changed, and our Covenant
GOD, who seemed in a Manner to have cast us off, appeared for us, in our
Distress.

He was pleased to raise up those, whom he delighted to honor, as the chosen
Instruments of our Deliverance. In this Connection, the Patriot Pit will not
be forgotten. Unity and Harmony were restored to our public Counsels. The
British Lion aroused as from a Sleep. A martial Spirit and Fire was diffused
and spread into our Fleets and Armies. Expeditions were formed and plan'd with
Wisdom and Consistency; and carried into Execution with Firmness and
Steadiness; and a Spirit and Resolution that Nothing could daunt or resist. The
guilty, ambitious Schemes of France vanished like a Dream of the Night: Our
Enemies fled before us in every Climate: Our Fleets and Armies went on from
conquering to conquer. The British Troops triumphed in every Quarter of the
World: Europe, Asia, Africa and America, beheld with Wonder our Success and
Victories.

It would be beside my present Purpose, to enumerate the great Things GOD has
done in Africa, the East Indies, and Germany. Let me briefly mention a few
Instances nearer Home. Cape-Breton, Crown-Point, Quebec, Montreal, yea, the
whole French Territory, almost, in North America, wrested from them, was given
into our Hands: Besides Guadaloupe, Martinic^, etc. in the West Indies; and the
Havana from the Spaniards. The Spaniards! what a wretched, despicable Figure
will they make, in the future History of these Times! And what crowns all, the
War is at Length terminated in a desirable and happy Peace. The dismal
Calamities of War, which had overspread the several Quarters of the Earth, are
at an End. The Supreme Ruler, who says to the proud Waves of the Sea, "
"Hitherto shall ye go and no further," and who overrules the Hearts of Men, has
diffused a Spirit of Union and Harmony among the several contending Powers, and
mercifully brought on a general Pacification -- a Peace, by which we have
acquired a mighty Enlargement of Dominion and Territory, and many Advantages --
a Peace peculiarly favorable and advantageous to us, in America; even beyond
our most sanguine Expectations, when the War first opened. These are the LORD'S
Doings, and justly mavelous in our Eyes. Many and striking are the
Demonstrations of a divine Interposition, and of the Goodness and Power of GOD
exerted in our Behalf.

Who commanded the Winds and the Seas, and ordered the Seasons, from Time to
Time so mercifully? Who commanded the Earth to yield her Increase, and
furnished Resources sufficient to carry on so many Expeditions, in so many
different Parts of the World, at the same Time? Who spirited the Soldiery to
offer themselves, and armed them with Patience, Resolution and Courage? Who
inspired our worthy Commanders, by Sea and Land, with Wisdom, Prudence and
Magnanimity, so proportioned to their elevated and important Stations? Permit
me to say, on this Occasion; Who raised up the late intrepid, heroic Leader,
the gallant Wolf; and furnished him with Talents, to so uncommon a Degree, for
the important Province he was called to? Who gave him an Head to Plan, and an
Arm to execute the mighty Design, his Heart was so much set upon? To execute it
in a Manner, that extorted the Admiration and Astonishment of his very Enemies?
Who animated the Nation and it is public Councils with such a Spirit of Union
and Harmony, to prosecute the War with Vigor, according to the Measures so
wisely concerted? Finally, Who excited and animated so many of GOD's professing
People, in this Land, and we trust also in our Mother Country, to pour out
frequent and servent Prayers at the Mercy Seat, for the Smiles of Heaven on our
military Operations? Doubtless, GOD is to be acknowledged and adored in all
these Things. Yes, you may say; "The superintending and directing Providence of
the Most High extends to all Events, and without Him not a Sparrow falls to the
Ground; for GOD governs the whole World." He does so: But then in some of GOD's
Works, there seems to be more evident and striking Marks of a divine
Superintendency and Conduct; and the Footsteps of Deity are more plainly
visible: And here the Results of Battles, and the Events of War are to be
ranked. These depend on so many fickle Uncertainties as to us, and so many
Things that are evidently beyond the Reach of human Power, as to render the
Hand of GOD the more conspicuous. When the Wind and the Weather, the various
Elements and an uncommon Co-incidence of Circumstances, have conspired to
favor our Enterprises: When an Unjarring Harmony has subsisted among all
Orders of Men concerned: When they have all united in one View, in one grand
Design: When a martial, heroic Ardor seemed to glow in every Breast: When,
though to a common Penetration, the Difficulties attending the most important
and decisive Conquest, that of Quebec, and which was a Key to the Rest, seemed
insuparable; yet the distinguished Leader, WOLF.
by a Sagacity lent him from Above, discerned the Method, perhaps the only
Method, in which, humanly speaking, the Enemy could be overcome -- discerned
the Critical Moment, when it was possible to wrest a Victory -- seized the
happy Moment, and with a surprising Presence of Mind, Wisdom and Courage that
Nothing could disconcert or daunt, surmounted all difficulties, and carried his
Plan into Execution: I say, when this is the Case, who will not say, not only,
that the Hand of GOD was there; but that it was a wonderful Work of his Power
and Goodness? And when GOD has been pleased to vouchsafe a remarkable Series,
an unbroken Chain of numerous Victories; what pious Mind can contemplate the
important Events, without owning and adoring the Hand of Heaven? -- without
being struck with a kind of Sacred Reverence of the Presence of GOD; and his
glorious Perfections, his Power, Wisdom, Goodness and Mercy so evidently
conspicuous therein.

But that we may be the more sensible of the Goodness of GOD, and our
Indebtedness to Him, for our late Successes, and present happy Settlement; it
may be proper to take Notice of one or two Things, which plainly determine it a
great Deliverance.

Let us consider, First, the Evils, which were thereby obviated and prevented.
How wretched had our Situation been, if French Plans had succeeded, and their
ambitious Schemes been carried into Execution? Had their Arms been succeeded in
Europe, according to their Design; what had been the Consequence, with Regard
to Great Britain, but the overthrow of the Protestant Succession, a Popish
Pretender obtruded, and the Loss both of civil and religious Liberty, and the
Kingdom being made a Scene of Desolation and Blood? And as to their Intentions
in America, how dismal had been our Fate had they succeeded? By the Chain of
Forts they had carried round us, and the Air, and Manner of their Operations,
what less could they design, than our utter Ruin, and the wresting from us this
goodly Heritage GOD gave to our Fathers?. And can we imagine to ourselves the
execution of such their Design without Amazement and Horror? -- Their Popish
and Pagan Armies marching into the Heart of our Country, practicing their
imhuman Cruelties without Pity? -- Without Distinction, butchering Men, Women
and Children, in their triumphant Progress; involving our Habitations, Churches
and Towns in devouring Flames; and deluging the Land with Slaughter and Blood;
whilst the miserable Remnant, stripped of all their precious Privileges, Civil
and Religious, would be reduced to a State of the most wretched Slavery. How
dismal were such a State of Things! But GOD in great Mercy has prevented it.

The Pit they were digging for us, they are fallen into themselves: And the
Mischief they were framing for us, GOD has brought down upon their own Heads:
Their ambitious, towering Scheme, is dashed to Pieces; and their whole American
Territory almost, is given up; and by the present Settlement annexed to the
British Crown. So wonderfully has GOD delivered us.

Let us consider, nextly, the Worth and Value of these Acquisitions, thus
secured to us; and the Evils we are like to be secured against, for the Time to
come. It Is not easy to ascertain their Importance and value to the British
Crown, and to these Provinces: They are, without Doubt, vastly valuable. The
Conquest of all France, I imagine, would not have been equally so: For in that
Case, it would be immensely chargeable to keep it; and in the End, perhaps
Britain would become a Province of France.

In sundry Views, the Reduction of Canada, is justly accounted a very important
Acquisition. It directly conduces to the future Security and Peace of these
Colonies. What a bloody Scourge have the French Settlements in Canada been to
these Provinces, from Generation to Generation? What horrid and inhuman
Butcheries have been perpetrated? How much Protestant Blood has been shed upon
our Frontiers, by the blood-thirsty Savages, spirited and set on by the
faithless French? But these horrid Butcheries are, we hope, likely to be
forever over and at an End. The present in human and cruel Out-breakings of the
Savages, we trust, will be of no long Continuance -- that proper Measures will
be concerted, for their being speedily and effectually suppressed.


Besides, what an immense Source of Wealth may this Acquisition prove; as it
opens a most valuable Trade with the Natives, for a vast Extent of Territory
round. -- But to wave this, and pass to take in another Point of View, a very
interesting and glorious one to a Christian. May we not hope, that these Events
will serve to give the Savages some Impressions in Favor of the Gospel, the
pure Gospel, unadulterated with popish Mixtures. Will not the Natives, after
having considered and weighed these Things, be naturally led to say, as the
Heathen did, with Regard to Israel, in Psalm cxxvi. 2. "Then said they among
the Heathen, the Lord has done great Things for them." "The GOD of Britons and
of Protestants has done great Things for them: He is a great GOD, and a mighty
King." And may we not hope, that their Minds may thence receive some powerful
Touch in Favor of the Blessed Gospel: And that a Way may be opened for the
spreading the glorious Gospel among them; and their being brought to a
professed and cordial Subjection to the Prince of Peace: That so, in these dark
Corners of the Earth, where Satan's Seat from Time immemorial has been, the
Churches of CHRIST may be erected, and his Gospel and Religion taught; and
Multitudes of Souls trained up for the Kingdom of Heaven. What a blessed,
glorious Event would this be, if CHRIST the King of Zion should then take to
himself his great Power and Reign! But I need say Nothing further, to give you
an Impression of the Greatness of the Deliverance and Salvation mercifully
granted us of GOD. "The LORD is our Strength, and he is become our Salvation."
Our Covenant GOD, and the GOD of our Fathers has done this; the GOD that
brought our Fathers into this Land, and planted them here; who watched over
them in the Days of their small Things; who planted his Church here, and still
defends and cherishes that Vine which his own right Hand had planted. It Is He
that has fought our Battles for us, and triumphed gloriously. It Is He that has
carried us on from Victory to Victory, to the present happy Settlement. Let a
Sense of this ever be found warm at our Hearts, and let us feel the Obligations
we are under of Love and Homage, of Gratitude, Thanksgiving and Praise to the
GOD of all our Salvations. Wherefore,

IV. Let us offer unto God Thanksgiving, and praise his Name. This is the Duty
we are now called to: Let us see to it, it be done aright. Our Hearts should be
impressed with a deep Sense of the goodness and salvation of GOD; and they
should act and flow out in the warmest and most cordial Gratitude to the
Supreme Ruler, and our Celestial Benefactor. To engage us to the acceptable
Discharge of this Duty, let us consider,

1. This is a most fit and reasonable Thing. It Is our treating GOD and acting
toward Him, as being what he is; infinitely the best of Beings, and the
glorious Source and Spring of all our Salvations. When we sincerely ascribe our
public Successes, our Victories and Triumphs, and in Consequence of these, our
present Settlement, to GOD; we ascribe them to their true Source and Original.
And this, together with correspondent Gratitude and Thanksgiving to the Most
High, is most reasonable, fit and right; for unto GOD the Honor and Praise do
belong.

Men can claim no other Honor from such Events, than what belongs to moral
Instruments, the Honor of having faithfully employed their distinguished
Talents for the Good of Mankind. In this View, our wise Counselors and
Politicians, our heroic Chiefs and Commanders, and our brave Soldiers too,
justly come in for their Share of Praise. A Tribute of Honor and Praise is due
to them from a preserved and grateful Country. But as they were raised up by
GOD, and furnished with their various Talents, and spirited and called forth to
the Exertion of them, for the Welfare and Salvation of their Country, by GOD;
so the Praise and Glory are ultimately due to him. Bless the LORD, O our Souls,
and all that is within us, praise his holy Name: This is reasonable, fit and
right.

2. This is delightful to serious and pious Minds. True Devotion is the most
noble and delightful Exercise of a reasonable Creature. A fixed and governing
Habit of Devotion, is the truest Ornament and Glory of a Man: And sincere
Gratitude and Thanksgiving is the most animating Part of Devotion: It warms and
exalts the Soul, with noble and affecting Conceptions of the Atributes of the
Deity, displayed for the Good of Mankind. And when whole Countries and Kingdoms
are relieved and made happy, the more elevated and delightful must be the Views
of the pious and devout, of the Goodness and Mercy, the Wisdom and Power of
GOD; whence all their public Salvations result. I might add here, this Branch
of Devotion is no less honorable to GOD, than it is delightful to good Men. GOD
himself takes Pleasure in seeing his reasonable Creatures rejoicing in his
Goodness, and in Himself the Author of all their Salvation: Yes, it is
honorable and pleasing to the most high GOD, to see whole Provinces and
Kingdoms kneeling before him, and sincerely ascribing the Praise and Glory of
all their public Salvations and Blessings to Him. Permit me then to say, as the
Levites did to the Congregation of Israel, on another Occasion, "Stand up and
bless the LORD your GOD forever and ever, and blessed be thy glorious Name,
which is exalted above all Blessing and Praise." Nehem. ix. 5.

3. Sincere and Heartfelt Gratitude, on this Occasion, has a Tendency to make
us, as a People, more virtuous and religious. It tends to meliorate the Heart,
and make the Life better. True Devotion conduces to improve and strengthen, in
the Heart, every Principle of Virtue and Holiness. A reverent and grateful
Sense of GOD and his Goodness, prevailing in the Heart, naturally discovers
itself in a Care and Endeavor to please and honor Him. A due Sense of the
Loving kindness and Mercy of the LORD, tends to melt and fill the Heart with a
Sense of our own Unworthiness, and to prompt us, from a Principle of Gratitude,
to please and serve the GOD of all our Salvations: So that our public
Solemnities of Thanksgiving and Praise, if rightly attended, tend to diffuse
and spread a Spirit of Devotion and Piety through the Land, and to animate and
stir up People to lead Lives of Holiness and Obedience -- to make us a better
People, more virtuous, holy and religious, more careful to maintain good Works,
and to do whatsoever GOD has commanded us. Let us then, with all our Hearts,
offer unto GOD Thanksgiving and bless his holy Name. And so I am prepared to
say,

V. We are to pay our Vows to the Most High. "Offer unto GOD Thanksgiving, and
pay thy Vows unto the Most High." We are, in sundry Views, under strongest
Obligations to make suitable Returns to GOD, for all his Goodness and Mercy.

Shall I call to your Remembrance, this Day, our solemn Transactions with GOD,
in that gloomy Season, presently after Fort William-Henry was taken and
destroyed by the French; and the Aspects of Providence seemed so very dark and
threatening; when we thought it our Duty, to set apart a Day for solemn
Humiliation and Prayer before GOD: You may perhaps remember, the Words treated
on, on that Occasion, were those in Judges x. 15. "We have sinned, do thou unto
us whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us only, we pray thee this Day."
Were you not ready, in that Season of Distress, to fall down before GOD; and in
the Bitterness of your Souls to confess your Sin, your Guilt and evil Deserts;
and to implore Protection and Deliverance, on what Terms GOD pleased? "Deliver
us only this Day from our Enemies, and punish us in what other Way thou will
for our Sins: Send Sickness, send Pestilence, send Blasting and Famine if thou will; let us fall into the Hands of the living GOD, and not into the Hands of
unreasonable Men; not into the Hands of our cruel and bloody Enemies." Were you
not ready to prostrate yourselves before the Mercy-Seat, and seriously to
promise and vow to the Most High, and Covenant with Him, that if He would
deliver and save you, you would be his faithful Servants forever; would devote
yourselves wholly to Him, to walk before Him and to keep his Commandments all
the Days of your Lives: And if you did not do so, were ready to own, you should
be the most guilty and inexcusable Creatures imaginable. Well, GOD did appear
for us and deliver us: He has saved us with a mighty Salvation; carried us with
Success and Victory, through the War, and brought us to this happy Period of it:
Now then we must pay our Vows to the Most High -- our Vows of Gratitude and
Love, of Homage and sincere Obedience. The devout Psalmist says in Psalm lxvi.
13, 14. "I will go into thy House with Burnt Offerings: And will pay thee my
Vows, which my Lips have uttered, and my Mouth has spoken, when I was in
Trouble."

We are not to forget our solemn Transactions with GOD in Years past; but must
still hold them in Remembrance; and render unto GOD according to all the
Benefits we have received. But, whether we formally and explicitly made Vows
and Promises to GOD, in the Season of our Distress, or not; was not something
like this implied, in the Solemn Prayers and Supplications we poured out in
GOD's House, from Time to Time? -- And I may add, I hope, in our Families and
in our Closets too? What was the Import and Meaning of those Prayers? Was it
not plainly implied, in all that Variety of Phrase and Expression, that might
be made Use of from Time to Time? -- That we humbly begged Deliverance, Success
in the War, and a final happy Settlement and Peace, at the Hand of GOD;
sensible that GOD only could bestow these Blessings; that if He should be
pleased to bestow them, it would be all Mercy, rich unmerited Mercy and Grace;
and that it should be regarded, resented and improved by us as such; and we
should hold ourselves bound and obliged to make all proper Returns to the GOD
of all our Salvations? These then are the Returns we are now bound to make, to
bless and praise the Name of GOD; and to express our Gratitude by Lives of
Holiness and New Obedience.

Besides, we may by no Means forget, that as we are the professing People of
GOD, we are under Covenant Obligations, to walk with GOD according to his Word;
and to make a right Use and Improvement not only of his Word and Ordinances,
but likewise of all the Dispensations of his Providence. Yes, we are under
solemn covenant Obligations to improve the Salvation and Mercy we now
celebrate, so as to be induced thence to consecrate ourselves, all our Powers
and Faculties, our Time and Talents to GOD, to his Service and Glory. O let us
not fail, on this Occasion, to answer the Obligations, we are under to GOD; and
with glad and devout Hearts, to pay our Vows to the Most High. I must add in the

VI. Place, We must now glorify GOD. "I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me." No Creature can glorify GOD, by making any Addition to his
essential Glory; or by making GOD any more glorious than he really is. It is
beyond the Reach or Capacity of Men or Angels, to make GOD any more really
Glorious than he always was, and always will be; for he is infinitely perfect,
infinitely glorious, independently of all Creatures: But we glorify GOD,
declaratively or manifestively, when we manifest or show forth his Glory: When
we think, speak, act and live so as speaks and declares GOD to be glorious:
Particularly,

1. We are to glorify GOD, by entertaining high and honorable Tho'ts of Him. We
must remove from our Apprehensions of GOD, every Thing that implies
Imperfection; and conceive of Him, as a Being of infinite Perfection and Glory.
All possible, infinite Perfections and Excellencies must meet in our Idea of
GOD: And we must conceive of Him, as the first and infinitely the greatest and
best of Beings. We think honorably of GOD, when we really think and conceive of
Him to be, what he really is, infinitely glorious. Particularly, we must
entertain very high and admiring Thoughts of those Perfections of the Deity,
his Wisdom, Power, Covenant Faithfulness, his Pity and Compassion, his
Goodness, Grace and Mercy, that have been eminently displayed in working
Salvation for us.

2. We are to glorify GOD by proper and suitable Affections and Actings of Soul
toward Him. By heartily believing the Revelations He has made of Himself in
his Word; by reverencing the Operations of his Hand, in his Works of
Providence; by trusting in Him, through the Mediator, for all the Blessings of
Time and Eternity; by loving GOD, the best of Beings, with all our Hearts and
with all our Souls; and by being effectually induced by all that Goodness and
Mercy, in which he has passed before us, to take up our complacential
everlasting Rest in GOD, to delight ourselves in Him, as our Portion, and the
Object of our Supreme Felicity. In a Word, every grateful and devout Temper of
Mind, suitable and adapted to the great Things GOD has done for us, should be
called forth into flourishing Exercise, to the Honor and Glory of GOD.

3. We must glorify GOD, by speaking reverently and honorably of Him and to
Him. It is infinite Condescension in the great GOD, to let Himself down to us:
And it becomes us to take his Sacred Name into our Lips, with greatest Humility
and Reverence: Especially on this Occasion does it become us, to pour out
through our Lips, the warmest Gratitude of our Hearts to the Father of Mercy,
and our great Deliverer and Benefactor, and by offering Praise and Thanksgiving
to glorify Him.

4. We are to glorify GOD, by Lives devoted to Him. "By adorning the Doctrine
of GOD our Savior in all Things; and making our Light shine be-Men that seeing
our good Works, they may glorify our Father which is in Heaven." By worshipping
and serving GOD according to his Appointment: By practicing Justice, Love and
Charity to our Fellow-Men; and by Humility, Meekness and Purity in all our
Behavior. We are to glorify GOD, by improving our Time and Talents well; and
by bringing forth Fruit, in Proportion to the Means and Advantages we enjoy. In
a Word, we are to glorify GOD, by living and conducting ourselves in such a
Manner, that the natural and genuine Language of the whole Tenor of our Conduct
and Deportment may be, that GOD is such an infinitely glorious Being, as he has
revealed Himself to be in His Word. Let us now make some IMPROVEMENT of this
Subject. And,

1. Let us seriously enquire, how we have been affected and influenced, in
Heart and Life, by all God's various Dealings with us, in the Course of his
Providence, from the Time when the late War opened to the present Day? And be
persuaded, in Obedience to the present Call of divine Goodness and Mercy,
speedily to reform and amend whatsoever is still to be found amiss in us, or
among us. GOD has been passing before us of late Years, by terrible Things in
Righteousness: He has likewise caused his Goodness and Mercy, in remarkable,
wonderful Instances of it, to pass before us: And by all, He has been calling
upon us, loudly and long calling upon us; to consider, to repent, to reform and
turn to GOD and our Duty. And what Influence have all GOD's Calls, and all the
Means He has been using with us, had to effect and bring about a Reformation?
Are we, in Consequence of all, become a reformed, and truly religious People?
Are we in any Measure -- in any considerable Measure reformed? Some particular
Persons, I doubt not, have repented and turned to GOD; it would be sad indeed
if none had: But has there been any Thing like a general Reformation effected,
by all GOD has been doing with us* Is there not as much -- is there not more
Sin in the Land, than when the War began? What one Sin is generally broken off
and forsaken? Truly, I fear, not so much as one. Are we more pious, godly and
devout than we used to be? Do we prize God's Word, Day and Ordinances more? Are
we more strict and exemplary in all the Branches of Piety, than formerly? Are
we more just, kind, charatable, peaceful and forgiving, with Regard to Men? Has
a Reformation been carried on in our Families? Is Family Religion revived among
us? In a Word, Do we live and conduct ourselves more, as it becomes the
Disciples and Followers of the blessed JESUS, than we used to do? I much fear,
but little of this can be answered in the Affirmative: It Is too plain we are
yet a sinful People; and there are many dark and threatening Symptoms upon us.
Let us, without Delay, take our Case into serious Consideration, and receive
Conviction of the Necessity we are under, of a thorough Reformation. If GOD'S
awful Rod has not driven you; let his great Goodness and Mercy lead you to
Repentance: And do not, after your Hardness and impenitent Hearts, treasure up
to yourselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the
righteous Judgments of GOD. It is a dreadful Thing to remain hardened and
impenitent under all GOD'S various Dealings with you, for your Reformation. O
be persuaded to break off every known Sin, and to turn, with all your Hearts,
to GOD in CHRIST; and enter, without Delay upon a Life of strict Religion and
real Godliness. Let a grateful Sense of the unmerited Goodness of God,
effectually engage you, to make all proper and suitable Returns to Him, and to
live to the Praise and Glory of the GOD of all your Salvations.

2. Let us be persuaded to the steady Practice of those Virtues and Rules of
Prudence, that are conducive to the public Welfare, Strength and Tranquillity.
As for the present Peace, may it be lasting as it is welcome, and may
Generations yet unborn, rejoice in the happy Consequences of it. And in this
Season of Tranquillity and Repose, it concerns us to turn our Attention to such
Things, as tend to render us a happy and flourishing People. The political
Precautions that may be proper at this Juncture, being out of my Province, I
leave to those, who have the Conduct and Management of our public Affairs: But
the improvement and Cultivation of moral Dispositions and social Virtues, must
always be proper to be recommended from this Place. If we consider, how much we
are exhausted, by the Length and Expensiveness of the War; -- how burdened with
Debts, and how many Individuals in the Colony are sunk, or sinking apace under
the Burden: It seems proper to call to Mind, the Necessity of checking and
discouraging, a Spirit of Prodigality and Expensive Vanity; which in the
natural Train of Things tend to sink us into Poverty and Disgrace: And of
promoting and cultivating Tranquillity, Prudence and Industry, and a Method of
living according to our Station and Ability: This would have a happy Tendency
to render us a flourishing People. It Is like wise of high Importance, that we
apply ourselves to the diligent Practice of all social Virtues and Duties: --
That we studiously shun and avoid all injurious Treatment of Mankind -- all
Strife and Contention; and every Thing that has a Tendency to breed mutual
Alienation, Disgust and Ill Will; and that we practice Equity and Moderation,
Kindness, Charity and Beneficence, and every proper Art of mutual Indearment;
and that we live together in unruffled Peace, Friendship, Love and Harmony:
This would be our Strength, our Beauty and our Glory. It Is proper to observe
further, that hardly any Thing more directly and effectually conduces to the
Strength, Firmness and Prosperity of a State or People, than a Public Spirit,
and a generous Regard to the Good of the Whole; and a Subordinating our private
Views and Interest to the Welfare of the Public: A Sense of this should be
fixed deep in our Hearts. Permit me also to remind you, on this Occasion, of
how great Importance it is to the Welfare of the Community, that a wise and
diligent Care be taken of the Education of Youth; that they be trained up in
the Way, in which they ought to go; that so they may become Worthy Members, not
only of the Churches of CHRIST, but of the Civil State. They should be formed
betimes to a Veneration and Reverence for Laws, both Human and Divine; and for
all lawful Authority in Family, in Church and State -- to Industry, Diligence
and Frugality; to every social and amiable Virtue; and to every Temper and
Practice that tend to render them Blessings in the World: That so, when their
Fathers fall asleep, a Generation may arise, who shall shine as Lights in the
World, and mark their Way through Life with worthy and laudable Actions, to
another and better World.

3. Let us be persuaded, from the Occasion of the present Solemnity, to look
forward with Hope and Joy and Trust in God, to that State of Purity and Peace,
the Church of Christ expects in the latter Day; and to the complete and endless
Purity and Peace of the Heavenly World. It Is painful to a pious and benevolent
Mind to consider the Miseries and Calamities Mankind have groaned under, from
Generation to Generation, ever since the Entrance of Sin into the World. Bloody
Wars and Devastations, and Mankind pursuing and devouring one another like
Beasts of Prey; make up a great Part of the History of past Ages: And whence
come Wars and Fightings upon the Earth? They come from the Ambition and Lusts
of Men: And will the Ambition and Lusts of Men always prevail to such a Degree,
as to drive Peace in a Manner, from the Earth; and render this lower World a
Stage of Calamity and Misery, an Aceldama, a Field of Blood? Will Satan, the
god of this World, always prevail, to lead ignorant, stupid Mankind captive to
their Ruin; and, as it were, go off the Stage victorious? This can hardly be
thought: No, the Prince of Peace, is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: He has
bruised the Serpent's Head; and led Captivity captive: And He will assert the
Conquest He has gained over the Powers of Darkness: He must reign and triumph;
and His Cause will finally prevail: His Kingdom of Truth and Righteousness and
Peace, will be gloriously set up, on the Ruins of Satan's Kingdom. A Period, a
long and happy Period of a Thousand Years, is justly expected; when Satan shall
be bound, and the Gospel of CHRIST shall be universally spread over all the
Nations of the Earth; and the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the LORD,
as the Waters cover the Sea; and Mankind in general through the Earth, in some
good Degree, shall be conformed in Heart and Life, to the Gospel and Temper of
JESUS: The glorious Gospel will powerfully prevail, to the disarming their
fierce Passions; regulating their exorbitant Desires, and inspiring the most
kindly and benevolent Sentiments: Hence, once for all, they will beat their
Swords into Plow Shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; and they will
learn War no more: But Mankind, being united in the Sacred Bands of the Gospel
Charity, will dwell together in Love, in Peace and undisturbed Tranquillity.
This blessed Period, it is probable, will not come on, till we are dead and
forgotten in the Earth: Yet ought we not, by Faith in the Word of GOD, to look
forward to that Day, with Pleasure and Joy; and earnestly breathe after that
Purity and Holiness, that Peace and Joy, which will then bless the Earth. But
especially does it concern us, to look forward with Faith and Hope and Joy, to
the complete and endless Peace and Purity of the Heavenly World: Where there
will be no Sin, nor Trouble, no War nor Uneasiness; but all will be Purity,
Peace and Happiness. This blessed State, if we are the faithful Servants of
CHRIST, we may justly expect; and it cannot be far off; for Death is hastening
upon us. This is that glorious Rest, which GOD, of his unbounded Goodness and
Grace, has prepared for all good Men. The Holiness, the Joy and Glory of that
World, far exceed our present Thoughts: "Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
have entered into the Heart of Man, the Things GOD has prepared for them that
love Him." It Is of much greater Importance to us, that we diligently prepare
for that World; than that we attempt to discribe it. Let us see to it, that the
Gospel has it is sanctifying and saving Influence upon our Hearts and Lives;
that we are accepted in the Beloved; and entitled to the Heavenly Felicity; and
that we act and live, as it becomes the Candidates for such a Kingdom and
World; and the Disciples and Followers of the blessed JESUS: That we enjoy the
solid Evidences of the special Love and Favor of GOD, and that Peace of GOD
possess our Hearts, which passes Understanding.

Let it be our Care, to live in Peace; in our Families, in our Neighborhood,
and with Mankind around us: And that we improve and flourish, more and more in
the divine Life; and grow up by happy and swift Advances to a Me^^ness for a
better World; ardently aspiring and breathing after the complete Purity, Rest
and Happiness of that State: So when we shall be called off from these Regions
of Guilt and Misery, of War and Bloodshed; we shall ascend to those peaceful,
blissful Realms on High; where no Sin will ever pollute; no Enemy will ever
molest; but all will be Peace and Joy and endless Tranquillity.

FINIS.

