THE LAWFULNESS, EXCELLENCY, and ADVANTAGE OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN THE
PUBLIC WORSHIP OF GOD, etc.

THE LAWFULNESS, EXCELLENCY, and ADVANTAGE OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC IN THE
PUBLIC WORSHIP OF GOD URGED AND ENFORCED, From SCRIPTURE, and the Example of
the far greater Part of CHRISTIANS in all Ages.

ADDRESSED To all (particularly the Presbyterians and Baptists) who have
hitherto been taught to look upon the Use of INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC in the Worship
of GOD as unlawful.

BY A PRESBYTERIAN.

Music has Charms to sooth the Savage Breast,
To soften Rocks, and bend the knotted Oak.
CONGREVE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by WILLIAM DUNLAP, at the Newest
Printing-Office, in Market-Street. M,DCC,LXIII.

The Lawfulness, Excellency, and Advantage of INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC, etc.
Praise him with ORGANS --

Psalm. CL. 4.
THERE are Thousands in the World, of such a dull, stupid, morose, and sullen
Turn of Mind, as to think every Thing that wears not the Face of Dejection,
dissolute; and who decry the most innocent Cheerfulness as criminal.

As Liquors tinge the containing Vessel, the Severity of these Men's Complexion
gives a Gloom to Religion, which is painted by them, as wearing a continual
Frown, and with Features inflexible to any Sort of Cheerfulness: And though the
Reason of Things, the Methods of Providence, the Order of the World, and the
Scriptures themselves, are unitedly against this sour and surly Stoicism, yet
such is the perverse Turn of Mind of these Men, that instead of laying hold
with Rapture on such Methods as are offered for their better Information, they
have as obstinately set themselves down to cavil at them, as if instead of the
utmost Benefit, the highest Injury had been offered, and Outrage committed
against them.

MANY, actuated by this perverse Turn of Mind, in other Respects of strong
Abilities, have been vainly and impiously tempted to murder their Time in
traversing the Bible merely to pick out Texts and Portions of it in Support of
their contracted Notions; when, after all, they have done Nothing to their
Purpose, but like the hungry peevish Viper in the Fable, broke their Teeth upon
a File that mocked their idle Frenzy.

THIS fills the Minds of such as are connected with them in Society, and who
fall into the Snare, with unfavourable Sentiments toward their
Fellow-Citizens; wrong Ideas of Persons and Things they are not acquainted
with; and uncharitable Interpretations of those Actions of which they are by no
Means competent Judges: It instills into their Minds the utmost Violence and
Bitterness, and eradicates that Charity and Brotherly-love, which is the
Ornament and Perfection of Religion, and the most indispensable Means for
attaining the End of it.

WHEREFORE that excellent Writer, Archbishop Tillotson, observes, That it will
be hard to determine how many Degrees of Innocence and Goodnature, or of
Coldness and Indifferency in Religion, are necessary to overbalance the Fury
and Mischiefs of a blind Zeal.

BISHOP Gibson also, speaking of the fatal Consequences of Bigotry, has this
excellent Observation; -- speaking of the Jews, he says, The more they failed
in the inward Obedience of the Heart, and the Duties of moral Goodness and
Righteousness, the greater Zeal they showed for the outward and ritual Parts of
the Law.

TRUE Devotion languishes, while the Mind is divided and taken up with
Controversies and Debates concerning Ceremonies, which in themselves cannot be
said to be essential to Religion, but mostly prove prejudicial to it, by
occasioning weak Minds to set too high a Value on them, and to mistake the
Shadow for the Substance.

WHATEVER Expedients, therefore, can be found to allay these Animosities, which
break us into different Factions and Interests, cannot but be useful to
Religion in general, and highly tend to its Reputation and Increase among Men.

AND certain I am, that were the Clergy of all Denominations, obliged to preach
up the Necessity of Brotherly-love, and prohibited from using Invectives
against those who differ from them in the ceremonial Forms of Devotion, the
Face of Religion, throughout the Land, would wear a different Aspect; nor would
Men have less Love for each other because of their Difference in the Modes of
Worship: But while the Churches are daily pronouncing their horrid and
blasphemous Anathemas against those of different Communities, the deluded
Flock, who look on themselves as of the Household of GOD, are taught to regard
and hate those of other Persuasions, as of the Household of the Devil.

THIS is a Fact of the greatest Notoriety; all Men know it, and none will deny
it: Instead of multiplying these desirable Opportunities, where we may agree in
Points of public Worship, that are indifferent in themselves, we let the
Spirit of Contention into those very Methods that are not only foreign to vital
Religion, but should in their Nature dispose us to be Friends: This our Anger
in our Devotion, is like Poison in Perfume, which taints the Spirits, instead
of chearing and refreshing them.

THIS unhappily being the Case, I shall not wonder if the Attempt I am making
toward introducing the Use of Instrumental Music into the Worship of those
Societies who have hitherto been taught to look upon such as unlawful, and
unscriptural, should be attended with the same Opposition with the Promulgation
of the Gospel itself, and the Promoter of it exposed to the same Bigotry and
misguided Zeal. However, as every well-meant Attempt deserves Approbation and
Encouragement, I shall venture to lay my Thoughts on this Subject before the
Public; which, though they may be far short of the End proposed, may yet
perhaps have the Merit of suggesting some Hints to others who may be Lovers of
the divine Harmony I am contending for, and better qualified to make the
Attempt.

HAVING thus briefly premised the fatal Tendency of a blind misguided Zeal, and
showed that it is not only destructive of Society, but a Bar to the Advancement
of Religion in the World, I shall now proceed to note the Origin of
Instrumental Music; the Lawfulness of using such in divine Worship; and that
it has been held so by the far greater Part of the Professors of Christianity
in all Ages of the World, even down to the present Time.

As the Scriptures are universally acknowledged to be given by the Inspiration
of GOD, the most probable Way to strengthen my Argument, and remove the
Prejudices of such as are disposed to cavil at the Institution I am
recommending, will be to take my Measures of it occasionally, from those who
were immediately directed and assisted in it by the HOLY GHOST.

AND first, with regard to the Origin of Vocal and Instrumental Music, they
were doubtless among the most early Inventions of the Sons of Men: Moses
particularly tells us, Genesis iv. 21, that Jubal, long before the Flood,
followed the making such musical Instruments as were then used in the Worship
of GOD, viz. The Harp and ORGAN, as a Trade: And with regard to Vocal Music,
we are told, Job xxxviii, that when the ALMIGHTY had laid the Foundations of
the Earth, the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of GOD shouted for
Joy.

"IF, says a late Writer, we look back to the Records of Antiquity, we shall
find that some of the oldest and most exalted Compositions of Men, are Songs of
Praise and Ecstasy to their GREAT CREATOR.

THERE is something in Poetry and Music admirably suited to divine Subjects;
and it is natural for the Soul, when struck with any Thing surprizingly great,
good or new, to break forth, beyond the common Modes of Speech, into the most
rapturous Turns of Expression; accompanied with correspondent Attitudes of Body
and Modulations of Voice. Even the untutored Savages around us, furnish
striking Examples of this.

HENCE it is, that Poetry and Music were originally confined to the immediate
Praises of the DEITY; and that the best and wisest Men of all Ages, have had
Recourse to divine Hymns and spiritual Songs, in the Effusions of their Souls
before the Almighty LORD of Heaven and Earth.

'ERE yet Temples were built, perhaps, or fixed Hours of Devotion set apart;
when the Voice of Conscience could be heard, and the busy Scenes of Art had not
yet seduced away the Attention of Man; the great Progenitors of our Race, as
they tended their Flocks on from Pasture to Pasture, no Doubt, often felt their
Hearts rapt into this Kind of sacred Ecstasy, and poured them forth in
unpremeditated Strains before the LORD. -- Whenever they received any signal
Instance of Almighty Goodness; whenever any surprising Effect of Almighty Power
struck their Sight, and kindled Admiration; that auspicious Moment, doubtless,
they embraced and adored the invisible Hand from which the Whole proceeded; the
Hand that formed the Earth, the Sun and Moon, which they beheld; that hung the
Clouds in Air; that charged their Bosoms with Treasures, and bade them drop
down in Fatness to rejoice Herb, and Beast, and Man.

THESE sublime Exercises may be considered as the express Inspirations of GOD
himself, being nothing else but the secret Agency of his Grace, through the
Means of his Works, on the Hearts of Men, in these early Days of Simplicity."
--

INDEED, Man could not behold the Beauties of Nature, without Admiration; --
every Thing within and without him, contributed to heighten this Joy into the
most transcendent Ecstasy; and a Sight of the wondrous Objects of Creation, must
inspire him to return Thanks to the great Author of his Being, in the most
beautiful and pleasing Sounds his Mind could suggest! His Raptures would have
been but ill expressed, had he used the common Language; -- something more
sweet and harmonious; more lofty and sublime, was wanting to express the Ideas
he had conceived of his MAKER, and the Thanks he owed him for so many
Blessings! And hence he ransacked Nature for Expressions and harmonious Sounds;
he formed to himself, as it were, a new Language, and adorned it with Numbers
and Cadence!

MILTON's Paradise Lost.
Hail, Son of God, Savior of Men! thy Name
Shall be the copious Matter of my Song
Henceforth; and never shall my Harp thy Praise
Forget, nor from thy Father's Praise disjoin.
THIS was, doubtless, the Origin of Music, and it has ever since been applied
by the Jews, and after them by the Generality of the Professors of
Christianity, to its proper Object, the celebrating the Greatness of the
Almighty, and the Magnificence of his Works; which the ancient Hebrew Bards
described in the most pompous, the most majestic, and the most sublime Manner
that is possible to be conceived, on all public Occasions!

BUT among all the Solemnities of this Nature, there is none in History so
glorious as that under the Reign of King Solomon, at the Dedication of the
Temple to the Worship of GOD: -- We are told, by an unerring Mouth, that
besides the great Officers of State, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the
Elders and Heads of Tribes, with the whole Body of the People ranged under
them, from one End of the Kingdom to the other, were summoned to assist on this
solemn Occasion: When the Ark of the Covenant, containing the two Tables of the
Law, was brought and deposited under the Wings of the Cherubims, in the holy
Place, the great Concert of Praise began: -- It was enlivened with an Hundred
and Twenty Trumpets, assisted by a proportionable Number of other Kinds of
musical Instruments, (among which we may rest assured the well-ton'd ORGAN
found a Place) and accompanied with a prodigious Number of Voices of all the
Singers of Israel, who were particularly instructed and set apart for religious
Performances of this Kind.

THE Business of this mighty Chorus was to extol their MAKER, and to excite the
whole Nation, thus assembled, to the Praise of his never-ceasing Goodness and
Mercy: As the Trumpets and Singers were as one, to make one Sound to be heard,
in praising and thanking the Lord; and when they lift up their Voice with the
Trumpets and Cymbals, and Instruments of Music, they praised the Lord, saying,
For he is good, for his Mercy endures for ever: -- On which the House was
filled with a Cloud, which evidently demonstrated the DIVINE PRESENCE among
them; insomuch that the Priests themselves, not being able to bear the
Awfulness of the Solemnity, retired into the Court of the Temple. -- In the
mean While, the People, whose Hearts were gradually moved by the Solemnity of
the whole Proceeding, having been melted by the all-conquering Strains of
MUSIC, and awed by the Appearance of that Glory which filled the Temple, bowed
themselves with their Faces to the Ground, and worshipped and praised the Lord!

FROM hence, therefore, it appears, that it does not only betray a Want of
Religion, but weak and childish Ignorance, not to see the Lawfulness of
Instrumental Music in our Acts of Devotion toward GOD; nor can it be unworthy
the Regard and Notice of the highest Rank of Mankind, when viewed, as it really
is, as a most sublime Acquisition!

AND certain it is, that among all the Studies that engage the Mind of Man, the
best adapted to his Nature, and to a suitable Acknowledgement of the Greatness
and Perfection of GOD, is that of Music: -- While other Creatures only hear
Sounds, in such a Manner as conduce to the Purposes of Animal Life, Man is
capable of discovering their Proportions, and thereby qualified for the
Perception and Pleasure of Harmony, which, properly speaking, cannot be
ascribed to any Ear but his own; and in him this Sense is, in a wonderful
Manner, subservient to the Use and Operation of his noblest Powers!

ON the Wings of this Faculty, we can fly in an Instant to the utmost Parts of
the Earth; we can ascend on High! -- Climb to Heaven! -- And soar among the
Stars! -- We can travel on, in Idea, from World to World! From System to
System! -- till our Thoughts are quite lost and swallowed in the Immensity of
GOD's Works! --

THE best of Men, says a late Writer, have found their chief Comfort to consist
in Exercises of this Kind; and those elevated Flights of the Soul to GOD, truly
proclaim her divine Original, her capacious Powers, and glorious Destination
for Eternity! They expand and strengthen her Faculties; improve and exalt the
Temper, and prepare her for the Harmony of Heaven!

LET dull phlegmatic Souls say what they will to the Contrary, Joy and
Cheerfulness are so far from being inconsistent with Religion, when rightly
ordered, that we find them many Times allowed and recommended in Scripture:
Thus, in the last Verse of the 32d Psalm, Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice: And
in the 1st Verse of the next Psalm, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous: -- So
Psalm lxviii. 3, Let the Righteous be glad: -- Nehemiah xii. 36, That they
should praise the LORD with the musical Instruments of David the Man of God. --
And that it might not be thought a Liberty proper only for former
Dispensations, the Apostle does no less than three Times give this Admonition
to the Philippians, Rejoice in the Lord; rejoice always in the Lord; yea, I say
rejoice. -- Our Devotion never soars higher, than when it is carried on the
Wings of Joy and Cheerfulness: And as Joy is an excellent Institution of
Devotion, so a constant Serenity and Cheerfulness of Spirit, is a fit
Disposition for our other Duties.

THE royal Psalmist David, whom it would be our greatest Perfection to imitate
in the Ardency of a constant lively Devotion, was among the most strenuous
Promoters of the divine Harmony I am contending for, in his Day: -- What a
pious Ardour; -- what a Glow of Gratitude; -- what exalted Conceptions of the
Deity are every where to be found in his inimitable Compositions! -- How often
does he call upon the Nations in his Day, and us in them, to praise the LORD
with the Organ! -- His exalted Language is the Voice of Rapture; his Soul is
kindled with divine Fervor; and it is impossible to read them without feeling
Part of his Transports! -- Him we seldom meet without a Psalm in his Mouth, or
an Instrument in his Hand; -- in whose Music was such sweet, sacred and divine
Power, that we are assured it had even the Efficacy of working such Miracles,
as to drive the evil Spirit twice from tormenting Saul; -- to compose his
fluctuating Spirits; disperse the Gloom that hung over his Mind; and to restore
that Monarch to the right Enjoyment of his rational Faculties: -- And it came
to pass, when the evil Spirit was upon Saul, that David took an Harp and played
with his Hand: So Saul was refreshed, and was well; and the evil Spirit
departed from him. 1 Samuel xvi. 23.

STUPID, therefore, beyond all Possibility of Excuse, must those grovelling
Souls be, who cannot hence learn the Lawfulness and divine Approbation of
Instrumental Music!

AN equal Instance of its amazing Efficacy and Force, we have in the Prophet
Elisha: His Spirits being ruffled and disconcerted; his Mind disordered, and
under a State of Dejection, the Minstrel was called in, and calmed him: -- All
the turbulent Passions which before made him the Terror of his Keepers, and a
fit Inhabitant of a gloomy Cell, were in an Instant composed by the sweet Power
of Music!

THE Mind of Man, even in Spirituals, acts with a corporal Dependence, and so
is helped or hindered in its Operations, according to the different Quality of
external Objects that occur to the Senses: And it is well known, that an
Impression left on the Heart by the Melody I am recommending, has tended to
compose the wandering Mind much more effectually than a Sermon, or rational
Discourse.

AN eminent Divine, within the Compass of my Memory, in his Discourse on the
Subject I am contending for, told his Audience there were but three Kinds of
Beings, that he knew of, whom GOD had endowed with Animal Sensation, who were
not charmed with the Harmony of Music; and they were the Devil, a Quaker, and
an Ass: But surely had this Declaimer been sufficiently Master of his Subject,
or had any Acquaintance with the World in our Day, he would have included, at
least, two whole Societies of worshipping Christians in his Charge: For though
indeed the Presbyterians and Baptists hold Psalmody lawful, and an important
Part of divine Worship, yet certain it is, that the miserable Manner in which
this Part of their Worship is droll'd out, seems rather to imitate the Braying
of Asses, than the divine Melody so often recommended in Scripture.

IT is no Pleasure to me to note this shameful Defect in their Acts of Devotion
toward GOD; nor is it from any Desire to expose either the Presbyterians or
Baptists, that I have been thus unreserv'd; -- my own Heart will acquit me of
Envy or Ill Nature, since I reprove only to reform: -- I profess myself to
belong to the Former, and have been a Member of that Church from my Infancy;
but I could not otherwise do Justice to the Truth, and the Subject I am upon:
-- And, would to Heaven, that what may be offered on this Head, might gain
their Attention. To them therefore, and to their serious Consideration, is this
Address more immediately intended.

IT has, I confess, often afforded me Matter of Surprise, seeing they hold the
Duty of praising GOD with the Voice of Melody as a very essential Part of
public Worship, that there has not been more Pains taken, at least, to
instruct such of the rising Generation as have good Voices, in the Use of
Psalmody; or, as it is well known that the Use of an Organ would not only hide
all Defects of this Nature, but raise the Affections, illuminate and invigorate
the Imagination, rouse and enliven all the Faculties of the Soul to Devotion,
and assist the Voice; that for these, and other Benefits that would accrue
therefrom to the whole Assembly, in which all the Brilliancy of Thought, the
Beauty of Description, the Elegance of Expression, come far short to enumerate,
they do not admit the Use of such into their Acts of Devotion, seeing the whole
Tenor of the Scripture is expressive of the Utility of no one human Invention
more than this; and the far greater Part of Christians in all Ages, have not
only viewed it in this Light, but have looked upon an Organ as absolutely
necessary for the Decency of public Worship, as well as the Advantages above
cited.

THUS the Calvinist Dutch, though they are universally acknowledged to be among
the best Singers of divine Music in the known World, never think their public
Worship complete without the Help of an Organ; many of them also, who are of
Circumstances, keep the same Instrument in their Chambers for the Use of Family
Worship: -- We have ever confessed them sound in the Principles of Religion,
and in this Respect have acknowledged them our Brethren: -- What a Pity it is
then, that we should differ from them in this.

THE Church of England too, between whose doctrinal Articles, (as pious Mr.
Gilbert Tennent very justly observes) and our Westminster Confession of Faith,
there is the sweetest Harmony, has always, since the Reformation, been eminent
for continuing and encouraging this noble Institution: Nor can I at present
recollect any one Society, among all the various Sects and Professions into
which the World is divided, the Presbyterians, Baptists, and Quakers excepted,
who do not approve of and use, as their Circumstances and Opportunies enable
them, the Instrument I am recommending, in their public Acts of Devotion. --
And will the most bigoted among us be hardy enough to assert that we only are
right in this Particular? -- However this may be, I do contend, that a sad and
sullen Humor, a morose and melancholy Disposition, either in the Worship of
GOD or otherwise, is so far from being commendable, that at best it must be
looked upon as an Infirmity and Weakness, in the best of those in whom it
resides; and if purposely affected and cherished, may deserve a severe Censure.

I WOULD by no Means, however, be understood, in the Course of my Arguments on
this Head, as though these external Things should be held as Parts of our
Devotion, or are by any Strength in themselves, considered abstractedly, direct
Causes of it; all I contend is, that the Grace of GOD, for the most Part, is
pleased, in Condescension to our Infirmities, to work upon our Passions by
Means, and move us by Ways suited to our Nature, and to sanctify these inferior
Helps to greater and higher Purposes.

NOR can I see the least Impropriety in the Institution I am recommending: In
the first and most early Times of the Church, what Care did GOD manifest not
only to have such Places erected to his Honor, but decently ornamented? Jacob
was admonished by a Vision, as by a Message from Heaven, to build him an Altar,
which was viewed by him ever after with the most profound Veneration! -- How
dreadful (says he) is this Place, for surely it is no other than the House of
GOD!

THAT Pretense to Spirituality and Humility, (says pious Mr. Gilb. Tennent)
which is only a Covert to Covetousness, Indifference, or Party-prejudice in the
Matters of Religion, is a mean and monstrous Evil, that should be abhorred by
all Mankind! -- Those severe Zealots who censure all Ornaments in Churches,
though they do not neglect them in their Dress and private Houses, -- surely,
they herein act a very inconsistent Part, and consequently not only condemn the
whole Body of the Jewish Church, but even pass Sentence upon GOD himself, who
appointed Ornaments in his House by his Sovereign Authority, and complained by
his Prophet of those covetous Misers who had cieled Houses of their own, but
left his House desolate, i. e. Naked, and bereaved of proper Ornaments! --

WHAT an immense Profusion of Treasure and Pains, as far excel all the Pomp of
modern Times, must have been expended in decorating the Temple, and making and
preparing various Sorts of Musical Instruments to be used in the Service of GOD
at its Dedication; and in instructing such as had good Voices, and other
suitable Qualifications, to accompany the same in this grand Chorus? No less
than four Thousand praised the Lord with the Instruments that I made (says
David) to praise therewith; 1 Chronicles. xxiii. 5. -- And David spoke to the Chief
of the Levites, to appoint their Brethren to be Singers to all the Instruments
of Music, and by sounding and lifting up their Voices with Joy; 1 Chronicles. xv.
16. -- So the Number of them, with their Brethren, that were instructed in the
Songs of the Lord, was two Hundred Eighty and Eight; 1 Chronicles. xxv. 7. -- And
David and all Israel played before the Lord with all their Might; 1 Chronicles.
xiii. 8. -- And all the Congregation worshipped, and the Singers sung, and the
Instruments sounded with them; and the Glory of the Lord filled the whole
House; 2 Chronicles. xxix. 28.

AND certain it is, that such Places are naturally apt to excite a greater
Reverence and Devotion, in the Discharge of Divine Service, than Places of
common Use: Here have I placed my Name, says GOD, and here will I dwell, for I
have a Delight therein. -- The Place properly reminds Men of their Business
there, and strikes a Kind of Awe into their Thoughts when they reflect on that
great and sacred Majesty they used to treat and converse with there.

OH! how often has the very Tears gushed out of mine Eyes, says pious St.
Augustine, at hearing the sweet Hymns and Songs of God! How have I been
ravished with the Praises and Harmony of the sweet-sounding Church, when those
sweet Voices, accompanied with the Organ, have pierced mine Ears! Thy Truth, O
LORD, has then distilled into mine Heart, and from thence I felt myself
inflamed with Piety and Devotion.

AND is there any Man (whose Heart has not shook off all Sense of what is
sacred) who finds himself no otherwise affected when he enters into the House
of God, than when he enters into that of his own or his Neighbor's?

IT has ever been the unhappy Fate of Superstition, that, by pretending to too
much Religion, it has sapped the Foundation of all Religion; and, by being
productive of such contracted Notions, that have no Being but in a blind
misguided Zeal, it has levelled the divine Oracles of the most high GOD with
the weak Opinions of frail Man. And sorry I am to observe, that the Clergy,
whose Business it is to inform the Understanding, as well as mend the Hearts of
their Hearers, are shamefully culpable in this Particular: And it is a Truth,
which redounds but little to their Reputation, either as Preachers of the
Gospel or intelligent Beings, that too many are led by them to believe, that if
there is Salvation to be had out of the Pales of their own Church, it is
nevertheless criminal, in the highest Degree, even to enter the Doors of any
other.

AND I am well aware, that the far greater Part of those who decry the Use of
Instrumental Music in the Worship of GOD, have never had a single Opportunity
even of being present at those Acts of Devotion in which the Organ is used, and
of making the Experiment: And, because instrumental Jargon, viz. the Fiddle and
Bagpipe, which they have all been blessed in hearing, THIS Remark is more
immediately intended for the Country, where it is well known Bigotry and
certain narrow-contracted Notions, in Matters of Religion, reign most
predominant.
(but which indeed have hardly any Resemblance at all of the Instrument I am
contending for, viz. the Organ) are used in those riotous Assemblies that are
calculated to excite carnal Mirth and Wantonness, they conclude, unheard, all
Instrumental Music must have a like Tendency to inflame the Passions to
Sensuality. -- With the same Force of Reason, Persons who are blinded with
Prejudice and Ignorance, may cavil at and decry the Utility of the most useful
Creatures and Inventions that GOD has appointed for the Support and Convenience
of Man: -- Because Food and Raiment are frequently perverted to Voluptuousness
and Wantonness, is it criminal to use either? -- Because the richest Genius,
like the most fertile Soil, when misled by a wrong Bent of Education, shoots up
into the rankest Weeds, and instead of Vines and Olives, produces to its
Possessor the most abundant Crop of Poison; are we therefore to suffer our
Minds to remain in the darkest Ignorance?

THIS most disingenious Way of arguing, which is really the Foundation of all
that can be said against the Use of Instrumental Music in the Worship of GOD,
is so very ridiculous, that one would wonder with what Face or Color of Reason
the Professors of Christianity, who have been blessed with the Light of the
Gospel, and who, if properly informed, might know better, could make Use of it.

WERE not Advice thrown away on such, one would recommend it to them, laying
Prejudice aside, to step into St. Paul's in this City, or any other Church that
has an Organ in it, and let them afterward speak their Sentiments impartially:
-- They will find it impossible to be present at such Acts of Worship, without
being elevated with their divine Melody, and feeling some Degree of that
heavenly Enthusiasm which spreads itself through the whole Assembly; which is
not only a strong Proof of the Propriety and Expediency of the Institution, but
gives a pleasing Idea, that the Cause of Christianity in such Churches is not
so desperate as the frantic Triumphs of the Vicious and Profane insinuate, or
the Gloomy and Desponding are apt to believe.

I MENTION this Church in particular, as being the only English Congregation in
the Province that has an Organ in it as yet, and as being a Church in which it
will be confessed Vocal Music is also brought to the greatest Perfection of
any Society perhaps in the Province: -- Indeed, the Public seem not to be
insensible of these Advantages; for, though it is said to be the largest
Building erected for the public Worship of God on the Continent, such
Multitudes flock thither, of all Denominations, as very frequently not to find
Room.

IT would, I confess, be the highest Injustice in me here (and it would be
paying the Audience but a poor Compliment) to insinuate, but that the Certainty
of hearing a spirited Discourse, delivered with a becoming Warmth and Energy,
and enforced with that Dignity and Solemnity becoming the sacred Desk, has its
proper Weight with the Multitude who flock thither; but I do contend, that no
House of Worship in America was ever so crowded before, except when the
inimitable Whitefield graced the same.

THE Members of the two episcopal Churches in this City, sensible of the
Advantages cited in the preceding Pages, and encouraged by the Certainty of
being able to get Organs made here in as great Perfection as in England, and
near one Half cheaper, have lately raised suitable Contributions among
themselves, with which to erect a very genteel one in their respective
Churches; and many in the Country are following their laudable Example.

AND would to GOD, that, divested of every Prejudice, this amiable Spirit of
promoting the decent Worship of GOD would diffuse itself among the
Presbyterians and Baptists also. -- What a glorious Appearance would an ORGAN
make in some of their Churches, especially in this and the neighboring Cities!
Nor would one look out of Character in the meanest Building in the Country. --
We should not by this deviate more from the Faith of true Presbyterianism, than
those of our Brethren in Scotland, Ireland, and America do, who have Steeples
with Bells to their Churches (where they are of Ability) which are not only
used at stated Times for Worship, Times of public Rejoicing, etc. but toll at
the Death and Interment not only of their own Members, but Persons of any other
Persuasion who request, and will go to the Expense of the same: The Generality
of our Clergy also in the old Countries wear the same decent Badges of
Distinction ( viz. the Gown and Band) with the Clergy of the Church of England;
so that the introducing the Use of the Organ into our Acts of Worship, would
not bring us one Jot nearer to Popery or Episcopacy than we were before, as
some of our weak but well-meaning Professors may be apt to imagine.

BESIDES the Advantages cited in the preceding Pages, such an Institution would
have this good Tendency, that, instead of their Members loitering away the
blessed Sabbath Day at Home, sequestering themselves from the rest of Mankind
in unsocial Retirements, or crouding other Houses of Worship, it would induce
them to crowd their own: -- And, till this is taken into Consideration, they
have, I fear, very little Grounds to expect their Congregations will either
thrive or increase on their Hands.

INDEED, however it may affect some particular Societies, it must afford a
sensible Pleasure to every generous Mind, not confined to the narrow Principles
of Party, to see such a laudable Spirit prevail, as at present, for promoting
so essential a Part of the public Worship of GOD. -- How can the most hardened
Sinner, says Bishop Beveridge PRIVATE THOUGHTS.
, who has made a Scorn of this noble Part of Devotion, but be softened and
reclaimed, and have a Veneration for it, when he hears the Praises of our great
CREATOR described in the most expressive Harmony? when it was his great and
infinite Goodness to bestow and frame Music for us to the very same End: And
we are in Duty and Gratitude bound to praise him therewith, both in our public
and private Devotions.

THIS is that which makes Heaven itself so pleasant a Place to those who dwell
therein, because they are always praising GOD: -- There the celestial Choirs
pour forth their triumphant Hallelujahs to his adorable Name! They cast their
Crowns at his Feet, saying, Worthy art thou, O LORD, to receive Glory, and
Honor, and Power! -- There the Cherubims and Seraphims continually do cry,
"Holy, Holy LORD GOD of Sabbath!" -- There the glorious Company of the Apostles
praise Him: -- There the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets praise Him: -- There
the noble Army of the Martyrs praise Him: -- There all the Spirits of just Men
made perfect praise Him continually!

THIS is the exalted Strain of Scripture Language in its Descriptions of
Heaven, when it would awaken our Diligence and engage our Affections in the
Pursuit of it.

BLESSED with such Prospects, we ought ever to maintain a deep Sense of our
Maker's Bounty and Goodness, and to be continually acknowledging our
Obligations with the utmost Gratitude, Sincerity, and Veneration. -- To be
created with intelligent Powers and Understanding; to bear the Signature of
GOD's Image; and be qualified for the Joys of a blessed Immortality, are Goods
really inestimable, and Privileges above Price! As such, they demand suitable
Sentiments, and our most solemn Thanksgiving.

THIS evidently appears to have been the happy Temper of the holy Psalmist,
whose affectionate Acknowledgments of the Goodness and Bounty of GOD, in the
cheerful Celebration of his Praise, make up a considerable Part of his divine
and ravishing Songs: -- How often do we find him exciting and disposing himself
and others to join Voice, Hand and Heart together, in this holy and delightful
Employment! -- Psalm xxxiii. 2, 3, Praise the Lord with the Harp; sing unto him
with the Psaltery, and an Instrument of ten Strings: Sing unto him a new Song,
play skilfully with a loud Voice: -- Psalm lxvi. 1, 8, Make a joyful Noise unto
God, all ye Lands: Oh! bless our God, ye People, and make the Voice of his
Praise to be heard: -- Psalm lxxi. 22, I will also praise thee with the
Psaltery, even thy Truth, O my God; unto thee will I sing with the Harp, O thou
Holy One of Israel: -- Psalm xcviii. 5, 6, Sing unto the Lord with the Harp;
with the Harp and the Voice of a Psalm: With Trumpets and Sound of Cornet make
a joyful Noise before the Lord the King: -- Psalm cl. 4, Praise him with
Organs: -- 1 Chronicles. xvi. 42, And with musical Instruments of God.

WHEN the Powers of Vocal and Instrumental Music thus unite in one joint
Chorus, he must certainly have a Heart not of Flesh, but of Marble,
insusceptible of all tender Impressions, who can withstand their united Force.

I AM well aware, that many well-meaning People have been led to decry the Use
of the Organ in divine Worship, because the New Testament is not more
expressive of its Utility: But I think it may be laid down as a fundamental
Truth, that the only Reason why the Use of it is not more frequently inculcated
in the New Testament is, that it was a Doctrine so well received by all
Denominations of Men, as to render any Thing on that Head entirely unnecessary:
Thus, should any settled Presbyterian Divine in our Day presume to take up his
own and his Hearers Time in proving the Lawfulness of Psalmody, as a Part of
their public Acts of Worship, would not the Hearers very justly infer the
Preacher was drove to his last Shift for Subject Matter? -- The Man, say they,
may with the same Face engross our Time in proving that the Sun shines at
Noonday, or that it is dark at Twelve at Night.

IN the preceding Pages I have shown, from the Authority of the Old Testament,
the divine Approbation of, and even Command for erecting the Temple for public
Worship: -- I have shown what a Profusion of Cost and Pains was expended in
furnishing it with decent Ornaments, and in erecting in it suitable Instruments
of Music, with which to assist in the Worship of GOD: And thus much I am
warranted to assert from the New, that, as our LORD and his Apostles are often
said to have made Use of this very Temple for the Performance of divine Service
therein, it evidences, to a Demonstration, his continued Approbation of the
Place, and of the decent Ornaments with which it was decorated: Nor will any
reasonable Man presume to say, that the costly and magnificent Organ, which had
been erected therein for divine Worship from the most early Dedication of that
sacred Edifice to the Service of GOD, had been pulled down on the Approach of
the Savior of the World, or was for ever after silent. Had this actually been
the Case, it would have been too remarkable an Incident to have been passed
over in Silence by the sacred Penmen: On the contrary, our Lord's Veneration
for it rose so high, as to induce him to whip the Profaners of it hence; in
which Act he brings a Quotation from the Old Testament to show the original
Intent of that sacred Edifice: -- It is written, says he, Isaiah lvi. 7. and
Jeremiah vii. 11. My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have
made it a Den of Thieves; but we have not the least Authority from hence to
infer that he attempted to pull down, deface, alter, or render useless any the
most minute Article of its Contents: Nor do we find a single Text in the Whole
of the New Testament disapproving or disallowing the Use of Instrumental Music
in the Worship of God; which plainly demonstrates, that such Things were not
only continued in Use, but were approved of and allowed as heretofore. And this
seems so plainly to be the Case, that it might be esteemed a Reproach to human
Reason to use more Arguments to evince its Utility, seeing the universal
Reception it has met with from all thinking People, in all Ages of the World,
and in all Places, manifestly evidences, that it is entirely suitable,
proportionate, and agreeable to the general Conception and Reason of Mankind.

I DOUBT not but I shall be condemned by some of my Readers for having
expressed myself with too much Warmth on this Subject; and by others for having
omitted saving many Things which the Authority of Holy Writ gives me a
sufficient Warrant to have urged: -- As to the first, the Instances I daily
see, or am creditably informed of, joined to the Good Will I bear to Mankind in
general, would not permit me to be more cool: -- And as to the other, I thought
it proper to leave the strongest Part of the Argument to the reverend Clergy,
who can best handle it, and whose Province it is: -- Certainly there is nothing
more demands their present Care, or would testify their Zeal for the Well-being
and Promotion of Religion in the World.

THE Worst, however, that can be said of this Attempt is, that it is the
Overflowing of a Heart sincere and ardent for the Happiness of Society in
general, and of that of which I am a Member in particular.

Philadelphia.
FINIS.

