A THANKSGIVING SERMON, FOR THE IMPORTANT and ASTONISHING VICTORY Obtained on
the Fifth of DECEMBER, M,DCC,LVII, By the Glorious King of PRUSSIA. Over the
united and far superior FORCES of the AUSTRIANS, in Silesia: PREACHED ON The
SABBATH of the Tenth of said Month, AT THE Synagogue of the JEWS, in Berlin.

BY DAVID HIRCHEL FRANCKEL, ARCH-RABBI. Translated from the German Original,
printed at Berlin.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ANDREW STEUART, and sold at his Printing-Office, at
the Bible-in-Heart in Second-street. 1763

The PUBLISHER's PREFACE, TO THE Christian READER.
IT may seem strange that this SERMON should appear in a new Edition, when the
Occasion of it is almost forgotten. But the Interposition of Providence in
Favor of his PRUSSIAN MAJESTY, is an Instance of GOD' s Power over Princes,
that deserves the serious Consideration of all Mankind, as it furnishes a
strong Encouragement to trust in the GREAT ARBITER of human Affairs, and to do
our Duty with Constancy and Resolution under the greatest Discouragements. --
Nor is the SERMON less singular, as it is the Production of a JEW, and
occasioned by the Victory and Success of that MONARCH. No Nation under Heaven
has been more severely treated, or more universally persecuted than this poor
unhappy People: Their Prejudices against our LORD JESUS CHRIST, as the promised
MESSIAH, have given too just Grounds to Christians to be displeased with their
hard Speeches, and evil Conduct, but can be no Warrant to rob, or oppress, or
to persecute and destroy them. Our LORD, whose Example we should follow, wept
for the Hardness of their Hearts, and prayed even for those that conspired to
take away his Life; and the Apostle Paul, who knew their Obstinacy and their
Mistakes, informs us, that his Heart's Desire and Prayer for Israel was that
they might be saved. And from the Promises in the sacred Volumes, that this
Nation, that are beloved of God for their Father's Sake, shall be again
restored to the divine Favor, all the Christian Churches seem to love them and
pray earnestly for their Restoration; and why should they not show them the
fame Love and Tenderness in a civil Capacity? From this little Performance it
is evident that they have Patriot Sentiments, and the warmest Gratitude to
Princes who have Wisdom and Humanity to protect and defend them: Hence it also
appears that they have just Sentiments of GOD 's moral Government, and of his
Care of just Princes, and declare that no Power is too weak when protected by
God, and no human Combinations able to effect their Purposes when he blasts
their Schemes, and laughs at their Councils.

As the blessed Era is drawing near when Jews and Gentiles shall every where
be one Church to Chirist Jesus, it is hoped that such Specimens of Dependence
on God and Gratitude to Mankind, as appears in this Sermon will excite all
Christian People to pray, yet more earnestly, for the Conversion and
Restoration of this once happy Nation, and to treat them with Kindness in all
their Dispersions. It Is not for Men too critically to enquire into the Times
and Seasons that God has reserved to himself, but from what we have often read
in the sacred Scriptures and profane History, and from his powerful
Interpositions in Favor of the King of Prussia, we are convinced that he can
easily raise up Instruments to accomplish his whole Will and Pleasure, and to
make his saving Health known to all Nations.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
PSALM. xxii. v. 23, 24. Ye that fear the Lord, praise him: All ye the Seed of
Jacob* glorify him; and fear him, all ye the Seed of Israel. For he has not
despised nor held in Scorn the Affliction of the Afflicted: Neither has he hid
his Face from him; but when he cried unto him, he heard.
LET us this Day, my Beloved, solemnly impress on our Hearts these Words of the
Royal Prophet; for we are the Afflicted, whose Affliction the Lord has not
despised, nor held in Scorn. Join with me in a Retrospect on those calamituous
Times, when our Sufferings were without any apparent Issue; when the Miseries
of War, with a strong and outstretched Arm, were hastening to surround us on
all Sides; when the exulting Enemy boasted, That the Lord was no longer our
Helper. Selah. Reflect what Earthly Power was able to disperse the Storm, which
impended over our Heads; or what human Understanding could have foreseen the
Plan, by which our Deliverance was to be wrought? Our Ruin seemed ineviatble.
The ravenous Nations of the Earth had already made Spoil of us, in their proud
Imaginations. But he who sits in Heaven derides them; the Lord laugheth them
to Scorn. He tried us. He caused us to feel the Rod of his Chastisements, that
we should humble ourselves before him; that, with contrite Hearts, we should
pour out our Supplications to him, This the Lord has done, that he might be
feared.

He has not hid his Face from us. The distingushing Favor of the Most High to
our Sovereign, in being a Sun and Shield to him; in protecting him under his
Wings; is, to all loyal Subjects, a gladsome Ray of Hope, under the most gloomy
Circumstances. Truly, thought we, our Redeemer lives; now the Lord has not
forsaken us. The goodness of our Creator had been our Refuge. We appointed a
Day of Public Prayer and Humiliation. Who, my Brethren, can, without Emotion,
without a sympathising Sadness, call to mind that SOLEMN DAY; when, with one
Heart and Voice, ye all prostrated yourselves in this Temple, before the Lord;
when the Tears flowing from every Eye, spoke the Tumult of your Hearts; and the
Fervor of the Petitions then offered up for the Preservation of our sole Hope,
the Welfare of our Sovereign, and for the Success of his righteous Arms? The
Lord has not despised, nor held our Affliction in Scorn; and when we cry unto
him, he hears us.

Behold, he inspired our gracious Monarch, with a Wisdom, which the Prudent of
the Earth stand amazed at. He confirmed the known Valor of his Men of War. He
bore them on Eagles Wings, wherever their Leader pointed. He guides his chosen
Nation with his Goodness! He sent his Terrors before him; he scattered the
Enemy, and overthrew the Schemes they most confided in. Who can withstand the
Omnipotent? Who, among the Mighty, is like unto thee! Who, like thee, is
strengthened with Holiness!

Now praise the Lord, ye that fear him. Let the Ardour which animated your
Prayers in the Day of Distress, now express itself in your Thanksgivings. As
this Temple has been wet with Tears of Grief and Oppression, let it now see
Tears of Joy and Gratitude. We have openly cried unto the Lord; openly in the
Eyes of the whole astonished World, has he heard us: Let our Thanksgivings
also be open. I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, says the anointed of
God; I will praise thee in the Congregation. When a poor Mortal does us any
Kindness; when a Prince condescends to assure us of his Favor; when a Patron
procures us any Benefit; or, when a common Friend steps in to our Relief in the
Time of Trouble; we delay not to return our Thanks. No Words can express our
Acknowledgement. We entreat them to be persuaded that their Kindness is not
thrown away on an ungrateful Person. With what eager Joy do we run from Friend
to Friend? Wish me Joy! embrace me my Friend! the King intends me some Good.
Such a great Man has done me a considerable Favor; Or, such a worthy Person
has stood my Friend in such an Exigency! Are we such toward weak mortal
Benefactors? with what Sentiments should our Hearts glow, when the Supreme
Benefactor, to deliver us from the rage of Destruction, works Miracles in the
Face of the whole World! Oh! that we could so raise our Voices, that as all
Europe has seen or heard of the mighty Wonder, it might now also have some Idea
of the Transport, some Elevation of Soul, with which we celebrate the Lord's
Goodness! Be it known to all the Ends of the Earth, that the Lord does not
forsake such as put their trust in him: That they may turn unto the Lord, and
that all the Kindreds of the Earth may worship before him. Psalm. xxii. 27.

The Thanksgiving acceptable to God, is to promote, among our Brethren, the
Knowledge of his Greatness, and a Zeal for his Service. To rouse, by our
Example, the Torpid, and to call on the Depressed; Come, let us rejoice in the
Lord! Know that the Lord is God; it is he that has made us. His Goodness is
everlasting, and his Truth endures from Generation to Generation.

We have already, on another Occasion, put you in Mind, dearly beloved
Brethren, of the House of Jacob, that rejoicing on any extraordinary Favor of
God, does not consist in sumptuous Entertainments and Revels, in wild
Acclamations, and much less in Gratifications which disgrace human Nature; no,
the Joy which becomes the Man of Holiness, and which alone will be approved of
by God, must be a spiritual Joy, penetrating into our inmost Heart, and
prompting us to show forth his Praise, to meditate on his loving Kindness, and
to offer to him the Sacrifice of good Works, and Vows of Benevolence.

We rejoice, that our Remonstrance has not been without its proper Fruit. Ye
have made Vows, for the Relief of the Poor; and particularly, of the Widows and
Orphans of those brave Soldiers, who have laid down their Lives for their
Country and the just Cause of their Prince: And these Vows, you may be assured,
are of much sweeter Savor to God, than Thousands of Rejoicings, as they are
called; but as the Fondness for extravagant Festevity is deep rooted in the
human Heart, and to overcome these Allurements is a severe and arduous Work; on
this joyful Opportunity, we shall briefly remind you of those Reasons, which
then convinced us of the abovementioned Truth.

The sacred Prophets frequently inculcate to us, that God rejoices not in the
Death of the Wicked. To specify the several Passages would be superfluous.
There is none of you who can be unacquainted with them.

Our Rabbis, and Doctors of the Oral Law, go further. They tell us, that on
the Overthrow of Pharaoh, and his Host in the Red*Sea, through which the
Children of Israel had passed dry-shod, the Lord spoke unto them, saying; The
Works of mine Hands sink in the Seas, and ye are singing before me! Consider,
my beloved Friends, if it was so when only the Heathens perished; Heathens, who
had no Knowledge of the Supreme Being, and who polluted the whole Earth with
their Idolatries, what shall we say in our Days, when such a Light has been
diffused among all civilized Nations, that they worship the Creator of the
Earth, and his Name is a Holiness among them? We are all Children of the one
living God. They, who declare themselves our Enemies, are equally the Works of
his Hands, and love and fear him; and we should love them, were they not
seduced by perverse Passions, to disturb the Tranquillity of our dear Sovereign.
Can we then shout, and give ourselves up to the frantic Excesses of a sensual
Joy, at the Destruction of the Works of God's Hands!

It may be objected: It is not from the Defeat of the Enemy, that our Joy
arises. God forbid that we should be pleased with Slaughter, or that our Eyes
should take a Delight in viewing the Streams of human Blood; which, to the
disgrace of Mankind, are incessantly flowing. But Truth and Justice bear
Witness against our Enemies, as it is manifest that our mild Sovereign is
perfectly innocent of these vast Effusions of Blood; and that it is only
absolute Necessity, derived from perfidious Machinations, that he has drawn
that victorious Sword, which otherwise, though possessed, in such Pre-eminence,
of all military Qualities, he would have wished might have rested in Peace.
Shall we not rejoice, that Justice triumphs; that the Sagacity of our King,
baffles the Devices of the Enemy; that his Heroism, and the Intrepedity of our
Countrymen, will shine in History, and be the Admiration of latest Posterity?

I answer; If your Joy springs from so pure a Source, see that it be not only
blameless, but commendable, and pleasing to God: But, my beloved Brethren,
forget not also, that the primary Cause of our Deliverance is to be sought for
in something higher than the Prudence of Man; than worldly Experience in War,
or habitual Valor. Behold, the Eyes of the Lord are on them who fear him, who
hope on his Goodness; that he may deliver their Soul. Acknowledge the Hand of
the gracious Preserver of the Earth! He it was who suggested to our Deliverer
such Plans as all History cannot parrellel! He it was who armed, with
Intripidity, the Breasts of your Countrymen; who enabled them to perform, under
the Conduct of our incomparable Sovereign, Exploits which future Ages must
necessarily look upon as Adventures of the fabulous Ages! You have seen Wonders
and supernatural Things, of which, anciently, your Ancestors alone could boast.
Lay them to* Heart with a proper Intenseness, and your Souls will be absorbed
in Devotion and placid Contemplation; in Solaces infinitely sweeter, than all
Mirth and Diversion; which, however they facinate the Senses, never reach the
Soul!

Imitate the GLORIOUS VICTOR! the WISE MONARCH! whom the Lord has chosen as
the Instrumnet of Prodigies! However Self-love may dazzle the Eyes of the Bulk
of Mankind: none of the Victories which he has obtained over his Persecutors,
does he ascribe to himself. All the Honor he refers solely to the Lord; who
blesses his Arms, enlightens his Understanding, and strengthens his Heart. No
sooner had the flying Enemy left him the Victory and the Field of Battle, than
jointly, with his whole triumpant Army, he returns Thanks to the Giver of all
Good. I see him! I see the august Warrior in the Presence of his Troops, lift
up his wearied Hands to Heaven: "Lord my Creator!" cries he, thou know how
innocent I am, of all the Blood shed this Day. Such was thy Will, Father. Now,
my loyal Fellow Soldiers, thank him with Heart and Mouth; for he it is who has
delivered us.

These Words suspend the Pangs of Death. The expiring Soldiers make a last
Effort to raise themselves; and, with broken Accents, join the Hymn, which was
sung with Extacy by the whole Army, whilst Tears dropped from the Eyes of the
Royal Hero. The Lord counts those Tears, and accepts of them as Witnessess
against the Unrighteous, who would load the King with the Guilt of all this
Carnage: Therefore shall his Eenemies be turned back; and, when he calls, he
shall find that the Lord is his Helper.

There may be still some Relics of Doubt on your Minds, in Opposition to the
Premises. If what the Lord has done for us, say you, be a supernatural Act, a
Miracle; where to serve all the military Dispositions, the Implements of War,
the King's Conduct, and the Vigor of the Soldiery? Could not the Angel have
gone forth from the Lord, and, in a Night, have swept away all the Forces of
the Enemy? With the Almighty there is no Impossibility; nay, Instances of such
Miracles are not wanting in the Holy Scriptures.

My beloved Friends, favor me with your Attention, whilst I read and comment
on a Passage in the SACRED BOOK of the LAW, which will remove all our Doubts.

We read in the First Book of the Law, Chap. xvi. And it came to pass in the
Days of Amraphel, King of Shinar; Arioch, King of Ellaser; Chedorlaomer, King
of Elam; and Tidal, King of the Nations; that they made War with Bera, King of
Sodom; with Birsha, King of Gomarrah; with Shinab, King of Admah; with
Shemeber, King of Zeboiim; and with the King of Bela, now Zoar; And all these
came together in the Vale of Siddim, where now is the Salt Sea. Twelve Years
they had been under Chedorlaomer, but in Thirteenth they revolted: Therefore,
in the fourtrenth Year, came Chedorlaomer, and the Kings that were with him;
and at Ashteroth Karnaim, defeated the Rephaims, (or the Giants) and in Ham,
the Susims, (or the Valiant) and in Kiriathaim-Plain, the Emims, (or the
Formidable) and the Horites, in their Mount Seir, to the Plain of Param, which
joins the Wilderness, Afterward they turned and came to the Spring of the
Just, which is Kadeth; and overran the whole Country of the Amalekites, and
likewise of the Amorites, who inhabited in Hazezon-Tamar. Then went out the
King of Sodom, and the King of Gomorrah, the King of Admah, the King of
Zeboiim, and the King of Bela; and in the Vale of Siddim joined Battle with
Chedorlaomer, the King of Elam; Tidal, the King of Nations; Amraphel, the King
of Shinar; and Arioch, King of Ellaser; four Kings with five. And in the Vail
of Siddim were many Bitumen-Pits; and the Kings of Soddom and Gomorrah turned
their Backs and fell therein, and the Remainder fled to the Mountains: And they
took all the Goods and Provisions of Sodom and Gomorrah, and went away;
carrying with them Lot, Abraham' s Brother's Son, with all his Effects, for he
lived at Soddom. And there came one that had escaped and told Abram, the
Hebrew, who lived near the Plain of Mamre, the Amorite, Brother to Eshcol and
Aner; and these were in Allience with Abram. And when Abram heard that his
Brother was carrid away Captive, he armed his Servants to the Number of three
Hundred and Eighteen, all born in his House, and followed them toward Dan;
where, having divided his Band, he fell upon them in the Night, routed them,
and pursued them as far as Hobah, which lies on the Left of Damascus. He
recovered all the Spoil; also his Brother Lot, with his Effects, the Women and
the People. In his Return from the Defeat of Chedorlaomor, and the Kings his
Confederates, the King of Sodom went out to meet him in the Field called the
King' s Dale. And Melchisedeck, of Salem, brought forth Bread and Wine; and he
was a Priest of God the Most High. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be
thou Abram of the Most High God, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth: And praised
be the Most High God, who has delivered thine Enemies into thine Hands; and
Abram gave to him Tithes of every Thing. Then said the King of Sodom to Abram,
Restore the People to me, and keep the Spoil to thyself. And Abram answered the
King of Sodom, I have lifted up mine Hand to the Lord the Most High God, the
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, that of whatever is thine, I will not keep so
much as a Thread or Shoe-Latchet, that thou never shall say thou have enriched
Abram.

This Pa^^age you observe, my beloved Brethren, bears a great Resemblance to
the happy Occasion of this Day's Solemnity. In the mere Nature of Things, it
was impossible that our Father Abraham, who at that Time was still called
Abram, should, with such a Handful of Men, defeat the Combined Forces of four
potent Monarchs. It is not without Reason, that the Scripture previously
acquaints us of the Archievements of these Kings. At Ashteroth Karnaim, they
had smote the Giants; at Ham, the Valiant, (Susim, the Word in the Text,
imports Invincible, or whom none could face) and at Kiriathim, the Formidable.
Other Nations had also felt the Force of their Arms. The Horites, Amalchites,
and Amorites, submitted to them. At lenghth five Kings entered in a
Confederency against these four superb Ravagers, and encountered them in the
Vale of Siddim: but they were totally routed with great Slaughter, and what
escaped the Sword was dispersed.

These Successes must naturally have filled all Parts with Consternation.
Opposition to such Power, seemed Temerity; that, in the Eye of human Prudence,
nothing was left but to make the best Terms for bowing the Neck to their Yoke.

Not so the great Proto-Patriarch. He, with a few Men raised in his own Family,
ventures on a War with these redoubted Conquerors. He was not ignorant what
Sort of Enemies he had to deal with. He well knew of what little Account a just
Cause and virtuous Views are with the Insolence of Superiority; yet, fearless
of the Dangers which naturally threatened his Enterprise, he declares for the
Cause of Righteousness and Generosity: He arms his Servants, three Hundred and
Eighteen, born within his House.

It is not improbable that by proper Overtures, he might have increased his
Body with the Remains of the defeated Armies; but he chooses rather to take the
Field only with a small Number of his Servants, on whose Fidelity he could
rely. They had been born in his Family, and grown up under his Eye. They had
been Witnesses of his irreproachable Life, and felt the Benefits of his
Virtues. They loved him as their Father, and he them as his Children. They were
ready when headed by him, to face any Danger; and to rush on Death, when Love
and Duty require such a Proof.

Their Leader, on his Part, is not wanting in Stratagems; and, in order to
surprise the secure Enemy on two Sides, he in the Night divides his small Band.
The Result is, that with three Hundred and Eighteen Men, he defeats those four
Kings; who, till then, had borne down all Resistance; and whom a Series of
Victories and Conquests had rendered the Terror of the neighboring Nations.

Now to whom will Abram attribute this signal Victory? Will he magnify his own
Conduct? Will he glory in the Valor of his Domestics, as invincible? Will he
grow proud in his Imaginations, and forget that Events are in the Hand of God;
and that it is he who gives to the Weak, Strength and Courage? Far otherwise.
Please to mind the Sequel: He is met by Melchisedek, the Priest of God, on his
return from the Victory, and followed by a Train of Captives, Spoils and
Trophies; the avenged Kings also hastening toward him, to thank him as their
Deliverer; Circumstances extremely flattering to human Vanity. Amidst this Pomp
of War, the Priest addresses himself to the Victor; and blessing him, says,
Abram, blessed be thou of the Most High God, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth;
that is, who supremely orders all Things in Heaven and Earth, as his Property:
And blessed be God the Most High, who has delivered thine Enemies into thine
Hands.

Here Is not a word of Abram's Courage and masterly Dispositions. He does not
expatiate on the Zeal and Bravery of his Men. He praises God alone, who had
made Abram an Instrument for performing Wonders, and had delivered his Enemies
into his Hands. Abram thanks the Priest of the Most High God; acknowledges all
the Praise and Honor to belong only to God; and, in Token of his Gratitude,
delivers to the Priest Tithes of all.

In Reality, had Abram not placed his whole Confidence in God; had he not been
penetrated, with lively Persuasion, that the Lord never forsakes those who
steadfastly seek his Loving-Kindnss, there would have been more of Rashness and
Presumption in his Expedition, than of real Magnanimity: But he believed in God
and it was accounted to him for Righteousness. He relied on God, as to him were
known the Justice of his Cause, and the Purity and Disinterestedness of his
Views; and this the King of Sodom experienced. I have lift up my Hand to the
Lord, or solemnly sworn, that of all that is thine I will not take a Thread, or
a Shoe-Latchet.

Abram however, clearly saw, that Providence does not require an inactive,
listless Reliance. It is the declared Will of our Creator, that we should exert
that Strength and Capacity which he has bestowed on us. If ever God alters the
Course of Nature, it is for very great and exalted Ends. It is a Saying of our
Rabbis, He does as few Miracles as possible. Accordingly Abram omitted nothing
of what his Experience, Prudence and Courage, dictated to him. He left the
Nature of Things to operate in its full Extent; placing, as to the Issue, all
his Trust in Providence, and the all-sufficient Favor of his Creator.

The Lord blessed his Proceedings, and, by a Miracle, performed in his Behalf,
what was beyond any natural Power, any worldly Prudence, supported by any human
Intrepidity.

Will it be necessary, dear and devout Brethren, to make any Application of the
foregoing Reflections, to the glorious Transactions of our Days. The same
living God, who in so wonderful a Manner succored our Father Abraham, also now
assists our King. The Lord is unchangeable in his Ways. The Powers which he has
implanted in Nature, are at present no less finite and limited, than in Ages
past; but he upholds it by his Bounty, unless moved by some more sublime and
transcendant View, and never breaks in upon its determined Course. He does not
despise, niether holds he in Scorn the Misery of the Poor; and when he cries
unto him, he hears him: But he also will not multiply Miracles unnecessarily.
We are to be doing, and make the best Use possible of the Talents with which he
has furnished us. Do you now wonder that all Europe* should be filled with
Admiration, at the Wisdom and Magnanimity of our great King, and the Valor of
our Countrymen; though, by every reflecting Person, the happy Issue is
accounted a Miracle? Can it seem strange to any one, that our admirable Hero
conducts every Thing with the greatest Circumspection and Prudence, and lets
nothing escape him which may forward the Success of his Views; yet should refer
to God alone, all the Honor of the Prosperiety of his Armies?

O give Thanks unto the Lord, extol his Name, make known his Deeds among the
Nations. Ye the Seed of Abraham his Chosen, sing unto him, and praise him, and
proclaim the Wonders which he has wrought. He is the Lord our God! Psalm. cv.

Let us now, dearly beloved Brethren, with Fervor and Devotion, bow before
him; and, from the Bottom of our Hearts, call upon him. the Lord does not
despise you, and casts not away his Covenant with you; for he is your God.

Lord of Hosts, God of Sabbath! thou host glorified thy Servant FREDERICK, and,
for his Sake, have thou done mighty Things. Continue to give him his Heart's
Desire. O grant that the Sword of Destruction may be sheathed; and say to the
Angel of Death, Hold thy Hand. May the Shepherds of thy People, the Princes of
the Earth, live before thee in Peace and Tranquillity: And may Truth and the
Knowledge of the Lord fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea. Bless the
Family of thy Servant FREDERICK, that it may continue forever before thee; for
what thou blessest, Lord is blessed for ever. Help thy People, the Remains of
thy Israel; and, in our Days, may the Redemmer, come to Zion. Amen.

FINIS.

