MINUTES OF CONFERENCES, HELD AT LANCASTER, In AUGUST, 1762. With the SACHEMS
and WARRIORS of several Tribes of Northern and Western INDIANS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. MDCCLXIII.

Minutes of Conferences, etc.
At a COUNCIL held at Lancaster, on Wednesday the Eleventh of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR; WILLIAM
LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, and BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires.


THE Governor having been informed last Week, at Philadelphia, that in
Consequence of several Invitations sent by this Government, at sundry Times, to
the Indians living on and near the Ohio, the Delaware Chief Beaver, and the
Deputies of other Tribes of Western Indians, would be at Lancaster on the
Eighth Instant; sat out from Philadelphia, attended by several Gentlemen, and
came here on the Ninth Instant, and found that the Indians had arrived the
Evening before.

On the Tenth the Governor, attended by the Gentlemen abovementioned, with
several of the Inhabitants of this Town, paid a Visit to Beaver, and the other
Indians, at their Encampment, about a Mile from the Town, where he took them by
the Hand, and bid them heartily welcome; and having seen that they were well
accommodated, took his Leave, and came back to Town.

The Governor Yesterday Afternoon received a Message from Beaver, that having
been a long Time from Home, they would take it very kindly if he would be
pleased to open the Conferences with them Tomorrow Morning, without waiting
any longer for the Six Nations, as he and those Indians with him were the first
invited, and were only made acquainted with the coming of the Six Nations since
they left their Homes.

The Governor returned them for Answer, that the Interpreter was not come; but
as soon as he should arrive, he would immediately proceed to Business with
them, and give them Notice when to attend.

This Afternoon arrived Six Tuscarora Indians, who waited on the Governor, and
acquainted him, that they were sent to him by those of their Nation, living at
Onohoquage, on the Upper Waters of the Sasquehannah, with a Letter; which,
after the Ceremony of opening his Eyes and Heart, by a String of Wampum, they
delivered to him, and it follows in these Words. --

Lower Tuscarora, Onohoquage, July 8, 1762.

Great Brother,

"I the Bearer, Augus, Chief of the Nation, am, and ever have been, a Friend
and Brother to the English, and to the Interest of Great Britain, now wait upon
your Excellency, by Agreement, to transact Affairs of Importance; and heartily
rejoice that the Five Nations have agreed to, and (as I hear) have actually
returned the English Prisoners, to enjoy the Liberties of their own Nation. --
And I the said Augus, Chief, with my whole Tribe, have ever been for Peace with
the English Colonies in America, and have minded the Things of Religion, and of
a private Life. And as true Friends to the Protestant Cause, we congratulate
your Excellency, our Brother, and all the British Nation, on the various
Conquests obtained against the common Enemy, and especially on the total
Reduction of Canada, with its Dependences, being greatly delighted with the
happy Prospect that now arises, without Clouds. As we rejoice to hear that the
Prisoners are resigned, so we hope a Peace will be established between us, the
Five Nations, and the English colonies on the Continent; a Peace that shall be
lasting and undisturbed, while the Waters run, and the Grass grows. -- We
should be glad to be informed of the State and Behavior of our Brethren in
Tuscarora Valley, and to have some Directions about the Way, as we propose to
make them a Visit; and also should be glad of a Pass, or Recommendation in
Writing, that we may be friendly received on the Way, and at the Valley.

I am your Brother, AUGUS, Chief."

The above was taken from the Mouth of the said Augus, Tuscarora Chief, by the
Help of an Interpreter, by me ELI FORBES, Missionary at Onchoquage.

After the Governor had read the Letter, they delivered him a Belt of Wampum,
to confirm the Sincerity of their Professions contained in the said Letter.

They then delivered the Governor another Belt from the Nanticokes and Conoys,
as a Testimony of their joining with the Tuscaroras in the same sincere
Professions.

The Governor acquainted them that he would take the Letter into Consideration,
and at a proper Time return them an Answer.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians held at Lancaster, on Thursday the Twelfth of
August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires, of the Council of the
Province; JOSEPH FOX, GEORGE ASHBRIDGE, JAMES WRIGHT, SAMUEL RHOADS, JAMES
WEBB, Esquires, of the Assembly, and several Magistrates, and a Number of
Gentlemen from Philadelphia, and other Parts of the Province. Tomago, or
Beaver, Chief of the Ohio Delawares, and Twenty-two others, most of them
Warriors; Wendocalla, Chief of the Ohio Delawares, and Twenty-two others, most
of them Warriors; Tissacoma, Chief of the Ohio Delawares, and Twenty-two
others, most of them Warriors; Akis, Chief of the Tuscaroras; Lenaskocana,
Chief of the Tuscaroras; Enasquana, Chief of the Tuscaroras; Miskepalathy, or
Red Hawk, Chief of the Shawanese, and Ten other Warriors; Wapemashehawy, or
White Elk, Chief of the Shawanese, and Ten other Warriors; Magalacutway, Chief
of the Shawanese, and Ten other Warriors; Cakakey, Chief of the Kickapoe
Nation; Micathie, Chief of the Kickapoe Nation; Teacott, Chief of the
Wawachtanies; Wiougha, Chief of the Wawachtanies; Weatona, Chief of the
Wawachtanies; Paoughawe, Chief of the Twightwee Nation; Cottalinnea, Chief of
the Twightwee Nation; Nenaouseca, Chief of the Twightwee Nation; Sawnaughakey,
Chief of the Twightwee Nation; ISAAC STILLE, and FREDERICK POST, Interpreters.


AFTER the Indians had taken their Seats, the Governor opened the Conferences
with the following Speech.

Brethren the Delawares, Shawanese, Twightwees, Wawachtanies, Tuscaroras, and
Kickapoes,

With this String I clean your Bodies from the Dust and Sweat, and open your
Eyes and Ears, that you may see your Brethren with Cheerfulness, and hear
distinctly what I have to say to you at this Conference.

A String (480)

Brethren,

With this String I open the Passage to your Hearts, that you may speak freely,
and without Reserve, as Brethren ought to do when they meet together.

A String (260)

Brethren,

It is now a great while since we have had the Pleasure of meeting one another
in Council, wherefore I take this Opportunity of condoling with you for the
Losses you may have sustained by the Death of any of your People, and with this
String I gather up the Bones of our deceased Brethren, and bury them decently,
according to the Custom of our Forefathers.

A String (460)

Brethren,

With this String I disperse the dark Clouds, which for many Years have hung
over our Heads, and prevented our seeing each other, that we may for the future
meet and confer together, as our Fathers used to do, and brighten and renew the
Covenant Chain of Friendship, for our mutual Benefit and Advantage.

A String (300)

Brethren,

As the Council Chamger has contracted much Dust, for Want of Use for some
Years past, and has also been stained with Blood, I, with this String, sweep
it quite clean, and wipe all Blood from off the Seats, that we may sit down and
confer together, without seeing any Thing to interrupt us, or make us uneasy.

A String (280)

Brethren,

Having now wiped your Eyes, opened the Way to your Hearts, and cleansed the
Council Seats, I, by this Belt, take you by the Hand, and bid you heartily
welcome, and assure you, that I am ready to do every Thing in my Power to
strengthen and preserve that Brotherly Love and Friendship, which so long
subsisted between your Ancestors and His Majesty's Subjects of this Government.

A Belt.

The Governor then told them he had finished what he had to say to them at
present, and that if they were prepared to speak to him at this Time, he was
ready to hear them; if not, he would appoint another Time for that Purpose.

Beaver, the Chief of the Delawares, then spoke to the Governor as follows.

Brother,

We all rejoice to hear what you have said to us, and are glad that you have
cleansed us, and have spoke to us in the Manner which our Forefathers used to
do to one another. As we speak different Languages, we shall be glad of an
Opportunity of consulting among ourselves, and shall deliver what we have to
say to you Tomorrow Morning.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, held at Lancaster, on Friday, the Thirteenth
of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires, Members of the Council.
JOSEPH FOX, SAMUEL RHOADS, JAMES WRIGHT, JOHN MORTON, Esquires, of the
Assembly. The Chiefs and Deputies of the several Nations of Indians as before.


The Governor having told the Indians that he was ready to hear them,

Beaver, the Delaware Chief, spoke as follows.

Brother,

I HAVE heard what you said to me Yesterday, and am well pleased with it. You
have cleansed me, opened my Eyes, and cleaned my Ears in the same Manner as our
Forefathers used to do. You will now listen to me attentively; with this String
I also open your Eyes, and clean your Ears, that you may see me, and hear what
I have to say to you.

A String.

Brother,

When our Grandfathers used to meet together, they wiped the Tears from one
another Eyes, and with this String I now wipe the Tears from your Eyes, that
you may see clearly your Brothers now before you.

A String.

Brother,

When our Grandfathers used to meet our Brethren, they cleansed each others
Hearts, and took away all Grief and Sorrow out of them: -- By this String I do
likewise clean your Hearts, and remove all Sorrow and Grief from them, and
strengthen your Breath, that you may speak more freely to your Brothers here
before you.

A String.

Brother,

It is a great While since we saw one another; we here present are really very
glad to see you and all our Brethren well. -- It is about four Years ago since
we first received any Messages from you, and ever since we have been employed
in carrying good News to all the Nations round, who were rejoiced to hear it
from you. And we have been likewise ever since endeavoring to bring in your
Flesh and Blood, as you required it of us. Mr. Croghan, and the Commander at
Fort-Pitt, know that we have delivered many of them, and now we bring a few
more of them to you. There are some behind yet, and they meet with good Usage,
and live as we do, and choose to stay with us; but I hope they will come to you
after some Time, because you live better than we do.

A Belt.

Brother,

I heard you Yesterday, and was much rejoiced to hear you, as were all your
Brethren here present. You told me you had removed all the dark Clouds that
hung over us. I am rejoiced that the dark Clouds are dispersed, so that we can
see one another clearly.

By this Belt I do, on my Part, disperse the Clouds. Now, Brother, let us join
heartily, and put our Hands together, to put away the Clouds.

If we should see the Clouds rise again, let us join to remove them, and keep
Peace together, so that our Children and Grandchildren, when they meet, may
rejoice to see one another, and live to great Ages in Peace.

A Belt.

Brother,

We are rejoiced to see one another; all the dark Clouds are now scattered, and
the Sun shines clear upon us, and all the Nations who are our Friends. We see
plainly that good Road which our Grandfathers used, when they traveled to your
Council Fire, to consult about our Affairs, when we lived in Friendship.

Brother,

We will join with you to keep that Road open and good; I assure you it was
never yet quite stopped up; we find our old Council Fire, which our Grandfathers
made, is still burning; now by this Belt I collect dry Wood to put to the Fire,
and make it bigger, so that the Smoke may rise to the Skies; when other Nations
see it, they will know by the Light that I have been in Council with my
Brethren.

A Belt.

Beaver then got up, and holding a Belt in his Hand, said,

This Belt we received last Fall from Sir William Johnson, at Fort-Detroit, who
then informed us, that he had heard of the good Work of Peace in which we had
been engaged with our Brethren the English; which Belt represents us, the
Delawares, in the Middle, and the Western Nations of Indians at one End, and
the English at the other, Hand in Hand, together holding fast the Chain of
Friendship; and assured us, that if we held this Chain of Friendship fast, our
Children and Grandchildren should grow up, and live to great Ages. -- We were
so pleased with this, that we put it into our Hearts, and have always kept it
there till now.

And now, Brother, you have heard from me what passed between Sir William
Johnson and me. -- I assure you I will actually do what was desired of me, and
hold fast this Chain of Friendship. I assure you I will always do my Part in
keeping this Friendship firm, and the Nations to the Westward will do the same.
I desire all you, my Brethren, will be strong, and join heartily in keeping
this Friendship alive; which if you do, you and your Grandchildren shall arrive
at a great Age.

A Belt.

Brother,

I desire you will take Pity on those of our Brothers that live or come amongst
you, and be kind to them. Our Brethren live among you, because they love you.
When any of our Brothers the English come amongst us, we always take Pity on
them, and give them Victuals, to make their Bodies strong; and we desire that
you will do the same to such of us as come amongst you, or live with you.

A Belt.

Brother,

I have no more to say at present; I shall wait to hear what you have to say to
us at another Time. You desired me to bring other Nations of Indians with me,
and I have brought them a great Way, who also wait to hear what you have to say.

The Governor then acquainted Beaver, that he was well pleased to hear what
they had said to him; and that he received it into his Heart, and should take a
proper Opportunity to give them an Answer.

The Governor rose and went to the Place where the English Prisoners sat, and
received them one by one, from the Hands of King Beaver, and here follow their
Names. Thomas Moore, taken from Potowmack, Maryland. Philip Studebecker, taken
from Conegocheague, Ditto. Ann Dougherty, taken from Pennsylvania. Peter
Condon, taken from Ditto. Mary Stroudman, taken from Conegocheague, Ditto.
William Jackson, taken from Tulpehocken, Ditto. Elizabeth M' Adam, taken from
Little Cove, Ditto. John Lloyd, taken from Ditto, Ditto. Eleanor Lancestoctes,
taken from Ditto. Dorothy Shobrin, taken from Big Cove, Ditto. Richard Rogers,
taken from Virginia. Esther Rogers, taken from Ditto. Jacob Rogers, taken from
South Branch, Ditto. Archibald Woods, taken from Ditto. Christopher Holtomen,
taken from Ditto. Rebecca Walter, taken from Ditto. Hans Boyer, a Boy, taken
from not known from whence.


FRIDAY, AUGUST 13, 1762. This Afternoon Tokahaion, and a Number of the Six
Nation Indians coming to Town, about Fifteen of them waited on the Governor, at
his Lodgings, and Tokahaion spoke to the Governor as follows.

Brother,

We were some Time ago invited by you, and our Brethren the Quakers of this
Province, to come to this Treaty at Lancaster, with our Cousins the Delawares.
Agreeable to this Invitation, we came down as far as Harris's Ferry, where we
heard that you intended to return Home Tomorrow, which induced us to make all
the Haste we could to this Place, that we might have the Pleasure of seeing
you. On our Way one of our Brethren died, but our Hurry was so great that we
threw his Body aside, and did not so much as stay to bury him. We are just come
to Town, and pay you this Visit to take you by the Hand, and let you know we
are glad to see you. We must request of you to order your People to lock up all
Rum, and not let our Indians have any, till the End of our Conferences. -- He
added, that they had seen the Cabbins which had been built to accommodate them,
but that they were at so great a Distance from the Place where their Cousins
the Delawares were lodged, that they could not conveniently discourse with
them; wherefore he desired that others might be provided near to them Tomorrow.

The Governor took them by the Hand, and after bidding them welcome, told them
that they were misinformed respecting his designing to return Home Tomorrow;
that as he heard they were on their Way, he had waited some Days, in
Expectation of their coming, and was now glad to see them; that he would do
every Thing in his Power, during their Stay here, to render their Situation
easy and agreeable to them, and would give strict Orders that no Rum should be
sold to them; that the Field where the Delawares were encamped, being too small
to accommodate them, he had pitched on a Place which he judged most convenient,
where Cabbins had been built, by his Order, for their Reception, at a
considerable Expense of Time and Money, which he hoped they would be well
pleased with; but if, on Trial, they should still be dissatisfied with that
Situation, he would remove them where they thought most proper; and that when
they had rested themselves, after the Fatigues of the long Journey they had
come, he would speak to them, and give them sufficient Notice of the Time, that
they might be prepared to meet him in Council. -- They were refreshed with a
Draught of Beer, and then took their Leaves, and departed.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, held at Lancaster, on Saturday the
Fourteenth of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, and BENJAMIN CHEW, Esquires, of the Council;
JOSEPH FOX, Esquire, of the Assembly, etc. JAMES WRIGHT, Esquire, of the
Assembly, etc. SAMUEL RHOADS, Esquire, of the Assembly, etc. JOHN MORTON,
Esquire, of the Assembly, etc. GEORGE ASHBRIDGE, Esquire, of the Assembly, etc.
JOSEPH GIBBONS, Esquire, of the Assembly, etc. DAVID McCONAUGHY, Esquire, of
the Assembly, etc.
The Western INDIANS, as before;
Hinderuntie, or the Garr, Senecas; Hogastees, Senecas; Hajentora, Speaker,
etc. Senecas; Tokahaion, Cayugas; Totinyentunya, Cayugas; Onechsogaret,
Cayugas; Gachradodo, Cayugas; Soghiowa, Cayugas; Dochneghdoris, or John
Shacalamy; Cayugas; Diohaguaande, Onandagoes; Hoghsetageg^^, Onandagoes;
Cagentorongu^^, Onandagoes; Thomas King, Oneidas; Conogoragheri, or Hans
George, Oneidas; Tiokoraghta, Oneidas; Ganigal, Tionaskocto, Tuskaroras;
Teedyuscung, Delawares; Tapeskohonk, or Samuel, Delawares; Wehololahund, or
Joseph Peepy, Delawares; Memenowal, or Augustus, Delawares; Kakolopomet, or
Compass, Delawares; Naywolaken, Delawares; Penowotis, or John Philip,
Delawares; Ullauckquam, or Robert White, Nanticokes and Conoys.
Olaykenawightamen, or Jemmy, Nanticokes and Conoys. Canahatch, or Last Night,
Nanticokes and Conoys. Tuchsat, or Sam, Nanticokes and Conoys.
Packsowamuchquis, or Charles, Nanticokes and Conoys. Packetellam, or Sam Adams,
and several others, Nanticokes and Conoys.
A List of the Northern INDIANS, including Men, Women, and Children, at the
Treaty at Lancaster, August 1762.
Oneidas, 156. Onondagoes, 156. Tuscaroras, 156. Nanticokes, 156. Conoys, 156.
Senecas, -- 97. Cayugas, and 128. Saponys, and a Mixture of 128. Shawanese and
Munseys, 128. TEEDYUSCUNG, and the Delawares with him, 176. In all, 557.


THE Governor sent a Message to the Six Nations, and those that came along with
them, to acquaint them, that he was going into Conference with the Western
Nations, at which they might be present, if they pleased; and on their coming
in, and taking their Seats, the Governor spoke to the Western Indians as
follows.

Brethren the Delawares, Shawanese, Twightwees, Wawachtanies, Tuscaroras, and
Kickapoes,

I return you Thanks for your Speeches of Yesterday, which were very agreeable
to me; and I shall now give you an Answer to such Parts thereof as require one.

Brethren,

Before I take Notice of what you said Yesterday, let me remind you of the
strict Friendship which was established with your Forefathers, by our old
Proprietor William Penn, on his first Arrival in this Country, and how happily
it subsisted between them and their Children, till the Troubles which
unfortunately broke out some few Years ago, and stopped up the Road between us.
The many Messages which we have since, from Time to Time, sent you, by
Frederick Post and Teedyuscung, and the great Pains we have taken to drive away
the Evil Spirit, plainly show how sincerely we have been disposed to renew that
Friendship.

Brethren,

You acquainted me, that after receiving our first Message about Place, which
was about four Years ago, you made it known to all the Indian Nations on this
Side, and over the Lakes, who were glad to hear the good News; and as we
desired you to deliver up our Flesh and Blood, you say that you have, from Time
to Time, delivered up many at Fort-Pitt, to the Commanding Officer, and to Mr.
Croghan, and that you now have brought in a few, which you delivered to me
Yesterday. You likewise say, you have yet others in your Possession, and that
some of them choose to live with you; but you made no Doubt of their coming to
us some Time hence; as we live better than the Indians.

Brethren,

For the Prisoners that you have delivered at Fort-Pitt, as well as for those
you have now brought along with you, and delivered to me, I return you my
hearty Thanks; but you must remember, that on re-establishing and renewing the
ancient Chain of Friendship with us, you repeatedly engaged to deliver us all
our Flesh and Blood, which you have taken from us, by the Instigation of the
Evil Spirit. On these Assurances and Engagements we have relied, and as we
cannot enjoy the Blessings we expected from that Peace, till the Parents and
Relations of those Prisoners have them restored to them, I must insist on your
taking every Measure in your Power to deliver them up, agreeable to your
Engagements, which will be the only Means of strengthening and establishing a
lasting Peace, to us and our Children, yet unborn.

A large Belt of Thirteen Rows.

Brethren,

You Yesterday, by this Belt, said you would join with me in dispersing the
dark Clouds, which have for some Time hung over our Heads; and desired I would
join with you, in hearty Endeavors to prevent any more Clouds from rising, or
if they should chance to rise, from coming to an Head.

Brethren,

GOD, who made all Things, has given us Eyes to see, and Tongues to speak to
each other, freely and openly; and I assure you, if I should see any little
Clouds arise, at never so great a Distance, I will take every Measure in my
Power to prevent their increasing, and communicate it to you forthwith; and if
you do the same to me, at all Times, it will prevent any Clouds from gathering
to an Head, so as to disturb the public Peace and Tranquillity, which have been
lately so happily established between us.

A Belt of Seven Rows.

Brethren,

It gave me great Satisfaction Yesterday, to hear you declare your Intentions
to keep open the Council Road between your Nation and us. As a small
Interruption on that Communication may be attended with dangerous Consequences
to us both, I heartily join with you in keeping the Road open, and perfectly
clear from Obstructions, for our mutual Use and Advantage.

I likewise take it kind in you to heap up dry Wood on our Council Fire, and I,
on my Part, shall still add more Wood to it, that the Smoke thereof may be seen
by the most distant Nations of Indians, to the Sunsetting, that are in
Friendship with His Majesty's Subjects.

A Belt of Nine Rows.

Brethren,

Yesterday you showed me a Belt, with the Figures of three Men in it, which you
say you received from Sir William Johnson last Fall, at the Conference he held
with all the Western Nations of Indians, at Fort-Detroit, repeating what he
said to you on it; all which Transactions there I am acquainted with, by Sir
William Johnson, who, as His Majesty's Superintendant of Indian Affairs, did
then renew the ancient Covenant Chain of Friendship, in Behalf of all His
Majesty's Subjects, with all those Western Nations of Indians. You say further,
that since you received that Covenant Belt, you laid it close to your Heart;
and, by this Belt, you assure me that you, and all the Western Nations, are
determined to adhere strictly to that Treaty and Renewal of Friendship; and
desire me to be strong, and hold it fast.

Brethren,

You must remember, that you then not only promised Sir William Johnson to
deliver up all our Flesh and Blood, who were Prisoners in your several Towns
and Countries; but that this Promise was an express Condition of that Treaty,
made between him and you. This Matter lies so near to my Heart, that I should
not act as your true and sincere Friend, if I did not speak with the greatest
Freedom and Plainness to you about it, and tell you again, that it is
impossible we can look upon you as our Brethren, if you detain from as our
Flesh and Blood; we cannot sleep quietly in our Beds, till we see them all; our
very Dreams are disturbed on their Account; we demand of you nothing more than
the Right which God and Nature has given us.

If we had among us ever so few of your Children, would you think that any
Professions of Friendship we could make to you were sincere, if we withheld
them from you but for one Day? Your Brother Teedyuscung may remember, that at
our first consering with him, at Easton, we had then one of your People in
Prison, and he thought it so grievous a Thing, that he told us he could not
speak freely to us, and should look upon what we said as coming not from our
Hearts, but from our Mouths only, until the said Prisoner was restored to him;
which was immediately done. Can you then delay doing us that Justice, which you
yourselves expected and received from us! We do not well understand your
Meaning, when you say, some of the Prisoners choose to live with you. If you
intend it as a Reason for not delivering them up, till they consent to come, we
must inform you, that we cannot admit of it. They were born Subjects of our
Great King, and as such, he has a Right to demand them. You have, it is true,
by the Delivery of some of the Prisoners, performed your Agreement in Part; but
as we know, and you acknowledge, there are a great many yet behind, we now
insist positively, that you do not fail, immediately on your Return, to collect
every one that remains among you, and deliver them up to us. Relying therefore
on your Honesty, and that you will faithfully comply with an Engagement you
have so solemnly made with us, I do, by this Belt, in Behalf of all His
Majesty's Subjects of this Province, lay Hold of that Covenant Belt, and will
keep it fast, that we, our Children, and Grandchildren, may long enjoy the
Blessings of Peace, and live together as Brethren, tilt they are old Men.

A Belt of Fifteen Rows.

Brethren,

I thank you for the kind Entertainment which you always give to any of our
People who live with you, or come among you. I am persuaded, that such of you
who have either lived or come amongst us occasionally, have always found that
we received and treated them with the same Kindness that we used to do. We are
Brethren, and while we live and love like Brethren, we shall be sure to give
one another a Share of what we have.

A Belt.

At a CONFERENCE with the Six Nation Indians, held at Lancaster, on Monday the
Sixteenth of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
etc. as before.

THE Governor, addressing himself to the Indians present, spoke as follows.

Brethren of the Six Nations, and all other our Brethren now present, We are
glad to see you, and with this String we bid you heartily welcome.

A String.

Brethren,

So long a Journey as you have now taken must have been very fatiguing, and
made your Bodies very dirty; with this String therefore I clean your Bodies,
and wipe off all the Sweat and Dirt from them.

A String.

Brethren,

As you came along, you must have hurt your Feet with the Stones, and torn your
Legs with the Bushes and Briars; I therefore apply some healing Oil to them,
and make them well.

A String.

Brethren,

With this String I open your Eyes, and clean your Ears, that you may see your
Brethren clearly, and hear distinctly what they shall have to say to you.

A String.

Brethren,

With this String I clear your Throats, and open the Passage to your Hearts,
that we may confer together freely and affectionately, as our Forefathers used
to do.

A String.

Brethren,

Having now cleansed your Bodies, opened your Eyes and Ears, cleared your
Throats, and made a Passage to your Hearts, I am now ready and disposed to hear
every Thing that you have to say to me.

Then Thomas King stood up, and spoke as follows, viz.

Brother,

We are well pleased to hear what you have said to us, and as we are of
different Nations, and speak different Languages, we shall take Time to
consider and explain what you have said, and Tomorrow, after Breakfast, I
shall give you Notice when we shall be ready to speak to you.

A String.

Brother,

I take this Opportunity to acquaint you, that all our Guns, Hatchets, and
other Things, are out of Repair, and we beg you will give Orders that they may
be forthwith mended.

A String.

The Governor granted them their Request, and told them their Guns, etc. should
be mended, and desired that they might be brought to the Council House, for
that Purpose.

At a CONFERENCE with the Western Indians, held at Lancaster, on Monday, the
Sixteenth of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON; Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
etc. as before.

THE Governor having acquainted the Indians that he was ready to hear what they
had to say,

Beaver, a Delaware Chief, spoke as follows.

Brother,

I do not choose to speak now myself, as I do not speak clearly and distinctly,
and therefore shall appoint this Indian, named Cleghiccon (in English, Simon)
to speak for me.

Then Cleghiccon spoke.

Brother,

The Day before Yesterday you spoke to me, and I have heard you, and we your
Brethren, the Western Indians, have all been consulting about it.

Brother,

I now inform you, in Behalf of my Grandchildren, the Tawwas, they have none of
your Flesh and Blood left in their Towns, for they have delivered them all up
to you: Likewise in Behalf of my Grandchildren, the Twightwees, they have
delivered them all up also, and have none left; Also on Behalf of the
Wawaghtanies, they have none of your Prisoners, for they have also delivered
them all up: And lastly, on Behalf of another Nation, called the Kickapoes,
they say they never had any Prisoners.

Brother,

The Day before Yesterday I heard what you said, and I assure you I am very
well pleased with it. From what you have said, I suppose this Matter of the
Prisoners to be the principal Business for which you invited us here.

Brother,

I have told you I left some of your Flesh and Blood where I came from, and I
assure you I look upon them as my own Flesh and Blood, and I assure you again,
you shall see them some Time hence.

Brother,

I am very well pleased that you have demanded them now, and assure you, you
shall have every one of them that remain with us.

Brother,

You may remember that you told me, we should deliver all the Prisoners at
Pittsburgh, and I shall be glad you would now show to me the Persons here whom
you shall appoint to receive those our Friends, and we shall be glad of it.

A Belt of Seven Rows.

Then Beaver stood up, and spoke.

Brother,

This is all I have to say to you. We, the Western Indians, have nothing
further to say to you. You know that we spoke three Days ago to you, about the
Friendship between us.

Brother,

The next Nation that have a Mind to speak to you are our Grandchildren, the
Shawanese, and they are now about to speak.

Then Miskapalathy, a Shawanese, rose up and spoke.

Brother,

I have heard what you and the Chief Men have been confering about, and now I
desire you will hear your younger Brothers, the Shawanese. Our Chief Men are
not here, but we are sent by the Chief Men, to speak for them, and what we say
comes from their Hearts. There are several of our Nation here, though but two
of us are deputed by our Chiefs.

Brother,

I am very well pleased to hear you have cleansed our Council House. Now,
though we who are lest are like Boys, I assure you we will assist you to (...)
our Council Chamber, and we will do it always from our Hearts.

A Belt of Eight Rows.

Brother,

You have heard what I had to say last Fall: George Croghan knows it, and I
suppose you know it. I told him then, that I would cut all the Prisoners loose,
and set them at Liberty.

Brother,

I have heard what you said to my Grandfathers, the Delawares, respecting the
Demand of your Flesh and Blood, and I am very well pleased with your Demand;
and I now assure you I am in a Hurry to get Home, for they, your Flesh and
Blood, yet remain there.

Brother,

I have heard what you said. Now I shall depart very soon. I expect to meet my
People, and all the Prisoners, at Pittsburgh, where I shall deliver them up,
and you shall then hear what I shall have further to say to you.

A String.

Brother,

Now you have heard what I have said to you, and it is all I intend to say to
you.

Brother,

I now want to mention something to you about our Trade with you.

Brother,

We of the Shawanese Twightwees, Ottaways, Wawaghtanies, and Kiekapoes, desire
you will take Pity on us. Our Chief Men at Home have their Eyes on us Boys, who
came with our Grandfathers, the Delawares, to talk with you about Friendship.
We have now concluded our Friendship with you. I now desire you will open a
Trade with us, and that you will not be too hard in it. If you open a Trade
among the back Nations, we desire to know at what Prices you can afford your
Goods.

A Belt of Seven Rows.

The Governor asking the Names of the two Shawanese Chiefs, or Deputies, was
informed they were called Miskapalathy, or the Red Hawke, and Wapemashaway, or
the White Horse. The Governor told them he had heard what they had said, and it
was very agreeable to him, and that he would give them Notice when he should
return them an Answer.

At a CONFERENCE with the Western Indians, held at Lancaster, on Wednesday, the
Eighteenth of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc, etc. as
before.

THE Governor, addressing himself to Beaver, and the Delawares from the Ohio,
spoke as follows, viz.

Brethren,

Listen to me, while I give you an Answer to the Speeches that you made to me
on Monday.

You spoke to me in Behalf of your Grandchildren, the Tawwas, Twightwees,
Wawaghtanies, and Kickapoes, acquainting me that they had respectively
delivered up all our People, who were Prisoners in their Towns during the War

Brether,

Let them know, that we esteem this as the greatest Mark they could have given
us of the Sincerity of their Friendship, and by this Belt we return them our
hearty Thanks.

Brethren,

You told us that our demanding the Prisoners at this Time, and in the Manner
we have done it, was very agreeable to you; and you supposed it was the
principal Business for which we invited you here.

Brethren,

You judge right, in thinking that the Affair of our Prisoners was a principal
Reason of our inviting you here; it really was so, for we had it very much at
Heart.

Another Reason of our desiring to see you was, that we might renew our ancient
Friendship, and brighten and strengthen the Covenant Chain, which so long and
happily subsisted between our Ancestors. This last has now been done to our
mutual Satisfaction, and it has given me, and all the good People present, the
highest Pleasure to hear from your own Mouths that, agreeable to our Demand,
you are determined to deliver up all the Prisoners that remain in your Towns,
to such Persons as I shall appoint to receive them, at Pittsburgh.

Brethren,

I have not yet concluded upon the Persons to be sent to Pittsburgh, for that
Purpose, but you may be assured I shall very soon; who, when they come, will
bring with them a Message and full Credentials from me; by which you will know,
that they are deputed by me to receive the Prisoners from you. I propose they
shall be at Pittsburgh the Second Day of October next, by which Time I expect
you will have collected all of them, and brought them to that Place.

A String.

Brethren,

We shall now return an Answer to your Grandchildren the Shawanese.

Brethren the, Shawanese,

You told me, at your last Meeting, that you were pleased to hear what had
passed between us and your Grandfathers, and with our having cleaned the
Council Chamber, which you said you would always assist in keeping clean. You
told us also, that your Chief Men are not here, but have deputed you to speak
for them, and that what you shall say comes from their Hearts.

Brethren,

As we have been very sincere and open in every Thing we have said to your
Grandfathers, we should have been glad that more of your Chiefs had been here,
to have heard it; but as they are not, we desire you will acquaint them, and
all your Nation, that we are extremely well disposed toward them, and are
determined to hold fast the Chain of Friendship that has been so happily
renewed between us, and are glad to hear you will always readily assist us to
keep the Council Chamber clean.

A Belt.

Brethren,

You told me that you had sent me Word last Fall, by Mr. Croghan, that you
would cut all the Bands of the Prisoners loose, and set them at Liberty; that
you were pleased to hear the Demand I made of your Grandfathers, that they
might all be delivered up; that you expect to meet your People, and all the
Prisoners, at Pittsburgh, where you will deliver them; and that you are in a
Hurry to go Home, for that Purpose.

Brethren,

Mr. Croghan delivered me your Message last Fall, and I was very well pleased
to hear you had concluded to set out People at Liberty; and I am the more so,
to hear that you expect your People may be on the Way to Pittsburgh, with the
Prisoners, and that you will deliver them up immediately; and your desiring to
return Home forthwith, for that Purpose, convinces me you are in earnest, and I
much approve of it.

Brethren,

You desired we would open a Trade with you, and the other Western Nations, and
not be too hard in our dealing with them. I must address my Answer not only to
you, but to the Delawares, and all present, who I desire may listen attentively
to it.

Brethren,

Trade is a Business of Importance, and what I intended to mention to you all
at this Meeting. You know that, for some Years past, this Government has kept
a great Store at Pittsburgh, in order to supply you with Goods, in Exchange for
your Skins and Furs, near your own Homes. Good Men have been appointed to
regulate the Prices of our Goods, and your Skins, and great Care has been taken
that you should not be cheated, or imposed upon, by those who have, from Time
to Time, kept the Provincial Store; but I am sorry to inform you, that the
Charges of carrying our Goods, and bringing back your Skins, so many Hundred
Miles, on Horseback, are so high, that it is a great Discouragement to that
Trade, and we lose a great Deal of Money by it every Year, insomuch that I sear
it will drop, unless your Uncles, the Six Nations, will consent to let us go,
with our Canoes, up the West Branch of Sasquehannah, as far as we can, and
build a few Storehouses on the Banks of that River, to secure our Goods in, as
we pass and re-pass. This will cut off a long Land Carriage, and may be a Means
of encouraging the Continuance of the Trade with you, and enabling our People
to sell their Goods to you at a reasonable Rate. -- We intend to speak to your
Uncles on this Subject.

Brethren,

I have now finished my Answers to your several Speeches, but I have still
something particularly to say to Beaver, and our Brethren of the Delaware
Nation, living at Allegheny, and desire you will attend to me.

Brethren the Delawares,

I take this Opportunity to inform you, that about Six Years ago your Brother
Teedyuscung made a Complaint against the Proprietaries, wherein he charged them
with defrauding the Delawares of a Tract of Land, lying on the River Delaware,
between Tohiccon-Creck and the Kittatinny Hills. He alleged, that this
Complaint was not made by him, on his own Account, but on Behalf of the Owners
of the Land, many of whom, he said, lived at Allegheny. This Dispute, Brethren,
was, by mutual Consent, refered to our Great King GEORGE, who ordered Sir
William Johnson to enquire fully into the Matter, and make his Report to Him,
that Justice might be done you, if you had been wronged. Accordingly Sir
William, about two Months ago, came to Easton, where, on the Proprietaries
Commissioners producing and reading sundry Writings and Papers, Teedyuscung was
convinced of his Error, and acknowledged that he had been mistaken with Regard
to the Charge of Forgery made against the Proprietaries, having been
misinformed by his Ancestors, and desired that all further Disputes about Land
should be buried under Ground, and never heard of more; offering that such of
the Indians as were then present should sign a Release for the Land in
Question, and that he would endeavor to persuade the rest of his Brethren who
were concerned to do the same at this Treaty at Lancaster. Now, Brethren of
Allegheny, as we are Face to Face, be plain, and tell whether you are satisfied
with, and approve of, what was done at the last Treaty at Easton, and whether
you lay any Claim to those Lands, that there may be no Room left for any future
Dispute about it among our Children.

A small Belt.

To which Beaver said,

Brother,

As to my own Part, I know nothing about the Lands upon the River Delaware; but
since you request it, I will first speak to my own People about it.

Then Beaver consulting with his Counselors, returned the following Answer.

Brother,

I must acknowledge I know nothing about the Lands upon the Delaware, and I
have no Concern with Lands upon that River. We know nothing of the Delawares
Claim to them. I have no Claim myself, nor any of my People. I suppose there
may be some Spots or Pieces of Land, in some Parts of the Province, that the
Delawares claim; but neither I nor any of my People know any Thing of them. As
to what you and our Brother Teedyuscung have done, if you are both pleased, I
am pleased with it. As to my Part, I want to say nothing about Land Affairs;
what I have at Heart, and what I came down about, is to confirm our Friendship,
and make a lasting Peace, so as our Children and Grandchildren may live
together in everlasting Peace, after we are dead.

Teedyuscung and his Delawares being present, something passed between them,
which was not interpreted.

The Governor, addressing himself to Beaver, said,

I am very much pleased with what you have said; you speak like an honest Man,
and I hope that the Friendship that has been made between us and our Brethren,
the Delawares, will remain firm, as long as the Sun shines, and the Rivers run.

Teedyuscung then stood up, and addressing himself to the Governor, said,

Brother,

Before all these Allegheny Indians here present, I do now assure you, that I
am ready and willing to sign a Release to all the Lands we have been disputing
about, as I told you I would at Easton, and desire no more may be ever said or
heard of them hereafter.

On which the Governor told Teedyuscung, that he was pleased with what he had
said, and that on that Occasion he had acted like an honest Man.

The Governor then concluded.

Brethren,

Your Brothers, the Proprietaries, about three Years ago, directed me, as soon
as Teedyuscung's Complaint against them was determined, and Justice done to
their Characters, to make their old Friends, the Delawares, a Present, in their
Name, to supply your Waists, and as a Mark of their Affection and Regard for
you, and to convince you that they had no ill Will in their Hearts against you,
but looked upon you as formerly to be their good Friends and Brothers. Now as
that Dispute is happily at an End, I am at Liberty to follow their Directions,
and shall accordingly order a Present of Goods to be delivered to you from the
Proprietaries.

At a CONFERENCE with the Northern Indians, held at Lancaster, on Thursday, the
Nineteenth of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, etc. etc. as before.

THOMAS KING, a Chief of the Oneidas, stood up, and spoke as follows, viz.

Brother,

Hearken to what I am going to say, in Answer to your Speech to me the Day
before Yesterday. I return you my Thanks; it gives me Pleasure that we see one
another, in the same Manner as our Forefathers used to do. -- Then taking up
the Strings delivered by the Governor in their Order, he repeated what had been
said upon them.

We are all very glad to see you, and your Brethren that are with you, in
Health. All die Six Nations, and our Nephews, have had interpreted to them all
that you said, and they are pleased with it, and very glad to see you, and that
it has pleased the Great GOD, who has all Power in his Hands, to suffer us to
come together, to speak to one another freely.

A String.

Then taking another String, he repeated the Governor's Words spoke upon it;
and, in the Name of all the Indians present, returned him Thanks for his taking
the Briars out of their Legs, and healing the Bruises that were made in their
Feet by the Stones.

A String.

Brother,

The other Day you cleared my Ears, and my Cousins here, for which I return you
Thanks; and now, by this String, I clear your Ears in the same Manner, thatyou
may hear what I have to say to you.

A String.

Brother,

You told me the other Day, that as we were come from afar, and the Roads were
very dusty, you cleansed our Throats from the Dust, and opened a Passage to our
Hearts; we all return you Thanks that you have cleansed us so far, and we do in
the same Manner clean your Throats and Hearts.

A String.

Brother,

You likewise told me you wiped the Tears from my Eyes, for the Loss of my
Friends, that we may see one another clearly, for which we all return you our
Thanks.

A String.

Brother,

It is now three Years since you first demanded of us your Flesh and Blood. Now
hear me, as to what I and all our Nations and our Allies, that live as far as
the Sunsetting, have done.

Brother,

I assure you, in Behalf of all of us present, and the Western Indians, of whom
you have been demanding your Flesh and Blood, that I have them here, and that
it is not my Fault, neither can I say our Maker has been the Cause, but the
French have been the Cause why you have not had them sooner.

Then directing his Discourse to his Brothers and Cousins, the Delawares, he
proceeded, and said,

I never had Occasion to go to War with the English Nation; the People I had
Occasion to go to War with live to the Southward; it has been so from all Ages,
and we have always gone to War against the Southern Indians; I never had Cause
to go to War with the English, this was owing to the Evil Spirit, the Devil.
When I used to go to War with the Southern Indians, and brought Prisoners Home,
I thought they were mine, and that no Body had any Right to meddle with them.
Now since I joined with you, I went to War again, and I brought French People
Home with me, as Prisoners, and you took them from me; this makes me think it
was owing to the Evil Spirit.

Brother,

I desire you to be strong. I have heard you often say, you would be very glad
if I would bring you the Captives, and you would make me Satisfaction, because
you know I am not as you are; I am of a quite different Nature from you;
sometimes I think you are not in Earnest with me, in telling me you will make
me Satisfaction.

Brother,

We have heard you, and so have all my Brothers and Cousins to the Westward
heard what you have said about giving us Satisfaction; your Words seem to be
very sweet to us. You told us if we did so and so, you would do so with us.

Brother,

You know we are different Nations, and have different Ways. We could not
immediately perform what you required of us, in returning your Flesh and Blood,
because every one of these Nations have different Ways; that is the Reason why
we could not so soon perform it.

Brother,

I am sorry it is so difficult for us to understand each other: If we could
understand one another, we would put one another in Mind of the Friendship that
subsisted between us and our Forefathers; but as we do not easily understand
one another, we are obliged to deliver you the Substance in short of what we
have to say, which makes it tedious. -- (Meaning that they are obliged to
interpret in two or three Languages, before it is told to us.)

Brother,

You have often told me, if I would bring your Flesh and Blood you would be
very glad, and would give such Prisoners Liberty to return with them, if they
did not incline to stay with you, and to go where they pleased.

A Belt of Eight Rows.

Thomas King being asked, who it was that promised the Prisoners should be left
to their Choice, to return with them, or to go where they pleased? He answered,
the Governor promised it at Easton, and there were two Governors there at that
Time. -- (Meaning Governor Denny, and Governor Bernard, of New Jersey.)

Brother Onas,

You have been requiring your Flesh and Blood these three Years; I promise you
I will give you them, and now I will deliver all I have brought.

A Belt of Eight Rows.

Brother Onas,

I am sorry we cannot speak to one another any faster, because we cannot
understand one another without so many Interpreters, and this takes up much
Time, so that we must be slow in telling our Business.

Brother Onas,

You have told us, of the Six Nations, that we must assist you to see your
Flesh and Blood. If we assist you, you say you shall see your Flesh and Blood.

Brother,

We have done what we can, and that is the Reason why you see so many of your
Flesh and Blood; some Indians part with them with Reluctance, and want to keep
them longer; they are unwilling to part with them, this brings a great deal of
Trouble on us, the Six Nations.

Brother Onas,

You have often told us, the Six Nations, that we should assist in getting your
Flesh and Blood. I have done my Endeavor, and taken great Pains: I have got a
great many of them, though at first with great Diffently: When I brought them
by the English Forts, they took them away from me; all along from Oswego to the
Carrying Place, and so to Niagara, till I got to Shamokin, they got them all
from me, and I believe they have made Servants of them; This is the Reason why
I brought so few of them: No Wonder they are so loath to come, when you make
Servants of them. You know that you have told me that I should assist you, you
cannot deny it: By and by you will say, I never told you to assist me, and that
I tell Lies when I say so.

Brother Onas,

You told me you would be very glad if I would bring you your Flesh and Blood,
and that you were able to make me Satisfaction for them: You said you had Rooms
full of Goods, and that we should never want any Thing while you have Goods:
You told me, we shall have a Recompense for our Trouble in bringing them down.
I assure you, I have brought all your Flesh and Blood that I could get at this
Time; there are some behind yet, but they belong to such People as are gone to
War against the Cherokees, and we could not take them without their Leave, and
when they return from War, we will certainly bring them.

Brother Onas,

I have brought Fourteen of your Flesh and Blood, that is all I could get this
Time; for as I told you, your People in the Forts have got them all away from
me, they have stole them, or persuaded them to run away from me, and have hid
them in the Bushes. As I told you, there are few left that belong to those
Indians that are gone to War against the Cherokees, with whom we have been at
War from all Ages, and they are at War with you; I assure you when they return,
we will bring them all to you. You used to tell me, I always came unawares upon
you, when I did come; you certainly knew that I was coming ever since last
Spring, and you might have got every Thing ready for me. There is one Captive
at the Camp that says he will not come, he says the Governor has seen him, and
talked with him at the Camp; all the rest are here.

A Belt.

Brother Onas,

It may be there are two Governors of you; your Messages and your Words do not
agree together; when I repeat what you have said to me, it seems disagreeable
to you.

Here the Governor asked what he meant by two Governors, and desired him to
explain himself, for he could not understand him.

He answered,

Brother,

You want to know what my Meaning is, by saying there are two Governors. In
every Country there is always one Head Governor, but here are two Governors. It
will not do for me to point out People, for you must certainly know there is
more than one Governor. I hear one say such a Thing, and another say such a
Thing; but I will not point out any Body, lest you should differ. You will hear
of it hereafter. I heard that both Governors came from Philadelphia, but
perhaps I may be misinformed.

The Governor desired to know, whether any Messages had been delivered to them
in their own Country, and by whom, and what the Messages were. He insisted on
their giving him a plain Answer.

They answered, that the Cayugas, who were at Philadelphia in the Spring,
brought the Messages to them; but do not pretend that they were delivered in
the Governor's Name, but they might have brought what passed only in private
Conversation.

Brother Onas,

As I have now brought your Flesh and Blood, I would have you to take Care of
them, and keep them fast. I brought a Girl to (...), and sthe run away: When I
came Home, I found her there. Bless me! says I, there in my Wife. I was sorry
that I had delivered her, but to my Surpries I found her at Home. You know it
is hard to part with a Wife.

Brother,

I have brought an English Prisoner, who I love as my own Wife: I have a young
Child by her. You know it is very hard for a Man to part with his Wife. I have
delivered her, therefore take Care of her, and keep her safe, that she don't
make her Escape.

Brother Onas,

Our Grandfathers used to tell us, we should keep fast Hold of the Chain of
Friendship, and always advised us to observe it; but now, in latter Days, as
soon as I came across the Hatchet, I got Hold of it, and really I did not know
what I was about, and stuck it into your Heads. By this Belt, I take the
Hatchet out of your Head; it belongs to you and the French; you are both of one
Color. It has been the Fault of the French that we struck you, and therefore
we take the Hatchet out of your Head.

A Belt of Eight Rows.

Brother Onas,

Now that I have taken the Hatchet out of your Head, I gather your Bones, which
lie seattered in so many Places, that I cannot name them particularly.

Brother,

There is a large Pine Tree in the Oneida Country, which I take and pull up by
the Roots, and then it makes a great Hole; when I look down the Hole, I see a
great River, running very strong at the Bottom. By this Belt I gather all your
Bones, wherever I can find them, and bury them in that Hole, and the Hatchet
with them; when I put them down the Hole, they fall into that strong Stream,
and float down it, I know not where. I stick that Pine Tree down again in the
same Hole, and then no Body can discover that there has been a Hole; so that
neither you nor I, nor our nor your Grandchildren, shall ever be able to know
where your Bones are laid. This is the Custom of our Forefathers, that when any
Difference arose between them and their Brethren, they buried it in this Manner.

A Belt.

Brother,

I own you are my eldest Brother. The eldest Brother should always teach the
youngest Brother, when they misbehave; I therefore desire when you see us
misbehave, that you would tell us of it, and teach us better.

A Belt of Seven Rows.

Brother Onas,

Our late Differences have been the Cause why the Clouds have hung over our
Heads, and made it dark. Now by this Belt I take away all the Clouds, that we
may see the Sky clear, and the Sun rise and set. We Fourteen Nations, now
present, tell you this.

A Belt of Six Rows,

Brother Onas,

I don't doubt but there is some Foulness come into your Heart, through your
Throat. My Grandfathers used to tell me, that whenever we found our Brother's
Heart and Throat to be foul, that they had left me the best Medicines, and
desired me to put it to your Mouth, to drink as a Physic, and that it would
cleanse their Throat and Heart, and pass quite through their Body down to the
Ground; and, Brethren, by this String I bury it in the Ground, so that your
Heart and Throat may be for ever clean. We Fourteen Nations tell you so.

A String.

Brother Onas,

I have removed all the Filthiness from your Body, and since I have cleansed it
out and in, I shall go about that good Work of Peace.

Brother Onas,

It was we of the Mohocks, Oneidas, Senecas, Onondagoes, Cayugas, and
Tuscararas, that first brought about the good Work of Peace. -- He added, that
the Mohocks and Oneidas were the eldest of the Six Nations, and both of a
Height.

Brother Onas,

I will acquaint you further, that I have more Brothers to the Westward, and
that we are all Brothers down as far as to the Sunset; my Friends are so many,
that I cannot tell hove many they are.

Brother Onas,

I will let you know, that though the Mohocks are the eldest, yet they are the
furthest off to the Eastward: When they hear any Thing, they pass through the
Oneidas to the Onondagoes, where the Council Fire burns: Likewise, when the
Senecas hear any Thing, they come to the Cayugas, because they are next to the
Onondagoe Council; so that whenever they hear any Thing to the East or West, it
is carried to the Onondagoe Council. (Meaning, that when you shall send any
Messages to the Onondagoe Council, they must be sent either to the Senecas or
Mohocks.

Brother Onas,

I will mention our old Friendship; I will make it new again; I will brighten
up our old Chain of Friendship. Our Grandfathers used to tell one another they
had one Heart, and here it is; they both had Hold of it: They used to tell one
another they had one Head, here it is. I tell you the same; you and we have one
Head, and one Heart. We Fourteen Nations tell you so.

They delivered a Belt of Nine Rows, representing the Figure of two Men in the
Middle, with a Heart between them, and Six Diamonds on each Side; one of the
Men represents the Indians, the other the English.

Brother Onas,

Now we have renewed our old Friendship; I am a little afraid your Fire is
almost out, it is not good; now I will take all that bad Fire away, and kindle
it again, and make a good Fire of it; I will take good dry Wood, and kindle up
the Fire afresh that our Grandfathers have made, and so make the Smoke rise up
so very high, that all distant Nations shall see it, and thereby know that
there is a Council Fire here. There was a good Fire at Easton; that was really
a good Fire, for when I came to that good Easton Fire, I could have my Belly
full of Victuals, and Plenty of Drink; but now I come here, I have little to
eat; I am sure I have no other Drink than dirty Water, which almost choaks me.

A Belt of Six Rows.

Brother Onas,

What we have hitherto said, concerning Peace, has been concluded upon by our
old Counselors. We also desired our chief Warriors to be strong, and assist
the old Counselors; and desired, if any Thing should be wanting in the old
Counselors, they would assist them in it, in order that our Friendship may be
lasting; for the Counselors can do nothing, unless the Warriors should give
their Consent to it. We Fourteen Nations tell you so.

A Belt with Seven Rows, with Two Diamonds in it, representing the Counselors
and Warriors, united in Council together.

Brother Onas,

Our Friendship seems to go on very kindly. I will tell you one Thing, you are
always longing after my Land, from the East to the West; you seem to be longing
after it. Now I desire you will not covet it any more; you will serve me as you
have done our Cousins, the Delawares; you have got all their Land from them;
all the Land hereabouts belonged to them once, and you have got it all.

Brother Onas,

I desire you to go no further than Nixhisaqua (or Mohenoy) I desire you will
settle no higher up, for if you keep pressing on me, you will push me out, for
I shall have no Place to live on, nor hunt in, neither for me nor my
Grandchildren; so I desire you will press no further. I desire another Thing,
that you will not take it from me by Force: If you take this Land by Force, it
will never go well with either of us. You may remember that GOD gave us this
Land, and you some other; yet I have parted with some of it to you.

A Belt of Six Rows.

Brother Onas,

You have desired me to assist you, in order to bring in your Flesh and Blood,
which now you see I have done. You used to tell me, if I would bring in your
Flesh and Blood, or assist you therein, you would satisfy those who brought
them in these are mighty pleasing Words to me, and I hope you will do so. Some
of our Warriors who are here have no Guns, and if you will bestow any on them,
I desire they may be good. You are daily making Risles; I do not know what you
do with them. When you gave me any Guns, you gave me yellow-stocked ones, that
are worth nothing. I have asked you now four Times. At Easton you gave me only
Gun-Locks: What think you could I do with them, without Stocks and Barrels? I
make no Guns. After I got the Gun-Locks, I joined myself with General Forbes,
and went to War with him, as you ordered me, against the French; and as soon as
I had done it, you still gave me only Gun-locks.

A Bunch of Ten Strings, mostly black.

Brother Onas,

Having finished what I had to say to you, I am now going to speak to my
Cousins. Please to hearken to what I shall say to them.

Then directing his Discourse to the Delawares, he spoke as follows.

My Cousins,

I could hardly get along. I heard such frightful News, that indeed I could not
get along, if I had not had good Courage. Teedyuscung, before I sat off from
Home, I heard you should say, you would poison us all, so that we should not
hold this Treaty. Thinks I to myself, I will come nevertheless; if I die, it
will be well; I can die but once; so then I came along as far as Wyoming.

My Cousins,

As soon as I came there, Teedyuscung began to make his Complaints that he had
no Fire, so says I, Cousin, there is certainly some Fire, for I made one here
for the Shawanese, (Cacawasheca) and I made another Fire at Shamokin, for
Alammapis; another Fire I made at Wighalousin; another Fire I made at Diahoga.
All those Fires are there yet. The Fire at Wighalousin is a good Fire, for I
heard no bad Stories there; that Fire at Shamokin is not yet out; if any Body
stirs it, it will soon blaze. I made the Fire at Wyoming for the Shawanese;
perhaps they will still return to that Place. Then I came along as far as
Harris's Ferry; there I heard another Piece of bad News from Teedyuscung, who
said he had got a Sort of Poison that will give the Indians the Bloody Flux,
and as soon as they come, he would give it to them, that they might get the
Flux, and die along the Road as they go. But, notwithstanding these
Discouragements, I came along, and got here. I now suspect there is a Bag of
Poison somewhere about this Camp, that will give us the Flux as we go Home; and
I think it will be great Shame, if it should be so, because our English
Brethren sent for us; and if any of us should die, it will appear to them as if
they had lost so many of their own People, because it was they that sent for us.

Now, Teedyuscung, I must teach you better; I will correct you; you must not
talk of such a Thing, for if any of us die, it will be said Teedyuscung was the
Cause of it; so you should not say such Things. By this Belt I make a Fire for
Teedyuscung, at Wyoming; I tell him to sit there by the Fire Side, and watch
that Fire; but I don't give it to him, for our English Brethren cast an Eye upon
that Land; therefore I say to Teedyuscung, watch that Fire, and if any White
People come there, tell them to go away, for that Land belongs to your Uncles,
the Six Nations. The Six Nations want to keep up that Fire, that they may hear
from their Brethren the English, and others.

The Belt was given to Tipiscohan.

Then turning to the Governor, be said,

Brother,

This is all I have to say at present, but I have more in my Heart, which I
cannot speak now, having staid so long that I am quite fatigued.

The Governor then acquainted Thomas King, that he had been attentive to all he
said, and that he thanked him for it, and when he had considered of it, would
at a proper Time return him an Answer; but told him, that he had not yet
delivered him the Prisoners, and as this was in improper Place, he desired a
few Indians would take them to the Courthouse, where he would receive them.

The Conference then broke up, and the Governor, his Council, and the
Commissioners, went with some Indian Chiefs to the Courthouse, to receive the
Prisoners; where being come, the Governor acquainted Thomas King, that he was
now ready to receive the Prisoners from him, and that they need not be under
any Apprehensions of being used ill, for that he would be kind to them, and
treat them like Children, and restore them to their Parents and Relations.

Then they delivered to the Governor the Prisoners, as follow.

Elizabeth Williams, a young Woman, delivered by Mussause, a Munsey Indian;
Henry Williams, about Eighteen Years of Age, Brother to Elizabeth Williams,
delivered by Conoyhocheratoquin, a Munsey; Peggy Dougherty, delivered by
Eckgohson, a Munsey; Mary Tidd, and her Child, taken near Samuel Depui's, by
Eckgohson; Abigail Evan, and her Child, taken at Stony-Creek, in Virginia, by
Cowachsora, a Seneca.

A Boy, by Meightong, a Munsey; a little Girl, by Eckgohson, a Munsey; a little
Boy, by Pessewauck, a Munsey; a Boy, of about Fourteen Years, by Eckgohson, a
Munsey; a Boy, of Twelve Years, by Cowockslaira, a Seneca; a little Boy, of
Seven Years, by Corocksaara, a Seneca; a little Girl, of Six Years, by
Contaronque, a Seneca. These Childrens Names unknown, as they cannot speak
English, or give any Account from whence they were taken.

John Brightwell, of Lower Marlborough, near Patuxent, in Maryland, a Deserter
from the First Battalion of Royal Americans.

Lancaster, August 22, 1762. At a CONFERENCE at John Hambright 's (where the
Governor delivered to the Delaware Indians the Presents made to them, by
himself and the Province)
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
WILLIAM LOGAN, Esquire Member of the Council; JOSEPH FOX, JAMES WEBB, Esquires,
Members of the Assembly; ISRAEL PEMBERTON, JEREMIAH WARDER, ISAAC GREENLEAFE,
BENJAMIN HOOTON; Beaver and Teedyuscung, Chiefs of the Delaware Nation at
Allegheny and Wyoming; Joseph Compass, alias Catepackeaman, Joseph Peepy,
Tayshiccomen, Taqualaw, Counselors to the Chiefs.


THE Governor opened the Conference, and spoke to the Indians as follows, viz.

Brother Beaver,

I told you, a few Days since, of the Disputes that had happened between your
Brothers, the Proprietaries, and Teedyuscung, about Land; and that I had their
Orders, as soon as that Dispute should be ended, and the Proprietaries
Characters cleared, to make the Delaware Indians a Present of considerable
Value, as a Mark of their Affection to their old Friends. To which Present from
the Proprietaries, the good People of this Province have been pleased to make
an Addition, of equal Value.

Brothers, Teedyuscung and Beaver,

As that Dispute is now happily settled, I do (in Consequence of the
Proprietaries Orders, and upon what was agreed upon at Easton, upon that
Subject, between me and your Friends, the People of this Province) make you a
Present of the Goods and Money now lying before you, to be equally divided
between you, as a Proof of the Regard, both of the Proprietaries and People,
for their old Friends, the Delaware Nation.

Brother Beaver,

As this is the first Time we have seen you, and our Friends from the Westward,
since the late Disturbances; and as some of them have been at Expense in
collecting and bringing down our Flesh and Blood, which they have now delivered
to us, I, and your Friends of this Province, have thought fit to make you this
further Present, to testify the Pleasure we have in seeing you, after so long
an Absence, and our Thankfulness for your having restored the Prisoners. -- As
you know better than we, in what Manner to divide the Present now made you, we
desire you will do it amongst those who come with you, in the most just and
equitable Manner, paying a particular Regard to those who have now, or at any
other Time, been at Trouble and Expense in collecting and restoring our Flesh
and Blood.

Brother Teedyuscung,

We have had frequent Opportunities of shaking you by the Hand, since the War,
and you, upon many Occasions, received the strongest Proofs of our
Reconciliation and Friendship for you. Nevertheless, as we observe that a
greater Number than common of your Friends are come down with you, in order to
enable you to show your Kindness to them, we think fit to make you this
additional Present.

And now, Brothers, I heartily wish the Peace and Friendship, which have been
renewed betwixt us at this Treaty, may continue and grow stronger, as long as
the Sun shall shine, or the Rivers run; to which you may be assured we, on our
Parts, shall contribute to the utmost of our Power, as we doubt not you will
also on yours.

After the Governor had finished his Speeches to Beaver and Teedyuscung, the
latter rose up, and addressing himself to Beaver, desired him to take Notice,
that he now delivered up all his Right and Claim to the Lands on the River
Delaware, that have been in Dispute between him and the Proprietaries of
Pennsylvania; and that he now, as he (Beaver) saw, received this Money and
Goods from his Brethren the English. He further desired Beaver to acquaint all
the Indians at Allegheny, that the Delaware Nation have now no Right or Claim
to any of the Lands on the Waters of the River Delaware, that have been in
Dispute.

Then turning to the Governor, said to him,

Now Brother Governor, our Children and Grandchildren shall never be able to
say hereafter, that they have any Right or Claim to the Lands that have been in
Dispute upon that River.

The Governor, directing his Discourse to Beaver and Teedyuscung, told them,
that as they had now received a considerable Sum of Money, he cautioned them
against giving too much of it to their young Men, who, instead of laying it out
in Things necessary and useful, might be tempted to debauch themselves with
strong Liquors, which might occasion them to quarrel, and do Mischief, not only
to one another, but also to their Brethren, the English; which might endanger
the Chain of Friendship betwixt them and us, and would be a very ungrateful
Return for all the Kindness we had shown them.

To which they both answered,

That they were obliged to the Governor for his Advice, in which they thought
he had their Good at Heart, and promised to follow it, and heartily thanked him
for it.

The Governor then delivered to Beaver and Teedyuscung respectively, Two
Hundred Pounds, in milled Dollars, and the Value of Four Hundred Pounds in
Goods, to be equally divided between them. He further presented to Beaver, and
those who came with him from the Ohio, the Value of Four Hundred Pounds in
Goods; and the Value of Two Hundred Pounds in Goods to Teedyuscung, and his
Friends and People. And after taking them both by the Hand he departed, and the
Conference ended.

At a CONFERENCE with the Northern Indians, held at Lancaster, on Monday, the
Twenty-third of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, etc. etc. as before.

THOMAS KING stood up, and addressing himself to the Governor, spoke as
follows, viz.

Brother Onas,

It is about three Years ago that you asked me, whether I was willing you
should build a Fort at Sh^^nokin; you said you wanted to build a Fort there, to
stand against the French, and to defend the Inhabitants; that our Great King
had commanded you to build Forts. You said you would keep a Fort there as long
as the War continued, but that you did not want any of our Land there.

Brother Onas,

You likewise asked me to let you build a Fort there, to defend my Land, and to
defend yourself; you told me, that you did not desire any greater Quantity of
my Land than what the Fort took up. I granted you Liberty to build a Fort,
because you told me it was the Great King GEORGE desired you might build one on
my Land; and I endeavored to assist you. You also told me, as soon as ever the
Peace was concluded you would go away; or that at any Time when I should tell
you to go away, you would go away, and that I might do what I would with the
Fort.

Brother Onas,

Now all the different Tribes of us present, desire that you will call your
Soldiers away from Shamokin; for we have concluded a Peace, and are as one
Brother, having one Head and one Heart.

If you take away your Soldiers, we desire you would keep your Trading House
there, and have some honest Man in it, because our Cousins follow their Hunting
there, and will want a Trade. This is the Way for us to live peaceably together.

Brother Onas,

I must tell you again, these Soldiers must go away from Shamokin Fort; I
desire it, and let there be only Traders live there; you know who are the
honest People; we desire that only honest People may live there, and that you
will not be too hard with us, when they may buy our Skins and Furs, and such
Things as we may have to sell. This will be the Way for us to live peaceably
together; but for you to keep Soldiers there, is not the Way to live peaceable.
Your Soldiers are very often unruly, and our Warriors are unruly, and when such
get together they do not agree. For as you have now made Peace with all our
Nations, there is no Occasion for Soldiers to live there any longer.

Brother Onas,

We, the Six Nations, have all consulted, and concluded on this Matter of your
removing the Soldiers from Shamokin; for you know we go to War with the
Southern Indians, the Cherokees; we have been at War with them ever since we
were created, and the Place where the Shamokin Fort stands is right in our
Warriors Path, and you know that Warriors are always an unruly People. For this
Reason we desire you to take away your Soldiers, and place some honest Man
there, that he may supply our Warriors with Ammunition, and any other
Necessaries that they may want, when they go to War against the Cherokees. We
must press you to take away your Soldiers from Shamokin, as our Warriors are
unruly. You have planted Corn there, and if our Warriors come there, they may
cut some of your Corn-stalks, and then you will be angry. The Fort you have
there does not now do any Good, for you have many other Forts all around you;
this one therefore can be of no Use to you; it stands as it were at your own
Doors.

A Belt of Twelve Rows.

Note, He said he had forgot a Word in this Belt, which was to tell the
Governor, that he might choose and appoint such Men as pleased to trade, and
also a Blacksmith and Gun-smith, to mend their Guns and Hatchets, or do any
Thing they may want.

He then added,

We desire that the present Store-keepers at Shamokin may be removed, and
honest Men placed there in their Room; for our Hunters, who have been down
there, complain that when Indians come there, and want Provisions and Goods,
they find the Store sometimes shut up, and they cannot be supplied with what
they want.

Brother Onas,

For my Part, I think John Harris is the most suitable Man to keep Store; for
he lives right in the Road where our Warriors pass, and he is very well known
by all of us in our Nation; as his Father was before him; we all know him. If
you choose John Harris, we desire you will order him to keep Provisions and
Clothes, to give to our People, who sometimes come there naked; and likewise
Ammunition for our Warriors, for that is their Path. We desire you may have no
Trading Houses higher up the Sasquehannah than Shamokin; let the Indians come
there, or to John Harris's; if they want to trade, let them come down to these
Trading Houses. We also desire you will send your Messages to John Harris's, so
that we may hear from one another, because where he lives the Road seems to
divide, and spread, and it goes to many Places. And we further desire you will
give him a Commission for these Things, in Writing.

Thomas King being asked, if they meant that John Harris was to be furnished
with Goods to sell or to give to the Indians? He answered, that they desired
there might be a Trading House there, and that this was what they requested;
and desiring to be excused, if they forgot any Part of their Speeches, as they
were very long.

He proceeded.

Brother Onas,

I have now mentioned two Places for you to keep Store Houses at, Shamokin and
John Harris's; but perhaps they will sell at different Prices, and if we have a
Mind to have Goods cheapest, we may go to John Harris's. We therefore desire
you will let us know, what Prices you set upon your Goods.

A Belt of Ten Rows.

Brother Onas,

I will also acquaint you of another proper Trading Place, and who we think
will be a suitable Man to keep that Store House, and that is George Croghan,
who is very well known by all our Nations, and several others. We desire you
will appoint him to keep Store at Bedford, because that is also in our Warriors
Path. We desire likewise, that there may be a Blacksmith and Gun-smith,
because my Cousins will be there a hunting, and will want their Things mended.
This will be known every where, throughout all our Nations; for as the Peace is
made, our young Men will set themselves to hunt, and bring Skins there, and
will have nothing else to do but hunt.

A Belt of Eight Rows.

Brother Onas,

I will also acquaint you of another Trading Place, which is the Place they
call Patowmack, in Maryland. One Dantel Cressap has sent me Word, by many
Warriors, this Spring, and he tells me, that if the Governor would order him to
keep a Store there, he would provide every Thing for the Warriors; for his
Father used-to maintain all the Indian Warriors that passed and re-passed that
Way. He likewise tells me, if the Governor would let him know what he thould
do, and if he should be allowed to do this, he would provide for the Warriors.
We now desire, that he may be the Person appointed to receive Messages, and
that you would acquaint the Governor of Maryland with this, that the Warriors
may pass and repass that Way, without any Molestation.

A Belt of Seven Rows.

Brother Onas,

We desire you to acquaint the Governor of Virginia, that we may pass and
re-pass through his Province, when we go to War with the Cherokees; for our
Warriors Road is stopped up in many Places; English People have settled on it.
And now we desire that a Road may be opened, that we may pass safely. We desire
nothing but Love and Friendship with our Brethren, the English, as we pass
through. We desire you will send a Letter, with this Belt, to the Governor of
Virginia, as from us, as soon as possible; for I do not know how soon my People
may go that Way; our Warriors have already the Hatchet in their Hands, and
perhaps they may go there before your Letter gets there; for which Reason I
desire you will make Haste in this Business.

A Belt of Five Rows.

Brother Onas,

We now desire you to be strong, and that you will give us Powder; I do not
think that you will refuse to let me have Powder, for you are able. Our
Brother, General Johnson, though but a single Man, supplies all our People with
Powder; when we go to see him, he fills all our Powder-horns with it. I see a
great many of you here, and I think you are more able than he. Our own People
at Home will have their Eye upon us, and expect that we shall bring them some
Powder, and Presents; we therefore hope you will consider us in this, and make
them larger than common, as we do not come to see you often.

A Belt of Nine Rows.

Brother Onas,

I now speak in Behalf of our Warriors. When we heard your Words come to our
Countries, they were very pleasing to us, that you would make Presents to your
Brethren, when they come to see you, and would give them any Thing they might
went. Now we desire you will give us some Vermilion, for you know that the
eldest Brother has always Pity and Compassion on the youngest Brother; we know
you are able, as you make all these Things in yourselves. We have all concluded
Peace now, but we have given our young Men Liberty to go to War with the
Southern Indians; this is the Reason of our wanting the red Paint; you see the
Warriors always paint themselves, when they go to War.

A String.

Brother Onas,

I shall now speak a few Words, without any Belt or String. Whenever the French
were asked for Paint, or any Thing else, they always gave it to the Indians
readily; and it is no Wonder that so many Indians liked the French, since they
were so kind to them.

You see several of our Indians here dressed in French Clothes; and we desire
the Governor will be strong, and supply us with every Thing.

Brother Onas,

I have not lest any Thing in my Heart; I have said every Thing material I had
to say; and now I desire you will help me as far as Shamokin, and supply me
with Provisions; for perhaps some of our People, if they are hungry, may hurt
some of the Inhabitants Corn or Fruit, and cause Differences to arise. When I
came from Easton last, I had no Provisions given me to eat, so that when I got
Home I was almost starved, and a mere Skeleton.

A String.

Brother Onas,

We want a little Lad that lives among you; he is Keisheta's Son; the old Man
ordered that he should live at Philadelphia, in order to learn English, to be
an Interpreter; we think by this Time he has learned it, and we now think it
Time for him to come Home; his Relations, that are present, desire that he may
go Home now with them.

A String.

Brother Onas,

You may remember, three Years ago, that this Man (pointing to Samuel Curtiss)
mentioned something to you about his Daughter, that was stolen from him in
Dorset County, in Maryland, about Fourteen Years ago. I spoke to you once
before about it, and I have heard nothing from you concerning her.

A black and white String.

Brother Onas,

I am now going to speak to you in Behalf of Tokahaion's two Daughters. They
desire the Governor will give them a Horse; they hear the Governor is very
kind, and gives many People Horses; they have two Plantations, at which they
plant Com, and want Horses to carry their Corn, to ease their Backs, because
when at Home, their Com Fieldsare at a considerable Distance from them.

A String.

Then Seneca George rose up, and spoke as follows, viz.

Brother Onas, and all our Brethren with you,

We all desire you to remember our Son, Robert White, who carries all our
Messages; he is old, and we desire you will give him a Horse; you did give him
a Mare before, but she is dead; she was with Foal, and died.

A Belt of Eight Rows.

Thomas King then spoke as follows, viz.

Brother Onas,

This is all I have to say; I have nothing more in my Mind; I beg you will
consider of all that I have said, and take Time to do it; it looks as if you
were in Haste to go Home, but I desire you will be patient, and stay; I came a
great Way, and will contentedly stay as long as may be convenient.

TUESDAY, the Twenty-fourth of August.
THOMAS KING, in Behalf of the Chiefs of the Six Nations, waited on the
Governor, and acquainted him, that as their Speeches to him of Yesterday were
long, he suspected he might have forgot something, and desired he would give
him the Opportunity of hearing every Thing he had said repeated to them.

On which the Governor appointed a Meeting at the old Lutheran Church, at which
were

PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, GOVERNOR, etc. WILLIAM LOGAN,
RICHARD PETER'S, Esquires, of the Council; JOSEPH FOX, JAMES WRIGHT, SAMUEL
RHOADS, Esquires, of the Assembly; Thomas King, Tokahaion, Kinderuntie, and
several other Chiefs of the Six Nations; ANDREW MONTOUR, and ISAAC STILLE,
Interpreters.


WHEN the Indians were seated, the Governor, laying the several Belts and
Strings in their Order, as delivered him Yesterday, directed the Secretary to
read the Minutes, which were distinctly interpreted to them, Paragraph by
Paragraph, and declared by the Indians to be right.

After which Thomas King arose, and spoke as follows.

Brother Onas,

I mistook when I told you Yesterday, that I would have you keep a Store at
Bedford; I meant that Sir William Johnson should have a Store there, and that
you should have the Care of the Stores at Shamokin, and John Harris's. As
George Croghan is under Sir William Johnson, I wanted that he should appoint
Mr. Croghan to keep the Store at Bedford.

Then Tokahaion, a Cayuga Chief, spoke to the Governor as follows.

Brother Onas,

My Cousins, that live at Wighalousin, tell me, they went to the Easton Treaty
to hear something about the Land Affair, between the Governor and Teedyuscung;
these, my Cousins, went to the Governor, to enquire about their own Lands. The
Governor made Answer to them, and told them, that he had bought their Land from
their Uncles. -- What they wanted to know about their Land is this, that if
they found it was not sold by the Six Nations, they think they ought to be paid
for it. And since my Cousins made this Complaint to the Governor, at Easton,
they have asked me, whether I had sold the Land, or not. And I told them, that
I did not know that I had sold any Lands belonging to my Cousins; but (speaking
to the Governor) said, you know it, because you have Writings.

He further added,

You can tell whether you have bought the Land, or not; if it is not sold to
you by the Six Nations, it still belongs to them; but I do not want to sell
Land, that you have already bought.

The Indians having finished what they had to say, the Governor acquainted
them, that Thomas King had promised him, the other Day, that they would deliver
up all the Prisoners that were in their Camp, and that he understood some were
there yet, and desired to know the Reason of their not being delivered up.

Thomas King Answered,

Brother,

I acknowledge to have said, I would deliver up all the Prisoners, and I
thought it had been done, and that all were delivered up that remained in the
Camp; but we have gone too far, in engaging to deliver up all the Prisoners in
the Indian Country, that belong to the absent Warriors. However, we suppose
they will be delivered up, and we will do our Endeavors that it shall be so,
and will consult with those that have the Prisoners.

Then Kinderuntie, the Seneca Warrior, spoke.

Brother,

There are yet two White Men in the Camp; one of them, though he came with us,
yet it was not by our Consent; he would follow us; he belongs to a Warrior,
that is gone to War against the Cherokees, and we had no Right to bring him,
without the Warrior's Consent; you see him every Day; he is at Liberty. The
other is a Deserter; he came among us of his own Accord; we informed Sir
William Johnson of it, and Sir William said, that perhaps he might have
misbehaved, and that we might keep him; perhaps he might learn the Language,
and be of Service as an Interpreter, and that he might stay with us, if he
would; he did not come to us as a Prisoner, and as he has his Liberty, you may
talk with him, if you please.

The Governor made Answer,

That as to the Captive, he expected they would deliver him up; and desired
that they would bring the Deserter to him Tomorrow Morning, that he might
speak with him.

To which Kinderuntie replied,

Brother,

I cannot deliver up the Captive to you; he does not belong to me; he belongs,
as I told you, to those that are gone to War; he came here of his own Accord;
he followed me down, and if I should deliver him now, the Warriors would say
that I had sold him, and that will make me ashamed; I therefore desire my
Brother will not force me to deliver him at this Time, to make me ashamed. As
to the Deserter, I will bring him to you at any Time.

The Governor concluded, by saying to them, that he would have them consider of
this Matter in their Council again, and reflect seriously upon it, as he should
have no Dependence on all they had already said, about restoring the Prisoners;
unless they now delivered up this one to him.

The Indians then broke up, and went to their Camp.

At a CONFERENCE with the Northern Indians, held at Lancaster, on Thursday, the
Twenty-sixth of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, etc. etc. as before.

THE Governor, first addressing himself to the Minisink Nation, spoke to them
as follows.

Brethren of the Minisink Nation,

You have, since I saw you, lost a great Man. With this String I condole with
you, and share your Grief on that Occasion; and with this Stroud I cover his
Grave, and desire you may mourn for him no longer.

A String and Stroud.

Brethren,

By this String I desire you may consult among yourselves, and appoint a Man to
sit in Council in his Place, which will be agreeable to me.

A String.

The Governor then, addressing himself to the Six Nations, returned the
following Answer to the several Speeches made by Thomas King, the Oneida Chief.

Brethren,

You have, according to the ancient Custom of your Ancestors, upon my bidding
you welcome, and cleaning you, performed the usual Ceremonies on like
Occasions; with which I am well pleased, and return you Thanks.

A large String.

Brethren, (Holding up the Belts and Strings that they gave)

By these Belts you have made me several Speeches, respecting my requesting you
to use your Influence with your Nephews, and all other Indian Nations, to
restore to us all our Flash and Blood. I make no Doubt you have met with some
Difficulties on that Head, as I am very well acquainted with the Manner in
which you carry on War against one another, and that what Prisoners you take,
you claim an absolute Property in, by adopting them into your own Nation, as
soon as they bring them Home.

But, Brethren, the Case is quite different between you and us. We do not look
upon you to have the same Sort of Right over our Flesh and Blood, as over your
own. As we are of a different Color from you, so we have different Customs. It
is a constant Rule with us White People, that upon making of a Peace with those
with whom we have been at War, the Prisoners on both Sides are faithfully
delivered up. Besides, you may remember it was a positive Engagement between
us, upon re-establishing the ancient Chain of Friendship that those Nations who
had taken any of our People Prisoners, should deliver them all up; and this,
Brethren, I must insist upon, as the only Means of burying every Thing that has
passed between us. I thank you for the Influence you have used, and the Trouble
you have taken, upon this Occasion; but we are informed, by such as have lately
passed through the Indian Countries, that there yet remain a great many of our
People, as Prisoners, in some of your Towns, particularly among our Brothers,
the Senccas. It is, I suppose, as you fay, that some of them may belong to the
Warriors, who are gone to War against the Southern Indians, with whom you are
always at War; but whether they belong to them, or any other People, we expect
that you will acquaint them with your repeated Engagements, that they shall all
be delivered up, and therefore that they will no longer continue unwilling to
part with them.

Brethren,

As to what you say about our Promises of paying you for our Flesh and Blood,
you must have been mistaken; for I never either told you so, or sent you any
such Message. If you have received any Messages to that Effect, they must have
come from some other People. But I must be plain with you on this Subject, and
tell you, that it is never our Custom to purchase our Flesh and Blood of any
Nation whatsoever. But, Brethren, what I have told you, and what I now again
tell you, is this, that for any Services you may have done, with any of the
Nations, on that Account, or for any Trouble or Expense they may be at, in
bringing them down to me, I will make you and them a suitable Satisfaction.

Here gives three Belts, and a Bunch of Wampum.

Brethren,

As to what you say about making Servants of our Prisoners, we are entirely
ignorant of it; we do no such Thing, but as soon as we receive them from your
Hands, we deliver them up to their Parents and Relations, if they happen to be
present, and if not, we cloth them, and take Care of them, till we can get an
Opportunity of sending them to their Friends. They are our own Flesh and Blood,
and we use them as tenderly as is in our Power; if any have been treated
otherwise, it is owing to your not delivering them to me. We have, indeed, at
the Instance of some of your own People, put the Prisoners into the
Courthouse, till we could take their Names, and be informed of the Places of
their Abode; and as soon as we were told this, they were all clothed, and
forthwith sent along, with some good Persons to take Care of them, to their
Habitations; therefore do not entertain any Notion that we make Servants or
Slaves of them, and when you return Home, let all your Nations know that this
is truly the Case, and that the Prisoners are at Liberty to go to their
Relations, as soon as they are delivered up to us; or, if they have no
Relations, they go into such Places where they can best get Employment, in
order to maintain themselves.

Brethren,

I think it my Duty to tell you, that such of our White Men who want to stay
with you, are either Deserters from the Army, or have behaved ill amongst us,
and were they to stay with you, they would be very apt to be very mischievous,
and make ill Blood between us; we desire therefore you will not encourage them,
but deliver all such up as you have amongst you; and if you place any
Dependence upon them, either in Peace or War, they will certainly deceive you,
as they have dene us.

A String.

Brethren,

It grieves me that any Occasion should have been administered to you, to
observe to me, in so public a Manner, that there are others besides myself who
concern themselves in Affairs of Government. If it be as you say, I must tell
you, Brethren, that it is a great Presumption, and an high Infringement of the
Rights of Government, for any Person whatsoever, within this Province, except
by my special Order or Commission, to send or deliver Messages to you, or to
any other Nations of Indians, or to treat with you, or them, on any public
Matters. I am the only Person entrusted by His Majesty, and the Proprietaries,
with the Administration of public Affairs within this Province; and I desire
you to take Notice, that in order to prevent any Thing of this Kind for the
future, all Messengers I shall send to you shall be furmthed with proper
Credentials, and my Speeches in Writing, under the usual Seal; and if any
Persons, Indians or others, should take upon them to deliver to you any
Messages in my Name, unless they bring with them such Credentials as above
mentioned, I desire you will pay no Regard to them, and acquaint me therewith.

A Belt.

Brethren,

You acquaint me, that your Grandfathers advised you never so have any
Difference with your Brethren, the English. It had been well you had constantly
taken their Advice, but as you say the Evil Spirit got the better of your
Understandings, and compelled you to strike us, you, the other Day, by this
Belt of Wampum, took the Hatchet out of my Head. It is possible, Brethren, that
as you struck us, and obliged us to strike you, that you also have been hurt by
us; I therefore, by this Belt, take the Hatchet out of your Heads.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this Belt I join with you in collecting all our and your Bones, wheresoever
scattered, and in burying them, with the Hatchet, and do heap up Earth about
the Roots of the great Tree in the Oneida Country, where they and the Hatchet
are buried; so that the Smell thereof may never offend us hereafter.

A Belt

Brethren,

By this Belt you tell me that I am your elder Brother, and whenever you
misbehave, you desire me to give you Advice. Brethren, my real Regard to your
Welfare, as we are Brethren, will always induce me to take Notice of any Thing
wrong that I shall observe in your Conduct; and by this Belt I stop your Ears
against hearkening to any but myself.

A Belt.

Brethren,

I join with you in dispersing the dark Clouds that have gathered together,
during our Differences, and hid the Light from us, that we may see the Sky
clearly, from Sunrising to Sunsetting.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this String of Wampum you tell me, that some Foulness may have got into my
Heart, through my Throat, and that with a Medicine, left you by your Fathers,
you make it pass quite through my Body to the Ground, and bury it there. As you
may have contracted the like Foulness, by this String of Wampum I thoroughly
purge your Body, and remove every Defilement.

A String.

Brethren,

You tell me, by this Belt, that there are only two Doors, the Mohawks and
Senecas, to the Onondagoe Council, one to the Westward, the other to the
Eastward, through one of which all the Messages to that Council should properly
come.

As I understand, by this Information, that you expect that this Method should
always be observed by me, I shall very readily conform to it, and think it a
very prudent Establishment of yours, for the Dispatch and regular Transaction
of Business.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this Belt you take Notice, that our old Council Fire is almost out, and not
good, and that you now put to it the same good dry Wood, such as your Ancestors
used, and make it burn as bright as ever. You add further, that your
Entertainment has not been as good here as at Easton.

Brethren,

I take it kind and friendly in you, that you have kindled up the old Fire; and
by this Belt I heap up some good dry Wood, and join with you in putting it on
the Council Fire, that it may burn as bright as ever. I am very sorry there
should be any Cause of Complaint given you here, with Respect to your
Accommodations; I took all the Pains in my Power that there should be none, and
I hope now every Thing is made agreeable to you, with Respect to your good
Accommodation.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this Belt you acquaint me, that your Warriors have assisted the Counselors
in making firm the good Work of Peace, and that without their Concurrence and
Assistance the Counselors can do nothing effectually.

Brethren,

It gives me Pleasure to hear that your Warriors are united with you in
Council, and are become unanimous in establishing the Peace, which has been so
happily brought about. I am sensible of their Importance, and hope that the
Harmony which now subsists may long continue; and I shall be ready to serve
them, as well as you, as long as their future Conduct shall merit it.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this Belt you tell me, that the English have a longing Eye after your Land,
and desire that we may not covet any more of your Land; and say further, that
we have got all the Land belonging to the Delawares, and shall serve you as we
have done them.

Brethren,

It is true the Delawares had a large Tract of Land in this Province, bordering
on the River Delaware, which the Proprietaries of this Province have, from Time
to Time, fairly purchased of them, and have honestly paid them for it, which
they have acknowledged, in your Presence.

Brethren,

By the same Belt you desire we will not think of making any more Purchase of
Land, or settling your Lands by Force; for if we do, we shall push you back,
and leave you no Land to live or hunt upon; and desire we would confine
ourselves to Nixhisaqua, or Mohonoy, and settle no higher up.

Brethren,

The Proprietaries of Pennsylvania have never forced a Purchase of Lands from
any of their Brethren, the Indians, since they have owned this Province. It is
very well known, that the Native Indians very readily sold their Lands to the
Proprietaries, as soon as he arrived here in their Country, about Eighty Years
ago. And about Thirty Years ago the Six Nations, observing greater Numbers of
White People than those old Purchases could accommodate, voluntarily sold to
the present Proprietaries some Lands, lying further West. And their Number
still increasing, at Albany, in the Year 1754, they sold them more Lands, as
far as the Limits of the Province to the West, to be bounded by a Line agreed
upon to the Northward.

And let me remind you of their Kindness to you, in this Respect; for no sooner
were they informed that you repented of this last Sale, than they immediately
gave Orders to their Agents here, to execute a Release to you for all the Lands
over the Allegheny Hills, which was accordingly done at Easton, in the Year
1758, in public Council; when a Draught of the Part of the Country, which the
Proprietaries held, by the Six Nations Deed, on this Side the Allegheny Hills,
was shown to, and approved by, the Six Nations, some of whom are now present;
and the Draught, and Copy of the Proprietary Release, were delivered in open
Council to them, who returned their hearty Thanks to the Proprietaries for
their Goodness. I hear those Chiefs put the Release and Draught into Sir
William Johnson's Hands, and desired him to keep it for them, together with
many other Deeds and Papers, at the same Time. Now, Brethren, as no Time has
been fixed for the running of the North Line, or Boundary of this last
Purchase, I desire you to apply to Sir William Johnson, and whenever you and he
shall think it necessary to run that Line, I shall always be ready to join with
you; and until this be done, agreeable to your Deed, I shall not suffer any of
my People to settle beyond it. By your Speech it appears to me, that you think
the Line is fixed at Mohonoy; but by the Deed, which I have not brought with
me, and so cannot now produce it, to the best of my Remembrance, the Line
begins at a certain Mountain, by the River Side, about a Mile above the Mouth
of Mohonoy. I must therefore desire, that none of your People be permitted to
disturb any Persons within the Limits of that Purchase, till that Line be
settled.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this String you (...) to give some Guns, telling me that you had already
made this Request four Times.

Brethren,

At the Conclusion of this Treaty I propose to make you a Present, Part of
which will consist of some good Guns, which I hope will please you.

Brethren,

I have heard attentively what you said to your Cousins, and to Teedyuscung in
particular. Among other Things you say, you formerly kindled a Fire at
Shamokin, for Allumapes; another at Wyoming, for the Shawanese; and others at
Wighalousin and Di^^^oga. You say to Teedyuscung, that the English cast an evil
Eye on the Lands at Wyoming, and that he is to watch that Fire, and if any
White People come there, to tell them to go away; for that Land belongs to the
Six Nations.

Brethren,

Some of you may remember, that at the Treaty held last Year, at Easton, the
Six Nations complained to me, that some English had settled upon their Lands,
and desired me to assist them in preventing that Settlement, that they might
not be wronged out of their Lands. They told me further, that they heard the
Land had been sold; that the Six Nations never sold it, and that those who sold
it stole it from them; that it was two Tuscaroras, one Oneida, and one Mohawk,
who sold it, unknown to the Six Nations. To this Request I answered, that a
Number of People, from Connecticut Government, had settled at a Place on the
River Delaware, called Cushietunck, about Fifty Miles North of the Blue Hills,
being the Settlement complained of, and claimed all the Lands from thence quite
up to Wyoming; that I had sent Messengers to them, to inform them that those
Lands belonged to the Six Nations, and ordered them to remove away; but they
resused to do it, assuring me, by the Messengers, that they had purchased all
those Lands of the Six Nations, and under that Pretense had a Right to hold
them.

As there are now many more of the Six Nations present than were at Easton last
Year, I again request you to tell me plainly, whether these Strangers are
settled there by your Consent or not, and why no Measures have been taken, if,
as some of you told me at Easton, the Lands were not sold by you, to oblige
those private Indians, who stole the Land from you, to procure a Surrender of
their unjust Deed, from the People to whom they have made it, that it might be
brought into the Onondagoe Council, and there cancelled or destroyed.

Upon which Thomas King, without consulting any of the other Chiefs, rose up
and spoke.

Brother,

It is very well known that the Land was solo by the Six Nations; some are here
now that sold that Land; it was sold for Two Thousand Dollars, but it was not
sold by our Consent in public Council; it was as it were stolen from us. Some
People said that my Name was to it, on which I went down immediately to
Connecticut, to see whether it was or not, and found it was not. I brought a
Paper back from Connecticut, which I shall show to the Governor. Had I not gone
down to Connecticut, the Lands would have been all settled up to Wyoming, as
sar as Awicka, Twelve Miles on this Side Chenango.

Thomas King being then asked, whether those Lands at Cushietunck were a Part
of those Lands that were stolen from them? He answered, they had nothing to do
with them; they belonged to the Delawares.

Then the Governor asked, whether the Lands above the Hills, and at Cushietunck
in particular, belonged to the Six Nations, or to the Delawares? this was asked
of all the Six Nations present, and the Governor desired they would all give an
Answer to it, Thomas King having already said that those Lands belonged to the
Delawares. They answered, that they would take it into Council, and give him an
Answer in Writing.

Whereupon the Conference broke up for the present.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, held at Lancaster, on Friday, the
Twentyseventh of August, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, etc. etc. as before.

THE Governor continuing his Speeches to the Six Nations, spoke as follows.

Brethren,

By this String I inform you, that a few Days since your Cousins, the Western
Indians, applied to me about our Trade with them, and told me that we sold our
Goods very dear, and desired we would sell them cheaper; on which I informed
them that I had, for their Benefit, opened a large Store of Goods at
Pittsburgh, and had appointed honest Men there to deal justly with them, and
made no Doubt but they had done so; but that our Land Carriage was so long, and
made the Expenses so very high, that we lost Money by the Trade every Year; and
that I know of no other Method, by which we could supply them cheaper, than by
your suffering us to go up the Western Branch of the Sasquehannah River, with
Boats or Canoes, and to build some small Store Houses, to put our Goods and
Skins in, as we went up and came down that River. This Liberty I told them I
would apply to you for, and I now desire you will be free, and tell me whether
you will consent that we should build such Store Houses there, being unwilling
to do any Thing of that Kind, without having first obtained your Approbation,
or to give you the least Reason to think we intend to settle any of the Lands
there.

If you approve of this Proposal, I will send proper Persons to view that
River, and to see how far Boats or Canoes can go up it; and I desire the People
I shall send upon that Service may be under your Protection, and treated as
your Friends, by any of your People they may happen to meet with in their
Journey.

A String.

Then Kinderuntie, the head Warrior of the Seneca Nation, suddenly rose up, and
spoke as follows.

Brother Onas,

You have laid out two Roads already; one you told me was a good one, the other
leads from Potowmack, and now you want another Road to go by Water; we cannot
grant it to you, because our chief old Men are not here; we are chiefly
Warriors here; I am almost as chief a Man as any among them, but we cannot
grant it to you, because our chief Men are not present, and the Matter has not
been consulted in Council. I give you this Answer now, because I have the Care
of those Lands; but if it is agreed upon in our Council, that will be another
Thing; but at present we deny you entirely.

Brother,

You may remember you told me, when you was going to Pittsburgh, you would
build a Fort against the French; and you told me that you wanted none of our
Lands; our Cousins know this, and that you promised to go away as soon as you
drove the French away, and yet you stay there, and build Houses, and make it
stronger and stronger every Day; for this Reason we entirely deny your Request;
you shall not have a Road this Way.

A Belt.

To which the Governor answered,

Brethren,

This Request did not arise from me; I only mentioned it, in order to oblige
your Cousins, the Delawares, who defired a Trade with us, and I did it that
they might have their Goods cheaper; but this is an indifferent Matter to me;
it particularly concerns your Cousins, the Delawares, and the Western Indians;
and since the Six Nations disapprove of our going up and down the West Branch,
and building Store Houses there, I shall say nothing further upon this Subject.

To which the Seneca Chief made Answer,

Brother,

I am glad to hear you, as you say it did not come from you, but that it came
from our Cousins; I thought it had been your own Proposal. I really quite
wonder at my Cousins, that they did not tell me this; but since they have
swallowed up all their own Land, and live to the Westward, I believe they are
growing proud. The Lands do belong to me where they live; I conquered it with
my Sword; but they are grown proud, and will, I suppose, not own us for their
Uncles.

The Governor answered, that if he expressed himself in such a Manner to them,
as if the Application did come from himself, he was mistaken; for that he meant
to express himself, that he did it in Consequence of the Delawares desiring a
Trade with us, and that our Goods might come cheaper to them, and that he knew
of no other Method of rendering them so, but by Means of a Water Carriage; and
therefore he told the Delawares that he would apply to their Uncles, the Six
Nations, for Liberty to carry our Goods up the West Branch of Sasquehannah; and
he desired that they should not think the Delawares in Fault, on this Account,
as they did not propose this Method to him; and that no Blame should be imputed
to them at all in this Affair; and that as he found it disagreeable to the Six
Nations, he would say nothing further about it.

The Governor then proceeded to speak to the Six Nations at follows.

Brethren

By this Belt you desired, that as there was no War now between you and us, and
the Fort at Shamokin stood upon your Warriors Path, the Soldiers might be
removed from that Garrison; but that the Trading House might still continue,
that your Hunter and Warriors might be supplied with Goods; and further desired
to know what Prices we set upon our Goods.

Brethren,

You must be sensible, that though an End be happily put to the Was between the
Indians and us, yet it still continues as warm as ever between as and the
French, and therefore without His Majesty's express Orders, at whose Instance
you acknowledge it was built, by your own Consent, I cannot remove the Soldiers
from that Garrison. I shall give particular Directions to the Commanding
Officer, that the Soldiers behave very well, both to your Warriors and Hunters,
when they come there; and if the Waniors behave well on their Parts, and keep
sober, there can be no Differences between them.

Brethren,

You further desire, by this Belt, that the Person who has the Care of the
Provincial Store may be removed, and an honest Man put in his Place.

Brethren,

The Agent at Shamokin has, so far as I know, supported the Character of an
honest Man; but as it seems he is not agreeable to you, I will consult with the
Gentlemen who are joined with me in the Direction of that Store House, when I
return to Philadelphia, and give you an Answer at a proper Time.

As to the Trading House, it shall continue, for your Convenience and
Accommodation; but it is not in my Power to fix any certain Price upon our
Goods. You know we don't make the Goods ourselves; they are made in England,
and the transporting them over the Seas is dangerous in War Time, and very
expensive, so that they must come much dearer now than in Time of Peace, and
their Prices change, as the Risque and Demand for them is greater or less; but
I am told, that they are sold to you as cheap as they can be afforded, and
cheaper than they can be purchased from private Traders, and Care will be taken
that they be good in their Quality.

A Belt.

Brother,

By this Belt you give it as your Opinion, that John Harris's House, standing
on your Warriors Path, would be a good Place for a Trading House, for the
Accommodation of your Warriors and Hunters, and desire one may be erected
there, and recommend John Harris to be Store-keeper.

Brethren,

By the Relation you gave me at Easton, in 1758, when you was relating the
Causes of the War, it appears that you were of Opinion, one of the principal
Reasons which made you join the French against us, was owing in a great Measure
to the ill Treatment your Warriors met with in Virginia, in those Places where
your War Path passes through the settled Part of that Colony; and you have now
desired me to write to the Governor of Virginia, that as there are Settlers on
your War Path, whereby it is stopped, he would cause it to be opened.

Now, Brethren, I must acquaint you, that all the Way from Harris's Ferry to
(...), the White People are settled very thick, so that should your Warriors
now use that Path, frequent Differences between them and the Inhabitants might
probably arise, by means whereof, the Peace so lately established between us
may be endangered. And I must desire you, for this Reason, to use your best
Interest with your Warriors, in case they are determined to go to War, that
they would pursue the old War Path from Shamokin, which lies along the Foot of
the Allegheny Hills, and which is the nearest Way they can go to their Enemies
Country.

A Belt.

Brethren,

As you tell me you intend to apply immediately to Sir William Johnson, to give
Orders that the Warriors be supplied with Necessaries, through Mr. Croghan, at
Rays-Town, I must refer you to him, that the same may be done in other of the
King's Garrisons, along the War Path.

Brethren,

As John Harris's House is a great Deal out of the Way, if more Trading Houses
shall hereafter be thought necessary than there are at present, which we shall
consider of, we shall take Care to six them at the most convenient Places, for
the Accommodation of our Indian Brethren, and appoint honest Men to take the
Direction of the Trade, who will deal justly and kindly with all the Indians.

A Belt.

Brethren,

By this Belt you desire a Trading House may be erected on Potowmack, at Daniel
Cressip's House, and that he may have the Care of it, for the Supply of your
Warriors, and that I will send your Request to the Governor of Maryland.

Brethren,

Your Belt, and all you have said upon it, shall be carefully sent to Governor
Sharp.

Brethren,

I shall also, agreeable to your Request, transmit your Belt, and what you have
said upon it, to the Governor of Virginia; and I shall lose no Time in doing
it, as your Warriors, you tell me, are now ready to set out.

A String.

Brethren,

Some red Paint, or Vermilion, is provided for you, and it shall be delivered
to you.

Brethren,

Agreeable to your Request, the Persons whom I shall appoint to attend you, on
your Return Home, will have Orders to surnish you with Provisions, as far as
Shamokin. I have received several Complaints of great Mischief being done by
the Indians, in their coming here, and therefore must insist upon it that you
restrain your young Men from committing any further Violence, or from taking
any Thing from the Inhabitants in their Return; for this must have a natural
Tendency to raise ill Blood in the Minds of the People.

A String.

Brethren,

The little Boy, Kisheta's Son, is, I hope, on his Way here, having sent for
him to Philadelphia.

Brethren,

Since you spoke to me, I am told Samuel Curtis is informed where his Daughter
is, and if he pleases to go and see her, and desires my Passports, he shall be
furnished with them.

A String.

Brethren,

A Horse shall be delivered to Tokabaion, for the Use of his two Daughters.

Brethren,

A Horse will likewise be given to Robert White, in Lieu of the one that died,

Brethren,

As to the Application made by your Friends at Wighalousin, with respect to
Lands they lay Claim to beyond the Mountains, I am surprised this should be
mentioned to me by Tokabaion, after what passed at Easton, In the Year 1758,
between me and the Six Nations, respecting those Lands. Their Deed to the
Proprietaries for those Lands was then produced, and was acknowledged to have
been executed by the Six Nations, some of whom were then present. They further
added, that they had sold the Land in Question, and were honestly paid for it,
and that the Land was theirs, and they would justify it; these were their
Expressions. This being the Cafe, and we being unacquainted with any Rights
they have, must refer them to you, and desire you will settle this Matter among
yourselves.

A String.

Brethren,

By this Belt you tell me, that your Grandfathers advised you to keep fast Hold
of the Chain of Friendship, and that you, the Mohawks, Oneidas, Senecas,
Onondagoes, Cayugas, and Tuscaroras, have brought about the Peace; that you
have more Brothers, Friends and Allies to the Westward, as far as the Sun sets,
so many that you cannot tell their Numbers; and in Behalf of them and
yourselves, who now make up fourteen Nations, you make our old Friendship new
again, and brighten the Covenant Chain.

Brethren,

You know that when the Peace was concluded first between us, at Easton, as
well as in several friendly Conferences held afterward, we both of us took
great Pains to send the Peace Belt among all your Nations, and among your
Friends and Allies, to the most distant Parts; and we have heard you say with
Pleasure, and we have ourselves likewise received Messages from several Indian
Nations, that they were glad to hear we had made Peace together, and joined
heartily in it.

Brethren,

We thank you for renewing your old Friendship; we very heartily join with you
in it, and in brightening the Covenant Chain, and confirm our Words with this
Belt. When you return Home, we desire you will show this Belt to your own
People, and to all the Nations in your Alliance, and let them know how friendly
your Brothers have received you; advise them not to hearken to any Stories that
bad People may tell them, to our Prejudice; desire them to stop their Ears to
all such Stories, and assure them that we shall, on all Occasions, preserve our
Friendship with our Indian Brethren, and their Allies. And we hope, that both
you and we shall be so careful as not to give the least Occasion of Difference,
so long as the World lasts.

A very large Peace Belt.

Brethren,

As I have now finished all my Business with you, I inform you, that as the
good People of this Province think you may want some Clothing, and other
Necessaries, they have, from the Regard they have for you, put into my Hands a
confiderable Present of Goods, which I shall deliver to such Persons as you
shall appoint to receive and divide them; and I defire, that in the dividing
them you will pay particular Regard, and give an handsome Present to such
Indians who have been at any Expense and Trouble in bringing down the Prisoners.

Thomas King desired that the Governor would stay a little longer, for that
they had something further to say to him.

Then the Onondagoe Chief, Deogwanda, rose up, and addressing himself to the
Governor, said,

Brother Onas,

I mentioned to you, the other Day, my Desire that there should be a Store
House kept at John Harris's, and that he might have the Care of the Store for
the Warriors. I desired, at the same Time, that the Road might be opened for
the Warriors, to pass through the back Settlements to the Southern Indians; you
know we are, and always have been at War with them, and I shall now begin to
strike them. You told me, in Answer, that you thought it best that that Road
should be stopped up, left any Differences should arise between your People and
our Warriors; and desired, if any Warriors did go to War, they would take the
old Road that led to the Southward, under the Mountains; and I now tell you,
that as you desired that Road should be stopped, it shall be so, and I will take
the old Road. We don't now desire a Store House should be kept at John Harris's
for the Warriors, but that he may be supplied with Provisions, and other
Necessaries, for our Chiefs and old Men, as they pass to and fro about the good
Work of Peace. We know John Harris, and he is known among all the Indian
Nations, and we desire he may be the Man appointed for the Care of this Matter

A String.

At a CONFERENCE at Mr. Slough s House, after the public Conferences. August
27, 1762.
PRESENT, The Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, etc.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, Esquires.

KINDERUNTIE, in Company with some other Six Nation Indians, having, agreeable
to the Governor's Desire, brought Peter Weese, one of the Captives, mentioned
to him in the old Lutberan Church; the Governor took Peter into a private Room
from the Indians, to confer with him respecting his Inclination to stay among
the Indians, left he should be under any Fear of speaking his Mind freely in
their Presence; when, after a free Conference, Peter desired he might not now
be detained among the White People, but left to his Liberty to return with the
Indians, and that on his Way he would call on his Brother, who lived near
Pittsburgh, and speak with him, and return to the Governor in the Spring, and
gave several Reasons for his staying with them this Winter. On which the
Governor consented to his Request, and went with him to the Indians; and then
acquainted the Six Nation Chiefs present, that as he had now consented that the
Prisoner, Peter Weese, should stay among them, agreeable to his Inclination,
and their Desire, he hoped they would be as honorable, on their Part, in
delivering up the other Prisoner, who was a Deserter from the Army, and now in
their Camp; and that they would do every Thing in their Power, on their Return
to their own Country, to collect every Prisoner among them, and deliver them up
faithfully, agreeable to their Promises.

Kinderuntie answered,

That he was well pleased with what the Covernor had done; that he would now
deliver up the Deserter to him, and that he should make it his particular
Business, when he returned Home, to make a thorough Search every where in their
Towns for all the Prisoners that are among them; that the Governor might rely
upon these Endeavors, and that as soon as he had done this he would faithfully
deliver them all up, and use his Interest with all others to do the same.

The Deserter was brought soon after to the Governor, who assured him of his
receiving him with Kindness, and he would grant him his Protection, if he would
consent to come among the English. He answered, that as he consided in the
Governor's Assurances, he was very willing to return among the English again,
and it he would grant him a Pass, he would go down into Maryland to his Parents
and Relations there.

Kinderuntie then said,

Brother,

As both you and we are in a great Hurry to have the Business of the Treaty
finished, that we may all return Home, I shall not detain you; and shall only
at this Time request you to grant to Totiniontonah a Rifle Gun, of your own
Make, and a Saddle for my Friend, this young Man here.

A String.

The Governor said, he would consider of what they said, and return them an
Answer Tomorrow Morning; and should be glad at that Time to see all the chief
Men of the Six Nations, that he might deliver them the Presents, and take his
Leave of them, as it is now growing late.

A SATURDAY, the Twenty-eighth of August, 1762.
EARLY in the Morning Deogwanda and Kinderuntie waited on the Governor, at his
Lodgings, and told him, that they had agreed in Council not to say any Thing
further about Lands; but would take what the Governor had said to them on
Thursday, respecting the Lands above the Hills, and at Cushictunck, and also
what he said the next Day, respecting the Lands claimed by the Minisink
Indians, at Wighalousin, to the Onondagoe Council, to be there considered.

On the same Day, in the Afternoon, the following Indians waited on the
Governor, at his Lodgings, viz.

PRESENT, Kinderuntie, the Seneca Chief, Totiniontonoh, a Cayuga, John
Shakalamy, and two Seneca Warriors; WILLIAM LOGAN, Esquires. RICHARD PETER'S,
Esquires.


Who complain against Nathaniel Holland, at Fort-Augusta, as a Man who always
treats the Indians who come there with ill Usage, and bad Language, insomuch
that they are very often so provoked as to do him Violence; and as the public
Business is now over, they entreat the Governor to remove him, and put a more
quiet Man in his Place. They further say, that as the Governor has acquainted
them that the War has occasioned a Rise in the Price of Goods, they hope the
Governor will give Orders that they may be paid a higher Price for their Skins
and Furs in Proportion.

The Governor made Answer, that he would take this Matter into Consideration,
and do in it whatever was thought reasonable; and further acquainted them, that
the small Presents they had requested of him the Day before should be granted
them.

AUGUST the Twenty-ninth. Sunday Morning.
THE Governor having ordered all the Goods intended as a Present to the Six
Nation Indians to be taken to Mr. Hambright's Malt-House, and appointed this
Morning for those Indians to meet him there, to receive them; they accordingly
came, when being seated, and the Goods divided into four different Parcels, in
Proportion to the Numbers of the different Tribes, the Governor, in the
Presence of William Logan, Esquire Member of the Council, Joseph Fox, Samuel
Rhoads, Esquires, of the Assembly, and some Gentlemen from Philadelphia,
acquainted them that, agreeable to what he told them on Friday last, he had now
provided a handsome Present of Goods, and desired they would accept of them, as
a Mark of the Affection and Regard of the good People of this Province for
them; and having laid aside a Parcel of the same, to a considerable Value, by
themselves, he told the Indians, that that particular Parcel was to be divided
among such Indians as had been at any Expense or Trouble in bringing down the
Captives.

The Governor then delivered the Goods, amounting to about Eight
Hundred-Pounds, and taking his Leave of the Indians, left them to divide them
among themselves, as they should think proper.

The END.

