Mr. Balch's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY AT BOSTON,
JUNE 6, 1763. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF OFFICERS. BY THOMAS
BALCH, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SECOND CHURCH IN DEDHAM.

BOSTON, N. E. PRINTED AND SOLD BY EDES AND GILL, IN QUEEN STREET, M,DCC.LXIII.

DANIEL IV.35. -- And He does according to His Will in the Army of Heaven, and
among the Inhabitants of the Earth.


THE Doctrine of universal Providence is believed and acknowledged by all (I
suppose) who confess God to be the Creator of the World; and with very good
Reason; for if he made it, it was doubtless for some wise Designs; and
therefore it is necessary that he should govern it, that his Design in it may
be accomplished.

The sacred Scriptures do every where instruct us to give God the Glory of his
preserving and governing Providence, as well as his creating Power.

He that commanded the World into Being, has caused it to continue unto this
Day. And as all Things are preserved by him; so he rules and governs them
according to his Will. This Doctrine of the universal Dominion and Providence
of God is here laid down -- He does according to his Will, in the Army of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth -- a Subject well worthy of our
Contemplation; and not unseasonable at this Time.

The surprising Turns of Providence, and the mavelous Things God has wrought
for his People in the Course of the late War, which is now bro't to so happy
and honorable a Conclusion, so interesting to us in this Land in particular,
and which may with Propriety be commemorated on this Day and Occasion, have
determined my Thoughts to this Subject. For he has made his wonderful Works to
be remembered. He has showed his People the Power of his Works, that he might
give them the Heritage of the Heathen.

Very apparently is the Government and Providence of God seen in the Affairs of
War; And not only is Success and Victory in Battle, but the bringing of a
troublesome War to a comfortable and advantageous Issue, the Result of
Providence, which Duty and Gratitude to the supreme Ruler of the World requires
us to take Notice of, with Wonder and Thankfulness. He makes Wars to cease to
the End of the Earth, puts an End to the Wars of the Nations, which had turned
the Earth into a Stage of bloody Confusion, and crowns them with Peace. And
this he does that he may be exalted in the Earth.

This great Truth is confirmed to us not only by rational Deductions (as may he
shown hereafter) but also by many Passages of the sacred Scriptures, and
particularly by the Words before us. They were uttered by King Nebuchadnezzar,
one of the most proud and absolute Monarchs of the World. The God of Heaven had
given him a Kingdom, or Empire, abounding in Wealth and Worldly Glories; and
being fixed at the Top of worldly Honors and Greatness, he would also be
absolute and uncontrollable in his Matters, and forgets that there is one above
him. But God would have the living to know that the Most High rules in the
Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.

The King of Babylon and his Flatterers conceited that he was God in Earth,
independent, and unaccountable to any. Though he might have some Notion of a
supreme God, yet he might also think, as some of the Heathen pretend to
believe, that his Government was confined to Heaven: But the great God will
have all Men to know that he rules on Earth too; that he sets up, and debases
whom he pleases. And at last the ambitious King is bro't to acknowledge this to
the Glory of God. For because he had lived a brutish sensual Life, and because
he was in Heart lifted up above the common Race of Mankind; therefore he was
driven from his magnificent Palace, and all Converse and Society with Men, to
herd with Beasts, and graze with Oxen. By this strange Turn of Providence, God
would teach him this Lesson, That he is the Giver of all Things; that even
Princes are accountable to him; that their Tenure is at his Will alone; and
that he can alter and alienate the Property of all Enjoyments, being himself
the absolute Lord of all.

This in Conclusion is freely acknowledged. He who, at last, thought himself
Supreme on Earth, blessed the Most High, and praised and honored him that
lives for ever and ever, whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his
Kingdom from Generation to Generation. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are
reputed as nothing: And he does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven,
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth.

My Text then teaches us, That the glorious God exercises an actual Providence
over all Things, according to his good Pleasure. -- He is a great and a
universal King; His Rule and Government over all Creatures is certain and
unlimitted: His Right of Dominion cannot be disputed; and he actually governs
and influences all Creatures as seems him good. He is the great Lord and
Inspector of the Universe; and that not as an idle and unconcerned Spectator of
the Designs, Behavior and Actions of created Beings; but he continually
watches over them as their King, Possessor and Ruler, to lead and determine
them to such Intentions and Ends as shall tend most to his Glory. -- His
Providential Care and Regard is exercised toward all; so that the End by him
designed and appointed, shall infallibly be attained. -- He does according to
his Will, every where, among all Creatures.

There is no earthly Potentate that has so certainly, absolutely and entirely
the Dominion over, or Disposal of any particular People, or Person, as God has
over all Persons and Things. For his is the Greatness, and the Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: For all that is in the Heaven, and in
the Earth is his; and his is the Kingdom, who is exalted as Head above all.

That this important Truth may be set in a just Light, We shall endeavor In
the first Place, To show what is implied in the Notion of a Providence, or what
is intended when God is said to exercise a Providence over his Creatures.
Secondly, To consider the great and universal Extent of his Providential Care
and Regards. And, Lastly, To enquire what reasonable Grounds we have to
conclude that God actually exercises such a Providence. --


First, I am to consider what is implied in the Notion of a Providence. --

God's exercising a Providence over his Creatures, principally intends and
implies in it these two Things: His sustaining and upholding Power, whereby the
Creatures subsist, and are continued in actual Being; and his governing and
disposing of all Things according to his Will.

It is the latter of these that my Text more especially leads to the
Consideration of.

God exercises his Power and Goodness toward his Creatures, whereby they are
supported and continued in their several distinct Orders. He does in his
Providence continually preserve the Creation, and keep the several Parts of it
in that Order of Being which he at first designed to keep them in. All
Creatures, of what Kind or Nature soever, are upheld in Being by a divine
Power. They all live upon God, who is the Fountain of Life to all his
Creatures; and therefore frequently styled, The living God.

But he not only sustains and keeps his Creatures in their Beings; but he
always determines and orders them just as he pleases. He has an actual
Influence over his Creatures, and governs them, and disposes of them as seems
good in his Sight. He does, as it were, hold them all in his Hand; and they are
more at his absolute Pleasure and Disposal, than the meanest Worm is at ours.
He is a most soverein Lord, and may, and actually does work all Things after
the Council of his own Will: For he has made all Things for himself, and for
his Pleasure they are and were created. The Potter has not more the Power over
the Clay, than God has over his Creatures --

It is not only true that sovereign Dominion and Authority belongs to God; but
it is certain that he exercises such a Power. His Creatures are entirely at his
Will; though it be many Ti^^^ against their own that they are so. And let the
reasonable, but sinful Creature, use all his Policy and Strength, after all,
the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand. -- He gives Liberty or Restraints,
permits or withholds as he sees meet. There is no Event of Providence but what
is according to his Sufferance or actual Disposal.

The sovereign and all wise Providence of God steers, directs and marriages all
Creatures and Things. As the whole Creation was made by Him and for Him, he
will take Care and powerfully dispose of all Things, so that the Honor of his
holy Name shall in the End be vindicated and magnified. For this End he
superintends his Creatures, their Actions and Concerns: and if he pleases, he
will restrain, or even invert the natural Order of Things. He will make the
Wisdom of the Wise Foolishness. The Battle shall not be to the Strong; nor
Favor to Men of Skill. The Sun at his Command at one Time stands still, and at
another takes an unnatural Course backwards. The Winds and Seas which are so
impetuous, and one would think even Lawless, yet they stir not, nor breathe,
but to fulfill his Word.

And his directive and influencing Providence is as certainly (...) his
Creatures when they act according to the general Laws of Nature, as when they
act in Opposition thereto. For, as he certainly knows all their Designs,
Inclinations, and Tendencies; so he can by his Power easily disappoint, curb
and alter them.

Thus we see what is intended by the Providence of God: It is that Influence
and Power of his, whereby he not only preserves and sustains his Creatures, but
governs, restrains and orders them as he pleases.

It may be added here, without the Formality of a distinct Head, The Rule
according to which he thus watches over, protects and disposes of his
Creatures, is his own Will "which is always directed by infinite Wisdom, and is
the Rule of Goodness." He does according to his Will -- Nothing besides is or
can be a Rule to him for the Government of the World. His sovereign Will is the
alone Law by which all Creatures shall be ordered, determined and disposed.
Because he is Lord of all, and because he is Supreme and Independent, therefore
he is not accountable to any for any of his Matters. He may do whatever he
pleases, in Heaven, in the Earth, and all deep Places, and none can stay his
Hand, or may say, Wherefore have Thou done thus?

There can be nothing binding to God, nor any Thing that can influence him in
any of his Operations out of himself, and beyond his own Will. His Wisdom,
Justice and Holiness alone must determine what is holy, just and good, and so
what is fit to be done in his Kingdom of Providence.

We may now pass on, and consider in the second Place, The great and universal
Extent of God's Providential Care and Influence. He does according to his Will,
in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth -- He is the sole
universal Monarch of the World. He is the great Lord and Governor of all
Creatures and Things, whether they be in Heaven, or on the Earth, visible or
invisible. As all owe their Existence to him; so they are all, without
Exception, under his restraining, preserving and directing Power and
Providence. He has prepared his Throne in the Heavens: but his Kingdom rules
over all. Though he manifests much more of his Glory and Excellency there; yet
his Dominion is by no Means confined thereto, but it reaches to the utmost
Bounds of the Creation. All Worlds and Creatures are absolutely his: And were
there as many more, they would be equally and rightfully under his Authority
and actual Government.

This might be more fully and clearly evinced by considering the several Ranks
of Creatures, and Orders of Beings; all which are under the Providential Care
and Power of God, and in his Word expressly said to be so --

Particularly,

Good Angels are under the divine Providence and Government. They are the most
excellent and perfect Creatures; and yet are so far from being exempted from
his Dominion, that none are more at his Will and Command than they. God
exercised a special Act of Providence toward them, when he made them in their
primitive Rectitude and Felicity. And after a sufficient Trial of their
Obedience, did for the Praise of his glorious Grace, confirm them in a State of
most perfect Blessedness for ever. This was an Act of sovereign Dominion and
Providence in God; for they as Creatures are mutable and liable to fall from
him, and to forfeit his Favor, as others who actually did apostatize.

And now they are entirely devoted to the divine Will and Pleasure. They are
readily, cheerfully and constantly obedient to the Will of God. It is their
Delight, and they account it, as indeed it is, their Glory and Honor to adore
and worship God, and execute his Will. And God makes use of them as the
Ministers of his Providence, and the Executioners of his Will in this lower
World. -- Again,

The evil Angels are under the powerful Restrains of divine Providence. Though
they are apostatized from God, and cannot willingly yield themselves up to his
good Pleasure, yet they are his and he will do with them whatsoever he pleases,
notwithstanding their high Opposition against him, and continual Endeavors to
free themselves and others from any Subjection to his Authority and Will. When
they had lost their original Integrity, and shown themselves implacable Enemies
to God, his Glory and Dignity, he cast them out of Heaven, the Seat of the
Blessed, and plunged them into the Pit of Destruction and Misery. And though they
have now an irreconcilable Enmity in their Natures against God, his Laws and
Government; yet they can effect nothing against Him. He curbs and restrains
them as he pleases. He holds them as in Chains, and they can go no further than
the Limits by him prescribed. He is able, and does, as he pleases, pull down
their strongest Holds. He binds the strong Man armed, and casts him out;
destroys his usurped, unlawful Power over the Souls of Men. The Son of God when
on Earth showed such a divine Power in ejecting him from possessed Bodies; in
not suffering him to speak, and in extorting from him a Confession that he was
the Son of God.

Though evil Spirits are potent, politic, and numerous, yet they cannot control
divine Providence in the Designs of it. They cannot stay an Omnipotent Hand.
They are securely reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness to the Judgment
of the great Day. The Providence and Power of God watches over, and holds them
in Horror and Misery. They are as condemned Malefactors, bound over to the last
Judgment, when final Vengeance shall come upon them. And even now their evil
Desires and mischievous Designs are restrained by a superior Power.

Furthermore,

God exercises his absolute Dominion and sovereign Providence over Men on
Earth. The Affairs of the World in general are ordered and determined by Him.
His is the Kingdom, and he is the Governor among the Nations. His Eyes are in
every Place, and he observes all Things with the most perfect, exact and
critical View. And he has an actual Influence in all human Affairs and Concerns.

Particular Nations and Kingdoms are under his Care and providential Rule, and
the Civil, Military and Secular, as well as religious and spiritual Interests
of a People are either opposed and lost, or established and promoted according
to his Permission and Will.

He puts the Administration of Government into what Hands he pleases; for all
the subordinate Powers that be are ordained of God, or at least suffered by
him. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another.

The Kingdoms and Dominions of the World are his, and he gives them to whom he
will. All humane Power is derived from him, whose Power and Authority is
universal, infinite and adorable. The greatest Potentates of the Earth, who
have been ready to imagine themselves sovereign and independent, are
nevertheless under his powerful Influence, and are by him made to subserve his
Interest and Glory, when their very Design was to contradict and oppose it.
That proud and potent King of Babylon, whose Greatness reached unto Heaven, and
his Dominion to the End of the Earth; all Nations trembled before Him; whom he
would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive; yet even he, this Child of
Pride, is made to confess one higher than himself, and to bow before him.

And this is what every one shall finally be made to do. For, the most High
actually rules in the Kingdoms of this World, and determines the Concerns of
particular States and People, according to his own Will and Wisdom. He stands
in the Congregation of the Mighty, and judges among the Gods.

Suffer me particularly to observe here, that whatever the Circumstances of a
Person of People are, they are put into such Circumstances either in the Course
of God's common Providence, or by some unusual Events. For God has the ordering
and government both of natural and accidental Causes and Events.

Hardly any Thing happens to Men, in the ordinary Course of their Lives, but
what, if heedfully attended to, may teach them that there is a wise, just and
good Providence, which directs and manages those natural Things, which are the
immediate Causes of their Prosperity, or of their Sorrow and Distress.

God does in some Measure govern the Moral, by the World of Nature. He rewards
or punishes Men by a wholesome or pestilential Air; by fruitful or barren
Seasons. He hinders or promotes their Designs by Wind and Weather; by a
backward or forward Spring. He makes Nature give Laws to Men, and set Bounds to
their Passions and Intrigues. How often does he by natural Causes, overthrow
powerful Fleets and Armies, defeat the wisest Counsels, arbitrate the
Differences of Princes, and decide the Fate of Kingdoms! Now if God thus
governs Men by Nature, he must govern Nature too. For necessary cannot be
suited to the Designs and Endeavors of free Agents, without the Influence of a
wise Providence.

God also has the Government of accidental Causes and Events. The outward Peace
and Comfort, or Misery of Men, of Families, and sometimes of whole Kingdoms,
depends upon something accidental. So that if God did not rule such Things,
some of the greatest and most remarkable Changes in the World, would be
excepted from his Care and Providence.

Men lay their Schemes as well as they can, and Providence seems to favor them
too; but by some secret Cause, their Devices are all disappointed, and their
Counsels carried headlong --

On the other Hand, the most unlikely Means shall sometimes attain the End. A
People shall be raised to worldly Glories by a surprising Course of Events, as
accidental as they are prosperous. Does not some wonderful Turn of Providence
sometimes highly favor Men, even contrary to all human Probability?

Again, Some casual Occurrences frustrate the most proper Means, and give an
unexpected Turn to the Interests of Men. What should conquer in a Race, but
Swiftness? What should win the Battle, but Strength, and Valor, and Marshal
Skill? What should supply Men's wants, and get Riches, but Understanding and
Diligence in human Affairs? What more likely Way to gain the Favor of others,
than a skilful Address? Yet the wise Man observed in his Days, and the
Observation holds good still, that it is not always thus; Time and Chance
happens to all -- Some favorable Juncture, and unseen Accidents are more
effectual than all human Strength, Art or Discretion.

Now, however fortuitously Things may happen, they are brought to pass by a
divine Efficiency; and there is some wise Design in them.

Many Things befall us which we never looked for, and could not foresee. These
are what we call Contingencies, or Accidents. But with Respect to God, there
can be no such Thing as Chance. For as he foreknows those Events, which to us
are most uncertain and surprising; so he actually governs them.

But I may not enlarge.

The various Successions of Peace and War, War and Peace are from Him. The
Desolations of War, and the Blessings of Peace are ordered by Him. War is the
Sword of the Lord, which he draws and sheaths again at his Pleasure. When he
sees fit he disturbs the Repose of the Nations, and calls opposing Armies into
the Field of Battle, where clashing Swords, and Garments rolled in Blood, open
a most distressing and melancholy Scene. -- And then, when the War has
accomplished that for which it was sent, he composes the Belligerent Powers to
Peace, calls off the Nations from opposing and destroying one another, and
disbands the most furious Armies.

It must indeed be allowed that War originates in the Lusts of Men, and
Princes; and that their Pride, Envy, Covetousness, Affectation of undue
Dominion, etc. are the secondary Causes of its Rise; and all the Horrors that
attend it. -- Nevertheless there is an overruling Hand of Providence,
disposing and ordering the exact Time of its Beginning, Continuance, and
Conclusion -- as well as the great and important Events of it.

Moreover,

God in his Providence cares, provides for, and governs particular Persons.
Though the universal World be under his constant Inspection, yet no particular
Soul is neglected by him. He has as much Respect to every individual Person, as
to the greatest Man upon Earth, or the World in general. So unsearchable is the
Wisdom of God, and so unlimited his Power, as that he can and actually does
know the State of every Man, and rules and governs him accordingly. --

All Men, both Good and Bad, are particularly respected by him, and either
succeeded or blasted in their Enterprises, according to his Will. Yea,

He has an Influence into the particular Actions of particular Persons. Every
good Action is performed by his efficacious Power, and the immediate Assistance
of his Grace.

And even evil Actions are done by his special Permission. He suffers them to
be performed, and yet, by his Providence, so directs and overrules them, as
that they will in the Conclusion make for his own Glory.

In a Word,

The Providence of God extends itself to the meane^^ and most inconsiderable
Creatures. They are not without the Limits of divine Providence and Care. Yea,
the very Hairs of our Head are all numbered by him. Divine Providence reaches to
the most minute Things, and influences the most invaluable Beings in the World.
In short, it reaches to the utmost Bounds of the Creation, and extends to all
Things.

We hasten now in the third and last Place, to consider what reasonable Grounds
we have to conclude, that God does actually exercise such a Providence.

It is certain we have sufficient Grounds of Assurance to found our Belief
upon, even from the frequent and express Testimony of the Word of God. He is
there said to be an infinite and an all-comprehending Being. All Power, and
Might and Dominion is ascribed to him. His Name is excellent in all the Earth;
his Glory is above the Heavens. Of him, and through him, and to him* are all
Things. He is the great and mighty God. The Lord of Hosts is his Name. Great in
Counsel, and mighty in working. The God of the Spirits of all Flesh, and
nothing is too hard for him. He forms the Light, and he creates Darkness: he
makes Peace, and creates Evil; the Lord does all these Things. To whom can we
liken him, for he is God: his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his
Pleasure. He alone is God, and there is none with him. He kills and he makes
alive; he wounds and he heals* neither is there any that can deliver out of his
Hand.

It were easy, but it is needless to multiply Texts of this Nature and Import,
wherein the Excellency, and Majesty, the Greatness and Glory, the Sovereignty
and Providence of God are asserted, and set forth, in the best Manner that
Words of human Eloquence will allow.

There are further many rational Grounds to believe the all-disposing
Providence of God.

As his eternal Godhead, almighty Power* and infinite Wisdom, are manifested to
his rational and intelligent Creatures; so they may also reasonably infer his
active Providence and continually influencing Power over all the Works of his
Hands. There is just Reason to believe that God rules and governs all his
Creatures, and all their Actions.

This may be argued from his creating all Things for himself. That God is the
Maker of all Things, is as true as that he is God. For except we allow him to
be the original Cause, the Creator and Former of all Things, we shall by
Consequence deny him to be the only self-existing, and independent Being. If
any Thing could exist and act without him, then he is not the all-perfect
Being: and so not truly God.

It therefore must, and easily will be granted, that in the Beginning God made
the Heavens and the Earth; and that without him was not any Thing made that was
made; that all within the Limits of the Creation, from the most glorious Angel
to the meanest Insect; yea, to the least Atom of Dust, was commanded into Being
by his all-powerful Word.

And as all Things were made by him, so for him. He has made all Things for
himself. His own Glory was the principal and last End in all his Works of
Creation. In whatever God does, his only Rule is his own Will, and his End is
the Manifestation of his glorious Excellencies.

Now, see if this Consideration will not necessarily infer his providential
Rule and Government over all Things? Can any Man believe God the Creator of all
Things, and acknowledge, as every one must do, that he made all for himself;
and yet disbelieve his actual Power and Providence over all? It cannot
certainly be beneath the Majesty of God to regard and take Care of the meanest
Creatures, since it was not unworthy of him to exert his almighty Power in
giving them Being at first. And it must certainly be inconsistent with the
Wisdom of God to create such a Variety of Beings for his own Glory, and then
entirely desert them, and take no Care that the End were actually attained.

We may be assured, that since God made all Things for the Display of his
glorious Perfections in them, he will so restrain, direct and influence them,
as that this End shall certainly be secured.

If God be the Maker of all Things, and his own Honor was his End therein; then
he is the Lord and sovereign Disposer of all. This is a plain and undeniable
Consequence.

Nor is it any reasonable Objection against this, that a Multitude of the most
excellent Creatures, Angels and Men, have fallen from their original State of
Perfection, and are now become unwilling and unable actively to glorify God.
For he by his Power can, and in his Providence actually does so overruled them
and their Actions, as that the great End shall be obtained. For God will be
glorified in them that perish, as well as in them that are saved --

I shall only add,

A divine Providence may be argued from Miracles, or Works above the Power of
natural Agents. Those Operations and Events which exceed the mere Force and
Power of Nature, will necessarily infer some superior and most powerful Being,
who interposes when he pleases, and hinders or inverts the natural Course and
Tendency of the Creatures.

That there have been such extraordinary Works or Events, we have all possible
Reason to believe. He that will n^^ give his Assent to the Truth of such Facts,
because he was never an Eyewitness of them, may, as well, and with as much
Reason, resolve to believe nothing at all, but what he has had a Personal
Knowledge of.

Allowing then that there have been such miraculous Works as never could have
been effected but by a divine Power, We may be assured that God exercises a
sovereign Power and Providence over the World; that he acts his Will and
Pleasure among all Creatures; that he permits them to act, or obstructs and
hinders according to his Will. If he did not watch over and govern the World,
to what can we impute those wonderful and miraculous Things which we find
recorded in the Scriptures of Truth? They were manifestly contrary to the known
established Laws of Nature. And it would be unreasonable to suppose that they
were effected by evil, but powerful Spirits, to put a Cheat upon Mankind.

The manifest Design of them was to glorify God, and to promote the Holiness
and Happiness of Men. They must therefore be wro't by the Finger of God; and
they prove his Power and Providence over his Creatures --

The Truth under Consideration might be further evidenced from God's frequent
restraining and subduing the Lusts of Men. These are so many Miracles of Grace,
and so many Evidences of God's adorable Power, and sovereign Providence. For if
some Almighty Hand did not continually hold in, and restrain the inordinate
Lusts of Men and Devils, this World would, before now, have been an Habitation
of Cruelty, and a mere Hell of Confusion and Misery.

What we have now heard under this Head, without further insisting upon it, may
give us a rational Conviction of the Truth we have been considering, viz. That
God exercises a powerful Providence over all his Creatures, according to his
Will.

And now, from what has been offered, let us in the first Place learn to adore
the infinite Majesty and Greatness of God.

How excellent, great, and glorious a Being is he, who thus rules, disposes,
and governs all Things! What an exalted Idea does this give us of the divine
Majesty, to think that he is a King, absolutely Sovereign, universal and
eternal! Of how glorious and adorable Perfections must that God be; and with
how glorious a Majesty must he be clothed, who can thus inspect and order the
Universe as he pleases!

What Authority and Power is he invested with, whose is the Heavens, and the
Earth, and all that therein is, and who has all Creatures at his sole Command,
and entire Disposal! How great a God is he! How greatly to be feared and had in
Reverence!

He must needs be entitled to all Honor and Worship, who has a necessary and
indisputable Right of Dominion over all. He who is Lord of all, is worthy to
receive all Blessing and Glory from all Creatures, according to their several
Abilities. It is the obliged Duty of all his reasonable Creatures to adore him
and magnify his Name, who is the exalted King and Head over all.

Earthly Princes and Governors will be respected, honored and obeyed by those
who are lawfully subjected to their Authority. And by how much they exceed in
Health and worldly Glories, and in the extent of their Dominions, a
proportionably greater Honor will be challenged by them. The Respect and Honor
which is paid them rises in Proportion to their outward Magnificence and
worldly Greatness.

What Glory, Adoration and Praise then is due to God, the universal King and
Governor, whose Authority and Power is most just and rightful; and who has all
Things at his Will and good Pleasure? We have all possible Reason to make him
the highest Object of our Esteem, Fear and Reverence. Shall not the Excellency
of so glorious a Being make us afraid* Shall not a holy Awe and Dread of the
almighty King fall upon us? Shall a finite Creature, to whom is given some
worldly Power, be regarded and reverenced by us; and shall not the infinite
God, who has all Power and Authority, be much more so? It is only for the Sake
of that derived Power wherewith Earthly Rulers are invested, that we honor and
obey them? Does not therefore God, the infinite Original of all Authority,
Might and Power, much more challenge our Fear, Adoration and humble Obedience*
Should not the Consideration of that sovereign Dominion, that boundless Power,
and all-governing Authority of God, strike us into an holy Fear and Trembling,
at the infinite awful and terrible Majesty that is with him?

How glorious is God our heavenly King! And how reveren^ial, humble and
obedient should we be to a Being, great and powerful as he is! He justly
demands, and it is our reasonable Duty, to pay all Worship, Homage and Praise
to him, who is all in all; who by an underived Authority, and an irresistible
Power, overrules all Creatures for his own Glory.

That which naturally flows from this Doctrine, is that of the inspired
Psalmist, O come, let us worship, and bow down! We should entertain high and
honorable Thoughts of him* and fall low before the high and lofty One --

But, Secondly, Let what has been said excite us to a serious Contemplation on
God's Works of Providence, and to give him the Glory of his Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, and other Excellencies that are therein manifested. This is one main
Business of our present State, as we are understanding and thoughtful
Creatures. And it is no improbable Opinion that some Part of our Employment in
Heaven will be to contemplate the Works of God, as well as his eternal Essence,
and to render him the Praise which results from both.

As the Glory of God is visible in the Creation of the World, so he makes known
his Wisdom and Goodness, his Power, Justice and Mercy in the Government of it.
The Word of God (as we have heard) teaches us to believe that all Creatures are
preserved and governed by the same almighty Hand which at first gave them
Being. That he by whom they at first existed keeps them in their several
Orders, Operations and Motions, and that nothing happens either in the common
Course of Nature, or in extraordinary Events without his Knowledge and
Determination. In a Word, that he is ever present with all his Creatures, and
that even the most inconsiderable of them are not excepted out of his Dominion
and Government. It is the Duty of reasonable Creatures to live under a due
Sense of this Providence. Nor is it enough that we retain the general Notion
and Belief of it in our Minds, but should take Care to apply it to particular
Events. For if God knows and orders every Thing that happens to ourselves and
others, to Nations and Kingdoms, it must be the Duty of his People to
acknowledge him in all.

We should often meditate, with suitable Affections, on the glorious Instances
of his Power, his Goodness, and his Grace, his unsearchable Wisdom, and his
Truth and Righteousness, which appear in the Administration of his Government
of rational Beings.

The Dispersions of Nations over the Face of the Earth, the Rise of Empires,
and the Fate of Kingdoms, as to outward Circumstances or spiritual Privileges,
are according to the Appointment of God, and the Influence of his Power.

We should particularly reflect with Gratitude upon the many signal Events of
Providence, in God's Protection of his own People; his defeating the Designs of
their Enemies; and the many wonderful Salvations and Favors which he has
granted to them.

Gratitude to God for favorable Dispensations of Providence, is so rational a
Duty, that they who regard nothing but their precious Enjoyments, without any
serious Remembrance of God, are, not only lost to all Sense of Religion, but
even to the most reasonable Apprehensions and Affections of human Nature.

Let us then ascribe the Glory of all the Salvations and Deliverences, which
the Church and People of God have had Experience of, from Time to Time, to him
who does according to his Will, in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth. It is he that has saved and defended them from their
Enemies, and disappointed their Devices against them. He is the supreme Cause
and Author of all those glorious Works which are wro't for the Churches
Salvation.

Instruments are indeed to be honored as Instruments whom God makes use of in
subduing the Church's Enemies; but God is to be acknowledged as the sole Author
of all Salvations. It is he that raises up Instruments: it is he that qualifies
and sits them for any Services and it is he that does all by them, and
therefore to his Name alone is all the Glory due.

Let our Souls then magnify the Lord, who has done great Things for his
People. Let us lift up his Name on high, and sacrifice Praise to him, who alone
does wondrous Things.

Let me here adopt some of the Expressions of another. Rev. Mr. Foxcroft's
Sermon on Psalm. 15 7. on Occasion of the Death of King George the First, and
the Accession of King George the Second, to the British Throne.


God has pleaded the Cause of his People, and upheld his Church amidst
innumerable (...), Wars, Persecutions and Oppressions. The Lord is great in
Zion, and he rules in the midst of his Enemies.

What an admirable Train of glorious Deliverances did the Lord give his People
in old Time to experience* The whole Story of the Jews is brightned with very
numerous and most surprising Memorials. And the Conduct of Providence toward
the Christian Church, both in the primitive Ages, and latter Times, has been
almost equally full of Wonders.

The English Nation in particular, has been the Stage of many the most
remarkable Dispensations. -- By what mavelous Methods of Providence was the
Reformation from Popery accomplished. And how has this glorious Interest been
signally guarded by an amazing Series of special Interpositions to this Day* It
has passed through many a hazardous Crisis, and been reduced to an expiring
Posture Time after Time: but has received new Life* and been made to flourish
again by some happy Turn of Affairs, so sudden and unaccountable, that the
Finger of God has visibly appeared, its Enemies themselves being judges.

And to come to this Land: how very remarkable have been the Operations of a
special Providence toward this People, from the Beginning down to this Day!

The great Actions and Specialties of Providence in Favor of the People of God
here, have been many and astonishing, and afford Materials for as entertaining
and affecting a Story as any Place in the whole World, in the same Compass of
Time, can furnish out. For whether we reflect on the Beginning and Rise, or
Continuance and Progress of these Plantations, that were begun upon a religious
Foundation, which you will allow me to say is the special Honor of New England.
We are on all Sides presented with wonderful Displays of the saving Power,
directing Wisdom, beneficent Goodness, and unfalling Truth of our Covenant-God.
-- Let me add* --

We have in particular been wonderfully saved from our Enemies, when, to all
human Appearance, they might have easily, had they been permitted, swallowed us
up, and made a Prey of us. --

If we come down to the late War, which very much originated in Disputes
relative to North America: how mavelous and affecting have been the
Appearances of Providence for us.

At the opening of it, when through the Perfidiousness of our Enemies, we were
obliged in our own Defense, to have Recourse to Arms, they had almost
surrounded us by Land, with a Line of Forts; had some of the best Troops in
France sent to their Assistance, and had engaged vast Numbers of the native
Savages in their Interests; and were big with Hopes of driving us from the
Inheritance derived to us from our Fathers, and obtained through a World of
Peril* Toil and Hardship* and at the Expense of much Blood and Treasure. -- But
blessed be God who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth: our Soul is escaped
as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowlers* the Snare is broken, and we are
escaped.

Several Times* at first, our military Affairs were under a Cloud, and
presented us with gloomy Prospects. But at length they took another Turn, and
became prosperous, even beyond our Expectation, and most sanguine Wishes.
Providence awaked on our Behalf, and by one Conquest after another, has
subjected the extended Country of Canada to the British Empire, whereby we are
delivered from the Hands of our ancient and inveterate Enemies, who had from
the Beginning been Scourges in our Sides, and upon all Occasions vexatious to
us; always contriving our Ruin, and exciting the Savages of the Wilderness,
ever delighting in Blood and Mischief, through deep rooted Prejudices against us,
to numberless inhuman Murders, and Depredations, on our infant Settlements.

Let us then Praise the Lord with our whole Hearts, and show forth all his
mavelous Works. Let us be glad and rejoice in him, who has maintained our
Right and our Cause, and who sat in the Throne judging Right -- He has not
suffered them who were our Enemies wrongfully to rejoice over us, and them that
hated us without a Cause -- He has stirred up himself and awaked to our
Judgment, even to our Cause. --

And now after a surprising and almost unparrelled Series of Victories and
Successes, with which divine Providence has crowned the British Fleets and
Armies in all Parts of the World, our Enemies have been brought to submit to
honorable Terms of Peace, and particularly advantageous, comfortable and happy
to these Colonies. -- This great Event reflects a Luster on his Majesty's Crown
and Arms, and adorns the Beginning of his Reign; which it is our ardent Wish
and Prayer may be very long and glorious -- and that in his Days the Righteous
may flourish, and Abundance of Peace. --

It was an happy Period with God's ancient People, when it was said of their
new conquered Country, The Land rested from War. And blessed be God that such a
joyful Era now shines forth upon us in America; and that we may sit every Man
under his Vine and under his Figtree, having none to make us afraid -- or to
disturb us in the Enjoyment either of the Fruits of the Earth, or our more
precious and distinguishing Privileges, both of a Religious and Civil Nature.

But is War bro't to an happy Conclusion? And do the Blessings of Peace smile
around us? Shall we therefore now beat our Swords into Plowshares, and our
Spears into Pruning Hooks; and lay aside our military Weapons as useless
Things, which we shall never more have Occasion for, and give up all Endeavors
to be acquainted with the Art of War, and to keep up a martial Spirit? -- How
impolitic; how unsafe; how dishonorable such a Conduct! Who knows how soon he
that has stilled the Tumult of the People at present, may again call to Arms?
We cannot but remember that it was but a few Years after the late Peace in 1748
was established, and the Flames of War extinguished, before they broke out
again.

The Church's Enemies are ever restless; and though God is above all the Enemies
of his People, and is able to curb their Power and restrain their Malice; --
yet have we not Reason to fear that the abounding of Iniquity in the Protestant
World, may provoke God soon again to chastize his People with the Punishment of
the Sword.

Is it not the Wisdom of a People to be always in a Posture of Defense?

Among the various Changes of human Affairs, the different and opposite Events
that do interchangeably succeed in the Course of human Life, for which the
Royal Preacher tells us, There is a Time and Season, those that do more
eminently affect Nations and Kingdoms are a Time of War, and a Time of Peace.
These take their Turns in their appointed Seasons, which is (as one Rev. Mr.
Clarke in his Artillery Election Sermon 173^
observes) an Admonition to us, that as War must be managed with Views of
Peace, so a Time of Peace must be improved to prepare for War.

Solomon the wisest of Men and Monarchs, though in his Days such a Peace
flourished* that it is said, there was no Adversary or evil Occurrent, yet who
made greater Preparation for War than he? And the Scripture speaks of it to his
Commendation.

Skilful and brave Soldiers are ever the Beauty and Glory, and under God, the
Safety and Defense of a People.

And I may be allowed on this Occasion particularly to say that the Gentlemen
of the ancient and honorable Company of the Artillery, should be encouraged in
their Endeavors to keep up a martial Spirit, and to acquire and propagate
Skill and Expertness in the Use of Arms. And we trust they are so, and will be
so by His Excellency the Captain General, by the Great and General Assembly and
by all that wish well to the real Interests of this People. --

His EXCELLENCY, and our other honored Rulers, who are pleased to grace these
Anniversaries with their Presence, and Attendance on the Exercises of divine
Service, usual on such Days, surely, do hereby signify their Approbation of the
Design of the Institution of this Company, as valuable, and of real Benefit to
the Community.

Our Fathers who laid the Foundation of this Establishment, though it it of
Importance. Nor will it be an Argument of our superior Wisdom to dissert the
Cause they were so anxious to support.

Have we not seen the Importance of well disciplined Troops in the late War?
And shall we that have known the great Utility and Necessity of expert and
valiant Soldiers, not be concerned to have such found among ourselves, who
might be able to force regular Forces upon equal Grounds, and not be afraid to
speak with the Enemy in the Gate?

Well accomplished and skilful Soldiers will be more than ever necessary for us
in any future War that may arise, as such will be those, in all Probability,
whom we shall chiefly have to deal with. --

As the Establishment of Peace upon such glorious Terms cannot but diffuse Joy
through the Minds of all that wish well to Zion, and are the real Friends of the
Protestant Cause* so we all bear our Part in grateful Acknowledgments to the
supreme Disposer of all Events, who has the Hearts of the Princes and
Potentates of the Earth in his Hand, for this gracious Dispensation, so much in
Favor to the British Governments in America, and to this Province in
particular.

Nevertheless it becomes us all, and Persons of a military Character will
especially remember, that the Time may come even in our Days, such is the
Instability of human Affairs, when those who envy our growing Greatness, may
form deep Plots against us, and endeavor to put them in Execution by the Point
of the Sword. Is it not then our Wisdom even in a Time of Peace to prepare for
War, and cherish a martial Spirit, that we may be in a ready Posture of Defense
on the Turn of Affairs?

Although the peculiar Smiles of Providence which attend this anniversary
Solemnity, inspire Joy and Gratitude into all our Hearts, yet we feel our
Sorrow and Mourning renewed for the Decease of the late worthy Colonel
PHILLIPS, who was so long an Ornament to the Artillery Company, as well as a
great Blessing in the other various public Stations which he filled with Honor,
Fidelity and Acceptance. But he is gone! Gone to be here no more! His Piety,
Integrity, Benevolence, and extensive Kindness and Goodness, afforded him solid
Comfort at the Approach of the last Enemy, and Victory over him. He quitted the
Field of Battle with Honor; and we doubt not knows by happy Experience the
Import of that gracious Proclamation and Promise of our divine Commander, To
him that overcomes will I grant to set with me on my Throne, even as I also
overcame and am set down with my Father on his Throne.

We, my Brethren, must ere long engage in the same Combat, for there is no
Discharge in that War; and the Body will fall and die in the Conflict, and
Death feed on its prostrate Prey in the Grave.

May we, may all in this Assembly of whatever Character and Condition in Life,
be concerned that we may be prepared for this last Scene of Life, and the
Beginning of a new, and never-ending State. This is the chief Business of Life,
which if neglected we are eternally ruined. To this End let us believe in the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, fly for Refuge to his atoning Sacrifice, submit to him as
the Lord our Righteousness, yield Obedience to his Commands as the Captain of
our Salvation, and live in the faithful Discharge of the Duties of our several
Stations.

Let us look to him, in whom it has pleased the Father that all Fullness should
dwell, for Grace and Strength to enable us to prosecute our Christian Warfare
amidst our surrounding and powerful Enemies, with Courage and Resolution, and
to push on with Patience and Bravery to the final Conquest; that when our
Warfare shall be accomplished, and Death shall discharge us from the Fatigues
and Turmoils of this transitory Life, we may put on the Garland of Immortality,
and live and reign with our victorious Redeemer, in the Realms of a glorious
and undisturbed Peace, through the endless Ages of Eternity. AMEN.

ERRATA.
PAGE 6. L. 3 from the Bottom for be read be. P. 8. L. 2. for last read lest.


