Mr. Appleton's SERMON At the Thursday Lecture in BOSTON.

Some unregenerate Persons not so far from the Kingdom of GOD as others.
Illustrated in a SERMON From MARK xii. 34. Preached some time past at the
Thursday Lecture in Boston.

By NATHANIEL APPLETON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Cambridge.

And he answered and said unto him, Master all these have I observed from my
Youth. Then Jesus beholding him, loved him, and said unto him, one thing thou
lackest.

Mark x. 20, 21. Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian.

Acts xxvi. 28. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND in Queen Street.
M,DCC,LXIII.

TO The Honorable WILLIAM BRATTLE, Esquire Brigadier-General, and One of His
Majesty's Council: The following Discourse (Published by his Desire) Is with
great Respect INSCRIBED By His much obliged Friend and humble Servant

The Author.

A Jewish Scribe not far from the Kingdom of GOD.
MARK xii. 34. And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto
him, thou art not far from the kingdom of GOD.


THIS is the answer Christ made to a certain scribe, whom after some
conference, he found to be more knowing, at least more ingenuous and fair in
his concessions and acknowledgements, as well as in his inquiries, than the
others, who conversed with him. The others came not to be enlightened and
instructed by Christ; for they, who had been instructed in all the learning of
their law, did in the pride of their hearts scorn to be taught of him; but
their design was to ensnare him in their talk: Thus we are told, that certain
of the Pharisees and of the Herodians (being sent by the rest) came to him to
catch him in his words, v. 13. which was by putting some ensnaring questions;
that by his answers they might get something against him. One of the questions
they put was, Whether it was lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or not? In which
Christ saw through all their hypocrisy and cunning: and gave them an answer,
which raised their admiration; but gave them no handle against him. -- Then
came the Sadducees with their puzzling question about the Resurrection: To
which Christ answered, so as not only to put them to silence, but to convince
them of their error, and their infidelity, if they had not been prejudiced
against him.

And now, one of the Scribes (the person our text refers to) being present; and
hearing how well, and how wisely Christ answered the Pharisees and the
Sadducees; takes his turn and puts his question, saying to him; Which is the
first Commandment of all? The question being put in a plain manner, and as if
he aimed rather at being instructed, than to get any thing against Christ in
his answer; Christ answers him directly to the question; and tells him, that to
love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all
our strength, was the first Commandment; and goes further than the scribe's
question, and tells him, which was the second, as well as the first
Commandment, namely to love his neighbor as himself: and assures him, that
there is no other Commandment greater than these.

The Scribe fell fully in with our Savior's answer, and freely acknowledges
it, and descants upon it, saying, well Master thou have said the truth; and
going over the two commandments, he declares them to be his own principles,
saying, There is one God, and there is none other but he, and to love him with
all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to
love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt-offerings and
sacrifices. There was so much wisdom and truth, as well as freedom, openness
and honestly appearing in this answer, that Christ commends it, and commends
him for it: for when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him,
thou art not far from the kingdom of God.

What I propose is to search into the meaning of the text; and see what there
was in this man, this scribe, beyond what there was in the other scribes, or
pharisees, that should induce Christ to say of him, that he was not far from
the kingdom of God: whereas the others were so far from it, that he tells them
Publicans and Harlots would go into the Kingdom of God before them. Matthew.
21.31. When Christ declared so distinguishingly of this scribe above the rest,
it does not appear to be by virtue of his omnisciency, and power to search the
heart; but he pronounces thus upon him, from the discovery he made of himself
in his answer. And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said, thou
art not far from the kingdom of God.

To handle this subject in as distinct and clear a manner as I can -- I propose

1. Briefly to show what we are to understand by the Kingdom of God, which the
scribe was not far from.

2. To consider the scribe's answer, and the several things which are contained
therein, and see what there is in the answer, that bids fair for the kingdom of
God, or showed that he was not far from it.

And as I go along, I shall make such application of the several points, as may
be instructive and profitable to us.

1. Let us consider the phrase here the Kingdom of God; and what is to be
understood by it.

Now it undoubtedly intends the gospel kingdom, or the kingdom of grace, as it
is exhibited and displayed in the gospel, which dispensation of grace began to
be set up in our Savior's time.

Accordingly, we find John the Baptist and forerunner of Christ, preaching up
repentance, saying Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Matthew. iii. 2.
And Christ himself began his public ministry declaring the same thing, Matthew.
iv. 7. The kingdom of heaven is the same with the kingdom of God, and
promiscuously used in the new testament.

This kingdom of God is that dispensation which opens the grand mystery of
man's redemption by Jesus Christ, in the clearest and fullest manner, that
mankind has ever been savoured with. A dispensation that sets forth the sin and
ruin of man, and his recovery by Jesus Christ. It sets forth and declares all
the world guilty before God; and that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners; and that by his obedience and death he is become the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes. The kingdom of God, or gospel
kingdom, exhibits Christ to us, as the prophet, priest and king of our
salvation; and issues forth this proclamation of grace in his name, He that
believes, that is on the Son of God, and is baptized, shall be saved, Man.
xvi. 16. giving out many encouraging calls and endearing invitations, setting
forth the richness and freeness of divine grace; and that the whole kingdom
from the foundation to the top-stone is of grace; that by grace we are saved
through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God; not of works
lest any man should boast, Ephesians. ii. 8.9. For this gospel kingdom is a kingdom
in which all boasting is forever excluded as to our selves, both as to strength
as well as righteousness.

The kingdom of God is begun in this world. Every professing christian is a
visible member of this kingdom: every true christian is a real member or
subject of this kingdom: and as to such true believers in Christ, -- the
kingdom of grace is carried on in this world, and perfected in heaven; where
there will be the completion, or perfection of the kingdom of grace in glory.

So then, from what has been said it appears, that the coming into this kingdom
of God, is the becoming true christians; and the actual coming into this
kingdom or becoming true christians, comprehends in it; first of all, a very
deep sense of our lost and wretched state by reason of sin; and of our own
utter inability to help or save our selves: and so of the absolute need we
stand in of a Savior, and that a great one. It also comprehends in it a
sincere belief that the Lord Jesus Christ is the only, and the all-sufficient
Savior, able to save to the uttermost all who come to God by him; and that we
actually receive him, as he is revealed and offered to us in his gospel, and
from a grateful sense of his infinite love and grace as well as of his
authority and power, freely yield our selves to his honor and service, to
glorify him in our bodies and with our spirits which are his; living as his
grace teaches us; running the race that is set before us, all the while looking
to Jesus as the author and finisher of our faith; and as the grand medium of
intercourse between God and us, and by whom all spiritual and saving blessings
are conveyed to us.

Every one who has come to such a sense of things, to such a faith in Christ,
and subjection to him, is actually born, brought into this kingdom of God, and
is a true Christian.

II. Let us now consider the Scribe's answer, and see what there was in it;
which discovered that he was not far from the kingdom of God: And that he was
nearer to it than the other Scribes Pharisees, and Sadducees, or the Jews in
general.

For the opening and illustrating this Point;

1. I would observe that the Jewish nation had many things peculiar to them,
that might serve to prepare them for the gospel kingdom, and so it might be
reasonably expected that they would not be far from the kingdom of God; but
ready to enter into it, whenever it should come among them.

No people had advantages equal with the Jews for understanding the nature of
the gospel kingdom: and such encouragements to come into it, as they had at
first; for really the kingdom of God, under a different dispensation, had been
among them from Moses his time. They had the advantage much every way; chiefly
that unto them were committed the oracles of God: for in those sacred oracles,
they were taught the fall of our first parents, and how sin and ruin first came
into the world. And the old testament, as it taught them the sinfulness of man,
so it taught them the need of a Savior, and gave them the promise of one, even
of the seed of the woman; and a multitude of promises, consequent upon this,
and to open and inlighten the same unto them. By the old testament it was
revealed to them, that this Savior, the seed of the woman, should be the seed
of Abraham their ancestor, of the tribe of Judah, and of the lineage of David
that he should be born of a virgin, and in Bethlehem of Judea. Moreover, it was
foretold in their prophecies, that he should appear in a state of humiliation,
so as to be despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief; yea, that he should be wounded for our transgressions, that he should
pour out his soul unto death, bear the sins of many, and make intercession for
the transgressors: and then should pass from that state of humiliation, to a
state of exaltation and glory; when he should see his seed, and his kingdom
should enlarge in the world, and he should be a light to the gentiles, as well
as the glory of his people Israel. Nay, the prophecies of the old testament
went so far, as to point out the very time when the great Savior should appear
and set up his gospel kingdom, Dan. ix. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish transgression, to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in an everlasting righteousness etc.
which prophecy was understood of weeks of years, viz. 400 years, which brought
it to the time that our Lord Jesus actually appeared: and accordingly, there
was a general expectation of the Messiah in those days.

And now one would think that a nation and people favored with a multitude of
such promises as these, and brought up from generation to generation in the
belief of the Messiah to come, should be the nearest to the kingdom, and the
most ready of any people in the world to enter into the gospel kingdom of the
Messiah, so soon as ever it came among them, and was published to them: which
was done to them, before it was to any other people: for he was sent in the
first place to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

In short, when we consider what the apostle says concerning them, Romans ix.
4.5. That to them pertained the adoption and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving the law, and the service of God, and the promises; and of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever; I say,
considering these things, what could be thought, but that upon the news of the
Messiah, and setting up of his kingdom, the Jews from all quarters would flock
in unto him?

2. Notwithstanding the Jews had such advantages of being near the kingdom of
God, and of entering into it; yet by reason of their horrible corruption, pride
and perverse construction of things; perhaps no people as such were farther
from the kingdom than they.

That nation abused the special favors of God to them; and grew very corrupt
and wicked, proud and perverse: and so put proud and perverse, corrupt and
carnal interpretations upon the law, and upon the promises and prophecies
concerning the Messiah's kingdom. For they seemed to forget all that was
predicted concerning his sufferings, and making his soul an offering for sin:
and looked only for a Messiah, who should set up his kingdom with external
power and pomp; giving them (the Jews) the pre-eminence and dominion over all
other nations -- Moreover, by a perverse, corrupt construction of the law,
understanding and construing it as forbidding only the external and gross acts:
they, especially the scribes and pharisees, grew very self-righteous, so as not
to see the need of a suffering, and an atoning Savior: nor did they see the
necessity of regeneration, or change of heart, which is so necessary to our
entering into the kingdom of God.

So that when the Messiah actually came, and the kingdom of God was among them;
it was so different from their carnal apprehensions, and vain proud thoughts
relating to the kingdom, that they were prejudiced against it. They could not
bear to have him who professed to be the Messiah, make such a poor outward
appearance; and to take a number of poor illiterate fishermen for his
disciples, and the chief ministers of his kingdom, rather than the great men,
the learned Rabbis of their own nation: and his expounding the law in such an
extensive spiritual sense, beyond what they did; and his reproving them so
plainly for their pride, hyprocrisy and wickedness, set them against him, his
person, his doctrine and his kingdom; so as to pour the greatest contempt upon
the same; endeavoring (...) methods to suppress his pretensions to the
Messiah-ship, yea to kill him, and get him out of the way.

And thus that people who had the advantage of being nearest the kingdom of
God, were really further from it, in their temper and disposition perhaps, than
any people in the world. And agreably to this says our Savior, Matthew. viii.
11.12. Many shall come from the east and west, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven: but the children of the kingdom (that is
the Jews) shall be cast out. And again Matthew. xxi. 31. Verily I say unto you,
that publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. The pride and
self-righteous spirit of the scribes and pharisees, their gross construction of
the law, their hypocrisy, their prejudice against the person of Christ, were
such that even publicans and harlots were nearer the kingdom of God, more ready
to receive the gospel than they. And he who considers the nature of spiritual
pride, self-righteousness, corrupt notions in religion handed down to
posterity, together with obstinacy and perverseness of spirit, must needs see
that they are qualities which set us at the greatest distance from the kingdom
of God: and that publicans and harlots, and such sinners, who are conscious of
their evil ways, seem to be more easily convinced and persuaded, than such sort
of people.

But the scribe in my text differed from his brethren; and how far so ever they
were from the kingdom of God, yet he was not far from it, as Christ the truest
and best judge in the matter, asserts and declares.

And so I am brought to consider, what there was in this scribe's answer, which
showed he was not far from the kingdom of God; or what there was in his answer,
that discovered he was in any sort better prepared to embrace christianity, and
enter the gospel kingdom than others. --

And here I shall,

First consider, the character which is given of his answer in general, viz.
that he answered discreetly. And then

Secondly, consider the matter of the answer it self, and the several things
contained therein; which may give us to see how near he was to the kingdom of
God.

1. Let us consider the character which is given of his answer in general, viz.
that he answered discreetly, that is understandingly and wisely, as the word
signifies.

He did not answer ignorantly, perversely, or sophistically. He did not answer
with subtility and craft, as if he had any particular private design of his own
in view, or any point to gain, or any intangling snare to guard against. He
does not appear to answer with low cunning, and want of honesty, as the priests
and scribes answered our Savior, when he asked them, whether the baptism of
John was from heaven, or of men? and they reasoned with themselves, saying; if
we shall say from heaven, he will then say, why believed ye him not? and if we
say of men, all the people will stone us, therefore they said, we cannot tell
whence it was, Luke xx. 4 -- 7. They could have told at least what they thought
about the matter: but fearing lest by answering either way, they should bring
themselves into a snare; they evaded the matter, by saying, they could not
tell. -- But there appears no such craftiness or deceit in the answer of this
scribe; for he appears to answer truly, yea honestly; and what he really
thought to be the truth. His answer don't seem to be the effect of pride, or
passion, or fear, or bias to any particular party; nor does it seem to savor
of prejudice or perverseness: for his answer was a true and a good answer; and
such an one as he ought to have given, exactly corresponding with what Christ
himself had said in the foregoing verses. Moreover, it appears to be delivered
with an air of honesty, and as his real opinion. This scribe by the question he
asked at first, and by this his reply to Christ's answer, seems to have been an
honest enquirer after truth; and was willing freely to own it, whenever it
appeared to him. And upon this account he may be said to be not far; at least
not so far from the kingdom of God as some others; but in a fairer way to
embrace the christian scheme, than his brethren. Who answered and acted with
craft and design, under the influence of pride, obstinacy and hypocrisy.

Thus a man having true thoughts, and a good understanding, as to the
doctrines, principles and precepts of christianity, and a disposition to speak
of the substantial points of religion, without any trimming or turning or
equivocating, is not so far from the kingdom of God; but is better prepared to
receive the christian faith, and come into the gospel kingdom, than he who is
ignorant, and erroneous; who is proud and perverse; insincere and hypocritical,
and who wilfully blinds his own eyes, and suppresses the convictions of his own
conscience.

And now, who will deny but that there are men of such different characters, at
lest as to degrees? And surely we may say, that the more knowing and
understanding, the more free from guile and hypocrisy, and pride and prejudice
any are; they are nearer to the kingdom of God, than those who have less
knowledge, and more pride, prejudice and hypocrisy. -- I do not say, that these
shall be actually brought into the kingdom of God, or made true christians
before the others: for who may presume to limit the power and grace of God, who
can, if he pleases, bring the remotest from this kingdom, into it at once; and
make the most unpromising wretches upon earth, the subjects of his grace? But
this no ways denies, but that the more understanding, and the more sound in
judgment, and the more free from pride and hypocrisy, they are not so far from
the kingdom of God as some others are.

Thus much concerning the answer in general, that it was a discreet wise
answer. -- I now proceed,

2. To consider the answer it self given by the scribe, and see what there is
in it, which gave occasion for Christ to say to him, that he was not far from
the kingdom of God; but rather bid fair for becoming a christian.

And here,

1. The answer acknowledges and declares, that which is the fundamental
principle of all true religion, viz. The being of a God, and the unity of the
Godhead.

And the scribe said unto him, Well master, thou have said the truth: for there
is one God, and none other but he; as in the verse but one before my text. Here
you see, he believed there is a God: and this is the foundation of all
religion; for religion and every act thereof supposes the being of a God: for
he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seez him, Heb. xi. 6. Now, in this point he was not so far
from the kingdom of God, as those atheistical fools who say in their hearts,
there is no God. There was not so much to do to bring him into the kingdom of
God, as there would be to such an one who does not so much as believe there is
a God: for the atheist must be brought to the faith of that which the scribe
believed already. So that he who believes there is a God, is at least one step
nearer to the kingdom of God, than he who don't so much as believe there is a
God, or any kingdom of God.

But then, the scribe not only believed there was a God, but that there was
only one God. There is one God (says he) and none other but he. The faith he
professed was that there was but one only living and true God. Well, this is a
step nearer than those who multiply gods, and so the objects of their worship,
and pay religious service to a number of feigned deities, which is due only to
the one true and living God. Accordingly in this respect the scribe might be
said, not to be so far from the kingdom of God, as the heathen world at that
day, who had a multitude of gods, to whom they paid religious worship: such as
the sun, and moon, four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and graven images.
For before these can come into the kingdom of God, they must be turned from all
these dumb idols; must be convinced of the sin and folly of idolatry, and must
renounce it, which the scribe implicitly does in his answer: and so was nearer
than those who were swallowed up in ignorance and idolatry.

And thus, such who have right notions of the Godhead as to the unity thereof;
and so of the one only object of religious worship, are nearer the kingdom of
God, than such who multiply objects of religious worship, and divide the glory
due only to God, with some of his creatures: as such who worship the virgin
Mary, and pray to Angels, and saints departed, as if they heard and knew, and
were able to help and save. The divine precept is, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Matthew. iv. 10. Accordingly, such who
embrace the protestant principles, which renounce all idolatry, are in that
respect nearer the kingdom of God, than those who embrace the idolatrous
principles of the church of Rome.

2. His answer made a proper distinction between the moral and the ceremonial
law; and acknowledges the moral to be much preferable, to all the ceremonies
and most costly sacrifices under the mosaic economy.

For thus the scribe answers: and to love him with all the heart etc. and to
love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices. As in the v. before my text. To love God with all the heart and
soul; and our neighbor as our selves; is the sum and substance of the moral
law: and this he freely acknowledges to be more than all whole burnt offerings,
and sacrifices, which may be considered as the sum of the ceremonial law, or of
positive institutions.

It was a matter of no small dispute among the Jews, which was the first and
the greatest commandment. Some pleaded for circumcision; which precept was
given to their father Abraham as a seal of the covenant. Others pleaded for the
philacteries, which were certain portions of the law, written of strips of
parchment, that they wore upon their foreheads and upon their arms; agreeable to
what is commanded, Exodus xiii. 9. Deuteronomy. v. 8, 11 -- 18. Now these portions of
the law being written and set forth in such a conspicuous manner, were
frequently repeated by those who wore them. And our Savior observes of the
scribes and pharisees, Matthew. xxiii. 5. that they made broad their
philacteries, out of ostentation and show: and no wonder if they pleaded for
the precepts inscribed on their philacteries as the greatest commandments;
among which was the law of the passover; the sanctifying the firstborn of men;
and setting apart of firstlings of beasts, Exodus xiii. begin Others pleaded for
the law of sacrifices, purification and keeping festivals.

But now, this scribe seems to understand the difference between moral precepts
and merely positive institutions; and gives the preference to the precepts of
morality: To love God with all the heart, and our neighbor as our self, is
more than all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices. The language of the jewish
practice was, as if burnt-offerings and sacrifices were the great commandment;
For these, they were observant of, and had great dependence upon, and upon
occasion would abound in them, even while they neglected the love of God, and
of their neighbor. Nay our Savior observes concerning them, that they were so
critical and nice, as to tithe their mint, annise and cummin, and such like
herbs; when at the same time they neglected the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, faith, and the love of God, Matthew. xxiii. 23. Luke xi. 42.

But this scribe understood the nature of true religion, and wherein it
consists better than this came to. He freely and fully gave the preference to
the moral law; and allows that the love of God, and of our neighbor, are
greater commandments, and of greater importance religion, than all the
sacrifices, and ceremonies of the jewish law. In this respect he was orthodox
and sound in his principles; and judged truly in the case; for the oracles of
truth teach us, that God has not such delight in burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord; and that to obey, especially
this great commandment of love, is better than sacrifice; and to hearken than
the fat of rams, 1 Samuel xv. 22. And to do justice and judgment (which implies
love to our neighbor,) is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice, Prove.
xxi. 3.

Now who can say this scribe was so far from the kingdom of God, as those who
had very different and so very false apprehensions of these things? and who
placed their religion in circumcision, or the sacrifices and ceremonies of the
jewish church, rather than in those two great commandments of love to God and
our neighbor? For the kingdom of God, or the gospel kingdom, has laid aside
all the sacrifices and ceremonies of the jewish law; and is a more plain and
simple dispensation; the substantial parts of which are supreme love to God,
and Christ, and sincere fervent charity one to another: all excited by or
grounded upon a true faith in Christ. Says the Apostle, 1 Timothy i. 5. The end of
the commandment, that is the completion, or perfection of the gospel
dispensation, is LOVE, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned. -- Surely then, this scribe, who at least maintained this in theory,
was not so far from the kingdom, as those who placed their religion in
sacrifices, purifications, and the punctilio's of the mosaic law, or of their
oral traditions: for this error in their understanding and judgment, must be
corrected and rectified; before they would be even with him respecting the
gospel kingdom.

And thus we may confidently assert, that such who do so well understand
religion, as to be able truly to distinguish between the weightier and lesser
matters of the gospel; between the essentials, and circumstantials of
christianity; are not so far from this kingdom, as those who grossly mistake in
this point; and place their religion more in the outward form and appearance,
than in the truth and reality of it; and who lay more stress upon the outward
services, and instituted parts of religion, than upon the moral part thereof.
So that under the gospel dispensation, such persons as place their religion in
outward professions and services, and satisfy themselves with the morning and
evening sacrifices of prayer and praise, and with the public worship, and
religious services of the sabbath, without seeking after that faith in Christ,
that love to God and their neighbor, which the gospel requires, are not so
near the kingdom of God, as they who look upon faith, repentance, love and
holiness, to be the great things of religion: and who attend upon the positive
instituted parts of religion, not as if the kingdom of God consisted in them,
but as means of God's appointing to attain those substantial virtues and
graces, in which the gospel kingdom does consist. For the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink; but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans
xiv. 17.

Many people are apt to deceive themselves, and think they are near the kingdom
of heaven: yea, that they are actually in the kingdom of grace; because they
are constant in attending religious worship, and go on in a round of duties;
when perhaps they have little or no regard to the love of God or of their
neighbor; but with all this round of religious duties, indulge themselves in
pride, worldliness, envy, hatred and malice. These, although they may be near in
the eye of the world, as well as in their own conceit, yet are really far from
the kingdom, and without a rectifying their understanding and judgment, as well
as a change of their will and inclination, they will not see the kingdom of
God, or become real christians: whereas the man who is doctrinally knowing in
this matter, and understands that faith and repentance, love and holiness, are
the great things of christianity; and the positive precepts and instituted
duties, are the appointed means to bring us to this, is not such an error as
the former.

Indeed, we are not to make the distinction so wide between the instituted
means of grace, and the grace it self, as to neglect the means, under a
pretense that we are looking after the end, the substantial parts of religion:
for he who overlooks and neglects the instituted means, such as prayer, the
word and ordinances, has not really a proper regard for the substantial parts
of religion as the end: for the gospel not only requires faith, love and
holiness, as the great things of the kingdom: but it requires our diligent and
constant attendance on the positive and instituted parts of religion, such as
reading, hearing, praying, and walking in all the ordinances, which are
appointed as means of obtaining grace; or of growth therein. For although these
duties may not be rested in; yet they must observed by us. The weightier
matters must be above all regarded; but the outward forms of divine appointment
may not be neglected.

3. The scribe's answer was free from the common error and corruption of that
day; as if it was only an external conformity that the law required: whereas he
acknowleges that the commandment reached to the heart, and required the inward
esteem and affections of the soul, as well as the outward expressions of love.

His answer is, and to love the Lord with the heart, and with the
understanding, and with the soul, and with the strength, and to love his
neighbor as himself.

The Jews at that day had so corrupted the written word with their oral
traditions, as to make religion to be a mere outside thing, a mere form, a
carcass without any life and spirit to animate it: and as if the heart had
nothing or but little to do in the matter. For although the written word they
then had, taught them that God looks at the heart, and that he required truth
in the inward parts. Psalm. li. 5. yea and that God demanded the heart, Prove.
xxiii. 26. yet by some means or other, they had so perverted these and such
like places of scripture, as to bring their religion very much to the outside,
and as if the inner man had but little to do in their religious services. And
this appears from the many plain hints and reproofs which Christ gave them in
this matter at one time and another; but more especially in his sermon upon the
mount; one evident design of which was to rescue the law from the false
glosses, which the scribes and pharisees had put upon it; whereby they had
taken away the spirit of the law, and confined it to the grosser acts; and as
if the heart and spirit of the man was no way concerned with the law. Matthew. v.
21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, thou shall not kill:
and whosever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment: but I say unto
you, whosoever is ANGRY with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment. By which it appeared that they construed the sixth commandment,
as forbidding only gross actual murder: and that if they did not actually kill
a person, they did not break this commandment. But now our Savior would have
them to know, that this law reached their very spirit; and that if they
suffered their spirits to rise so much as into anger without a cause, they
transgressed this law. They little thought when they indulged causeless and
rash anger, hatred, wrath, desire of revenge, that they brake this law. -- So
again, ye have heard, that it has been said, thou shall not commit adultery:
but I say unto you, whosoever lacks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart. chap. v. 27.28. By which it
appears, as if the doctrine of that day was, that only the gross act of
adultery was forbidden by that commandment. But here he corrects their error,
and gives them to understand that the law was more spiritual, and extensive in
it is requirements than this* and that so much as unchaste thoughts and desires
indulged, were breaches of this commandment: Furthermore, the woe that Christ
pronounces upon them for making clean only the outside of the cup or platter,
Matthew. xxiii. 35. plainly shows, that an outside religion was what they taught
and practiced, without any proper regard to the Heart.

The Scribe seems by his answer to understand that religion was inward as well
as outward; that to love God and his neighbor, was not to love in word and in
tongue only, or in some outward expressions of love: but to love with the
heart, indeed and in truth. The Scribe's answer considers the heart and soul as
the seat of this love: and that the commandment reached to the heart, and to
all that is within him.

Now such a true apprehension of religion, showed, that he was not so far from
the kingdom of God as his brethren scribes and pharisees, who taught the law as
reaching only to the outward man. His answer discovers a true thought of
religion, and that it lay in the heart, as well as in the outer man. And surely
this is a step, a large step toward true christianity, nearer than those who
adhered to the mere lettter of the law, without any regard to the spirit of the
same. Consider how much further they must needs be from true christianity, who
make religion all an outside thing; than he who in his principles and
profession extends it to the heart and soul, and all the powers of the inner
man.

From whence we may argue, that such who maintain this principle, that religion
is spiritual, and reaches to all the powers and affections of the soul, as well
as to the organs and members of the body, are not so far from the kingdom of
God, as such who place all their religion in the outside and bodily part.
Varying the terms, and putting christian instead of jew; and christianity
instead of circumcision; we may adopt the words of the apostle, Romans ii. 28,
29. and say, He is not a christian, who is one outwardly; But he is a
christian, who is one inwardly. -- For christianity is that of the heart, in
the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

Here then, we may see that they who place religion in the heart and spirit, as
well as outer man; are much nearer the kingdom of God, than such who place all
their religion in outward forms and modes of worship, and in external
expressions of love and regard to God, without any notice of their hearts, to
see that they be right with him. What a poor religion must that be, that is
only in the letter, but not in the spirit? and how remote must they be from
true christianity, who place it all in some outward form, and appearance, and
look no further? whereas the man who in his judgment, places religion in the
heart, even although he has not attained to this inward gracious principle
himself; yet appears to be in a much fairer way for it than the former. For by
considering the law of God in its large extent, as reaching to the heart, the
thoughts, desires and intents of it, as well as to the outward man, the man is
in a much fairer way to conviction, which is a step to repentance: for whilst
the man considers the law as reaching to his heart, he is led to see
innumerable sins in his heart which the other is insensible of. And such an one
cannot but see a deal of corruption and wickedness wtihin, which the other
thinks nothing of; so that this man who sees the law reaching his heart, is one
step nearer to conviction than the other. The apostle Paul when pharisee, and
serving the law in the oldness of the letter, without extending it to the inner
man, was blameless and righteous in his own eyes: but when he saw the
spirituality of the law; and how it is precepts reached to the heart, and all
the inner man; then (...) revived, then he had a sense of (...) which he never
had before. But without supposing the eyes to be opened to such a degree, and
in such a spiritual and saving manner, by the spirit of God, as the apostle's
were: it may be truly said, that a speculative apprehension of the
extensiveness of the divine law, reaching to the (...), desires and purposes of
the heart, lays a man much more fairly open to conviction, than he who is
insensible of this; and has no apprehension of either the sins or duties of the
heart.

4. The Scribe's answer showed, that he understood LOVE to be the grand, and
even universal principle of all true religion.

Says he, to LOVE God with the heart, understanding, strength and soul; and to
LOVE his neighbor as himself, is more than all burnt-offerings, and
sacrifices. So that he by his answer understood LOVE, the love of God
especially that was the main thing in religion and the grand spring or
principle, from whence any religious services are performed in an acceptable
manner. His answer plainly intimates, that there is nothing in religion equal
with Love. The answer fully falls in with what Christ had just before said,
that the first commandment was to love the Lord with all thine heart etc. this
is the first commandment: it is the great commandment of all; it is the life
and soul and savor of every thing else in religion, without the love of God
resting in the heart, all acts of religion are but dead formality.

And now, as the scribe by his answer seems to understand this; he was advanced
a considerable step toward the kingdom of God, to what others were, who placed
the essence of religion in any thing besides Love: even although they should
place it in the most difficult and most self-denying acts of obedience and
submission to God. Some are apt to place religion in a fear and dread of the
divine majesty, and in a sort of servile obedience and submission to his will,
in voluntary humility, in mortifications and self-denials, without considering
that love which is the necessary ingredient and essential principle of every
thing in religion; they labor under gross mistakes in religion, for thus says
the apostle, Though I have the gift of prophecy and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge; and though I had all faith, so that I could remove
mountains: and though I be (...) my goods to feed the poor; and though I give
my body to be burned, and have not charity, or love I am nothing, and it all
profits me nothing. 1 Cor. xiii. 23. Religion without love is bondage and
slavery rather than glorious liberty; and would be a mere task and burden,
rather than delightful to the soul. It is love which renders the ways of
religion, ways of pleasantness; and more delightful than all riches, or indeed
than necessary food.

And therefore when men's sentiments are so rectified (as they were in some
degree in this scribe) as to see love to be the soul of religion; and the very
thing that gives us pleasure in religion, and renders the same through Christ
acceptable to the great object of religion, they are not far from the kingdom
of God. For love is the cardinal grace in the christian scheme. 1 Cor. xiii.
13. Now abides faith, hope and love; but the greatest of there is love: our
bible renders it charity, but the word is love; so in the forementioned 1 Timothy
i. 5. The end of the commandment, or the perfection of the gospel dispensation
is love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

Indeed, faith seems to stand first in the gospel scheme; hence this was the
gospel that the apostles were sent forth to preach every where: He that
believes shall be saved, Mark xvi. 10. and we are said, to be saved by grace,
through faith; Ephesians. ii. 8. But then that faith which is saving works, or is
made perfect by love. It is love that animates the faith, and makes it a living
saving faith, without which it is a dead faith, and will profit nothing.

So that if you would but so much as get near the kingdom of God, you must get
well possessed of this one point, that love is of the very essence of
christianity, the very life and soul of it, without which no religion can be
pleasing to God, or pleasant or profitable to our selves. For although faith be
the basis of all true religion, because he that comes unto God, must believe
that he is; and so he who comes to Christ, and becomes a subject of his
kingdom, must believe that he is the Son of the living God, and the Savior of
sinners: yet if a man should pretend that barely such a faith is the sum and
substance of true christianity, and that such a faith is of it self and by it
self a saving faith, they set up a dead faith for a saving faith, and set up
that for saving religion, that has neither spirit, nor favor, nor relish in
it. For love seems to be a fulfilling of the gospel, as well as of the law. So
that there is no faith that will save without love; no fear, no hope, no
repentance, no obedience, no acts of devotion that are to any saving purpose
without love. O then, may we be well possessed of this point in theory, and let
us labor after such a supreme love to God, and such a superlative love to the
Lord Jesus; and such a sincere fervent charity one to another, which is the
very life and soul of christianity, and in which the kingdom of God consists.
May God by his blessed Spirit shed abroad this love into our souls!

5. The scribe's answer discovered that he understood the commandment of the
law required perfect love without any defect or falling short therein.

It is, says the scribe, to love him with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, with all the soul, and with all the strength. So that here we
see the scribe acknowledging that the commandment of the law required perfect
love, the love of the whole man to the utmost extent of human power, without
the least failing or falling short therein. There must be no time, not so much
as one moment, but what God must have the whole love of the whole heart and
soul, without the least abatement: For the law don't allow for the least defect
or failing.

But here you may be ready to ask, how this sentiment concerning the law and
commandment served to bring him nearer to the kingdom of God?

To which, I would answer and say, that considering this sentiment in the
answer of the scribe, with the plain, obvious and natural consequences of the
same; perhaps there is no one sentiment in the scribe's answer that led more
directly to the kingdom of God, or kingdom of grace, than this.

For let us consider,

1. That this must needs afford matter of conviction to him that he had
transgressed this commandment, and was guilty before God. -- For when he
considers what he says, that the first and great commandment is, to love the
Lord our God, with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and his neighbor as himself; he must see if he looked into himself,
and back upon his past life, that he had not come up to this commandment; but
had fallen short of it in innumerable instances: and indeed that he never did
in one instance come up to this commandment: that he did not then at that time;
and that he never did love God with all his heart, and with all his soul. Nay,
if he would but examine himself with any tolerable care or impartiality, he
would find that instead of loving God with all his heart, he did not love him
with any heartiness or sincerity at all: but the instead thereof the world, and
the things which are in the world, such as the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life, had gotten his heart, his understanding, his
soul, and all his strength. And that instead of being devoted entirely to God,
the world and self had engrossed his affections, his thoughts, his time, and
all his care.

What must that man think of himself and of his condition; who allows that the
first and great commandment is to love the Lord his God with all his heart,
soul, and strength, and finds that he himself falls utterly short of it; so as
never in one instance in all his life to come up to this commandment? Would not
his show the man that he is a sinner, a great sinner, who has transgressed this
great and good commandment, and never once in all his life complied with it?
And how can he help thinking that God is infinitely angry at him, for denying
to him that perfect supreme love which he demands, and which is infinitely due
to him: and giving his heart and affections to some inferior creature or other?
And how can he help thinking that he is exposed to the divine resentment, and
lies open to the dreadful wrath, and almighty vengeance of that God from whom
he has withheld that love and service which he demanded, and is infinitely due
to him? And when the man has gone on in such a natural train of thinking as
this, what can remain to him, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation to devour him?

Now what situation of mind is nearer the kingdom of God than this? What temper
of mind better prepared to hearken to the news of a Savior, and of a way of
salvation than this? So that the scribe by acknowledging the first and great
commandment was to love God with a perfect love, without any defect, might by
looking into himself see that he had broken, yea that he had never kept this
commandment; and consequently that he was liable to the wrath and curse of God,
which is denounced against every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the law to do them, Gal. iii. 10. And this must needs
serve to prepare his mind better than any thing to hearken to the news of a
Savior, and to embrace a method of salvation that should be propounded to him;
which is the very kingdom of God, we are treating of. For if the scribe did but
let his thoughts run in a natural rational course upon this commandment, they
must quickly run to this, that he needed one to help and save him, and that
without a Savior and Redeemer, he must needs perish. Well now, let the scribe
be brought to this point, which his own answer would by plain and short
reasoning lead him to: and how far would he then be (do you think) from the
kingdom of God, which reveals such an atoning sacrifice, and savior unto him?

And from hence, we may observe, that a due sense of the demands which the
divine law has upon us; and the perfect love, the perfect holiness, and
unsinning obedience it requires of us, serves to bring us near to the kingdom
of God, as it is a preparation for our entertaining and embracing the gracious
offers of the gospel. In order to know what manner of persons we are, and what
we stand in need of, we must know what we ought to be: And to know what we
ought to be, is to know what the law of God which is righteous and holy,
demands of us. And therein we shall see it requires perfect LOVE, the love of
the whole heart perfect obedience, and spotless holiness. And now when we
compare our selves with this law, we shall see such dreadful defects and
deviations from it; yea a life and a temper so contrary hereunto, as to see
that if God should proceed against us, according to the rigorous but righteous
demands of the law, we must needs be undone and miserable to all eternity: And
consequently that we stand in absolute need of one to interpose in our behalf,
and help and save us from the wrath to come. And when is a man so well prepared
to receive a savior, as when he sees the absolute need of one? Says Christ,
Mat. ix. 12. The whole need not a physician, but they that are (...): I came
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Persons must see
themselves to be sinners, before they will see any occasion for repentance, or
need of a savior: And in order to see themselves sinners, they must see the
law in the wide extent thereof. You therefore who are insensible of your sins
and don't see such need of an atoning sacrifice, and savior; do but look to
the law of God, and see what perfect love, and perfect holiness it requires of
you; and what a curse it denounces against all who transgress the same. And see
how horribly you fall short, and transgress this law; and how you thereby
expose your selves to the divine wrath and curse: And then you will see the
need of one to atone for your sins, to interceed between you and the divine
wrath; and to be the end of the law for righteousness unto you. And when you
shall be brought to such a state as this, there will be but a step between you
and the kingdom of God: But a step between you and your acceptance of Christ,
who is in gospel revealed, and offered to you as such a savior.

2. But then, it is to be considered further that the scribe if he understood
his own answer, must needs see, that as he had not kept the law for the time
past; so neither could he for the time to come; and that if God should forgive
all his past offenses against the first and great commandment yet that he could
not keep it for the time to come; but should be transgressing it every day, and
be adding to the new score of guilt continually; nay he must needs see, if he
thoroughly examined and observed himself, that he was so far from being able to
love and serve God perfectly, that he was not able to do it with any gospel
sincerity, without some special assistance. And this would bring him a step
nearer to the kingdom of God, as it would lead him to see not only that he
needed an atoning sacrifice for sins past, but some special assistance, to
enable him to love God even with sincerity. And as Christ is offered in the
gospel kingdom, to be our strength, as well as righteousness, it would serve to
prepare the way for his acceptance of him in that character also. Surely the
scribe, if his heart was in his own answer, must see it was highly reasonable
to love God above all: But then he might doubtless see that he could not so
much as do this, without the divine help: That he had not so much the command
of his own heart and affections, as to fix them supremely upon him, whom his
reason and conscience told him was the proper object hereof. And the more he
saw of this his weakness and impotency to guide and govern his affections and
appetites, the nearer he was to the kingdom of God; as by this he would be the
better disposed to accept of the help which Christ offers in his gospel, and of
his grace that would be sufficient for him.

Accordingly we may observe that a sense of the divine precepts, and the vast
extent of them, together with a sense of our own inability of our selves to
keep them so much as with any gospel sincerity, prepares for the gospel
kingdom, and brings us near to it, where grace and help is offered, and may be
had. The more we see of the perfections of the divine law, the more we shall
see of our own imperfection and weakness; and the more we see of our own
weakness and corruption, (...) clearly we shall see the need of a savior, with
(...) is everlasting strength; and this will the better prepare us to go to
Christ in whom it has pleased the father that all fullness (...) and of whose
fullness we may receive and grace for grace.

Thus particularly according to the scribe's answer, when a man sees the
command is to love the Lord our God with all our heart, etc. and when (...) but
acknowledge that it is highly just and reasonable that he should thus love God;
but finds he has (...) strength and power of his own to do it; but that his
heart (...) of ^iving upon God, runs after the world and the (...) not desire
grace to help him to take off his affection from the world, and fix them upon
God? (...) be inclined, or at least will he not see it reasonable that he
should be inclined to come into that gospel kingdom where help and grace may be
had; where the love of God may be so shed abroad in his heart by the holy
Ghost, whereby he may be enabled to love God sincerely and supremely, although
not with a legal perfection.

Thus I have considered several things in the scribe's answer; all which being
laid together, gave occasion for our Savior to say of him, that he was not far
from the kingdom of God: that is, not far from seeing into the reasonableness
and truth of christianity, and embracing the same. But whether he ever actually
came into this kingdom, so as to become a true disciple of Christ or not, we
cannot say, because we have no further account of him. But by his discreet
answer, and what was comprehended therein. Christ himself pronounces upon him,
that he was not far from the kingdom of God, that is, according to the plain
and natural sense of our Savior's words, that he was nearer the gospel
kingdom; and bid (...) to be a christian than his brethren. And it must be
allowed this the principles and sentiments in his answer as I have shown,
plainly set forth, that if they were seriously (...), and duly prosecuted, they
would lead a man to see that he stood in need of a Savior, and of just such a
Savior as Jesus Christ is. And then there would want only this one step
actually to enter into the kingdom; namely the free owning, and hearty
accepting of Christ for his prince and savior, as he is revealed and offered
in the gospel.

I shall now conclude the subject with some APPLICATION.

1. From what we have heard we infer that although some are not so far from the
kingdom of God as others; yet this is not always according to outward and human
appearance; for oftentimes same who seem the nearest are really the furthest
off.

Our Savior in the text asserts concerning one, that he was not far from the
kingdom of God; which implies that others were far off, or were not so near.
And this doubtless is the case in the several ages and places of the world,
especially in every part of the visible church. For it must be allowed, that
some have knowledge and certain qualities, and dispositions, which bring them
nearer to the christian state than others. For although I freely acknowledge that
there is no man out of this kingdom, let him be never so near to it, but it
requires an act of divine power and sovereign grace, to bring him actually into
it: for no man comes to the Son but whom the Father draws, Joh. vi. 44. and
regeneration is of the Spirit of God. (Joh. 3.5.) yet it does not follow, but
that they may be so prepared, if not by natural temper, yet by education
instruction, example, consideration and thought, and by the free enjoyment of
the means of grace, as to be so much nearer the kingdom than others, as not to
need so much to be done for them at the time of actually bringing them into the
kingdom as some others. Who will say but that Agrippa was nearer the kingdom
than some others, who was almost persuaded to be a christian. Divines have been
will not to distinguish between common and special grace: and as among those who
are favored with special grace, some attain to higher degrees than others; so
it is as to common grace: it must be allowed that some make a much better
improvement of common grace than others. And who will say that those who make
the best improvement and greatest seize in common grace, are so far from
the kingdom of God, and bid no fairer to enter into it, than those who make no,
or but very poor improvement of the grace God affords them in common with
others?

But now as to persons being near or far off from the kingdom; it is often very
different from the common apprehensions of men in the matter. -- No people were
(...) so near the kingdom of God, and of the Messiah, as the Jews; and yet, as
I observed before, perhaps no people in their temper were further from the
kingdom than they: And among the Jews, none were thought so near the kingdom as
the pharisees: it being a common saying among the Jews, that if but two men
went to heaven, one of them would be a pharisee: whereas in truth, there were
none among the Jews further from the kingdom than they. Insomuch that our
Savior observes that publicans and harlots would sooner enter into the kingdom
of heaven than they, Matthew. xxi. 31. And he illustrates it by a parable,
setting forth the different tempers of a pharisee and a publican, Luke xviii.
10 -- 14. Two men went up into the temple to pray, one a pharisee, the other a
publican. The pharisee, stood and prayed thus with himself, "God I thank thee,
I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
publican: I fast twice a week, and I give tithes of all that I possess: And the
publican standing afar off, would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven;
but smote upon his breast, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man
went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every one who
exalts himself shall be abased; but he who humbles himself shall be
exalted." By which it appears, that sinners who have some humble sense of their
sins, are nearer the kingdom, and in a much fairer way than proud
self-righteous hypocrites. For nothing is more contrary to the genius and
spirit of the gospel kingdom than pride; and the very nature and tendency of
the gospel kingdom is to humble pride; and bring down the haughtiness of man,
that the Lord alone, and his rich and free grace may be exalted.

2. We may gather from what has been said that good knowledge in religious
matters, with moral honesty and ingenuity, bids fair for the kingdom of God.

The favorable remark Christ makes upon the scribe's answer, teaches us, that
when persons are willing to know the doctrines and principles of the gospel,
and are so honest and ingenuous, as to own and acknowledge the truth thereof,
as it appears to them, they are in a much more hopeful way than those who
despise knowledge, and neglect the means of knowledge: and reject the truth
when it is offered unto them; and deny it when convinced of it: when men choose
darkness rather than light, and obstinately persist in error rather than
embrace the truth, they are very remote from that kingdom which is founded in
truth.

3. A right understanding of the law in all its high demands upon us, serves to
bring us so much nearer to the kingdom of God.

It is by the law that there is the knowledge of sin: for sin is the
transgression of the law of God. Now therefore, the more clear and extensive
views we have of the divine law in the numerous demands and various
requirements of it, with all the awful penal sanctions thereof, the better
shall we be prepared to receive the gospel: for if we thus see and understand
the law, we shall see that we are guilty before God: and without a Mediator,
and an interest in him, under the divine wrath and curse, and liable to death
and eternal destruction.

Now surely, a sense of these things must needs very much prepare for the
gospel kingdom; which issues forth a proclamation of grace inviting the
transgressors of the divine law, to come in, assuring them, that whosoever
comes to Christ, he will in no wise cast out; but shall through him obtain
pardon, justification and eternal life. The law then in all it is rigorous, but
righteous demands, may well be called a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
Gal iii. 24. For it serves to give us such a sense of our own sin and guilt, as
to put us upon fleeing from the tribunal of awful and inflexible justice, to
prostrate our selves before the mercy-seat prepared, and throne of grace
erected in the gospel kingdom. It is therefore of vast importance that men
should be well instructed in the law of God, and made to see how exceeding
broad it is, and how extensive in its demands, and how dreadful in its
penalties; as that which may be a special means to put persons upon repairing
to that divine person, who was made of a woman, and made under the law, to
redeem us who were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

4. It is a bad sign when persons content themselves with the outward acts of
religion, and have little or no regard to their hearts, and the affections of
their souls.

You see the first and great commandment is Love; and to love God with all the
heart and soul. Surely then such, who content themselves with lifeless
heartless duties in religion, whatever they may think of themselves; or
whatever others may think of them, are not near the kingdom; and their placing
religion in outward (...) and ceremony, and not in sincere and hearty
affections has a sad tendency to keep them at a distance. For such oftentimes
^^arter themselves, that they are already in the kingdom: and such a self
flattering, and self-deceiving spirit indulged, is a very dangerous state: for
many of the means of grace, such as counsels, warnings and reproofs which may
reach others, will not be likely to affect these.

5. How thankful should we be, for the special advantages we (...) for getting
NEAR, but getting INTO the kingdom of GOD.

We have the gospel of the kingdom preached to us; the proclamations of grace
are issued forth, with the terms upon which we may be admitted and accepted: We
have the statutes and ordinances of the kingdom published to us; and we are
invited and called upon, yea entreated by the ambassadors of Christ, to come
into the kingdom; and the spirit says come, by stirring up convictions and good
motions; and in short, there are no means, helps or encouragements, which it is
reasonable for God to grant, but he is ready to afford unto us. Surely then,
these distinguishing means and helps call for our most thankful
acknowledgments; and we should bless the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is thus blessing us with spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ Jesus.

6. It greatly concerns us all to examine our selves in this matter, and see
how it is with us; and how we stand related to the kingdom of God.

It is of infinite importance to be in this kingdom; for the kingdom of grace
here, and the kingdom of glory hereafter, are inseperably connected. Surely
then, it infinitely concerns every one of us to see, and so far as we are able
to know how we stand related to this kingdom.

First of all, Whether we are in this kingdom. Many of you are visibly and
professedly in this kingdom; and most of you by baptism, are visibly the
children of the kingdom. But now I beseech you consider and inquire, whether
you be really in this kingdom: have you felt the power of this kingdom upon
your souls, and working effectually within you? Are you convinced of your lost
and undone state, by reason of sin, and without a savior? Do you by an eye of
faith, see Jesus to be the only and all-sufficient Savior? and do you receive
him, and rely upon him as he is revealed and offered to you in his gospel? Does
the grace of the gospel operate upon you? Are you become the willing subjects
of this glorious king? Have you openly professed him, and sworn allegiance to
him? have you his spirit ruling in you? Are you conformed to the spirit of this
kingdom? Do you live as this grace of God teaches you, denying ungodliness, and
every worldly lust, and living soberly, righteously and godly in the present
world? And do you walk in all the ordinances and commandments of the Lord
blameless? In short, do you bear and bring forth the fruits of the kingdom,
such as faith, love, holiness and righteousness? Now if this be the case, you
may be congratulated as happy subjects of this kingdom of grace, and heirs of
the kingdom of glory.

Secondly, if you cannot find that you are as yet in the kingdom, consider and
inquire whether ye be near or far off.

Are you not near the kingdom? Is not the kingdom of God among you? Is not the
gospel of the kingdom preached unto you? Are you not invited and called upon to
come in by friends and by ministers? And is not the spirit of God striving with
you? And is not God waiting upon you, keeping the door open to you, to see if
you will come in? And don't some of you find your selves upon the point of
coming in? Are you not forming resolutions that you will make haste, and make
no more delay in this matter? But then, let me ask some of you, whether you are
not gone further from the kingdom than you were some time ago? Have you not by
neglecting the awakenings and convictions which have been stirred up in you,
very much lost them? And have you not by quenching and grieving the spirit
provoked him to withdraw, and has he not left you in a greater dullness,
coldness and backwardness to the things of God, than in times past? Now if any
of you upon examining and observing your selves, find this to be your case, Oh!
how should it alarm your fears, lest the spirit of God should utterly leave
you, and you should never enter into the kingdom. O ye delaying sinners! you
should consider how long God has been calling and waiting upon you; and if you
don't bestir your selves speedily, and in good earnest, all your resolutions
will grow more and more feeble; and all the hopeful prospects will vanish, and
the door of the kingdom will be for ever shut against you.

7. And to conclude: How sad and dreadful will the case of such be, who though
they are not far from the kingdom of God, yet by some means or other, fall
short at last.

Whether this was the case of the scribe in our text we cannot say; but this we
have reason to fear is the sad case of many persons under the gospel. They have
a good degree of knowledge in spiritual matters, and in the nature of the
gospel kingdom; and have many awakenings and convictions; and are brought to
many purposes and promises, relating to their coming into the gospel church and
kingdom: but by neglecting to prosecute the same, they fail of the grace of
God; never get into the kingdom of grace here, and so finally rejected as to
the kingdom of glory.

But now, how sad will the case of such be, and how aggravated their grief and
misery, to think they were near the kingdom, within a step or two of entering
in; and yet for not actually entering, are for ever rejected? Oh! how will it
cut such poor wretches to the heart, to think the door of the kingdom stood
open to them, and God called and invited them by his word, by his ministers,
and by his spirit, and waited on them from month to month, from year to year;
but they still delayed, and practically refused, and now the door is
everlastingly shut against them? How will it cut them to think that by
instructions and counsels, awakenings and convictions, they were brought near
the kingdom, and upon the very point of entering in; but delayed and delayed
till their opportunity was lapsed, and they are for ever rejected! With what
anguish and vexation of spirit, will they be filled, to think that once they
were as it were near to heaven's gates; but for want of that faith, that
resolution, the gospel required, they fell short! And with what everlasting
upbraiding of themselves will they be filled, when they see not only Abraham,
and all the prophets in the kingdom of God; but shall see them come from the
east and from the west, from the north and from the south, and sit down with
them in the kingdom of God; while they, the children of the kingdom, children
of the church, and visible members of the kingdom, and under the enjoyment of
the best means, are thrust out.

O may you, my hearers, who are at the door of the kingdom, but not come in as
yet, bestir your selves speedily and in good earnest, that this may not be your
unhappy case! And may God by his almighty grace, overcome all remaining
reluctance, and bring you in!

AMEN.
ERRATA.
PAge 10 line 12 from the bottom, dele they, p. 13 l. 8 f. ourself r.
ourselves, p. 19 l. 19 dele that, l. 28 f. resting r. ruling, p. 24 l. 7 from
the bott. f. interceed r. interpose.


