A Blow at the Root OF THE REFINED ANTINOMIANISM Of the present Age.

Wherein that Maxim, which is so absolutely essential to their Scheme, that it
cannot subsist without it, laid down by Mr. Marshall, viz. That in justifying
Faith, "we believe that to be true, which is not true before we believe it,"
thoroughly examined: Mr. Wilson's Arguments in its Defense, considered and
answered; and the whole Antinomian Controversy, as it now stands, brought to a
short Issue, and rendered plain to the meanest Capacity.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, A.M. Minister of the Gospel at Bethlem, New England.

Go through, go through the Gates; prepare you the Way of the People, cast up,
cast up the Highway, gather out the Stones, lift up a Standard for the People.

ISAI. lxii. 10. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street.
M,DCC,LXIII.

Advertisement.
IN a Piece, entitled, "Letters and Dialogues, upon the Nature of Love to God,
Faith in Christ, Assurance of a Title to eternal Life." Printed at Boston
New England. 1759. -- Reprinted, London. 1761. -- Mr. Marshal's account of
justifying Faith, was taken Notice of, viz. That in justifying Faith, "we
believe that to be true, which is not true before we believe it." And twelve
Queries were stated on the Point. -- To vindicate that whole System of
Religion, which is founded in, and results from this kind of Faith, two Volumes
were printed in London, 1762. containing about 300 Pages, each: Entitled,
Palaemon's Creed reviewed and examined. By David Wilson. This Author, among
other Things, has undertaken to prove, that in justifying Faith, "we believe
that to be true, which is not true before we believe it." -- The following
Pages are designed as an Answer to this Gentleman, on that Point. -- And if
that Point, which is essential to their Scheme, and the ROOT of all the Mi^^^,
can be proved to be wrong; their whole Scheme is overthrown. This little
Pamphlet then means, to bring to a short Issue, a Controversy which has been
the Source of infinite Mischief to the Souls of Mankind.

J. Bellamy.
Bethlem, Jan. 14. 1763.
A Blow at the Root of the refined Antinomianism of the present Age.
THE next and immediate Design, of writing on controverted Points, is, to
assist the Reader, by holding forth clear Light, to come to a well grounded
Judgment, touching the Point in Dispute. And to this End, we should distinguish
between Things that differ, state the Point in Dispute, with great exactitude;
and then present to the Reader, the Arguments on the one side and the other, of
the Question in Debate, and leave him to judge for himself. -- And accordingly,
in these Pages, I shall (1.) make some needful Distinctions; the not attending
to which, has occasioned no small Confusion in this Controversy, about the
Nature of justifying Faith. (2.) State the Question now to be disputed, with
great exactness. (3.) Offer Arguments against, and (4.) Consider their
Arguments in Favor of, the Position, which contains the Question in Dispute.
And then leave every Reader to judge for himself. -- The Distinctions to be
made, are these,

1. THERE is an essential Difference between Justification in the Sight of God,
and a persuation in our own Minds, that we are justified. One is the Act of God
our Judge; the other is the Act of our own Minds; as is self-evident. -- And
God's Act must of Necessity be, in order of Nature, at least, before our Act.
We must be justified, before we can know that we are justified. For a Thing
must exist, before its Existence can be perceived; to say otherwise, is an
express Contradiction.

2. WE are justified by Faith alone, and that whether we know our Faith to be
of the right Kind, or not: But we are assured of our Justification, by a
Consciousness of our Faith, and other Christian Graces, and by knowing they are
of the right Kind. We are justified without Respect to any Thing in us, or
about us, considered as a recommending Qualification; simply by free Grace
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Our Union with Christ, is the
Foundation of our Interest in him, his Atonement and Merits; and so of our
Title to Pardon, Justification and eternal Life, according to the Gospel. Faith
alone, is that on our Part, whereby we are united to Christ and become one with
him, and so that alone, by which we are justified. A Consciousness in our own
Minds, that we have true Faith, and those other Christian Graces which are
connected with it, and always accompany it, is that alone, by which we can know
that we are justified. So that while we are justified simply on the Account of
Christ's Righteousness, we can know that we are in Fact justified merely by a
Consciousness of our own inherent Graces; even as a poor Woman is made rich
simply by her Husband's Estate, with whom she becomes one in the Eye of the Law
by Marriage: but she knows her Title her Husband's Estate, only as she knows
that she was married to him, and actually continues to be his Wife.

3. THERE is an essential Difference between a full Assurance, that those, who
receive Christ, and come to God in his Name, shall be pardoned, justified and
have eternal Life: and a Consciousness that I do receive Christ, and come to
God in his Name, and am consequently pardoned, justified and entitled to
eternal Life. -- That those who receive Christ and come to God in his Name,
shall be pardoned, justified, and have eternal Life, is plainly and expressly
revealed in the Gospel, and was true before I was born. And it appears to be
true to every one, who understands the Gospel aright, and believes it with all
his Heart. But I must actually understand the Gospel, believe it with all my
Heart, and in the belief of it actually receive Christ, and come to God in his
Name, before I am justified; and so before I can be conscious to my self that I
have so acted, and that consequently I am pardoned, justified and entitled to
eternal Life.

4. ALTHOUGH Justification in the Sight of God, must o^ Necessity be in order
of Nature before our Knowledge that we are justified; because a Thing must
exist before it is Existence can be perceived by the Mind: yet it is not
impossible that a justified Believer may know his Justification soon, from an
inward Consciousness of his receiving Christ, and coming to God in his Name,
and from a Consciousness of all the Christian Graces, which are connected with,
and do always accompany true Faith. At Conversion, a Sinner is brought out of
Darkness into ma^^^ous Light, and beholding the Glory of the Lord, is charged
into the same Image; and will of Course therefore in the Time of it, in all
ordinary Cases, at least, naturally be conscious of the Change. And the greater
the Change is, the more conscious will he be of it. And no Man can prove but
that Divine Light may possibly be imparted in so great a Degree, and the Change
be so c^ear, that at once it may be known to be a saving Change. I do not say,
that it is always, or that it is ordinarily so, Nowadays: but I am willing to
grant that it may be so. And from many Expressions in the new Testament, I am
inclined to think it was commonly so in the Apostolic Age. The three Thousand
on the Day of Pentecost, not only received the Word gladly, but immediately
began to spend their Time in praising God, Act. ii. 41, 47. and Converts in
that Age in general being justified by Faith, had Peace with God, and re^y^^ in
Hope of the Glory of God, Romans v. 1, 2. Whom Loving not seen, ye Love; in whom,
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye (one and all) rejoice with Joy
unspeak b^^ and full of Glory, 1 Pet. i. 8. nor do we read of one Saint in the
New Testament, who doubted of his being in a justified State: nor have we any
Reason, from the Writings of the New Testament, to think, but that Assurance of
their good Estate was universally enjoyed by all true Believers in the
Apostolic Age.

AND here, by the Way, this inclines me to entertain charitable Tho'ts of the
first Reformers, that their Hearts might be right, even although it could be
proved, that they made Assurance, of the Essence of Faith; as it is affirmed,
by some, that they did. For they were in the heat of Dispute with the Papists,
who denied that Assurance was at all attainable in this Life. But good Men
among the first Reformers might be conscious to themselves, that they had had
Assurance from the very Time of their Conversion; and might observe from the
apostolic Writings, that it used to be so with the apostolic Converts; and
might observe it to be so with their Converts; and so, through want of proper
Attention to the Nature of Things, might be led to affirm, that Assurance it
self is of the Essence of Justifying Faith. And by that one false Maxim, be in
insensibly led into many other Mistakes. But the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, who sat about an hundred Years after the Reformation, time having
been had mean while to look more carefully into Things, and to distinguish
between Things that differ, lest Assurance out of their Definition of
Justifying Faith, in their Confession of Faith; Larger, and Shorter Catechisms.
Nay, they even expressly affirm, in their Larger Catechism, in Answer to
Question 81. "That Assurance of Grace and Salvation are not of the Essence of
Faith." For while it was affirmed, that Assurance was of the Essence of Faith,
by the Protestant Preachers, two Things would constantly happen, it may
reasonably be supposed, which would tend to convince them, that they were
wrong, viz. 1. Many of their seeming Converts, who appeared to be full of the
strongest Assurance of the Pardon of their Sins, would apostatize and fall away
to open Wickedness, before their Eyes: as it has been with many in our Day.

2. And their Adversaries, the Papists, who hated all Assurance of Salvation in
general, as the Arminian Party do in our Day, would take the Advantage of their
Mistake, and make such Objections against them, as they could not answer.
Which, when the heat of the Controversy was a little over, and the Protestant
Party had had Time impartially to weigh Things, loath as Men naturally are to
give up a Point they have once espoused, they would feel themselves obliged to
do it, in this Case. -- And accordingly it came to pass, within about an
hundred Years, that Protestant Divines in general gave up that Notion, and
defined Faith, in a very different Manner; as we may see in the Confession of
Faith and Catechisms of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and yet
retained the Doctrine of Assurance, and asserted it in the strongest Language,
but not as being of the Essence of Faith, but as resulting "from the inward
Evidence of those Graces, unto which the Promises are made." And in New
England, which was settled about that Time, that Notion has been, from the very
first Settlement of it, to this Day, universally exploded, by all our Divines
of Note. Na^, I never heard of but one single Minister, in New England, who
appeared in Print to defend that Notion, that Assurance is of the Essence of
Faith; and he is a Minister over a separate Congregation. And Testimony has
been publicly born against him in Years past, by some of the most noted
Ministers in the Country. In Scotland, when this Notion was above forty Years
ago, advanced and propagated among them, by some who have since separated
themselves from that Church, it was condemned by the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, as being contrary to the Word of God, to their Confession
of Faith and Catechisms; and all their Ministers were strictly prohibited,
under the pain of the Censures of that Church, by Writing, Printing, Preaching,
Catechizing, or in any other Way, to teach this, and the other Doctrines in
Connection with it. See the Acts of the general Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, 1720, Act V. and 1722, Act VII particularly these Words, out of a
Book entitled, the Marrow of Modern Divinity, were expressly condemned, viz.
wherefore as Paul, and Silas, said to the Jailor, so say I unto you, believe or
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; that is, be verily persuaded in
your Heart, that Jesus Christ is yours, and that you shall have Life and
Salvation by him, that whatsoever Christ did for the Salvation of Mankind, he
did it for you -- Forasmuch as the holy Scripture speaks to all in general,
none of us ought to distrust himself but believe that it does belong
particularly to himself. These Words were expressly condemned, as making saving
Faith consist in, "a Man's Persuasion that Christ is his, died for him," etc.
These Things are not said, to determine what is Truth, by the Names and
Influence of fallible Men. To do so, would be to justify the whole popish
Party, in their appeal to the Pope, to decide all Points of Religion; and to
give up the first Maxim on which the Reformation was built; viz. That the Word
of God is the only Rule of Faith and Manners. It is not what the first
Reformers said, nor what the Assembly of Divines said, nor what any other Men
or Body or Men, since the Apostles were dead, have said, or do say, that can
determine any Doctrine of Religion, or settle any Point of Controversy about
Religion. If they cannot be settled by the holy Scriptures, they must remain
for ever undetermined in this World. And to be unwilling to appeal to the
Bible, and to that alone, to determine what is Truth; is a full Proof a Man is
a Heart an Infidel. He don't really believe the Bible is the Word of God, nor
build his Scheme of Religion upon it; but upon his own Experiences, or the
Sayings of others, whose Experiences he imagines were like his own. However
what has been said, may let the Public see, how I can consistently entertain an
Opinion, that some Men's Hearts may be more orthodox than their Heads, in this
Matter; which was the Point I was upon. It is very observable, that Mr. Wilson,
who is constantly repeating it, that all the protestant World are on his side,
and glorying in it, is obliged, in the midst of it all, to own, that while some
hold, that Assurance is of the Essence of Faith, others only maintain, that
Assurance accompanies it: (p. 97.) two Things in their Nature essentially
different, nay contrary to each other. -- For to say, that Assurance
accompanies Faith, is to say, "it is not Faith, but something else, which true
Believers are wont to have in Company with Faith."


BUT while true Converts may, from their first Conversion, from a Consciousness
of the saving Change they have passed through, be persuaded, that they are in a
State of Favor with God, and Rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God; Satan, that
great Enemy to all Good, may transform himself into an Angel of Light, and
delude Hundreds and Thousands and ten Thousands (and it is foretold that Satan
is to deceive the Nations 'till the Thousands Years of Christ's Reign do
commence, Rev. xx. 3.) with a firm Belief that their Sins are forgiven, who
never were converted; and so oblige them to believe their Sins are forgiven,
when according to the plainest Declarations of Scripture, they are not
forgiven; and so necessitate them in order to vindicate themselves, to assert,
that in justifying Faith "we believe that to be true which is not true before
we believe it," and that without any Evidence from Scripture, Sense or Reason."

And these false Converts, emboldened by the greatness of their Number, may
rise, cut out a whole new Scheme of Religion subversive of Christianity, and
seek to propagate it through the Christian World, showing the greatest Rancor
against the true Gospel of Christ. Mean while, true Christians may get puzzled,
stumbled and bewildered, and some perhaps brought unawares to espouse the
Language of the deluded, and to seem to plead their Cause. And the common
Enemies to all experimental Religion, rejoice in Hopes it will finally appear
to all the World, that there is nothing in vital Piety, and that all Religion
consists in an external regular Behavior; and it is no matter what Men's
Principles be, if their Lives are but good: which is nothing better than
downright Infidelity.

THIS I take to be the Devil's Grand Scheme, in this present Age; and to
counteract this his Design has been one chief End of all my former
Publications: and so now of this. -- But to return, and to proceed to state the
Question to be disputed.

IN the beginning of my third Dialogue, which was on the Nature of Assurance of
a Title to eternal Life, I had said, that Sanctification, taking the Word in a
large and comprehensive Sense, is the Evidence, the only Scripture-evidence, of
a good Estate. And to prevent Misunderstanding, I added, It is usual for
Divines to distinguish between Regeneration and Conversion, between first
Conversion and progressive Sanctification, between Divine Views and holy
Affections, between Grace in the Heart and an holy Life and Conversation; but I
mean to comprehend all under one general Name. You may call it the Image of
God, or Holiness of Heart and Life, or a real Conformity to the Divine Law, and
a genuine Compliance with the Gospel of Christ. I have already let you see,
what I apprehend to be the Nature of Law and Gospel, of Love to God and Faith
in Christ. -- When I say, this is the only Evidence, I mean, that this is the
only Thing wherein Saints and Sinners, in every Instance, differ. One has the
Image of God, the other has not. -- Or to express my self in the Language of
Inspiration, Joh. xvii. 3. This is Life eternal, to know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And 1 John ii. 3, 4, 5. Hereby we do
know that we do know him, if we keep his Commandments. He that says I know
him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him.
But whose keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected: hereby
we know that we are in him.

IN answer to which Words, Mr. Cudworth says, this "is no other than the
Assurance of the Pharisee." Further Defense, p. 265. -- but why? because, says
he, "it is only founded on the Difference there is between him and other Man"
-- To which I reply; and this may as well be objected against the Assurance of
all the apostolical Saints; as is evident from 1 Job. ii. 3, 4, 5. the very
Text I quoted. For they knew they loved God, and kept his Commands, while the
rest of the World lay in Wickedness. And therefore they said, 1 John v. 19. We
know that we are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness. And will Mr.
Cudworth affirm, that their Assurance was that of the Pharisees? Besides there
is a Fallacy in his Words: For the apostolical Assurance did not arise merely
from a Consciousness, they differed from others; which might be true, and yet
they have no Grace; as was the Case with the Pharisee; but from a
Consciousness, that their Characters were agreeable to the Gospel Standard; that
they had those Graces which, according to Christ's holy Religion, are peculiar
to the Saints, and certainly connected with eternal Life. Upon this, their
Assurance was built, just as I had represented. However, if Mr. Cudworth's
Words prove nothing else, yet at least they seem to be a sufficient Evidence of
his hearty Disaffection to the only scriptural Assurance of a good Estate. And
he appears to think with his late Friend, that we may as well "place the dome
of a Cathedral on the Stalk of a Tulip," as place our Assurance on this only
scriptural Foundation. -- But how then would he have us get Assurance? even by
believing that our Sins are forgiven, while conscious that we are upon a Level
with the worst of Sinners, no difference between us and them, as dead in Sin,
as impenitent and unconverted, and as full of Enmity to God. -- And this Belief
is to beget our first Love. -- But alas, what Grounds have we for this Belief?
What Evidence for the Truth of what we believe? why none at all, says honest
Mr. Marshall, "from Scripture Sense Reason." For the Fact believed to be true
"is not true before we believe it."

And as Mr. Cudworth affirms Assurance from a Consciousness of Sanctification,
to be the Assurance of the Pharisee; to his Brother Mr. Wilson, with the same
Spirit, affirms it to be the Assurance of Papists, perhaps an hundred Times
over; See Mr. Wilson's Review of Palamon's Creed Vol. 2 p. 101. and elsewhere
through both his Volumes. -- N. B. The particular References to Mr. Wilson, which
will be made in these Sheets, will be to his 2d Vol. in which he has made some
Remarks on my Dialogues. I here give Notice of it once for all.
although he well knew, that the Papists join with Antinomians, in denying that a
certain Assurance, from a Consciousness of our own Sanctification, is
attainable in the present Life; Page 104. Mr. Wilson says, speaking of the
Papists. as it is supposed, that Men will frequently have too much Reason to
suspect the sincerity of their own Love and Obedience; whether the former be
genuine, and the latter such as God will accept of; they granted, that any hope
of Salvation Men can attain to in this mortal State, must, and ought, still to
be mixed with Fear and Doubting: -- They never can attain to any absolute
Certainty about it. Such were the leading Sentiments of the most eminent
Teachers in the Romish Church

AND how exactly agreab^e these Sentiments are to the Sentiments of the most
eminent Teaches of Mr Wilson's Party, the following Words of the celebrated Mr
H -- y. will show. This Method of seeking Peace and Assurance, I fear, will
perplex the simple Minded; and cherish, rather than suppress the Fluctuations
of Doubt. For* let the Signs be what you please, a Love of the Brethren, or a
Love of all Righteousness, a Change of Heart, or an Alteration of Life; these
good Qualifications are sometimes like the Stars at Noon day, not easily, if at
all, discernible: or else they are like a Glowworm in the Night, glimmering,
rather than shining: Consequently, will yield, at the best, but a feeble. -- at
the worst, a very precatious Evidence -- If, in such a Manner, we should
acquire some little Assurance, how soon may it be unsettled by the incursions
of daily Temptations, or destroyed by the Insurrection of remaining Sin! at
such a Juncture, how will it keep its Standing! how retain its Being! it will
fare like a tottering Wall before a Tempest; or b^ as the Rush without Mire*
and the Flag without Water.

BUT while Papists and Antinomians thus join to deny any certain Assurance by
our own inherent Graces, the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, agreeable with
the holy Scriptures, strongly assert it. (...) of Faith, Chap. xviii. Such as
truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him in Sincerity, See may in this
Life be certainly assured, that they are in a State of Grace." -- "This
certainty is not a bare conjectural and probable Persuasion -- but an infa^ble
Assurance of Faith, founded upon the divine truth of the Promises of salvation
the inward Evidence of those Graces unto which those Promises are made, etc.


how then would Mr. Wilson have us get Assurance? even, by believing our Sins
are forgiven, without any Consciousness of any Grace in us. without any
Reflection upon the Act of Appropriation made by the Believer, or a Persuasian
of the Truth of his own Faith. p. 123. Without knowing any Thing further about
their State, than that they are by Nature Children of Wrath, and Heirs of Hell,
under the Curse of an angry Sin-revenging God. p. 175. These are his own Words.

BUT how shall we know that our Sins are forgiven? are our Sins forgiven while
we are in an impenitent, unconverted, christless State? are they forgiven even
while we are "Heirs of Hell, and under the Curse of an angry God?" that is,
forgiven, when they are not forgiven? an express Contradiction this! or are we
to believe they are forgiven, when in Fact they are not forgiven? yes, this is
the very Thing Antinomians use to hold, that the Elect are justified from
Eternity, or from the Resurrection of Christ, and that in due time their
Justification is manifested to them by the Spirit, on which they commence
Believers. And this Scheme, how contrary soever to the BIBLE, was consistent
with it self. But that Scheme is new modested. And now they say, that in
Justifying Faith, "we believe that to be true, which is not true before we
believe it." This Mr. Marshal had said. And this Saying of Mr. Marshall's, Mr.
Wilson undertakes to vindicate, (p. 14) pretending (...) Assurance that the
whole Bible and a^l the Protestant World are on his Side.

Mr. Cudworth was affrighted and shocked at the Thought of "believing that to
be true which is not true before we believe it, without any Evidence from
Scripture, Sense or Reason," after I had shown the Absurdity of it in the
twelve Queries in my second Dialogue. He felt he could not answer my Reasoning.
He was afraid. He durst not look the Point fairly in the Face. He turned his
Eyes, and buried himself in Obscurity in the midst of a Multitude of ambiguous
Words. And to pacify his credulous Reader, says, that I misrepresent their
Scheme; when he, at the same Time, knew, that I had represented it exactly as
Mr. Marshall, a Writer highly celebrated by all their Party, had done. See his
Further Defense, p. 246.

BUT Mr. Wilson is a Man of Courage; he thinks he can maintain the Point: He
sees it must be done, or their whole Scheme be given u^. He has tried: He has
doubtless done his best. And this is the very Point now to be examined, viz.
Whether in justifying Faith "we believe that to be true, which is not true
before we believe it?"

A Position in it self so evidently absurd, that were it not made Use of to
deceive Multitudes of precious Souls, it would not deserve the least Attention
of any Man of Sense. But Matters being as they are, it is worth while to
examine it. And it is worth while for all concerned in the British Dominions to
attend to the Subject. For it lies at the Foundation of their whole Scheme. And
if this single Position is false, their whole Scheme is false. For they all
affirm that, our Sins are not forgiven before we believe they are forgiven. And
that in the first direct Act of justifying Faith we believe they are forgiven.
And therefore it is, and must be, a fundamental Maxim with them, upon the Truth
of which their whole Scheme depends, that, in justifying Faith, we believe that
to be true, (...) is not true before we believe it.

No Writer, I ever saw, has expressed the Matter with such undisguised Honesty
and Simplicity, as their ce^ebrated Mr. Marshall, whose Gospel Mystery of
Sanctification, they profess to value next to the Bible. Let us therefore hear
his own Words, look into their plain and natural Meaning, and state distinctly
the Point to be disputed.

Mr. Marshall's Words are these, and the more we think of them, the more
remarkable will they appear. Let it be well observed, that the Reason why we
are to assure our selves in our Faith, that God freely gives Christ and his
Salvation to us in particular, is not because it is a Truth before we believe
it, but because it becomes a certain Truth when we believe it; and because it
never will be true, except we do in some Measure persuade and assure our selves
that it is so. We have no absolute Promise or Declaration in Scripture, that
God certainly will or does give Christ and his Salvation to any one of us in
particular; neither do we know it to be true already by Scripture or Sense or
Reason, before we assure our selves absolutely of it; yea, we are without
Christ's Salvation at present, in a State of Sin and Misery; under the Curse
and Wrath of God. Only -- we are bound by the Command of God, thus to assure
our selves: and the Scripture does sufficiently warrant us, that we shall not
deceive our selves, in believing a Lie: but according to our Faith, so shall it
be to us. Mat. ix. 29. This is a strange Kind of Assurance, far different from
other ordinary Kinds; and therefore no wonder if it be found weak and
imperfect, and difficult to be obtained, and assaulted with many Doubtings. We
are constrained to believe other Things on the clear Evidence we have that they
are true, and would remain true, whether we believe them or no; so that we
cannot deny our Assent, without rebelling against the Light of our Senses,
Reason or Conscience. But here our Assurance, is not impressed on our Thoughts
by any Evidence of the Thing; but we must work it out in our selves by the
Assistance of the Spirit of God. Mystery. p. 173, 174 -- In this plain, honest
Declaration, which opens to clear view the Heart and Soul of their whole
Scheme, these eight Things may be observed.

1. IN general: That "this is a STRANGE Kind of Assurance, FAR DIFFERENT from
other ordinary Kinds." In all other Kinds of Assurance, he observes, there are
these two Things. (1.) What we believe "is true before we believe it, and
whether we believe it or no." (2.) "We are constrained to believe on the clear
Evidence we have that they are true." But "this is a strange Kind of Assurance,
far different from other ordinary Kinds," in these two Respects. (1) As we
believe "that to be true, which is not true before we believe it; and never
would be true, if we did not believe it." (2.) As we believe "without any
Evidence of the Thing." -- "Any Evidence from Scripture, Sense or Reason." --
Herein the Strangeness consists, and its Difference from all other Kinds of
Assurance in the Universe.

A true Convert gets Assurance thus. -- The Word of God teaches, Joh. i. 12.
That he who receives Christ and believes in his Name, is a Child of God: But I
receive Christ and believe in his Name; therefore I am a Child of God. --
Again, the Word of God teaches, Acts iii. 19. That he who repents and is
converted shall have his Sins blotted out: But I repent and am converted;
therefore my Sins are blotted out. -- Once more, the Word of God teaches Acts
xvi. 31. That he who believes in the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved: But I
believe in the Lord Jesus Chrst; therefore I shall be saved -- This is the
"ordinary" Way of getting Assurance. And the Things believed are true before we
believe them: and we believe only in exact Proportion to our Evidence.

BUT in "this strange Kind of Assurance," a Sinner who as yet is impenitent,
unconverted, has not received Christ, nor believed in his Name, but is "under
the Wrath and Curse of God," believes his Sins are forgiven; not because they
are, for they are not; not because he has Evidence they are, for he has none;
but full Evidence to the contrary. But say they, because God has commanded him
to believe that they are forgiven, and promised that if he believes they are
forgiven, they shall be forgiven. That is, God has commanded him to believe a
Lie and promised that if he believes that he, it shall become a Truth.
"According to our Faith so shall it be to us" -- Not that that Text in Mat. ix.
29. speaks a Word about "this strange Kind of Assurance:" For it does not. The
Thing the two blind Men believed was true before they believed it: and they
were constrained to believe by clear Evidence, viz. That Christ was able to
open their Eyes. See ver. 27, 28. -- No. This Kind of Assurance is so strange,
that it is not so much as once required, commanded, exhorted to, or recommended
in the Bible: nor any thing like it. Nor indeed is there any Thing like it in
the Universe. For it is in truth "a strange kind ot Assurance, far different
from other ordinary Kinds." -- But to be more particular, and that even those
who are of the weakest Capacity, may not only think, but be quite certain, that
we do not misunderstand this Author, so very highly celebrated by Gentlemen of
the first Rank on that Side of the Question, observe.

2. THE thing to be believed is a supposed Fact, which has no Existence, viz.
"that God freely gives Christ and his Salvation to us in particular." Which he
says, "is not true before we believe it." But pray, what does he mean by God's
giving Christ and his Salvation to us in particular?" We often read in the
Bible of the Gift of Christ, but every thing taught in the Bible relating to
that grand and glorious Affair, is true before we believe, and whether we
believe or no. For Instance, is it not true, whether we believe it or not, that
God so loved the World, as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life? Joh. iii. 16.
And are not those Words true whether we believe them or not, that God has
given to us eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son? 1 John v. 11. And again,
were not those Words true, whether the Jews believed them or not, My Father
gives you the true Bread from Heaven? Joh. vi. 32. Yes, beyond all Doubt, all
these Things are true, and every single Sentiment implied in them is true, has
been true above these Thousand Years, and will remain true, whether we believe
them or not. And indeed this is the Case with all the Truths contained in the
Bible; yea, with every single Truth in the Universe. They are true before we
believe them, and whether we believe them or not.

WHAT then does Mr Marshall mean by God's giving Christ and his Salvation to us
in particular?" which he says, "is not true before we believe it. Not that
giving of Christ we read of in the Bible: but something essentially different.
He plainly means giving us in particular a saving interest in Christ and his
Salvation: granting us Pardon, Justification and a Title to eternal Life, while
impenitent and unconverted. This is plain from what he considers as opposite
thereto. Yea, we are without Christ's Salvation at present, in a state of Sin
and Misery, under the Wrath and Curse of God Which Words determine his meaning
with the utmost Certainty. So that the Fact to be be^^^d to be true is this,
that we have a saving Interest in Christ, are delivered from "the Wrath and
Curse of God," are pardoned and entitled to eternal Life: and indeed this is no
more than Mr. Wilson, and all others in his Scheme, hold, that we do believe,
in the first direct Act of justifying Faith; and without which they all affirm
our Faith is not saying. To be sure Mr. Wilson affirms this, over and over
again, perhaps an Hundred Times, through both his Volumes. Particularly p. 145.
he defines justifying Faith in these Words. "Justifying Faith is a believing
the Remission of Sins with special Application to a Man's self -- Now observe,

3. Mr. Marshall says, "this is not true before we believe it." But had it been
declared, expressly or implicitly, in the Word of God, it had been true before
we believe it, and whether we believe it or not: for this is the Case with
every Declaration in the Bible. But Mr. Marshall is so open, frank and honest,
as to own that it is not taught in the Word of God We have no absolute Promise
or Declaration in Scripture, that God ^oth or will give Christ and his
Salvation to any one of us in particular. -- Yea, we are without Christ's
Salvation at present, under the Wrath of God. -- Therefore,

4. The thing to be believed to be true, instead of being true before we
believe it, is false. Yea, is known to be false, is owned to be false, is
publicly declared before the World to be false. Instead of our having a saving
Interest in Christ, we "are under the Wrath and Curse of God." -- And therefore
this honest Man, in perfect Consistence with himself, declares.

5. NEITHER do we know it to be true already by Scripture, or Sense, or Reason.
-- our Assurance is not impressed on our Thoughts by ANY Evidence of the Thing.
-- And indeed, nothing could be more absurd and Self-contradictory, than to
pretend (as some of the Party seem to do) to have any Evidence of the truth of
a Fact, which is known and acknowledged not to be true. For if we not only
think, but know, that it is not true; we know that there is Evidence of its
Untruth. Not simply, no Evidence of its truth; but full Demonstration of it is
Falsehood. Mr. Marshall's meaning is so plain, that it seems impossible it
should be any plainer. And these Words did not drop from his Pen inadvertently;
but the plain Truth of the Case drew them from him. For he has said nothing but
what is absolutely essential to their Scheme. He knew it was so; and he had
Honesty enough to own it. True Mr Cudworth was sensible, he could not vindicate
the Scheme, set in this open honest Light. Therefore he (absolutely without any
Grounds) pretends I misrepresent their Scheme; and then buries up himself in a
heap of ambiguous Words; without attempting to answer my Queries upon the
Point. But I appeal to all Men of common Sense, into whose Hands this shall
come, whether I do not understand Mr. Marshall's Words in the Sense, the very
^ense, the only Sense they can possibly bear -- It is p^ain beyond dispute,
that Mr. Wilson understands them in the very Sense I do For, as we shall see
presently, he maintains, that in justifying Faith "we believe that to be true
which is not true before we believe it" -- Well -- if it is not true it is
false. -- And if it is not true, it implie a Contradiction to say, that there
is "any Evidence from Scripture, Sense or Reason," of its Truth And therefore
if it be believed at all, it must be" without any Evidence from Scripture,
Sense or Reason," as Mr. Marshall honestly owns.
But how a Man, not given u^ Delusion, can believe that to be true, which he
c^inly knows is false, may puzzle a Lock or Newton to ^y. However, Mr.
Marshall goes on to declare,

^. THAT herein lies the great difficulty of believing, not as it is with
divine Truths because the thing to be believed is contrary to our vicious
Byasses; ( Joh. iii. 19.) but merely because we have no Evidence of it is Truth,
but full Demonstration that it is false. This is a strange kind of Assurance,
far different from other ordinary Kinds; and therefore no wonder if it be found
weak and imperfect, and difficult to be obtained, and assaulted with many
Doubtings. -- But pray, wherein does it differ from all other Kinds of
Assurance? and why is it so difficult to be obtained? He goes on to say, we are
constrained to believe other things on the clear Evidence that we have that
they are true, and would remain true, whether we believe them or no: so that we
cannot deny our Assent, without rebelling against the Light of our Senses,
Reason or Conscience: but here our Assurance is not impressed on our Thoughts
BY ANY EVIDENCE OF THE THING. -- And on this Account, and merely on this
Account, is it difficult to believe this Fact. For there is no Man but that
would be glad to believe, that instead of going to Hell after Death, he shall
be for ever happy in Heaven. Balaam said, let me die the Death of the
Rightoeus, and let my latter End be like his. So that wicked Men would be glad
to get this Faith; and if they cannot get it, it is not because they are not
willing to have it; as was the Case with the wicked Jews, whom Christ
upbraided, Joh. v. 40 Ye WILL NOT come to me that ye might have Life; but
merely because they have not "any Evidence of the thing." So then they are not
to blame for their Unbelief; for it is no Crime. Rather they are to be pitied;
for it can be considered only as a Calamity. And accordingly several Writers
have of late appeared in Great Britain zealous to prove, that Faith is no Duty,
and Unbelief no Sin.

THUS far then Mr. Marshall's Words are plain, and his Meaning easy to be come
at: but the next Particular is not without some Difficulty. For,

7. HE says, that the Fact not being true, but rather known to be false, and so
there being no Evidence of any Kind, or from any Quarter to build our Faith
upon, we must therefore work it out in our selves by the Assistance of the
Spirit of God. But how can a Man, in his right Senses, go about to work up
himself to believe, that to true, which he knows is not true, but absolutely
false? and which Way does a Man go to work in this Case? He does not look for
Evidence; for he knows there is none from Scripture, Sense or Reason. Nay, he
does not try to believe it to be true, as supposing it true; for he knows it is
not true. But he tries to believe it is true, that it may become true, by his
believing it to be true. Surprising, shocking Affair!

AND all this by the Assistance of the Spirit of God." -- But pray, how can the
Spirit of God grant any Assistance in such a Case? Were the Fact true, and were
there Evidence of its Truth, we should need no Assistance in the Case. A wicked
Man is as able and as willing to believe such a Fact as any Saint in the World.
And since the Fact is known not to be true, and it is known there is no
Evidence of its Truth, but full Demonstration of its Falsehood, what Assistance
can the Spirit of God grant in the Case? The Psalmist prays, Open thou mine
S^es, that I may behold (...) things out of thy Law. And if our vic^ous Blasses
render us inattentive to, and prejudice us against, divine Truths; so that we
are saw of Heart to believe them to be, what in Fact they are, whether we
believe or no; or if we hate the Light because our Deeds are evil, if we hate
the Truth because it condemns us, we may need the Influences of the Divine
Spirit to remove our Prejudices, to open our Eyes, to make us attentive to and
give us a relish for the Truth, to cause us to savor the Things which (...) of
God; and so long as any Corruption remains in our Hearts, to blind our Man's to
the holy Beauty and Glory of Divine Truths, we may need the Divine Spirit, to
open our Eyes, that we may behold wondrous Things out of God's Law. But in this
Case, there is no Prejujudice in the Heart of the most wicked Man in the World
to be removed; for the Fact believed would have suited Balaam himself. And it
can be of no Advantage to have our Eyes opened in the Case; but rather a
Disadvantage For the wider our Eyes are opened, the more plainly and clearly
shall we see, that it is not true, but absolutely false; that there is no
Evidence of its Truth, but full Demonstration of its Falsehood. There is nothing
in the Case, therefore, to be done, by any Spirit, for us, but to put out our
Eyes, and blind our Minds, that so we may, by the mighty ^ower of Delusion, be
led firmly to believe a Lie. But surely, no Spirit will do this for us, but
that wicked Spirit, who is the Father of Lies, and a Murderer from the
beginning. He may bring Texts of Scripture to us, as once he did to our
Savior, and apply them to our Souls, one after another, till ravished with
Joy, we cry out, I know my Sins are forgiven! I know God loves me! I know I
shall be saved! I am as certain of it, as of my own Existence! and should all
the World say I am deluded, I would not regard them! I have been particularly
acquainted with many Instances of Sinners thus deluded. Numbers of our Converts
in New England twenty Years ago, were to all appearance converted thus.

THUS we have taken in impartial View of Mr. Marshall Doctrine, the very
Doctrine Mr. Wison has undertaken to vind^e^e; and for a complete stating the
Question to be disputed, there is but one Observation more to be made.

8. A fundamental Maxim in Mr. Marshall's Scheme, on which all the rest
depends; I say, A fundamental Maxim in Mr. Marshall's whole Scheme is, that in
Justifying Faith "we believe that to be true, which is not true before we
believe it." And this Maxim is absolutely essential to his Scheme. For,

THE Fact believed is that "my Sins are forgiven." or in other Words, "that I
have a saving Interest in Christ and all the Benefits purchased by him." --
Now, if they say, that this is true before I believe it, they must, with the
grossest Sort of Antinomians, hold that we are justified before Faith, in
express Contradiction to the whole Gospel. -- This they do not, they dare not
say. -- They are therefore under an absolute necessity to say, that we believe
that to be true which is not true before we believe it."

BUT if it is not true before we believe it, then every thing Mr. Marshall has
said will inevitably follow. For if it is not true, it is false. If it is not
true, there is, there can be, no "Evidence from Scripture, Sense or Reason"
that it is true. And therefore we must believe "without any Evidence of the
Thing." And so it is "a strange kind of Assurance," and "difficult to be
obtained," and we must "work it out in our selves." And it being so contrary to
common Sense, even to the Reason of all Mankind, to believe that to be true
which we know is not true, we evidently need the Assistance of some Spirit in
the Affair. Not the Spirit of God indeed, for he never helps Men to believe any
thing, but what is true before we believe it.

IF therefore it can be proved, that this fundamental Maxim is false, down goes
their whole Scheme, and all who are setted upon it, he buried in its Ruins. --

1. IT is self evident, that in all Instances, a thing must exist, at least, in
order of Nature, before it is Existence can be discerned by the human Mind. To
say otherwise, is an express Contradiction. For, to discern that a Thing exists
before it does exist, is to see that it is before it is: Which is the same as
to say, that a Thing may be, and not be, at the same Time. Which is an express
Contradiction. --

BUT to believe my Sins are forgiven, is to discern that this Fact is really
so, that this Thing does exist. It Is Existence then is in order of Nature,
before I discern it is Existence. For to say, I can see a Thing to be, which is
not, is an express Contradiction. So then they must say, we are justified
before Faith, or their Faith is an inconsistent, Self-contradictory Thing.

I am well aware, that this Sort of Converts, in their inward Experiences, are
wont to have the Love of God and pardon of Sin, to their Apprehension,
manifested to their Souls before they believe. For this Manifestation is the
Ground of their belie^^ and indeed it would be simply impossible, they ever
should believe, if they had not something of this Nature For no human Mind can
believe what appears to be not true. But it will not do to speak out this
Secret, and tell the World plainly how it is. For then it would appear, that
they are justified before Faith, and all would join to condemn them as gross
Antinomians. And therefore they are obliged to give such an Account of their
Faith, as in its own Nature evidently implies a Contradiction. Nor can you get
one of these Men coolly and impartially to attend to this Point, because they
are conscious of an insuperable Difficulty. Rather, they will bury themselves
in obscurity, in a multitude of ambiguous Words, not at all to the Purpose.
Witness Mr. Cadwarth's Farther Defense, and Mr. Wilson's Review.

2. THE Thing believed to be true, is on their own Scheme, a Lie. -- For.

THEY all hold that we are not pardoned 'till after Faith, at least in order of
Nature. Besure, Mr. Wilson expresses this strongly. He says, p 209 that
"Justification is a Consequent of our Union with Christ by Faith." And to the
same Purpose, page 101, 195, 205, etc. -- Now, if it be a Consequent of our
Union with Christ by Faith, then it does not exist 'till after Faith. Faith is
in order of Nature before Justification. But their Faith consists in believing
they are justified. And so it consists in the believing of a Lie. Unless they
will contradict themselves, and say, that Justification is nor a Consequent of
our Union with Christ by Faith. Or else affirm, that to believe a Thing is,
when it is not, is not to believe a Lie. -- Besides,

THE Proposition believed to be true in their Faith, is what they themselves
must own to be a Lie, on another Account: For in their Faith, the Proposition
believed to be true is, that an Unbeliever is justified. For their Faith does
not consist in believing this Proposition, (...) a Believer, am justified. For
this is true, before it is believed, and whether it is believed or not. -- But
their Faith consists in believing this Proposition, viz I^ who am an
Unbeliever, am justified, which, as they say, is not true before it is
believed, and for the Truth of which we have no Evidence from Scripture, Sense
or Reason. -- For they all maintain, that in the first Act of Justifying Faith,
prior to any Reflection on my own Act, I believe my Sins are all forgiven, p.
102, 123. without knowing any Thing further about my State, than that I am by
Nature a Child of Wrath, and an Heir of Hell, under the Curse of an angry and
Sin-revenging God. p. 175. But if I believe, that I, who, to my own
Apprehension, am an Unbeliever, am justified; then I believe, that an
Unbeliever is justified; which they own to be a Lie. -- Indeed, they hold, that
in my believing it to be true, it becomes true. And so though it was a Lie, yet
now it becomes true. And so they keep themselves from seeing that what they
believe, continues to be a Lie. -- However, it was a Lie, when first believed,
according to their own Scheme: For it becomes true, only in Consequence of
their believing it to be true. -- And if God has never said, as in Fact he has
not, that if we believe our Sins are forgiven, they shall be forgiven; what
they believe is not only a (...), when they believe it, but also continues to
be a ^e, notwithstanding their Faith; and will be found to (...) so at the Day
of Judgment, according to the express Declaration of our blessed Savior, Mat.
vii. 21.27.

BUT again, what they believe, may be proved to be ^^e, by another Argument. --
Thus -- according to Scripture, no impenitent Sinner, while such, ever was, or
ever will be forgiven: But they believe themselves forgiven while impenitent:
therefore what they believe is a Lie. -- That no impenitent Sinner, while such,
ever was, or ever will be forgiven, is plain from Lev. xxvi. throughout. 1 Kin.
viii. throughout. Prove. xxviii. 13. (...). lv. 7. Luke xiii. 5. Acts ii. 38.
and iii. 19. etc. etc. as I have proved at large in another Place ( E^^y on the
Nature of the Gospel. Sect. viii.) -- nor can these Men deny it, without
expressly contradicting the Westminster Confession of Faith, which asserts,
Chap. XV. That no Sinner may expect Pardon without Repentance. And if they give
up that Confession of Faith, as heterodox, what will become of their bold
Pretenses, and confident Affirmation, That all the Protestant World are on
their Side, except Arminians, Baxterians, and ranting Sectaries? "p. ^5. -- But
they believe themselves forgiven while impen^tent. As is certain from this,
that they all hold, that a belief they are forgiven is the very thing which
causes them to begin to repent. -- Therefore, their Faith consists in believing
a Lie. -- But

3. GRANTING the Fact believed, to be indeed true, yet as it is acknowledged to
be no Truth revealed in the Gospel, their Faith is not an evangelical Faith,
nor are those religious Affections, which flow from it, evangelical Graces. For
as the Fact believed is not revealed in the Gospel, so it is no part of Gospel
Truth. And to their Faith is not Gospel Faith, nor their Holiness, Gospel
Holiness. For all Evangelical and holy Affections are excited in the Mind by
Gospel Truths, Psalm. xix. 7. Joh. xvii. 17. Jam. i. 18. They may be called
Antinomians; and they greatly resemble the ancient Manicha^^s; as I have shown
in the forementioned Essay! but they cannot with Propriety, be called
Christians; for that which is the Foundation of their Scheme, is no Part of
Christianity, is not once taught in Christ's Gospel; as they themselves
acknowledge. For the whole Gospel, they own, is true before we believe it, and
whether we believe it or not. But the first and fundamental Article of their
Creed, and that from which all their religious Affections flow, is not true
before they believe it to be true; and so it is no Part of the Gospel.

4. IN order to prove Mr. Sandeman's Faith, not to be justifying Faith, Mr.
Wilson uses this Argument. Every one who is possessed of justifying Faith, must
undoubtedly be justified; but a general Belief of the Gospel, or a general
Assent to the Truth of the Facts recorded in the New Testament, is to be found
with many who are never justified: therefore a general Faith or assent to the
Truths of the Gospel, and History of the Facts recorded in the new Testament,
is not justifying Faith. p. 72. -- This Argument he asserts to be conclusive:
But it is equally strong against himself. For, -- every one who is possessed of
Justifying Faith, must be undoubtedly justified; but a belief of the Rem^ssion
of Sins, with application to a Man's self, which is his own Definition of
justifying Faith, p. 145. is to be found with many who were never justified; as
he himselfs own, p. 102. therefore this belief is not justifying Faith.

SHOULD he say, that Self-deceived Sinners do not believe their Sins to be
forgiven, upon the Testimony of God in his Word^ the same is true on his
Scheme, by his own Acknowledgement: for it was not true before he believed it.
But the Testimony of God is true before we believe it, and whether we ever
believe it or not: as he himself owns. Therefore his Faith is not built on the
Divine Testimony: But rather, as Mr. Marshall says, "is without any Evidence
from Scripture Sense or Reason."

Or should he say, that the Faith of deluded Sinners is not productive of
Evangelical Graces: The same may be said of his Faith. For no religious
Affections can be called evangelical Graces, which do not result from the
Knowledge and Belief of some Truth revealed in the Gospel. But the supposed
Truth, which is the Source of all their religious Affections, is not contained
in the Gospel: as they themselves own.

Or should he say, that deceived Sinners are prompted to believe their Sins
forgiven, from a self-righteous Spirit: Just this is the Case on the Scheme of
these Men. As I have proved at large, Essay, Sect. IX. -- There is no possible
Way then for him to get rid of the Force of his own Argument. It is equally
Conclusive against his Scheme, and Mr. Sandeman's: And does indeed confute them
both at once.

THUS we see, that the Faith of these Gentlemen, in which they profess to
believe that to be true, which is not true before we believe it, -- implies a
Contradiction in it is own Nature -- is the belief of a Lie -- is no Gospel
Faith -- is nothing more than deluded Sinners may have: it is therefore very
far from being that precious Faith, which is peculiar to God's Elect, and which
is infallibly connected with eternal Life -- Nothing therefore now remains, but
to attend carefully to Mr. Wilson's Arguments in it is Vindication, which may be
summed up in these four.

Mr. Wilson's Arguments to prove, that in Justifying Faith, we believe that to
be true, which is not true before we believe it.
Arg. I. FROM the Offers and Promises of the Gospel. His Notion is, that the
Declaration of the Gospel amounts to this, -- O, impenitent, unconverted,
christless Sinner, believe and thou shall be saved, i. e. believe thy Sins are
forgiven, and they shall be forgiven. Believe thou shall be saved, and it shall
be to thee according to thy Faith. It is not true before we believe, but in
believing it to be true, it becomes true. According to the Faith so shall it be
to thee, pa. 14. -- But this Declaration is not made in the Gospel: but is a
Lie; and he that believes it, believes a Lie; as has been already proved.

Mr. Wilson has labored the Point, in Vindication of Mr. M^'s Words, p 28, 29,
30, 31. and this is the S^m and Substance of his Plea -- "an offered Gift is n^
m^ne before I receive it." -- "But the offer gives me a Right to receive it."
-- "to believe it mine is to receive it" Therefore in Justifying Faith, we
believe that to be true which is not true before we believe it. -- a mere
Fallacy -- to believe a Thing mine, is different from, and a Consequence of
receiving it. -- For instance, a Man offers me a Guinea; the Guinea suits my
Heart, I receive (...) I know I receive it, and so I know and believe it is
mine: -- But here is nothing like believing a thing to be true, which is not
true before I believe it.

THE Pharasee firmly believed, that the God of Abraham, was their God and
Father and Friend, and would make them happy for ever. This none can deny. But
^d they receive the God of Abraham for their God and P^rsion; as he was offered
to them in the Old Testament: -- No^ far from it. -- They hated and rejected
him with all their Hearts, and murdered his very Image, his only begotten Son.
Just so a deluded Sinner may be ravished in a belief, that Christ, Pardon and
Heaven, are his (...) and yet in the mean time may hate and reject with the
utmost Abhorrence, that Christ, that Pardon, and that Heaven, which are offered
in the Gospel as I have shown at large in the forementioned Essay.

WE agree -- that the Gospel proposes nothing to be believed by us, says Mr.
Wilson, but what is infallibly (...), whether we believe it or not. -- But if
any one should from hence inter, that the Gospel does not afford sufficient
Warrant, or lay a Foundation for be^^ any thing, but what is infallibly true,
whether we believe it or not: This we beg Leave to deny. For as God in the
Gospel freely promises, or makes an offer of Life and Salvation to Sinners
through Jesus Christ, it is evident, the Promise cannot be believed, but in the
way of appropriating the Gift, or believing they shall be saved through his
Blood: which certainly cannot be said to be a Truth, whether we believe it or
not; for if it was, all who hear the Gospel would infallibly be saved.

The Matter is plainly this: the Gospel no where proposes it as a Truth to be
believed, that Men shall be saved through Christ, whether they believe or not;
but it every where testifies, that he that believes shall be saved. Now this
very Declaration published, and frequently repeated in the Gospel for the
Encouragement or Sinners, makes it warrantable, for every one of them to
believe his own particular Salvation through Christ. And the Truth is, till he
believes this upon the footing of the divine Promise, Faithfulness, or
Veracity, he in effect, really and in the Sense of Scripture, disbelieves and
calls in Question the Truth of the divine Testimony made known in the
Proposition aforementioned. That he does so, evidently appears by his not
crediting it, so as to rest his hope of Salvation wholly upon the Promise of
God, and the Record which he has given of his Son, in the Gospel. p. 14, 15.

Stop now, candid Reader, and critically examine these Words. "He disbelieves
the divine Testimony," says he But why? because he does not rest his hope of
Salvation wholly upon the Promise of God. -- but pray, what promise? Why this,
he that believes shall be saved. Which is so "frequently repeated in the
Gospel." -- He that believes! that believes what! pray, what is the Sinner to
believe? he is to believe "his own particular Salvation." -- to "believe that
he shall be saved." -- But is this the meaning of the Text? Indeed no. That
Proposition is not once used in this Sense in the Bible* The Gospel no where
declares, that he that believe (...), shall be saved: but very many times
expressly to the contrary. The Thing believed is a Lie. But to believe a Lie, is
not to believe in Christ; unless they make this Lie, that very Christ, on which
they venture their all for Eternity. -- Read the Bible through, O impenitent,
unconverted christless Sinner, and you may find enough such Declarations as
these, Repent and be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus for the Remission
of Sins -- repent and be converted that thy Sins may be blotted out -- Except
ye repent ye shall perish -- repent, and believe the Gospel -- believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved -- and these Declarations are all
true before you believe them, and whether you believe them or not. -- But you
can no where find any thing like this, believe thy Sins are forgiven, and they
shall be forgiven -- believe thou shall be saved, and thou shall be saved. --
In this Case, what you believe is not true before you believe it, as they
themselves grant. And believing a Lie, though it may make it seem true to you,
yet it will not make it in Fact true.

PRAY, who is he that believes the divine Testimony? He that believes the very
Thing God means to say; Or he that puts a new Meaning to God's Words, which God
never intended, and which never came into his Heart? -- May we not say of these
Men, as our Savior did of the Pharisees; by your Traditions you make the
Command of God of none Effect. So by their Faith they make the Declarations of
the Gospel a Lie. The Gospel declares, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish:
Repent and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. But these Men
teach, that if an impenitent, unconverted Sinner, while such, believes his Sins
are blotted out, they are blotted out. -- That is, if he believes a Thing to be
true, which is directly contrary to the Declaration of the Gospel, it shall
become true: And so his Faith shall cause the Declaration of the Gospel to
become a Lie.

BESIDES, O Christless Sinner, what Warrant have you to believe that your Sins
are forgiven? is it already true? no. But does the Gospel propose any Thing to
be believed by us, but what is infallible true, whether we believe it or not?
Mr. Wilson himself is (...).

BUT, says Mr. Wi^ If a Man offers m^ (...) truly I have certainly a Warrant
to receive (...) in receiving it, to believe it mine. p 18 (...) conscious to
my self, that (...) receive it* I have good Evidence to believe it is mine. And
in this (...) as mine, in order of Nature, before I believe it mine. And so,
what I believe is true, before I believe it. And so this Similitude is nothing
to the Purpose, nor does that all help to reconcile to common Sense their
strange Kind of (...), which is (...) different from other ordinary Kinds. Yet
they believe Christ is (...), without any Consciousness that they receive him*
p 1^^. And cons^^^ affirm that, that Assurance of an interest in Christ, which
re^^^ merely from a Consciousness of any ^nherent Grace, is altogether popish.

BUT no Man can believe the Gospel, who does not be^^eve his Sins are pardoned,
in Mr. (...) Judgment. (...) ^4.133. etc. etc -- And yet he knows, and he
(...)* that this Fact is not revealed in the Gospel. Yea, he (...), "it is not
proposed in the Gospel to be believed (...)" p 14. And yet no Man, he says, can
believe the Gospel, who does not believe it. An express Contradiction again. --
Mr. Wils^n grants a Man may have saving Faith, and yet not know that it is
saving. p. 123. Ma^g. But he would have a Sinner believe his Sins are pardoned,
previous to one single Thought, that he has saving Faith p. 123. But in this
Case, it must be "without any Evidence of the Thing." However, he disbelieves
the Gospel, if he does not believe it, although there is no such Thing in the
Gospel -- "A strange Kind of Assurance^"

BUT, says Mr. Wilson, the stung Israelites, in looking to the bear in Serpent,
had, every one of them, good Reason to believe, and fully assure himself, that
he in particular should be healed. -- And why? (...) to him^ (...) Cure. -- And
(...), to himself that (...), do, may be as certain (...) strange Kind of (...)
without any (...) cries, (...) had a stung Israelite looked to the brazen
Serpent, without being at the same time conscious to himself, that he did look,
he could not have been assured of a Cure, notwithstanding his Be^ter of the
divine Declaration, that whosoever look^ shall be healed.

BUT Mr. Wilson will again say, had not the Israelites a good Warrant to take
and eat the Manna which lay around their Tents? and has not every Sinner as
good a Right to take Christ the Bread of Life, and eat and live for ever? p.
31. Had the Israelites loathed the Manna so perfectly, as absolutely to refuse
to gather and eat it; and in their Hunger, set themselves to work up a Belief,
that their Be^^^es were full, without any Consciousness of the Thing, it might
have been to Mr. Wilson's Purpose. But what was there in all their Conduct, at
all resembling Mr. Wilson's Faith? They gathered the Manna, they made Cakes of
it, they eat, they were refreshed, and they were conscious to themselves of all
that passed. Here was no Assurance worked up "without any Evidence from
Scripture, Sense or Reason." Here was no believing any Thing to be true, but
what was true before it was believed. Here was nothing but what was perfectly
rational^ -- In short, here was nothing (...) not the (...) shadow of a
Resemblance -- Nor indeed ^s there in a Nature any Thing to resemble their
(...) to unless among those who are desirous, who very often believe strongly
Things to be true, which would have (...)

THUS we have a Specimen of Mr. (...), Manner of Reasoning, to vindicate our
believing that to be true, which is not true, from the Declarations, Offers and
Promises of the Gospel. He repeats much the same Things perhaps 200 Times over
in his two Volumes. -- And when all is fare and done, it comes to this -- "God
has, in Fact, no where in his Word declared that my Sins are forgiven; however
I must believe they are forgiven, or I do not believe the Word of God. -- le^s
not true before I believe it, but absolutely fa^se; yet I have a good Warrant
to believe it is true, although I have no Evidence of the (...) from Scripture,
Sense or Reason. -- in receiving a Gift, I know it is mine; but (...) a
Consciousness that I receive (...) to Self contradictory (...) of Reasoning.
And yet he pretends to have all the Bible, and all the Protestant World on
(...). And no Man can be saved, who is destitute of this unscriptural,
irrational, inconsistent, Self-contradictory Thing, which he ca^ls, by the
sacred Name of (...) Christ. -- But let us proceed to another Argument, which
like the former, is repeated over and over again, and ^cattered along through
(...) whole Performance.

Arg. 2. F^^M the Nature of Reliance on Christ's Righteousness. Perhaps this
Argument is stated and urged no where to so good Advantage, as in p. 15.10.1^.
It wi^ not be denied, that the Gospel declares Christ to be an all sufficient
Savior, and bears Testimony to his Righteousness as every way sufficient for
the Justification of the most guilty Sinner. -- If one approaching to a frozen
Lake or River, over which he has Occasion to pass, tells me that he has been
assured, by good Information, that the Ice was sufficient^y strong to support
him: and yet, after all proves ^orous and ave^^e to make trial, by venturing
his Person freely upon it: I plainly perceive he has (...) the Report he heard;
because he does not (...) in^t, or, wh^ is the same thing, he cannot trust ^e,
conside in, or venture himself on the sea -- None ca^ (...) to believe the
Report of the Gospel concerning the Righteousness of Christ, but those who,
without being conscious of any personal Merit of good Qualification about the
(...), re^y f^ and whom upon that Righteousness for Justification and
Salvation. And it is equality certain, that such a firm Reliance, or fiducial
Recumbancy upon the Righteousness of Christ revealed in the Gospel, must, in
the very Nature of the Thing empty the Faith of one's own Justification and
Salvation through this Righteousness. -- For a Man to venture himself, and all
his most valuable Interests, upon a Bottom that he doubts is weak and
insufficient to support him, would be the greatest Folly imaginable; yet this
he must do, who pretends to rely wh^^ly upon Christ and his Righteousness for
Justification and Salvation and yet has not the Faith of his own Salvation. --
If a Man has been assured, by good Information, that the Ice of any frozen Lake
or River he has occasion to pass over, is sufficiently strong to support him;
and yet is timorous, and doubts whether he will be safe if he should venture
upon it; it is plain he does not confide in, or give Credit to the Report he
heard; for if he did, he would be as much assured of his own Safety, as of the
Truth of the Report, or the Veracity of him that made it. The Application is
easy. -- Upon the whole, it is evident, that till a Man believes, and ^s in
some Measure assured of his own Justification and Salvation through the
Righteousness and Blood of Christ, he never truly believes the Report of the
Gospel, or the divine Testimony concerning the same. Let the Reader then judge
whether there is any Truth or Sense, in asserting, that the Hearers of the
Gospel, have no Warrant to believe any Thing but what is infallibly true,
whether they believe it or not. -- To which, I Answer,

1. IT is written, He is able to save to the uttermost all who come to God by
him. I hear the Report, I understand it, I believe it with all my Heart; and in
the belief of it, I come to God by Christ, for Salvation. I am conscious to my
self, I do so. And so I believe I shall be saved. But what I believe is true
before I believe it, and whether I believe it or not. For he who comes to God
by Christ, shall be saved, whatever Doubts he may have of his good Estate. And
here is nothing believed, but upon good Evidence. And nothing like their
"strange Kind of Assurance," which is worked up "without any Evidence of the
Thing." As Mr. Marshall honestly states the Case. -- For,

2. ON their Scheme they believe they shall be saved, without any Consciousness
of their coming to God by Christ, as Mr. Wilson declares over and over again.
p. 102, 123. They believe their Sins are forgiven, without any Consciousness of
Repentance, Conversion, or Faith in the Blood of Christ. They believe they
shall have a safe Passage over the Lake, without any Consciousness of venturing
or walking on it. And so they believe something to be true, which in Fact is
not true; and which at the Day of Judgment, will be found to be a Lie.

COME, candid Reader, come go with me, to the Side of a frozen Lake: View the
Ice with your own Eyes, and behold and see, it is full ten Feet thick. And will
not this bear the Weight of a single Man? Yea, will it not bear the Weight of a
thousand Men? You therefore cannot doubt of the safety of venturing upon it,
without rebelling against the Light of your Reason, Senses and Conscience. And
if you venture upon it, it is equally evident you will be safe. "You are
constrained to believe it by the clearest Evidence." It is true before you
believe it. You are certain it is true from "the clearest Evidence." You are
then at the furthest Distance from any thing like their Faith, nor have you the
least occasion to work up your self to believe any thing "which is not true
before you believe it, without any Evidence of the thing." -- So

COME, O enlightened Sinner, whose Eyes are opened to see the whole Gospel Plan
in its Glory. Come view this Way of Salvation with your own Eyes. See God the
Father, the infinitely glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, to magnify his
Law, which this revolted World all join to hate, and to condemn Sin, which the
apostate World all join to justify; even see him, set forth his own Son, of
equal Glory with himself, to be a Propitiation, to declare his Righteousness,
that consistently with the honor of his Government, he may pardon the penitent
Sinner, that comes to him in the Name of Christ, and looks only to free Grace,
through the Redemption that is ^n Jesus. View the infinite Dignity of the
Mediator -- view his Mediatorial Character, Office and Work -- see how he has,
in his Life and Death, magnified the Law and made it honorable -- see the
eternal Father, how infinitely well pleased he is, in what his Son has done --
He raises him from the Dead -- sets him at his own right Hand -- Repentance and
Remission of Sins are proclaimed to a guilty World in his Name -- and the Cry
is, Repent and be converted that ^ur Sins may be blotted out -- Can there be a
Doubt now whether it is safe to venture your all upon this Mediator, and return
to God in his Name? infinitely hateful, odious and ill-deserving as you are!
impossible! so sure as Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah -- so sure as he died
on the Cross, and now reigns at his Father's right Hand; even so sure and
certain it is, that it is safe for a Sinner, for the greatest Sinner, for any
Sinner, to repent and come to God in his NAME. -- "Are you not constrained to
believe this, by the clearest Evidence?" And is it not equally certain, that if
you repent, convert, and come to God in the Name of Christ, venturing your all
for Eternity wholly and entirely upon his Atonement, Righteousness and Merits,
and the infinitely free Grace of God through him, as revealed in the Gospel; that
you shall be sat, eternally safe. And therefore, in exact Proportion as you
are conscious of these Things, you may be certain of your own Safety in
particular. Nor have you any need, or any manner of Occasion, to believe any
Thing to be true which is not true; or to believe without Evidence. Nay, you
are set at the greatest Distance from this kind of blind Faith. -- But on the
other Hand,

WHAT Course for Comfort, can an impenitent, unconverted, christi^^s Sinner,
while such, blind to the Glory of God, to the Beauty of his Law, and to the
Glory and All Sufficiency of Christ, take? if he will believe his Sins are
forgiven, when in Fact they are not forgiven, and he knows in his Conscience
they are not; he must believe without any Evidence of the Thing." And to call
this, Faith in Christ; to call this, trusting wholly in the Righteousness of
Christ, is to put Darkness for Light; and to substitute in the Room of Christ,
a Lie, and nothing but a Lie, as the sole Object of their Faith.

Arg. 3. From the Nature of that Faith which was required of the Israelites;
and for the want of which they could not enter into the Land of Canaan. When
God gave the Children of Israel, a promise of entering into the Land of Canaan,
says Mr. Wilson, I presume it will not be denied, that they had not only a
Warrant, but that it was their indispensible Duty to believe, that he would
bring them to the Possession of it, notwithstanding the Difficulties they might
have to encounter by the Way; -- yet it cannot be said it was infallibly true,
that they should enter into the promised Land whether they believed or not; for
the Event proved the contrary. It is evident then, that they were called to
believe something that was not infallibly true, whether they believed it or
not. p. 18, 19. This is equally true of the Promise of the Gospel made to
Sinners of Mankind indefinitely, p. 23. For God has given to all who hear the
Gospel, a Promise of entering into his Rest or Heaven; which gives every one of
them sufficient Warrant to believe, that -- he shall be saved. p. 23, 24. --
This Promise is the first and immediate Foundation of Faith. -- It is only by
an appropriating and fiducial Peswasion thereof, that any one can commence a
true believer of the Gospel, or attain to any certain Knowledge of his eternal
Election. p 25. However the Thing to be believed is not true before they
believe it, and never will be true unless they do believe it. p. 18 -- 26. And
therefore he concludes, that in justifying Faith, we believe that to be true,
which is not true before we believe it. -- To this I answer,

1. THE Promise which God made to Abraham, and confirmed by an Oath, in Genesis
xxii. 16. referred to Numb. xiv. 30. (for God never did confirm by an Oath his
Promise to that Congregation who came out of Egypt; there is no such Thing on
Scripture Record. Therefore Numb. xiv. 30 has Reference to Genesis xxii. 16.) I
say, the Promise which God made to Abraham, and confirmed by an Oath, in Genesis
xxii. 16. to give the Land of Canaan to his Seed, was unconditional and
absolute. And by it God obliged himself, to give Abraham a Seed, and in due
Time, in spite of all Obstacles, whether from their own Temper, or the
Opposition of others, to bring them to, and put them in Possession of the Land
of Canaan. And had God, by any Means, eventually failed of doing this Thing, he
would have been chargeable with the Breach o^ that Promise, which he made to
Abraham.

Now this absolute Promise to Abraham, was a shadow of that absolute Promise,
which God the Father made to his Son, on his undertaking to offer up himself a
Sacrifice for the Sins of Men; that he should see his Seed, and pra^ng his
Da^s; that he should see the Travail of his Soul, and be satisfied. Isai. iiii.
By which Promise the Father absolutely obliged himself, that all Christ's Seed
should finally be brought to the heavenly Canaan, notwithstanding all
Opposition, from their own Hearts, and from every other Quarter. And if by any
Means, any one of Christ's Seed should finally perish, God would be chargeable
with a Breach of that Promise made to his Son

BUT as St. Paul reasons, Romans ix. 6. All are not Israel, which are of Israel;
so not all the Seed of Abraham, according to the Flesh, had an Interest in the
absolute Promise of the earthly Canaan, in the Sense, in which God originally
intended it, and in the Sense, in which he afterward explained it. For
Ishmael, who was a Child of Abraham, was first cast off. And afterward Esau
was rejected. And afterward six Hundred Thousand were cast off at once. And
all, in perfect Consistence, with the divine Promise to Abraham. Nor was there,
as Mr. Wilson insinuates, the least show or appearance of any Breach of
Promise. This was merely the impious and blasphemous Construction, the wicked
Israelites put upon the divine Conduct. For by an appropriating Act of Faith,
exactly of the same Nature with that Mr. Wilson pleads for, they had been fully
persuaded, that they, in particular, should come to the Land of Canaan. And
therefore, on their Disappointment, were ready to charge God with a Breach of
Promise, Numb. xiv. 3. To which God, in great Wrath, says, and ye shall know my
Breach of Promi^ As if he had said, "this is what you impiously charge me with.
But unmoved to alter my Determination, by your impious Charge, in the
Wilderness you shall die: And if you (...) this a Breach of Promise, you shall
know, I will break it thus: for assuredly your Carcases shall fall in the
Wilderness." -- And this is a l^vely Type of the final Doom, which will be
passed, at the great Day, on all impenitent Sinners, who by an appropriating
Act of Faith, have taken all the Promises to themselves, while in Fact, not one
of them ever belonged to them in the Sense, in which, they imagined. So they
shall know God's Breach of Promise, just as the wicked Israelites did.

2. THE absolute Promise of the Land of Canaan made to Abraham, had no Respect
to any, who were not of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh. And
therefore unless a Man could produce his Genealogy, and prove himself a
Descendant of Abraham, he could, by that Promise, claim no Right or Share in
the Land of Canaan: For, without this, all the good Qualifications in the World
would be no Weight to give a Man, a right to an Inheritance in that Land.

SO the absolute Promise of the heavenly Canaan made to Christ, has no Respect
to any but those who are Christ's Seed: those who are in Christ. And therefore
unless a P^sessed Christian can produce good Proof, that he is ^ Christ, he can
claim no Title to Heaven, by virtue of that absolute Promise. Our own
Righteousness, in this Case, can give no Title at all. But if ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and H^s according to the Promise, Gal. iii. 20.

WHEN therefore any Man, who is unconscious that he is united to Christ by
Faith, is bold to put in a Claim to the heavenly Canaan, he is guilty of the
grossest Presumption, and has no Evidence to support his Claim "from Scripture,
Sense or Reason."

3. GOD's Promise in Exodus iii. 17. made to that Congregation which died in the
Wilderness, of bringing them to the Land of Canaan, was not an absolute, but a
cond^tional Promise, as is plain beyond all Dispute from Numb. xxxii. 6 -- 1^.
which the Reader is desired to turn to And indeed the Conditions, although not
expressed in that Promise Exodus iii. 17. were plainly implied in the very
Nature of the Thing. For if they should, from an Attachment to the Pleasures
and Manners of Egypt, and from a mean and low Opinion of the Land of Canaan, or
from a distrust of the D^^ine Power and Fidelity to conduct them safely
thither, decline and finally refuse to march for Canaan; or if after they set
out on their Journey, repent they ever entered on the Expedition, and desire to
go back again; neither they, nor any Mortal else, would have had any reason to
imagine, that God was obliged by that Promise he made to them in Exodus iii. 17.
to bring them there. God's promise then to bring that Congregation to Canaan,
left him at (...) Liberty, to kill them by Hundreds and Thousands, if they
rece^^ed against the Lord, instead of cordially falling in with his Proposal;
yea, to ^oom a^l their Carcases to ^a^l in the Wilderness. -- It is absolutely
certain, by the Divine Conduct, that God viewed it, in this Light -- And
therefore.

THEY had no Warrant, (...) of them, to believe absolutely, when they (...) ^at
they should come to Canaan. It is (...) the Matter thus from Numb. xxx. ^^ --
15. Nor had they any Warrant to believe (...)* that if they would cordially
(...) with the Divine Proposal* and from their (...) Soul (...) an everlasting
Farewell to all the Manners and ^es of Egypt, set their whole Hearts on the
holy Land, enlist under the Banner of the God of Abraham, c^ave to him with all
their Hearts, march after him, trust his Wisdom, Sufficiency and Fidelity, to
conduct them thither, ^s Power to overcome all Obstacles, and so courageously
march after him into the holy Land, and ag^ under him against the seven Nations
of Canaan, and persevere till they had obtained a complete Victory, then, and
in this Way, and in no other, might they expect to come to the Possession of
that good Land. -- He, therefore, who found within himself, an Heart prepared
and di^p^led to all this, might reasonably expect, to arrive to a Possession or
that good Land. Unless some for special and wise Reasons, God should think fit
instead of the earthly, to give him an Inheritance in the heavenly Canaan. And
therefore, if the wicked (...) they came out of Egypt, far, very far, (...) a
Temper and Disposition, did confidently believe they should come to the
promised Land, they had, in Fact, no Warrant for their Belief. Nor did God hold
himself obliged, to order Things so, that it should be unto them, according to
their Faith; but thought himself, at full Liberty, to lead them into such
trying Circumstances, as should effectually discover their Unbelief, Enmity
against God, Attachment to Egypt, low Thoughts of Canaan, all which were
consistent with that appropriating Belief, they had, when they le^t Egypt, that
they should get to Canaan. And when their Hearts were thus discovered, God held
himself at Liberty, notwithstanding any Promise he had made to them, to doom
them ^ll to Death.

AND just so it is, in the present Case. The Gospel promises eternal Life,
absolutely and unconditionally to no Child of (...) Nor has any Child of Adam,
any Warrant to believe absolutely and unconditionally, that he shall be saved
-- But the Gospel brings the News of the Glories of the heavenly Canaan, where
God the supreme Good, is to be for ever enjoyed, and represents to our View an
almighty Savior and Conductor; invites us to (...) all for the Pearl of great
Price, from our (...) Soul, bid an eternal Farewell to the Pleasures and
Manners of Egypt; lay up all our Treasures and Hopes in Heaven, deny ourselves,
take up our Cross and follow Christ to the End of our Lives, placing our whole
Dependence in the Merits of his Blood, and the influences of his Spirit^* and
promises that all such shall finally arrive safe to the heavenly Canaan: But
denounces Damnation against all the rest. -- He then who is conscious that he
has such an Heart in him, may expect to see that good Land. But if any* (...)
of this, firmly believe, they shall assured^y inherit eternal Life, their Faith
is absolutely "without any Evidence from Scripture, Sense or Reason"; just as
Mr. Marshall says. And they may depend upon it, that God does not hold himself
obliged, that according to their Faith, so shall it be to them. For if Men will
believe Things, which God never promised, he is not obliged to answer their
presumptuous Expectations, how much soever they may pervert his Word, to make
themselves believe that he is. If they will affirm, that although it is not true
before they believe it; yet if they believe it is true, it will become true;
still God never said so. God never enjoined this Kind of Faith, nor will he
ever Answer the Expectations it begets.

THE Israelites could not enter in, because of Unbelief. -- Spiritual B^^^dness
is the Source of Unbelief, 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4. They were Blind to the Being and
Perfections of God. They did not see, that the God of Abraham was an absolutely
perfect, an infinitely g^^^us and amiable Being; the supreme, all-sufficient
Good, infinitely worthy of supreme Love, and the most entire Confidence, Trust
and Dependence. Rather, they entertained a low Idea of God. And hence, when
Things lo^ked Dark, and they come to a Pinch, it appeared that they did not
think in their Hearts, that he was a Being fit to be believed and trusted* --
And so, they did not think in their Hearts, that (...) they should venture to
take his Word, and march after him to Canaan, that it would end well Their
(...) to Heaven, and the (...) there. And therefore they were heart (...) they
had ever left Egypt, and wished themselves back again, they magnified the Glory
of the Land of Egypt, and spoke contemptibly of the Land of Canaan, they
blasphemed God, and were on the Point of stoning Calib and (...) -- Thus they
could not enter in because of Unbelief (...) of their Unbelief of those Things,
which were true, whether they believed them or not. -- For God was an
absolutely perfect Being, fit to be believed and trusted -- And i^ they had
believed him to be such, and in that Belief, ventured to Trust him, and much
after him to Canaan, it would have ended well. -- These Things were true,
whether they believed them or no. -- And there was sufficient Evidence of their
Truth. -- And it was this that rendered their Unbelief so Criminal -- Whereas,
had these Things not been true, but taken had they known they are false, they
could not have been at all to Blame to their Unbelief. And God never did, and
never will blame his Creatures for Unbelief when he knows, and they (...) that
there is no Evidence from Scripture, Sense of Reason, that the Things to be
believed are true.

A^g 4 FROM those Words, in Mar. xi. 23, 24. Whosoever should say unto this
Mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into the Sea, and shall not doubt
in his Heart, but shall believe that th^se Things is (...) be says, shall ca^^
to (...), he shall have whatsoever be says. Therefore, I say unto you, what
Things soever ye desire whom ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them -- From these Words it is plain," says Mr. Wilson, "that Men
may have sufficient Warrant to believe some Things which cannot be said to be
infallibly true, whether they believe them or not. p. 27. -- To which I Answer,
--

1. THAT the Faith, here spoken o^ is the Faith of Miracles. And it was true
before they believed it; that if they were at any Time inspired by immediate
are Revelation, to declare, that such a particular Miracle should be wrought,
it should be done. When therefore the immediate Suggestion of the Divine Spirit
came into their Minds, prompting them to declare, that a particular miraculous
Event should happen, they had, from that, and from the Promise of Christ, full
Evidence to believe that it would be done on their Declaration. And on this
Ground, Peter had a good Warrant to say, to the lame Man, in Act. iii. Rise up,
and walk: And full Evidence before he spoke, to believe, that on his Speaking,
the Man would he healed. And so again, here was nothing like their "strange
Kind of Assurance, without any Evidence of the Thing."

2. BUT if any are disposed to understand the Promise in the 24th Verse, in a
larger Latitude, to respect all the Prayers of true Saints; Whatsoever Thing ye
desire when ye ^^ay, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them; yet
even then, the Words will not prove, that we ought to believe that to be true,
which is not true before we believe it. -- For, it is true before we believe
it, that whatsoever we ask the Father, in Chaist's Name, agreeable to God's
Will, shall be given to us, Mat. vii. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Job. xvi. 23, 24. When
therefore any one desires, and is conscious to himself, that he has an Heart to
ask the offered Blessings of the Gospel, in the Name of Christ, he cannot but
know, it he believes the Gospel to be true, that he shall have them: For he is
"constrained to believe it, by the clearest Evidence:" For he has the express
Promise of Christ in the Case. -- As if I should say to my Child, whenever you
want Bread, ask me for it, and you shall have it. I will never fall in any one
Instance to give it to you. You may therefore come in the full Assurance of
Faith, nothing doubting, but that you shall receive it. For this I establish as
an invariable Rule, by which I will conduct toward you, viz. Ask, and ye shall
receive; seek, and ye shall find. When therefore you want Bread* and have an
Heart to ask it in the Manner you know I would have you, you may know before
you ask that you shall receive: And so you may ask, believing you shall
receive, and you shall have it. And now again, in all this* there is nothing
like their "strange Kind of Assurance," nothing like believing "without any
Evidence of the Thing." and believing "that to be true which is not before we
believe it." For it is true whether we believe it or not, that whatsoever we
ask in Christ's Name shall be given us. And we have the highest Evidence of the
Thing. -- What it is to ask in Christ's Name, has been already shown. ( Essay.
Sect. IV, and V.)

3. IN order to make this Text serve the Purpose of supporting their Scheme, it
must be understood thus. O christless, impenitent, unconverted Sinner, who art
in an unpardoned State, under the Wrath and Curse of God, impenitent as thou
art, believe thy Sins are forgiven, and they shall be forgiven. I do not say as
Peter did, repent and be converted, that thy Sins may be blotted out. But I
say, impenitent as thou art, and certain as thou art, of thine impenitency,
without any Evidence of the Thing, from Scripture, Sense or Reason, believe thy
Sins are blotted out, and it shall be unto thee according to thy Faith. For
although it is not true before thou believe it, in believing it to be true, it
shall become true. Believe therefore thy Sins are forgiven, and they shall be
forgiven. -- This is the Spirit and Soul of that evangelical Preaching in
fashion with these Men. See p. 102, 123, 175, etc -- But neither that Text in
Mark, nor any other in the Bible gives the least Countenance to their Scheme.

THUS we have taken a View of the Arguments, which Mr. Wilson uses, to prove,
that in justifying Faith "we believe that to be true, which is not true before
we believe it." -- And thus we have finished what was at first proposed. And
his Scheme, in contrast with that of the gross Antin^mians, stands thus,

GROSS Antin^mianism, and refined Antin^mianism, agree in asserting, that in
justifying Faith we believe that our Sins are forgiven, and that God is
reconciled to us.

GROSS Antin^mians, assert, (1.) That the Erect are justified before Faith.
(2.) That their Justification is manifested to them by the Spirit of God. (3.)
In Consequence of which they believe they are justified. (4.) This Belief
pacifies their Consciences, and is the Source of every religious Affection.

REFINED Antin^mians, assert, (1.) That before Faith the Elect, as well as
others, are under the Wrath of God and Curse of the Law. (2) That yet in Faith
they believe God loves them, and they are delivered from the Curse of the Law.
(3.) And because this is not true before it is believed, therefore they believe
it without any Evidence of the Thing. (4) This ^e^e^ pacifies the Conscience,
and is the Source of every religious Affection. -- Now,

IF the Elect are not justified before Faith, the gross Antin^mian Scheme is
fundamentally false. -- And,

IF in justifying Faith, we are not to believe that to be true, which is not
true before we believe it, the refined Antin^mian Scheme is also fundamentally
false.

THE Fact believed on both Schemes is the same, viz. that an impenitent,
unconverted, christless Sinner is justified. And a Belief of this Fact, on both
Schemes, produces the same Effects, viz. pacifies the Conscience, and is the
Source of all their Religion. And both Schemes grant that this Fact is not
revealed in the Bible. But one vindicates his Belief by saying, the Elect are
justified before Faith, and have their Justification immediately revealed to
them by the Spirit of God. And the other by saying, we are commanded by God, to
believe that to be true, which is not true before we believe it, and to believe
without any Evidence of the Thing, and God stands obliged that our Faith shall
(...) be disappointed.

WE have heard how the celebrated Mr Marshall explains his Scheme; and we have
considered what Mr. Wilson has to offer in its Defense. And the Controversy is
brought into a narrow Compass, to one single Point. viz. whether in justifying
Faith we believe that to be true, which is not true before we believe it. And
it is brought down out of the Clouds, and made plain and easy to the weakest
Capacity, and every one is freely left to judge for himself.

IF after all any poor bewildered Sinner is still at a loss, let him take his
Bible in his Hand, enter into his Closet, fall on his Knees, look up to God who
has given him the Bible to be the only Rule of his Faith, and say, O Lord, thou
have given me thy holy Word to be the only Rule of my Faith; and is it safe,
great God, for me to venture my Soul for Eternity in the Belief of that, which,
all acknowledge, is not revealed in thy holy Word? If every Truth contained in
that sacred Book, all which are true before they are believed, join to declare
me an unpardoned Sinner; O leave me not to quiet my Conscience by the Belief of
that which is not revealed there! O suffer me not to fly from the unerring Word
of my final Judge, and take Refuge in a Lie! Rather let me have no Peace, than
a false Peace! O lead me out of this bewildered St^^ and give me an Heart to
understand and believe thy holy Word, and make that the only Rule of my Faith,
of thine infinite Mercy through Jesus Christ. Then let him turn to, read, and
well consider the following Texts: Mat. vii. 21 -- 27. Act. iii. 19. Luk xiii.
3, 5. Isai. lv. 7. Prove. xxviii. 13. Act. xx. 21. Job. iii. 19, 20. 2 Cor. xi.
13, 14. Luke iv. 9, 10, 11. 1 Job. ii. 4.

FINIS.

