Mr. Barnard's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 25th. 1763;

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY

FRANCIS BERNARD, ESQUIRE; GOVERNER and Commander in Chief, THE HONORABLE His
MAJESTY'S COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY 25th. 1763.

BEING the Anniversary for the Election of HIS MAJESTY'S COUNCIL for said
PROVINCE.

By THOMAS BARNARD, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in SALEM.

BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and
the Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL. MDCCLXIII.

Province of Massachusetts Bay. In COUNCIL, May 26. 1763.
ORDERED, That BENJAMIN LYNDE, JOHN CHOATE, and NATHANIEL ROPES, Esqrs, be a
Committee to wait on the Rev'd Mr. THOMAS BARNARD, and give him the Thanks of
the Board for his Sermon preached before the General Court on Wednesday the
25th Instant, being the Day appointed by the Royal Charter for the Election of
Counselors for the Province aforesaid; and to desire a Copy thereof for the
Press.

Attest. A. OLIVER, Secr.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
JUDGES IX. 7, -- 15. -- HEARKEN unto me, you Men of She^hem, that GOD may
hearken unto you. The Trees went forth upon a Time to anoint a King over them.
And they said unto the Olive Tree, Reign thou over us. But the Olive Tree said
unto them, should I leave my Fatness, wherewith by me they honor GOD and Man,
and go to be promoted over the Trees? And the Trees said unto the Figtree, Come
thou and reign over us; But the Fig Tree said unto them, should I forsake my
Sweetness and my good Fruit, and go to be promoted over Trees? Then said the
Trees unto the Vine, Come thou and reign over us; And the Vine said unto them,
should I leave my Wine, which cheereth GOD and Man, and go to be promoted over
the Trees? Then said all the Trees unto the Bramble, Come thou and reign over
us; And the Bramble said unto the Trees, If in Truth ye anoint me King over
you, then come and put your Trust in my Shadow; And if not, let Fire come out
of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon.
IT was the Obersvation of an Ancient, who had well remarked the Infirmity of
Men, that "becuase they have no Changes, therefore they fear not GOD." But
however the calm, uniform Course of Providence may too little affect light
Minds, yet a Series of such alarming Events, as we have for Years past seen and
felt; the divine Patronage of Right and Liberty; the many unexpected, yea
Improbable and mavelous Steps, by which this noble Cause has been resened
from Dangers, and at length amply secured; are Proofs of the sovereignty
righteous and gracious Dominion of GOD, which should and will fix the
Resolution of every sober Mind to ^^^^ide religiously in Him.

At the same Time, the best Apprehensions of GOD, which Reason aided by
Revelation can form, teach us to rely on the Father of Spirits, the great
Preserver of Men, not only in Emergencies, but in the general Course of Life,
and even in Affairs wherein human Power and Sagacity have much to do, for a
proper Direction of the Powers of the Mind, as well as for the Maintenance of
the Health and Strength of the Body.

PRAYER therefore, is an Application to Heaven, as natural and as obvious, in
its Grounds and Motives, as any of the most common Actions of Life. A Mind open
to divine Advices, is a Mind in its true State of modest Humility.

THIS important Day then, of the annual Exercise of the peculiar Rights of the
Inhabitants of this Province, by which Rights our civil Polity approaches
nearer to that of the happy Island from whence we originated, than that of any
other of the British Plantations, and if so, to the Standard of a perfect
Government; This joyful Day, I say, is most properly opened, by this solemn Act
of public Worship; by a devout Address to the Fountain of Wisdom, from whom are
derived all the Streams of it, which are dispersed in innumerable human Minds;
and by a decent Attention to those moral and religious Truths, an Attention to
which, is indeed in the last Resort, the hearkening unto GOD. What lively Faith
should animate these Services; "O People saved of the LORD, for whom he has
done such great Things, whereof ye are glad."

FROM whence can a Politician go to the most arduous Affairs, which require
Coolness, Deliberation, Integrity, public Spirit, and an inward Regard to GOD,
better than from such an Exercise, as composes the Soul, brings to View the
highest Motives to disinterested Benevolence, and presents in their true
Colors, Craft, Avarice, little Designs, sinister Practices, and every Thing,
which generous Souls and those best acquainted with themselves, are most
jealous of, and keep the strictest Guard against.

HOWEVER the Passage of sacred Story now read, which the Wisdom of GOD has
handed down to us, may not lead to those important Points, which have been
often treated on this Anniversary, with Accuracy, yet it may suggest to us some
such Truths, as however obvious, yet can never pass our Minds, but with
Advantage, and which have a direct Aspect on the weighty Affairs of this Day.

THE Style and Construction of these Verses, is that of an Apologue, or Fable,
a Mode of speaking extremely popular in ancient Times, and much in Taste among
the eastern Nations at this Day. It had its peculiar Advantages, especially in
cases of Reproof; it insinuated itself in a smooth and artful Manner into
Persons indisposed to hear, and by not making personal Application on the
Instant, it delayed that Resentment, through which Reproof often fails of its Use.

SOME Roman Writers have piqued themselves on the famous Apologue of Menenius
Agrippa, concerning the Stomach and Limbs of the human Body, which had such a
wondrous Influence in calming the irritated Spirits of the Patricians and
Commons, as being the most ancient Example of that Manner of Speaking. It must
have mortified them to have known, that this moral and political Fable,
correct, beautiful and instructive as it is, was uttered by a despised and in
their Opinion, barbarous Hebrew, 700 Years before Agrippa was born.

FOR it was delivered, while Israel was yet governed by Judges of their own
Election. Among these Gideon was famous. Under their grievous Oppressions, GOD
raised them up this eminent Magistrate and General, who with great Success
humbled their Enemies, and restored their Liberty and Tranquillity. Such a
grateful Sense had the People of his Merit and Services, that they were for
rendering the supreme Magistracy hereditary in his Family, which he saw fit to
decline. But this was a transient Fit of Gratitude; for when their Danger was
no more, they treated his Family with base Neglect. And no wonder, that when
(as we find) they had forgotten their supreme Deliverer, they should ill use
the Instruments of his Providence for their Good.

THIS unworthy Spirit was wro't up, by a seditious base-born Son of Gideon,
named Abimelech, a Youth of an ambitious and enterprising Genius, of a cruel
and tyrannical Temper. He had the Address to persuade a strong Party to combine
in setting aside Gideon's, legitimate Sons, under the Pretense (and Ambition
never wants colorable Pretenses) that Inconveniences might arise to the
Constitution, from their Numbers. And lest after the People had tasted of his
arbitrary Measures, they should recover their Senses, he villainously murdered
all Gideon's Sons, except this Jotham, the Speaker in our Text, who escaped the
Massacre. And thus Abimelech was made King by the prevailing Faction.

ADVICE of this Transaction was it seems bro't to Jotham, before the Assembly
of Electors broke up; and he from a Place of Safety addresses them in the
Manner I have read; intending by the "Olive Tree, etc." the Family of Gideon,
who had the Example and Instructions of their Father, to form them to the Love
of their Country, and of every social Virtue; and by the "Bramble", their new
Leader, the Spirit of whose Government was easily predicted, from the Temper
and past Conduct of the Man. Thus much for the Occasion of this Harangue.

TO bring this Fable as an Authority, to prove the divine Right of Societies of
choosing their chief Magistrate, though a Proof as much to the Purpose as many
Texts which have been adduced, to prove the divine hereditary Right of Tyranny
and Tyrants, would yet be futile and absurd. What has more Weight is, that this
Fragment of Antiquity, shows how high we may trace the Claim and Practice of
civil Societies, to elect such to Places of Trust for the common Benefit, as
would in the general Opinion well answer the Ends of their Appointment.

THE Doctrines of Slavery, political or theological, are not the Maxims of
Reason, Prudence or Revelation; nor took Place till Men by Ignorance,
Effeminacy and Corruption, became fitted for them. It Is no doubt an Improvement
upon this Principle of civil Right, in great and populous Communities, where
the chief Authority is entrusted to ONE, to render it hereditary in a certain
Family, so long as the Succession in it comitts with the well-being of the
Society.

BUT, it is a less abstract Use I propose to make of this Parable, by directing
your Thoughts, my honored and can did HEARERS, to two or three Lessons and
Warnings of Wisdom, set here to View. And if what I shall now say, be the Words
of moral and religious Truth and Soberness, it will not be Arrogance in me, to
use Jotham's Words, "Hearken unto me, and GOD shall hearken unto you."

Is It. THE first is, That it is the Part of Wisdom, in those who have the Right
of electing others to important Trusts in Society, to choose such as have in
private Life manifested, that the benevolent Affections have powerful Influence
upon them, who have conducted worthily in more contracted Spheres of Action.

SUCH a Character Jotham intends, by "the Olive Tree with whose Fatness they
honor GOD and Man," "the Fig Tree abounding in Sweetness and good Fruit," "the
Vine whose Wine cheereth" or is agreeable to "GOD and Man." These the Republic
of Trees called forth to public Stations, who had before shown their
Disposition to promote the Happiness of all about them, in their narrow Circle,
and of whom it was to be presumed that their Usefulness would be increased,
when their Capacity of Service should be extended. The Application is easy.

OBSERVATION of human Nature fully proves, that the Wisdom of the Creator has
made Part of our Frame, two Setts of Affections to impell us to Action, the
selfish and the benevolent; in the Balance of which, the due Proportion of
their Influence, the perfect Character in social Life consists. And although such
is the Influence of Matter, in the different Combination of its Parts, upon
Mind; so manifold are the Trials which the same Wisdom sees best for different
Creatures; that these Affections, these inward Motives, have very different
Proportions in the Make of different Persons; yet by the due Exercise of the
Powers of the Mind they may be respectively cultivated or restrained, so as
that any one by prudent Conduct in indulging or limiting them, may become
entitled to Respect and Love, and promise fair to be a public Blessing.

WHEN a strong Disposition to do Good and promote Happiness, arises merely or
mostly from natural Complexion, it is yet in a moral View amiable; seeing the
Presumption is, that notwithstanding the natural Bias, there will be much
Occasion in this corrupt World, for the restraining the Stimulus of contrary
Affections, in the various Parts and incidents of the Intercourse of Life.

BUT this Character becomes more amiable and useful, because more perfect, when
these Tendencies of Constitution become fixed Habits, on Reflection and
Principle. When Men are active in their Endeavors for the Welfare of those
about them, from a just Sense of the innate Excellency and happy Fruits of
public Spirit, from a Comparison of these with the contrary Temper, which cold,
vindictive, proud, avaritious, cannot feel the sublime Pleasure of sympathizing
with others, but lives only for itself, and having been useless or noxious in
its Day, drops into Oblivion unregretted, unlamented, and its Memory rots.

BUT Religion, Contemplation of the blessed GOD and his Son, the best Friend of
Men, steadfast Imitation of these highest and most noble Examples; this fixes
social Love on its firmest and best Foundation; this affords the most worthy
and powerful Motives to it; this raises it to the most exalted Pitch.

WHEN Affections of this Kind have the Ascendant in private Life, the Person
whom they possess becomes a rich Blssing to all within the Sphere of their
Operation. Place him at the Head of a Family, he counts it the chief Joy of
Life, to exert himself for its Good. His wise Maxims of Education, his prudent
Regimen, derive Blessings even on his remotest Dependants. His Servants are as
Children, his Children as his own Soul. He forms them to such Tempers, he
obliges them to such Deportment, as shall maintain Internal Harmony and
Friendship, he encourages their Industry, trains them to Virtue and Piety and
uses every Method whereby they may become meet for the Descent of the best
Blessings of Heaven upon them.

SUCH an One is the Life and Cement of good Neighborhood. His "liberal Heart
devises liberal Things," and "the Law of Kindness is in his Lips." He "prays
for the Peace of Jerusalem," and his unceasing Endeavors second his best
Wishes. He stills the angry Passions of the Imprudent, is the Arbiter of
contending Parties, feels the Troubles and mourns the Folly and Vices of every
Individual, rejoices in their Joys. -- He is ever vigilant for the Interests of
the Church, Parish, Town, he is connected with, and never more in his Element,
than when engaged in Designs for their Tranquillity, Opulence, Virtue and
Religion.

RAISE such a Character to a public Station, an important Trust in Society,
that of a Maker for Instance of those Laws by which it subsists, and this
generous Spirit which before blessed a few, sends forth its benign Influence,
and Thousands and Thousands feel the happy Effects of it. He receives the Trust
as Power put into his Hands by the universal Father, to indulge in the most
pleasing Degree to his ruling Passion. No Honors, no Profits of his own are
sought distinct from such generous Views, no Designs of others countenanced,
which are unfavorable to the public Peace and Prosperity. He enjoys the Plenty,
the Liberty, the Knowledge, the Virtue, of all about him, in Prospect, while he
is pursuing proper Measures for them; in pleasurable Sympathy when they are
possessed of them. He is therefore ever intent, moved thereto by Instinct,
Reason and Religion, to improve his Trust to the general Advantage, from the
lowest to the highest Point of it.

WHEN such is the deserved Character of the ruling Part of a Community, "GOD
has a Pleasure for them," Men of such a Temper and such Affections, sleep and
wake for the common Benefit. Their equal and ardent Love to the Whole, excites
them to all such Measures as Wisdom points out, whereby the Whole may be made
easy and happy. While by all Encouragement to Agriculture, they "turn a
Wilderness into a fruitful Field," they protect and cherish her Sister
Commerce, and make every Part of the Globe, as well as their own, minister to
their Plenty and Riches. Fair Liberty, which gives Life and Spirit to the
whole, is guarded by them as the Apple of their Eye. -- Wrong Doing and
Immorality are frowned upon, Temperance and good Manners, supported as the very
Source of that Spirit of Independance and masculine Courage, which must give
the collective Body of a Community, Respect and Weight with their Neighbors,
which will render them terrible to foreign Enemies, as "an Army with Burners."
In their Days, Arts and Sciences will be cultivated and flourish, those who
excel in them be honored and favored, while their Labors tend to enoble the
Mind, to diffuse those intellectual Accomplishments, which afford the most
refined Pleasures the human Mind can be blessed with, short of those which are
divine, and at the same Time raise up from Age to Age, Men of "Knowledge and
Wisdom, the stability of their Times." Especially will this lovely Spirit of
Patriotism exert itself in the Support of real Religion, by severely
animadverting on every Thing contrary to its unquestioned Dictates, by stricly
requiring that outward Veneration of GOD, which none deny to be his due, by
guarding the Rights of Conscience with the nicest Care, the least Infringement
of which, in some Degree saps the Foundation of that "pure Religion and
undefiled," which alone is useful to Men, or acceptable to the Deity.

FROM what has been said, it may be well inferred, that when any Community, or
those in it who have the Right of electing their principal Officers, neglect
such Qualifications as I have described, they become in the Language of our
Law, Felo's de se, in the Style of Scripture, "they refuse to hearken unto GOD"
and "reject the Counsel of GOD against themselves." For nothing is more certain
than that "Grapes are not to be gathered of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles." No
Society can flourish long, where public Spirit is not the Characteristics of
its Rulers -- Avarice will in an independent State its Neighbors, and in any
State keep its own interior Condition weak and contemptible, by stinting the
Progress of every Thing which is its Strength and Beauty. In a single person,
it will thwart every Measure which requires Expense, starving the Public for
fear of lessening its own private Stock. Terrible are the Effects of this
corrupt Passion, when Rulers are venal, and Justice itself bought and sold. --
Want of Capacity, from whence proceed little sordid Views, will serve
particular Interests to the Detriment of the common, create Uneasiness and
Bickerings, like those of the Belly and Limbs in the Fable, and keep a Society
low. -- Ambition, except well restrained, is dangerous in a Ruler: When
gratified, it cannot heartily love Equals, is apt to look with an evil Eye on
Liberty herself, when the crosses its Views; disappointed especially in an
irascible Constitution, which is mostly the Case, it is like a raging Fire
which devours every Thing in its way, nor spares "the Cedars of Lebanon." --
Indolence, will not give itself the Trouble to foresee or guard; to think nor
act for "the Peace of Jerusalem." The worst impending Calamities awake it not.
The Public sinks or swims as Events turn up, when unactive Men are at Helm. --
What is called a political Head, skill in the Art of Government, where
disinterested Patriotism is not at Bottom, is but a mean detestable Craft,
which abuses its Acquaintance with the Passions of Men, its Ascendency over
their Ignorance, or Confidence it has insidiously gained, to answer Purposes
alien from the general Interest, by Means inconsistent with plain open Right.
-- Severity of Temper, inclining to write its Laws in Blood, will keep Society
unquiet, and be apt to approach the Verge of Tyranny. Touchiness or Moreseness
sinks the Character of Reputation of Ruler, and if it prevails in the general
Complexion of the Body of Rulers, of Government itself. -- But above all,
Disregard to Religion, open Impiety, in a Ruler, especialy in an
Administration, has a most baneful Influence on Society. To patronize
Dissolution of Manners, by Word or Example, contagious Example, to suffer the
Hedges of Morality to be trodden down, that Fear of GOD to fail, without which
every social Tie is weak, and easily snapped in sunder, is the worst Defect of
Policy, the greatest Want of Benevolence that can be conceived. -- "Sin is the
Reproach of any People." and if there be a righteous Ruler of the World, he
will visit for such Neglects in those, who repose Trusts in unfit Persons, and
this Irreligion in its own Nature brings a Curse.

WHEREFORE, Let those of my Hearers who are more peculiarly concerned in these
Observations, hearken unto GOD. They have been in a solemn Manner asking his
Direction and Blessing this Morning; GOD speaks to them, he answers their
Requests, b^ the Dictates of good Sense, Integrity and Prudence, which we
presume are now (...) them, and which if attended to (...) an happy Issue to
the Choice of this Day. If they take heed to the mark the Characters, which
unworthy or noxious in private Life, will be useless or hurtful to the general
Interests, and avoid them. They cannot have greater Security, of any Man's
being a Blessing in the Execution of the Trust reposed in him, than this, That
he has given full Proof in private Life, of the Extent and Strength of the
Habits of Justice and Benevolence he possesses. When these Habits are joined
with good Sense, extensive Knowledge and Penetration; which I mean always to
take into the Account, and animated by a Reverence of GOD, and they fix on such
Men, they have done their Part faithfully, and may cheerfully leave Events to
GOD.

II. THE Second Observation I make on the Part of ancient Story now read, is,
That Men who are well qualified for important Offices in Society, will, when
called to undertake them, do it with a serious Sense of the Labor and
Difficulty, attending a faithful Discharge of them.

THIS Remark I make, on the Averseness of the Olive Tree, the Fig Tree, etc. to
the being preferred; their esteeming the Ease and Quiet of a retired Life of
Beneficence, more eligible than all the Honors and Profits of a public Station.

GOD forbid that all worthy Men should carry a similar Aversion to such a
Length, that Society should be forced to recur to Brambles, for the filling the
Departments necessary to its Subsistence.

WHERE Men in high Posts, execute the Duties of them with Integrity and Zeal,
the Envious, or those who affect to degrade human Nature, to derive whatever
appears valuable from a foul and corrupt Source, these may call such, Men of
Ambition, and say, they are but gratifying their Pride; but the Tenor of their
Conduct proves the Goodness of their Principles. Let Ambition be one; and is it
not (within due Limits) a good one, yea a necessary one, for Creatures of our
Rank, who are not so perfect as to be moved only by the sublimest Affections.
Public Trusts well discharged, uniform Patriotism, vindicate from such
invidious Aspersions prove the selfish Passions to be under due Restraint: For
where such Conduct is persevered in, there must have been a sober Sense of the
Weight of such Trusts, a final Resolution to go through every Step of Labor,
needful to the qualifying for the faithful and useful Discharge of them.

LET us then suppose, an upright Mind deliberating on and ballancing each Side
of the Affair, when a chief Place in Government presents. He sees before him
Honor and Distinction among his Fellow-Citizens; Power which Nature so
greedily catches at; perhaps more Revenue than private Life will afford him.
But he sees on the other Side, that good Conscience requires, close Application
of Mind to the amassing civil and political Knowledge; the gaining just Ideas
of the general Rights of Mankind natural and social; of the Laws of Nature and
Nations; the municipal Constitutions of his own Country; the Genius and
Interests of his People; their Connections with, or Dangers from their
Neighbors; the Methods of best increasing their Numbers, Wealth and Extent;
the Laws which will render their Liberties more equal and secure; their
internal Policy more firm; encourage their Trade and Manufactures; promote
Virtue and a Spirit of Religion: The good Ruler, in such a View, esteems his
Office a Post of Care and Burden.

HE is also sensible, that from a Variety of Causes he shall have much Trial of
his Stedfastness, much Anxiety and Grief; that he must set his Face forward in
Duty as a Flint, resolving that till he dies his Integrity shall not depart
from him. Aware of his limited Capacity of Mind, he foresees he may advise to,
or vote for Measures, which Experience may prove unfit or unsalutary. Those
Evildoers, to whom he is by his Place to be a Terror, will of Course be his
avowed Enemies, if he shall distinguish himself in the Cause of Order, Peace
and Justice. The Infirmities of others will give him much Pain. For placed on
high, with the Eyes of all fixed on him, Censures will be frequent and severe.
The most useful Institutions, if novel, often offend by their Novelty; if
Remedies of deep-rooted, long-continued Evils; some have found an Advantage in
these Evils, they will be chagrined; the Change is often attended with
Perplexities, the good Effects perhaps at a Distance; the Patriot must have
much Firmness to support him under the Complaints and Obloquy which will be
sometimes stirred up. Some think themselves equal to the Government of
Provinces and Kingdoms, merely through Want of Sense; these are usually very
loud in their Clamours. Others carp because they imagine nothing can be well
done but by themselves; -- They are out of Place, they are injured and the
Commonwealth suffers.

To conclude here, the wise and tho'tful Ruler ever considers himself, as
introduced by the high Monarch of the Universe, the Judge of All, to his Post
of Dignity. He esteems himself bound to follow Him who "never slumbers nor
sleeps," never intermits his powerful and gracious Providence. The Vows of GOD
are upon him. And when he carries himself forward to that awful Tribunal, at
which the great as well as the small are to appear, he is convinced, that as he
has more Talents to account for the Improvement of than others, his future
Reward or Punishment will be proportionably greater. `How can I,' says he in
his Retirements for Recollection, `How can I bear to hear from the Judge of
All, "thou wicked and slothful Servant!" `How can I bear the Woe which those
deserve who by Breach of Trust, have been accessory to the Wrongs of
Multitudes, of Peoples and Nations!'

BUT the wise GOD has, in the moral as well as in the natural World, set one
Thing over against another. With his Anxieties and Labors, the Patriot Ruler
has also his Satisfactions and Supports. If he is the Butt of the Querulous and
Envious, he has little to fear from Flattery. The Incense of Parasites is
usually offered to those of other Designs and Tempers. He is sure of the Esteem
of the discerning Few, the best Judges and truest Friends of Merit, whose
Opinion only affects a wise Man's inward. Peace, and a Series of Wisdom and
Beneficence, will in the long Run be the Object of general Approbation, though
the Path to such Honor be tedious and rugged. He will have the constant
Applause of his own Mind, which like a Shield of Brass, repels the Darts of
Envy, and keeps all calm within. He will enjoy the noble Pleasure of being able
to appeal to GOD, "LORD thou know that I have served thee in Integrity, and
done that which is good in thy Sight." He will be able to look forward to the
great Day with sublime Joy, when by Faith he views the Judge of All
distributing the Rewards of Grace, saying, "Well done good and faithful
Servant, thou have; been faithful in a few Things, I will make thee Ruler over
many Things, enter thou into the Joy of thy LORD." And if a "Cup of cold Water"
given to a Disciple of his, shall not lose its Reward, to what an elevated Seat
of Glory shall those be exalted, who out of Regard to GOD, have employed their
Time and Abilities for the Happiness of Multitudes.

WHEN therefore, my Hearers, we deprecate the Advancement of such to high
Offices, who receive them only as a Gratification of childish Vanity, or as the
Means, of gratifying some selfish paltry Interest, or who though they labor and
toil in them, yet it is only to satiate some ugly Passion; when, I say, we pray
that this may not be our Fate, we ought with Gratitude to Heaven, to rejoice
that our Affairs are hitherto in better Hands.

IT affords the strongest Presumption of Capacity, Application and public
Spirit in Rulers, when in the Style of Scripture, "All Things go well." And
it is to be pretty certainly determined that Things in the whole go well, when
the Body of a People feel well, and when the malevolent and froward, are
obliged to exaggerate or distort in Order to present a different Image of
Affairs. Tranquillity and Order are not the Effects of Chance. We are then one
and all to be thankful for Blessings of this sort we have experienced, and to
endeavor in our respective Places, that they may be perpetuated.

A JUSTER Compliment cannot be paid to the GENTLEMAN, whom his royal Master has
placed at the Head of this Province, (and seeing thereby we enjoy much Peace
and Quietness, may He be long here continued) than in the Name of this whole
People, to express our full Confidence in him, that it is his Heart's Desire,
that such may from Time to Time be joined in the Administration with him, as
shall heartily labor and watch for the Liberty, Peace and Prosperity of the
Community; going on harmoniously and zealously with him in promoting the
general Interest, that so he may enjoy that permanent and heartfelt Pleasure,
which is the Property and Happiness of a generous Mind in an exalted Station,
and give account at last, not merely of well-meant Endeavors, but of extensive
and substantial Fruits of his Fidelity in the Service of his People, his Master
and his GOD.

WISE Rulers, in such a Train of Thinking, will enter upon their Offices with
great Sobriety of Mind, as into Scenes of Care and Burden, through the whole
of which they shall need the steadiest Application, unwearied Efforts to
approve themselves to Him, by whom the Welfare of the People is entrusted to
them; -- And to every Thing human, will add that devout Dependence upon Him,
whose is the Preparation of the Heart, whose is Counsel and Understanding;
which shall secure his gracious Presence, his constant Guidance and final
Acceptance. -- May this be the Spirit of those who shall be chosen into HIS
MAJESTY'S Council this Day!

WITH such Ideas of the Weight of public Trusts the Body of a People will, if
they are wise or humane, be careful not to add to the unavoidable Fatigues of
Magistracy, groundless Jealousies and trifling Complaints: But where there are
Marks of good Intention, and of a steady Pursuit of the general Weal, will be
tender of the Character of their Rulers, ready to give them Honor and
Applause, animate them by cheerful Submission, and ever (above all) commend
them to GOD, whose "Ministers they are to them so good," and through whom his
Bounties descend upon them.

III. THE last Part of our present Meditations will arise from the Conclusion
of our Text, which presents to us the Spirit and Genius of unlimited Despotism;
and from this View we shall naturally turn to the lovely Contrast, and be led
to a grateful Recollection of the Blessings of civil and religious Liberty, a
valuable Branch whereof we are this Lay improving.

HERE our Field of Meditation grows extensive, and I own I the rather chose
this Part of Scripture for my Text, because it carries us beyond our own
comparatively little Interests; to continue ourselves to which, at such a
joyful and remarkable a Period as this, and on such a Day, would betray want of
Judgment and want of Gratitude. You see here in the Fable a repti^,
contemptible, noxious Plant; in the Application of it, an upstart Usurper,
raised to Power by the Folly of some and the Wickedness of others, no sooner
invested with it, than he insolently lets his Electors know what they had to
expect from him: If in Truth ye anoint me King over you, then come and put your
Trust in my Shadow; and if nor, let Fire come out of the Bramble, and devour
the Cedars of Lebanon. -- 'You have made me your supreme Magistrate, you are
now to pay me an unreserved, abject Submission; if you fail, expect this Power
to be employed to the Destruction of him who dares oppose me, though the most
noble and respectable Character.'

THIS is the genuine Language of arbitrary Will, and has been too often heard,
not only in Fable, but in real Life, and Facts have followed it in a most full
and dreadful Extent. The Tyrant's Nod, the Caprice of his Minions and
Parasites, have disposed of Liberty, Property, Life, in spite of the most
venerable Rights, descended from distant Ages; the Voice of Reason; the Maxims
of Equity and Claims of Conscience. No Justice restrains: no Mercy relents:
Does any one dispute, or lift up his Hand, "Fire comes out of the Bramble and
destroys the Cedars of Lebanon." O that for the Honor of the human Species, the
horrible Fruits of arbitrary Power were Matter of Theory only, or the painting
of a lively Imagination: that Persecution, Oppression, Rapine, Massacres,
Depopulations, were Exaggerations or Caracatura's! -- But it is not easy to
overcharge the dismal Features of Tyranny: Every one conversant in ancient
History has seen this Fury firing the Cedars of Lebanon yea, devouring every
Part of the Earth by Turns with her internal Flames: Nor have later Ages, with
all the Experience of those who went before them, quite emancipated themselves
from her Chains, escaped her Ravages.

ASIA formerly, almost to its utmost Limits, saw the wanton Alexander with no
Pretense of Right, yet spreading? Desolation, accounting the Claim of
Independence, a sufficient Cause for inducing all the Miseries of War, on those
whom GOD and Nature had made free. The Romans, once the People on the Earth the
most tenacious of their Liberties, yet saw Julius proscribing their few
surviving Patriots, basely abusing the Name and Majesty of the Commonwealth, to
aid him in climbing the Pinnacle of lawless Greatness, from whence he might
trample it under Foot. Language cannot describe the wretched Condition to which
the Mistress of the World fell, when she was subjected to Monsters, who could
wish the whole People had one Neck, to be cut off at a Stroke; when the first
Magistrates were set up and pulled down by a rude, rapacious Soldiery; when the
very Show of Virtue, Integrity and Love of their Country, marked Men out for
Destruction.

WHEN in after Times, the northern Parts of Europe became the Seat of Liberty,
her Influence tending Southward, what constant Conflicts have there been
between Freedom and Despotism! what Seas of Blood have been shed in them! How
often has this noble Cause been foiled! In how many Parts is the Name and Thing
extinct! Where are the ancient Parliaments of France, the Cortes of Spain, the
Assemblies of the States and Commons, the voluntary Supporters of Princes, the
avowed Defenders of their own Rights? They are no more. -- There gripes the
iron Hand of Power; there dwells unmanly, dastardly Slavery, in her most
disgraceful and ignominious Forms. For never is a tame, contented Slavery more
unworthy and reproachful, than in Times and Places where Knowledge of natural
and social Right prevails. There a hellish Inquisition reigns over the sacred
Rights of Conscience; there Dragoons are the Instruments of converting Men to
Truth; there Industry flags, and every thing generous is cramped and
discouraged.

BUT, Britain, favored of GOD, has hitherto maintained her Liberty; Freedom
has subsisted in Health and Vigor, overcome all Opposition; recovered of every
Disorder: There may she ever flourish, and "under her Shadow we shall be safe."
Not all the Vicissitudes of human Affairs have afforded Opportunity for the
Destruction of the Freedom of our Nations. Intestine Frauds and Treasons, the
Weakness and Wickedness of Princes, foreign Invasions, have all in Event ('it is
wonderful!) but they have all, in Event, served to fix Liberty more firmly, to
mark out her Path, determine her Bounds, extend her Influence.

LOOK back, my Hearers, to the most distant Times, of which we have any
authentic Records; trace the English History from thence, in its principal
Events, to this Day, you will find it verified. The Irruption of the Romans
drew our Ancestors from the Fastnesses of the Wilderness, and its uncultivated
Manners, to social Life, to Knowledge, perhaps of Christianity itself. The
rough Saxons imported those masculine Principles of Freedom and Government,
that Equipoise of Power and Liberty, which, built upon and improved, have
rendered the British Constitution the Admiration and Envy of the World. The
Companions and Abettors of the Norman Invader, as though the very Air of the
Island infected them; no sooner were they seated, than they became the
Restrainers of Power, the Patrons of Liberty. Papal Usurpations upon civil
Rights could never have quiet Possession there, for any Length of Time. And
when what was termed ecclesiastical Power, was translated from the Mitre to the
Crown, this Power, founded on civil, or imperial and canonLaw, in themselves
and unchecked, a System of Tyranny, could never establish itself to the Wrong
of the commonLaw, the ancient, fundamental Laws, Customs and Franchises of the
People. Attempts to put these Laws in Use, and extend them, were the real
Source of the Misfortunes of the Royal House of Steuart; these Attempts made
wise Men mad in the Fury of their Opposition to them for a Season, brought on
Scenes of Confusion and Misery. Length of Time has cooled the Party-Rage which
succeeded that unhappy Day; and it ought, in good Measure, to cover the Errors
of those Princes, that the first of them had the Honor, to be Progenitor to
Kings, who have as zealously labored for the Happiness of these Nations, as
ever they mistakenly could for their Hurt.

THE Restoration of the Constitution in King Charles the Second, however fair
it promised, had well nigh been but a transient Gleam of Light, hastening to
fatal Darkness, through the mean Attachment of that Prince to a foreign grasping
Power, and the nigh Approach of the Succession of a Popish Sovereign; when
behold! the very Men who had been bribed and pensioned to betray their Country,
opened their Eyes, forsook their Master, and became steadfast Opposers of the
public Enemy.

The glorious Revolution in I688, placed the Rights of Britons on a sure Basis;
they were declared, claimed, acknowledged, in their full Extent; and yet,
strange to tell; there wanted not a Faction of deluded or abandoned Men, who by
restless Treason, endeavored to sink them and us again, into Slavery to the
most contemptible Abimelechs. But the Effect followed, which is to be expected
from social Virtue and public Spirit alarmed and its Powers collected, greatly
an Overmatch for unnatural Parricide, it prevailed in the peaceable Succession
of the illustrious House of Hanover, and the close Attachment of all who wished
well to themselves or their Posterity, to them. GOD be thanked, that the Time
is come, when this absurd Spirit is extinct.

DURING the long Period we have reviewed, England was frequently in Jeopardy
from Abroad; sometimes ready in Despair to subject herself to foreign Power,
that she might free herself from domestic Tyranny, as in the Case of King John;
once at the Brink of being swallowed up by an invincible Armada of Spain; once
nigh remediless Confusion, through the infernal Arts of Rome, in the infamous
Powder Plot; and for a Century past, constantly endangered by the insidious
Arts of France, the unceasing Enemy of her Tranquillity -- an Enemy, at one
Time tampering with her indolent, profuse, superstitious Princes; at another,
abetting vagrant Pretenders to her Crown: At length, this aspiring Power
rightly judged that her future Efforts of this Kind would be vain, if the
British Plantations on the Continent of America should flourish and extend, and
derive Wealth and Strength for their Mother Country: Her Ministry therefore,
with Craft and Perfidy, laid a Plan for first stinting their Growth (as they
found the inhuman stimulating the Savages to their Destruction, would not
effect the Purpose) that they might by and by overwhelm them. This brought on
the late bloody War, in which, to distress and weaken Britain, this capital
Enemy had the Address to engage the greatest Part of Europe, and at length to
seduce the weak Councils of Spain to taste the bitter Fruits of it. The most
important Events of the War, its first dark Scenes, the "Light which arose in
the Darkness," brightning "more and more unto the perfect Day," in its glorious
Issue, are deeply imprinted in every Breast; I shall therefore wave the Recital.

THE Exaltation of Great Britain to the Summit of earthly Grandeur and Glory,
was reserved in the Counsels of GOD for the Age and Reign of GEORGE the Third,
-- "Blessed are our Eyes for they see, our Ears for they hear," those great
Things, which our Ancestors "desired to see and hear, but did not."

WE see a King on the Throne (succeeding his royal Grandfather, of immortal
Memory) rejoicing, that, to every other Motive, this of Birth is added, to
endear his Subjects to him, to attach him to their Laws and Constitutions, and
engage him to Vigilance and Zeal for their Protection. While the venerable
Foundations of all we hold dear, are guarded with the strictest Care, while the
lowest Subject is safe as the highest, in every Enjoyment he can desire; the
most powerful Enemies, the most formidable Combination of them, have fallen
into "the Pit which they themselves dug."

AUSPICIOUS Day! when Britain, the special Care of Heaven, blessed with a
patriot Sovereign, served by wise and faithful Counselors, brave Commanders,
successful Fleets and Armies, seconded in her Efforts by all her Children, and
by none more zealously than by those of New England, (I don't say gives Law to,
a free State detests the arrogant tyrannic Phrase, but) has it in her Power to
demand Peace of the most powerful Enemies, on Terms, just and equal, safe,
highly advantageous and glorious, beyond what were expected or even sought for,
through a Deluge of Blood.

HAPPY Sovereign of such a People, generous Olive Tree; whose Branches spread
out, whose Fruit is dispersed for the Healing of the Nations! Happy Island of
his Nativity; blessed the Womb that bare him! It is GEORGE the Third, who gives
Peace to half the World. How can Faction but be dumb, contending Parties but
melt into gentle Harmony.

IN these Events, the LORD GOD has spoken, who can but prophecy, "In his Days
shall the Righteous flourish, and Abundance of Peace so long as the Moon
endures: He shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea: They that dwell in the
Wilderness shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the Dust: The Kings
of Tarshish and the Isles shall bring Presents; the Kings of Sheba and Seba
shall offer Gifts: He shall deliver the Needy when he cries, the Poor also,
and him that has no Helper: He shall redeem their Soul from Deceit and
Violence; and precious shall their Blood be in his Sight. And he shall live,
and to him shall be given of the Gold of Sheba: Prayer also shall be made for
him continually, and daily shall he be praised. His Name shall endure forever,
his Name shall be continued as long as the Sun."

BUT chiefly thou, O America, may well rejoice, the Children of New England
may be glad and triumph, in Reflection on Events past, and Prospect of the
future. Encompassed with native Savages, our Fathers having escaped from
Oppression, deepest felt by pious Minds, carried their Lives in their Hands,
subjected to Captivities, to inhuman Cruelties and Massacres Encompassed with
crafty, faithless Europeans, who sought their Ruin, what Prospect could they
have before them. The dearer and more valuable the Rights they had earned, the
more gloomy the Forethought of losing them. And if we their Offspring, call to
Mind the Ideas which possessed us in the Year I756, with what Exultation must
we sing, "The Snare is broken and we are escaped."

NOW commences the Era of our quiet Enjoyment of those Liberties, which our
Fathers purchased with the Toil of their whole Lives, their Treasure, their
Blood. Safe from the Enemy of the Wilderness, safe from the griping Hand of
arbitrary Sway and cruel Superstition; Here shall be the late founded Seat of
Peace and Freedom. Here shall our indulgent Mother, who has most generously
rescued and protected us, be served and honored by growing Numbers, with all
Duty, Love and Gratitude, till Time shall be no more. Here shall be a perennial
Source of her Strength and Riches. Here shall Arts and Sciences, the Companions
of Tranquillity, flourish. Here shall her new Subjects and their Posterity,
bless the Day, when their imagined Enemies Victories proved to them the
Beginning of the most valuable Freedom. Here shall dwell uncorrupted Faith, the
pure Worship of GOD, in its primitive Simplicity, unawed, uninterrupted; here
shall it extend itself and its benign Influences among those who have hitherto
"sat in Darkness, in the Region and under the Shadow of Death." "Truth shall
spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven; yea the
Lord shall give that which is is good; Righteousness shall go before him, and
shall set us in the Way of his Steps."

O that neither we, nor those who come after us, may wantonly forfeit these
Blessings and these Hopes; but by a wise Use of our distinguished Privileges, a
moderate and virtuous Enjoyment of the Blessings of Peace, and steady living up
to the Maxims of our holy Religion, may derive upon ourselves and ours, the
Continuance of them; for "the Mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto Children's
Children, to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his
Commandments, to do them."

THE END.

