Upon the PEACE. A SERMON. Preached at the Church of PETSWORTH, In the County
of GLOUCESTER, On AUGUST the 25th, The Day Appointed by AUTHORITY FOR THE
Observance of that Solemnity.

By the Reverend JAMES HORROCKS, A. M. Fellow of TRINITY College, CAMBRIDGE,
and Master of the GRAMMAR SCHOOL in WILLIAM and MARY College.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by JOSEPH ROYLE, MDCCLXIII.

To the Honorable FRANCIS FAUQUIER, Esquire his Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and
Commander in Chief of the Colony and Dominion of Virginia, and F. R. S.
SIR,
I COULD not be at a Loss, when I was determined to publish this Sermon, to
whom I should address it.

You are, Sir, so eminently attached to the Principles of the BRITISH
CONSTITUTION, so devoted a Friend to the LIBERTY, which BRITONS ought to enjoy
under it, and so zealous a Promoter of the Improvements of this Colony, that
any Discourse designed for the Advancement of these, could not with Propriety
ask any other Patronage.

My Obligations to your HONOR for that Civility and Politeness, you have been
pleased to treat me with ever since my Arrival in this Country, as well as my
Inclination to do Justice to a Character so peculiarly deserving the Esteem of
all good Men, would lead me to exspatiate on this Theme with great Truth and
Pleasure. But I am very sensible, however agreeable this might (...) me, it
would not prove so to you: I shall therefore leave this Subject to the honest
Pen of some future Historian, who, when your Administration shall be considered
by the Impartiality and Candor of Posterity, will be able to set it in a just
and proper Light, without incurring a Suspicion of Flattery.

That you may long enjoy Life Here, still attended with that the most exalted
of Satisfactions, which must ever result from the pleasing Reflection on making
a grateful People easy, and happy under a just, and merciful Government, is the
ardent wish of every Friend to this Country, and to which you will please to
permit me to add my Prayers, who am

with the greatest Submission, and Respect, your Honor's most Obliged, and most
Obedient Humble Servant JAMES HORROCKS.

A SERMON.
PSALM CXLVII. v. 14. He makes Peace in thy Borders, and fills Thee with the
Flower of Wheat.
A LONG, dangerous, and expensive War now closes with an honorable Peace; and
for this we are ordered to a most reasonable, pious Duty, to return our solemn
Thanks to that great and good GOD, who has taught our Hands to war and our
Fingers to fight so very successfully. It Is this at last that completes our Joy
by stopping the further Progress of War with her cruel and inseparable
Attendants, Misery and Horror: For Conquerors themselves must own it is ever
accompanied by those ghastly Furies: The finest and most brilliant Victories
cost many Tears: The most blooming and verdant Laurels are ever stained with
Blood, and even in the Day of Triumph the Cries of Bitterness and Sorrow mix
themselves with the Shouts of Joy and Gladness. We may with Truth say, we have
had enough of Victory, we have had enough of military Glory, and the Trophies
and the Spoils of War; or rather, enough of human Blood has been poured upon
the Earth even to glut the ravenous Jaws of Death: We have had enough of that
Success which cannot be enjoyed but at the Expense of the Lives of our
Fellow Creatures, and those often the bravest and the best of Men. Therefore let
us with Hearts unfeigned and Gratitude sincere return our Thanks to Almighty
GOD for restoring Peace to these Dominions, Security to Trade and Commerce, and
Stability to our Religion and Church.

I shall not here take up your time in giving you a Detail of the many and
great Advantages we have gained, the important Acquisitions made, or the signal
Victories obtained by Sea and Land in the Course of this War, though such indeed
might be entertaining, and agreeable enough, but better seen in the Annals of
the times, and I think with much more propriety read there than heard here. I
shall therefore beg your Attention to what more nearly concerns you not only as
a Community but as Individuals, and while I endeavor to show you what good Use
you should make of these peaceable Times, I conceive I shall be offering some
Things worthy your Consideration and which, if regarded, may prove of solid and
lasting Benefit to you all.

The first Thing that will naturally present itself to us in our reflecting
upon the happy Consequences resulting from the Blessing now given us, is the
Security of our Civil Liberty, a Happiness we justly glory in; For Britons have
preserved it pure and uncorrupted through all the Struggles of Ambition and the
most dangerous Attacks of Power: They have set the World a fair Example that
the highest Ambition of Princes should be to govern a free People, and that no
People can be great or happy but such as are so; whilst other Nations have
bowed their Necks to the Yoke of Power and have basely given up this
indisputable Right of Man derived to Him from the first Law of Nature, and
daily feel that Misery, which ever waits on Slaves. Oh Liberty! Thou art the
Author of every good and perfect Gift, the inexhaustible Fountain, from whence
all Blessings flow. Without Thee, what avails the Sweetness of Climate, or the
most delightful Situation in the World? what avail all the Riches of Nature,
the various Production of the Earth, the Mine bringing forth a thousand
Treasures, the Olive and the Vine blooming upon the Mountains, if Tyranny
usurps the happy Plains, and proud Oppression deforms the gay-smiling face of
Nature.

Here the feeling Heart will naturally reflect on and lament the Fate of those
who are doomed to Slavery, eternal Slavery. Unhappy Creatures destined to
submit to it, and perhaps no less so are those Countries which are obliged to
practice it! Respecting this particular, and the manner in which it is Here
conducted, it may be said it loses much of it is Horror, when compared with that
of other Places. This perhaps is true, and I am likewise fully persuaded, that
in some of those Families which properly respect Humanity, the State of
Servitude approaches to the Condition of an easy Dependence, and through the
Consideration and mildness of the Master the very Name of Slave is often
forgotten. But of these how few! Whilst the grasping Avarice of some, the
unfeeling hard-heartedness, the very monstrous Disposition of others, which
seems to delight in acts of Cruelty, are known to be exercised daily in
producing such Scenes of Misery and Wretchedness, as cannot but be in the
highest Degree shocking to those, who know how to think properly of the
Condition of Human Nature.

But to return from this Digression. Amiable as Liberty is, we must not pursue
it with blind Enthusiasm, and ungoverned Zeal: We ought ever to remember, that
this very precious Liberty is no other way to be secured to us, but by a
dutiful Obedience to the Laws of our Country, and those our Superiors, who have
the Care of them. It is Folly, nay it is madness to suppose that that is true
Liberty, which allows Men to act as they please, just as their inflamed Brains,
or wild Imagination may urge them on: For soon, full soon by this means Liberty
and public Safety would become Enemies to each other, and fall together. When
Liberty becomes so licentious, as to be free from the Check and Control of
just Laws, when it transgresses the Bounds prescribed by Nature, numerous and
those the worst of Evils will immediately follow: Thus the River, which whilst
confined in its proper Channel, carried Riches and Plenteousness along with it,
gladdening the Lands it flowed through; when it has burst through it is Barrier and
overflowed it is Banks, brings Terror and Desolation, the produce of the Earth,
Cattle and Men are swept away, and lost in the Deluge of it is Waters. Exactly
similar is the Case, when Laws have not their proper Course, or not obeyed, as
they ought to be, an Evil which though free Governments may be the aptest to fall
into, is so great a one, that every true Friend to Liberty would study to
prevent it; for, as it has been well observed, there is no greater Tyranny upon
the Face of the Earth, than that, where those who should obey, are become our
Masters: So very necessary is it that we should faithfully adhere to that
Principle I mentioned a little before, that we should always be ready and
willing to pay a cheerful Obedience to the Laws of our Country, to the King,
and all that are put in Authority under Him, as this is not only acting
according to the Precepts of our holy Religion, but the only way to secure to
us the Blessings we are now so thankful for, and which you would do well
seriously to consider.

In Respect of our private Conduct, our just Sense of the many and various good
Things of this Life which we enjoy, will best appear in the Use we shall make
of them. In Consequence of a good Peace may naturally be expected a greater
Plenty of every thing, and if you apply your Affluence and Abundance to the
Purposes Providence designed, they become real Blessings. Reason in this Case
evidently points out to you, that you ought to have your Hearts open to acts of
Charity and Humanity, and to hold in the greatest Abhorrence sordid Avarice.
Above all things, not only that you may have it in your Power to do good to
others, but on your own account, you should be sober and moderate in your
Pleasures, not dissolving in Luxury and Excess, things so extremely prejudicial
to your own Health and Fortune, and which will infallibly involve your Families
in Hardships and Misfortunes. And may it not here be asked, is there not
already too great a Tendency amongst us to Extravagance and Luxury? Some time
ago was it not justly observed to you, and this by the Highest Authority here,
that some of the Evils this Country labors under, were to be imputed to
Excesses of this Nature? Supposing the common Articles of domestic Expense are
not carried too far, why are you beholden to our Mother Country for so many
Things you would do very well without, which the insignificant Pride of Dress,
the empty Ambition of gaudy Furniture, or a splendid Equipage lead you into,
and which most undoubtedly serve more for Ostentation and Parade, than any real
Use or valuable Purpose in Life. You may imitate other Countries in their
Virtues, if they have any, as fast as you please, but believe me, you imitate
them too soon, much too soon in their Vices. But what can be said in Defense of
that prevailing Passion and Taste for Gaming? Racing, Cards, Dice and all such
Diversions, where they are persu'd with that Eagerness as a Business or
Occupation, have that fatal Tendency, that they never will permit that Country
long to maintain the Character of a well moraliz'd People. If we consider the
great Loss of Time, Money, and that Disinclination to Business, which these
Things occasion, how many good Reasons may be urged, why it is much to be
wished that several of these idle Amusements were either unknown amongst us, or
immediately vanished from all Families, that are desirous to appear Examples of
Sobriety, and Moderation? Our great and good Forefathers lived without Them,
and I can see no Reason, no good Reason at least, why we their Posterity might
not do so too, if we pleased. Many useful Arts in former Days were taken in
Hand, and executed by both the Sexes, which now are almost entirely laid aside,
and neglected by the one, and are absolutely forgot by, and unknown to the
other. I could say much more to this Subject, but that has been said, may
appear to some full enough, and therefore I shall proceed to another particular
universally acknowleg'd of the highest Importance, and I hope that what I shall
here advance will be received with Candor and Goodnature, when it proceeds
from no other Principle than a Desire to amend That which seems to require it,
and to offer some Hints which well improved, and made use of, might prove of
singular Service, and Advantage.

I dare say you all know, and even feel the Necessity of a good Education, and
I imagine would look upon it as no small Degree of Felicity, if you could be
sure of making your Sons hereafter in Life serviceable to your Country, useful
to their own Families, and happy in Themselves.

It should ever be remembered that the Children of the present Generation will
be the Men that are to govern in the next, and such as they are trained up now,
will they be afterward throughout Life, when left to themselves. The now
full-grown, and exalted Oak, which has always undeviating risen in Rectitude,
is not to be forced from it is Uprightness by Violence very cogent and
oppressive; and likewise fruitless would be the Attempt to unbend the same from
that Crookedness, and Perverseness it was fixed in, ever since it was a tender
Plant. A Circumstance which makes it of the utmost Importance in every Sense
both with Regard to the Public and Private Interest, in what manner Youth is
prepared to appear hereafter on the Stage of Life. In respect of the present
Method of Education persu'd by far the greater Part amongst us, will it not
appear to a thoughtful Person likely to take an unhappy Turn? The Attention of
the Generality seems particularly directed to those parts of useful Knowledge,
as they may be called, which will turn out to some immediate Account of Profit,
and Advantage, which will make some quick Return of a solid, lucrative Nature
to their Possessor, whilst those more truly useful Arts, and valuable Studies,
which polish, and humanize Mankind, which raise the Genius, and which mend the
Heart, which inspire the noble Principles of Probity and Honor, which in short
lay the Foundation of every private, and public Virtue, whilst these, I say,
lie neglected and overlooked, as altogether unnecessary to a Youth's future
Advancement, and Success in the World. Instead of this what is there
substituted? Perhaps I am not far from the Truth, as it is not my Design to be
so, when I observe that a little Knowledge in Figures and Accounts, a
Smattering of the Mathematics, and a tolerable Acquaintance with the peculiar
Business of the Country, make up the Sum total of the Learning of I know not
how many. On such Things as these then your Minds must always be employed, or
Time will hang extremely heavy on your hands, except when you are engaged in
some of those Amusements and Diversions I have before mentioned (for though it is
a strange Connection, that of a Persuit after Money and Pleasure, yet such is
frequently the Case) and this in such a manner, as shall leave no Room (if you
had the Disposition) for any Improvement in any thing more commendable. In
consequence of all this your Care of your Descendants must be expected to be
similar, and proportionably Defective; and accordingly we may observe you are
much more intent upon cultivating a few dirty Acres of Land, than the improving
and polishing a Youth's mind, which left wild to itself, like the Woods we live
in, is seldom seen to produce any thing fair, lovely, or elegant. For is it an
uncommon thing, (I heartily wish it was so) to see the hopeful Heir to a large
Estate brought up in a manner by no means answerable to it, and who, when in
Possession of it, either knowing not how to use it very stupidly hoards it up,
or profusely squanders it away, without Judgment, Taste, or Reputation.

It Is most certain, that in the Treasures of Ancient Learning are to be sought
for all those excellent Precepts, which improve and mend the Heart, which as it
is the source of every Virtue and every Vice cannot be tended with too much
Deligence and Care, it is I say, in those valuable Stores of Knowledge, where we
are to receive such Rules, as shall lay the Passions under the Restraint of
just Laws, that shall teach us each virtuous and generous Principle of Justice,
Integrity, and Honor; It Is there, and there only we shall meet with painted in
the liveliest Colors the most shining Examples of the bravest and the best of
Men, not to be gazed at, but to be imitated: It Is from the Contemplation of
those amiable Pictures, it is by the lovely Ideas we draw in from their
Excellence, that we may learn to regulate and form our Manners, learn to
transplant into our own Breasts their bright Perfections, till we shine like
Them. Upon this noble and broad Foundation let us erect the glorious
Superstructure of our Holy Religion, whence we shall see arise that fair
Edifice at once complete in every Point of Utility and Convenience, and adorned
with all the Elegance and Simplicity of Nature; which at once shall stand firm
and unshaken on its proper Basis, and the Ornament and Honor of all the Country
round.

After having thus dwelt more largely, than I at first intended, on the
foregoing Subject, I shall add the following Exhortation, which though it only
touches upon those Particulars, which might very properly be drawn out into a
greater Length, yet may have a good Effect, if duly attended to and regarded.

The most unfeeling, adamantine Heart cannot but swell with Thanks and Praise
to Almighty GOD for these invaluable Blessings, the Peace and Security we now
enjoy; but to testify properly this our Gratitude to the Supreme Being, let us
all for the future (and this is the only way to do it) observe the most pious
and religious Deportment, let us by the strictest Regard to the Precepts of
that Religion with which we are blessed, the purest upon the Face of the Earth,
be so very prudent, and so very circumspect, that if possible, we may never do
amiss: Thus we may hope to appear in the Presence of Almighty GOD, not as the
most unworthy of his Creatures, upon whom he has been graciously pleased to
pour down his Blessings.

Next to our thus conscientiously discharging our Duty to GOD, let us study to
express our Loyalty, Affection, and Fidelity to the best and most beneficent
King by a steady and due Obedience to his Laws, and Government, for this is the
only kind Return we can make him, and this may much contribute toward making
him sit easy, and happy on the Throne of his Ancestors, and sweeten the Toils
and Pains of Royalty. As it will not a little serve to this good Purpose, let
every one as much as lies in his Power discourage, and discountenance every
insolent Attempt to disturb the public Tranquillity, curb every Appearance of
Disorder and Discontent, and promote by all possible means the utmost Peace,
Friendship, and Brotherly Love amongst one another.

If we entertain a just Sense of our Happiness at this Time, we shall show our
Pleasure and Satisfaction in it with Propriety and Decency; Let us therefore by
no means indulge in wild Intemperance, Riot, or Luxury, but express a rational
and becoming Joy for our present Welfare and Prosperity, and study to render
permanent the inestimable Benefits resulting from so glorious a Peace.

On this happy and joyful Occasion I think the most Scrupulous Hearer cannot be
offended, that I conclude in a manner somewhat unusual indeed, yet I hope not
improper or unsuitable though in the Language of Poetry, Oh Peace! Thou Source
and Soul of Social Bliss,
Beneath whose calm, inspiring Influence
Science her Views enlarges, Art refines,
And swelling Commerce opens all her Ports:
Blessed be the Man Divine, who gives us Thee.
THOMSON'S BRITAN:


