Mr. Frink's Thanksgiving-SERMON ON The Reduction of the Havannah.

The mavelous Works of Creation and Providence, illustrated. Being The
Substance of a SERMON Preached at the North Precinct in Shrewsbury. On Thursday
the 7th of October, 1762. A Day of public Thanksgiving, Occasioned By the
Reduction of the Havannah.

By SAMUEL FRINK, A. M.

Printed at the repeated Desire of some that heard it.

Thou, even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens
with all their Host, the Earth and all Things that are therein; -- and thou
preservest them all, and the Host of Heaven worshippeth thee. NEH. ix. 6.
BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1763.

To the READER.
THE repeated Application, of some Gentlemen, who were present when this
Discourse was delivered, has so far prevailed with me, as to give them a Copy
for the Press, though with some Reluctance. The Author does not pretend to any
Thing refined or extraordinary: He acknowledges there are many Discourses on
such Occasions, already published, that far exceed; prepared by Gentlemen of
greater Parts, Ability and Reading, than he pretends to. The Author though it it
would be decent at least, and a Point of Manners, to wait the Approbation of
that worthy Gentleman and Scholar, whose Place he supplied, and for whom, he
shall always have a Veneration and Regard; which was no small Inducement to
procrastinate. Sensible at the same Time, that he was within the Reach of cold
Criticism, and exposed to the Envy and Malice of Bigotry, since the
conscientious Change of his Persuasion; which has caused Enemies almost
innumerable, on every Side, which makes his Situation, as he apprehends, very
dangerous: Enemies spiteful and malicious, such as no Man would suppose could
possibly exist on this Side the infernal Regions, was there not such a
notorious Specimen exhibited* -- For Christians that profess one Lord, one
Faith, and one Baptism, to load one another with Curses and Imprecations, is
very shocking. -- The least Attention to that divine Religion, would doubtless
prevent the casting forth in this sportive Manner, Firebrarnds, Arrows and
Death; and silence those uncharitable and cruel Wishes, which it is to be hoped
will never come either upon the Person that now writes, or upon his Enemies. --
Be it known to these Persons, that God Almighty will not be dictated by Wishes,
and that Wishing will never alter any wise Design of his. If God pleases to
make the Sea my Grave, I am contented: But I would remind such Persons, that
after Death, comes the Judgment We must all appear before the Tribunal, meet
together before our Judge; then all Controversy will cease forever, our Lord
and Master will then make known the true Followers of the Lamb. -- I can assure
those mine Enemies, that I am not ashamed of my Profession, neither is there
any Doubt in my Mind with Regard to the Solidity of the Foundation upon which I
build, though some are pleased to call it Wood, Hay, Stubble, etc. And I am
willing to suffer Martyrdom in Body as well as Character, as long as I build
upon Christ the Foundation. -- My only Desire is, that I may enjoy the
Privilege of an Englishman, viz. Liberty of Conscience, which is indulged my
Enemies: Always desiring to have the Advancement of my Redeemer's Kingdom in
View.

I would acquaint the Reader, that I have consulted the best of Authors upon
the Subject, and made Use of them, where it suited. If this Discourse proves
serviceable to reclaim the Atheistical Thinker, or furnishes the Reader with
any new Ideas with Regard to divine Providence, I shall not regret the
Publication.

S. F.
May, 1763.
A Thanksgiving-SERMON.
REV. xv. 3. -- Great and Mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty. --


THE Revelation of St. John, has been esteemed by all learned and judicious
Men, since the Religion of the great Emanuel diffused Light and Life, through
Nations that sat in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death; to be the most difficult
and mysterious Part of the Bible. It has indeed puzzled the brightest Genius,
in it is Endeavors to investigate the Mysteries recorded in this Book -- Many
Things are accomplishing, and perhaps accomplished, concerning mystical
Babylon, or Rome papal. -- We all with earnest Expectation wait, the blessed,
glorious and joyful Time, when the Man of Sin shall be destroyed -- When
mystical Babylon, that mystery of Iniquity, fraught with the Wages of Sin,
shall be hurried with the greatest Precipitation (by the divine Permission)
into the Abyss of Oblivion and Nonexistence -- Then shall the glorious
millennial State dawn, when the Church of God, (whereof the Temple on Mount
Zion was a Type) -- The Mountain of the Lord's House, shall be established in
the Top of the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall
flow unto it. -- When one of those bright Intelligences, who inhabit Realms
inaccessible to Mortals here below, shall fly through the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel, to preach unto all those that dwell on the Earth, to
every Nation and Kindred, and Tongue, and People. -- But why this Digression --
My Hearers, I shall not pretend to dive into this Bathos; but gently glide upon
the Surface; lest by endeavoring to plunge into the Abyss, I should find it
unfathomable, and difficult with Ease or Decency, to emerge from its Profundity.

I take the Words read at this Time for a Theme suitable, as I suppose, to
expand Fancy's Wing, in order to expatiate upon the magnalia Dei, the great
Things of God. -- How great and mavelous all his Works of Creation, and
Providence are; and I might more especially treat of the mavelous Work of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ: But that I must leave; as the Occasion of our
meeting together, naturally leads us largely to treat of God's mavelous Works
of Providence. -- I shall but gently glide along upon the Surface of the first,
in the Skiff of my natural and artificial Abilities, and so declaim more
largely upon the latter: Such as the great and mavelous Works of God's
Providence toward us in Years past; in prospering the British Arms; in
granting us Prosperity; especially this Year, and the last, in setting
Prosperity and Adversity, the one over against the other.

These Things loudly call upon us, to recollect; and may they make a lasting
Impression upon our Minds; so that we may teach them to our Children, that
these mighty Acts of the Lord may be known by succeeding Generations. All
Things which arise to our View, on the Surface of this Earth, at the Call and
Command of the great Architect, arose from the primordial Mass. -- The
invisible Things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the Things that are made; even his eternal Power and Godhead. His
Power, in being able with so much Ease and Expedition, to rear and uphold so
vast a Fabric -- His Wisdom, in contriving such a beautiful System of Things,
digesting them so fitly, and connecting them so firmly, and in such harmonious
Order. -- And his Godhead, in being the Author of all those Beauties and
Perfections; all those Splendors and Magnificences, which we behold with so
much Pleasure and Wonder; in the Contemplation of which, the Heathen were
carried away in poetic Rapture; which sometimes terminated in Hymns and
Eulogies to the World's Creator.

In my descant on Creation, I shall not trouble you with Geographical
Certainties, or Astronomical Niceties; but proceed in just Gradation
intelligible to all; forming my Plan upon that of the holy Penman, (in the
first Chapter of Genesis.) directed by unerring Wisdom: -- And shall fix my
Observations more especially, on those great and mavelous Works of Jehovah,
on this Terraqueous Globe, conspicuous to a contemplative Mind, -- This
Terraqueous Globe, which all-bounteous Heaven designed for our present Abode.
-- Not being wholly confined to this Terrestial Habitation, being necessitated,
perhaps my Thot's may sometimes soar upon Contemplation's Wings, to the starry
Region. This Abode of Mortals, differs from the Celestial, as it was formed out
of pre-existent Matter, which probably they were not; But then the Mass out of
which it arose, was (...) Ovid.
rude and undigested, and unapt of itself to receive the beautiful Form which
the almighty Artist put upon it, so as to deserve, though in a secondary Sense
only, the Name of a Creation -- So that we may justly be transported, and join
the comprehensive Strain in the Text -- Great and mavelous --

That the World by some powerful, yea, omnipotent Agent, was created out of a
Chaos, a confused, inordinate Heap of Matter, is evident from the Histories of
the most ancient Nations, and the Testimonies of their best Authors. -- And
this is no ways repugnant to Scripture, but agreeable thereto; for it is
manifest from the Description Moses gives of the Creation, where he says, Vid.
Bp. Patrick, in loc.
In the Beginning God created the Earth, i.e the Matter whereof the Chaos was
composed, which was without Form, without any Shape or Order; and void, without
any Thing living, or growing in it; and Darkness was upon the Face of the
Waters: nothing was seen for want of Light which lay buried in this vast Abyss.

"The inspired Penman, by the Chaos, seems to give us an idea of a fluid Mass,
wherein the Seeds and Principles of all Things were blended together, and
mingled in Confusion, so that heavy and light, dense and rare, fluid and solid
Particles, were all in wild Confusion and Disorder." --

It may be observed, that before the holy Penman informs us what particular
Creatures were each Day successively brought into Being, (as a Thing essential
and preparatory to the Work) he tells us, That the Spirit of God moved upon the
Face of the Waters. Whether by the Spirit of God, we are to understand his holy
and essential Spirit, which is the third Person in the ever-blessed Trinity, or
the Spirit of the Messiah, as some of the ancient Jews have understood it; or
that plastic Nature, which according to some, was made subservient to him upon
this Occasion, or some other Emanation of the divine Power; we may rationally
suppose, that its Incubation or Brooding (as it literally signifies) upon the
Chaotick Mass, not only separated those Parts which were jumbled together, but
impregnated it with several Kinds of vital Influence, or gave a vivifick
Virtue, to produce what was contained in it, so as to make it capable of
Disposition and Order. -- Great and Mavelous! --

In this State, we may suppose the Chaos to have been, when the Fiat for Light
was given, on the first Day. -- Whereupon all the confused, stagnating
Principles of Matter, began to range into Form and Order the terrene Parts
which over-clouded the Expansum, at the Summons given, retired to their
respective Centers, viz. the Planets: And as the grosser Parts subsided, the
lighter and more tenuous mounted up, and meeting together in a Body, were then
put into a circular Motion, so as to visit the whole Expansum of the Chaos;
This was not only to separate the Light from the Darkness, and make a
Distribution of Day and Night, but to facilitate the Work too, and forward the
Digestion of the remaining Parts of Creation.

Thus the bright and active Element of Fire was extracted from the chaotick
Mass. This was for the present to influence the upper Parts of the Chaos, and
to be the Instrument of Rarefaction, and all the rest of the Operations, which
were necessary to mould it into such Creatures as were afterward brought into
Being -- Great and Mavelous! --

On the second Day of Creation, the beautiful Element of Air was extracted,
when before Water lay undistinguishably dispersed, in the Expansion of the
Chaos, and together with the Ether, made a pellucid Body.

The next Thing to be done; was to make a Division of these Waters, and
distribute them in proper Portions to their respective Planets; which is taken
to be the meaning of the Waters above the Firmament. -- The Almighty gave
Command and all the aqueous Parts of the great Pellucid subsided toward their
Centers, and circumfused about their Globes. -- The Waters under the Firmament,
were divided from the Waters above the Firmament; the Waters of the Earth of
the Moon and other Planets which before this Day lay confusedly dispersed in
the Expansum were divided.

The watery Particles on the third Day having cleared the Expansum, and falling
upon the Planetary Orbs, covered the Face of the Earth as well as other
Planets; the great Creator gave command for the Waters to be gathered into one
Place, and the dry Land to appear. Then the mighty Mountains instantaneously
reared their lofty Heads -- and the Waters with tremendous Roar, flowing from
their enormous Sides filled the wide extended Valleys. -- Those Vales which the
swelling of the Earth in some Places, had made in others for the Reception of
the Waters, which seems to be countenanced by the Psalmist: The Waters standing
above the Mountains, at thy Rebuke they fled, at the Voice of thy Thunder
(perhaps an Earthquake which is subterranean Thunder) they hasted away, and
went down to the Valleys beneath, even unto the Place which thou had prepared
for them. -- And by Jehovah himself, who is introduced thus speaking in the
Book of Job I break up for the Sea, my decreed Place, and set Bars and Doors.

After this, the Almighty Jehovah gave Command, and the Earth was covered over
with verdant Herbage, the gay Green, which is Nature's universal Robe --
Vegetables of all Kinds were then produced in full Proportion, laden with
Fruit, and not subjected to the ordinary way of Maturation, by virtue of a
supernatural Power, given by the great Artichect; notwithstanding the fecundity
of the primigenial Earth, beyond what it is since the Fall of Mankind; it is
rational to suppose something supernatural, if we consider the Space of Time,
in which the Thing was accomplished -- Great and mavelous are his Works! --

After the All-powerful Jehovah had finished this lower World, the divine
Historian carries us upon Contemplation's Wing, to the starry Region -- Let us
then, with him, hover a while in the Regions above, and take a View of those
Luminaries that rule the Day and Night, the Work of the fourth Day.

The Moon, as well as the other Planets, must be supposed to go along with the
Earth in its Formation, and to advance in Proportion, though it is not said to be
made before the reflected Rays of the Sun made it visible to the Earth -- That
flaming Light, which is of different Make and Matter, and which moved around
the chaotick Mass, having used its Influence, in producing the Ether, in the
separation of the Water, and the Arefaction of the Earth; the omnipotent Agent,
on this fourth Day, cast into a proper Orb; for no Doubt, had its Duration been
longer, the Heat would have been too intense, both for the Production and
Conservation of the human and brutal Species. -- As was said before, the
Almighty placed it at a convenient Distance from the Earth, and other Planets;
giving it a duplicate Motion to distinguish the Day from the Night, and to mark
out the various Seasons of the Year, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, and by
Consequence, the Seasons for ploughing, sowing, planting, pruning, reaping,
vintage, sailing etc. and formed it into that glorious Luminary, we are every
Day so much indebted to, and view so often with Admiration -- Wonderful are the
Works of God, his Ways incomprehensible to Mortals!

Let us re-visit the Habitation of Mortals, having glanced upon the mavelous
Works of the Deity in the Formation of inanimate Creatures; we shall now
proceed, with the holy Penman, to the animate; the Work of the fifth Day --
Beginning with the less, and going on to the more perfect; until we come with
the mosaic History, to the top of the animal Creation: which is Man --

With vast Amazement, we may view the innumerable Multitude of Fish that
inhabit the Deep, and Fowl that mount on high in Air, which by the almighty
Fiat, were in an instant produced out of Matter, as it was mixed with Water,
which contained many Things besides Water in the Simple -- The great Congruity
there is in their Natures, is a sufficient Indication of this -- Let the Waters
bring forth abundance (says God); immediately the Command is obeyed, and the
Waters bring forth abundantly -- So that we may naturally suppose, that many
Individuals were at first created. -- Again, there seems to be something
peculiar, in blessing his Creatures; of which there is no mention made before.
-- Here he bids them to be fruitful and multiply Limborch's Theolg.
-- and marvellously we behold a prolific Virtue, and a natural Instinct for
Generation; so that they may preserve their Species, and multiply their
Individuals.

Every Thing being put into mavelous Order by Omnipotence it self -- The
Earth covered with Herbage -- The Waters stored with finny Inhabitants -- The
Air replenished with the winged Tribes -- And that Fire which moved round the
chaotick Mass, placed at such a convenient Distance, so as to give Warmth and
Nourishment to them all; and that this sublunary Abode might be more
comfortable for the most noble of all God's Works, even Man.

In the beginning of the sixth and last Day, terrestrial Animals were created;
the savage Beasts that range the Wood; all tame and domestic Creatures for the
Use of Man, constituted Vicegerent here below -- and creeping Things
innumerable, the most odious to the human Species, of any of the Creation of
God. -- GOD made the Beasts, and every Thing that creeps, after his Kind. --
Great and mavelous are thy Works, O Lord God Almighty!

Every Thing being made subservient to a rational intelligent Being, in order
to advance his Felicity -- The Light had penetrated into, and clarified the
dark and thick Atmosphere -- The Air was freed from noxious Vapors, and fitted
for Respiration -- The Waters so disposed, as to afford Mists and Dews from
Heaven; Springs and Rivers from the Earth, to supply Man's Necessities. -- The
Earth was now solid for his Support, was covered with Trees, Shrubs, and
Vegetables of all Kinds, for Sustenance and Delight. -- The glorious Firmament
on High, with all the blue aetherial Region, and shining Frame of the spangled
Heavens, was laid open to Contemplation, and the Luminaries by their powerful
Influences, put in such Order as to distinguish the Seasons, and make the World
a delicious, and pleasant Habitation -- In short, when all Sorts of Animals, in
Air, Seas, and Earth, were contrived by infinite Wisdom, so as to contribute in
their several Capacities for Benefit and Delight; then Man was created, and
brought upon the Stage -- Then he was constituted by the Almighty, Lord and
Governor of the whole, in which his Honor and Dignity were consulted -- In an
Instant of Time, the great Protoplast was made in full Perfection.

But perhaps the Thing will make a stronger Impression on our Minds, if we
suppose the Figure of Man to rise by Degrees, and finished Part by Part, in a
Succession of Time -- That when the whole was completed, the Veins and
Arteries bored, the Sinews and Tendons laid, the Joints fitted, and the Liquor
transmutable into Blood and Juices, lodged in the Ventricles of the Heart, God
infusing into it a Principle of Life: after which, the Liquor in the Heart
begins to descend, and thrill along the Veins; and this crimson Current, caused
a heavenly Blush to arise in the Countenance, such as scorned the help of Art,
and was above the Power of Imitation -- This Image moved, it walked, it spoke;
moved with a Majesty, which loudly proclaimed it, Lord of the Creation; and
spoke with such an Accent and Sublimity of Sentiment, as to make every Ear
attentive, and even it is great Creator enter into Converse with it -- If we
should see all this transacted before our Eyes, should we not stand astonished
at the Sight, and in humble Admiration cry out, Lord, what is Man that thou art
mindful thus of him and the Son of Man that thou thus visitest him? From a
Piece of Clay thou have made him little lower than the Angels, to crown him
with Glory and Worship; thou have made him to have Dominion over the Works of
thy Hands, and thou have put all Things in Subjection under his Feet -- O Lord
our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the World! -- Yes, verily we may
cry out with Propriety, Great and mavelous.

But besides all this; Man had the Image of his great Creator instamped upon
him -- A Mind fortified to bear the divine Presence -- qualified for the divine
Converse; fully illuminated by the divine Spirit: and a Body, contrary to it is
natural Composition, indulged the Privilege of Immortality -- an Harmony in
all it is Faculties -- an Understanding stored with all Knowledge, -- a Will
submitted to the divine Pleasure -- Affections placed on their proper Objects:
a serene Conscience, and resplendent Holiness. -- In short, a Body formed with
so much Majesty and Splendour, as to challenge the Government of this inferior
World. -- Great and mavelous is this Work of thine, Lord God Almighty!

Having taken a cursory View of the mavelous Works of the Deity, in the
Creation of Beings, rational and irrational, animate and inanimate.

Let us now shift the Scene; which will open to our View, his providential Care
over the Creation: For as soon as Creatur^^ are made, they want divine Power to
support them: "No Time can be imagined, in which they can subsist without God's
Interposition; and the Preservation of the World, may with Propriety be called
a continual Creation." -- Let us then view the various Parts of his Providence
-- The Scene will open in order, these following Acts of Providence, viz. --
God's Inspection -- His Preservation -- The Provision he makes for Men and
Beasts -- His Concurrence and Cooperation with all Things. -- And then proceed
to the rational World -- Considering the Government of Causes, natural,
accidental and moral; and the directing of Events, private and public. --
God's Inspection is mavelous; His Eyes are in every Place; as the Scriptures
assure us; they run to and fro', throughout the whole Earth: -- All Things are
naked and open, to the Sight of him with whom we have to do -- God has an
universal Inspection, and this is even necessary in God; His Presence is in
every Place, and his divine Substance permeates all Things.

This is an Instance of his Perfection, that he is not limited to the use of
material Organs, such Instruments as we make use of -- Not to need those Helps
which we need; which are a thousand, and ten thousand Times surpassed by the
Immensity of that Essence, which is every where at once, so as to penetrate all
Things within, like an universal Soul, and contain all Things without, like an
universal Place --

As this mavelous Structure, at first arose by God's Almighty Power, so his
marvellously assisting Hand, is stretched forth, in the Preservation of the
Being, and his Power, and Wisdom, are displayed, in the Provision he makes for
the well-being of all Things. -- By a bare Fiat, or Act of his Will, they
passed from Nothing into Being; if He should suspend that Act, they must
unavoidably return to a State of Nonentity. -- In short, as the Apostle well
observes, God holds, or bears up all Things by the Word of his Power. -- The
same almighty Power is necessary to keep the World from sinking into Nothing,
that was necessary to raise it out of Nothing. The Preservation of every Thing
at this very Day, is as much the Effect of God's Power, as they were the
Moment, the very first Moment that they existed -- Great and mavelous! Thou,
even thou art the Lord alone; Thou have made the Heaven, even the Heaven of
Heavens, with all their Hosts, the Earth and all Things that are therein, and
thou preservest them all. God thinks it not enough to preserve all his
Creatures in Being, but he provides too for their well-being.

We will then take a short View of some Parts of his Providence, in order to
conceive how just the Observation of the Psalmist is, viz. That the Eyes of all
wait upon God, who opens his Hand, and fills all things living, with
Plenteousness.

If we look upon the Earth, our present Abode, we cannot but perceive its
Fruitfulness, in Animals and Vegitables -- A variety of Trees, all laden with
Delicacies, whose Seeds are in themselves, in order for their Continuance. -- A
variety of delightful Flowers, wonderful in their make. -- Grains of all Sorts,
for Man's Support; and Herbs of all Kinds, both for Food and Physic, rising
conspicuous to our view on its Surface. -- And yet the Earth out of which these
Blessings are produced, is a cold Mass of Matter, destitute of Warmth and
prolifick Virtue.

If we take a View, as we pass into the Region of Animals, we cannot but
observe, the singular Beauty and Strength, that some of them are endowed with;
others have great Sagacity: All, how savage soever in their Nature, are
tenderly concerned for the Preservation of their Young. Mavelous indeed is
this!

I shall not expatiate any further, over the several Tribes of Animals -- But
go on in regular Progression to another Act of God's Providence; his constant
Concurrence, and Cooperation with all Things.

As God's Essence is in every Place, so is his Power extended to all Things;
the proper End of his Power is Action, and consequently where the Deity is,
there it must be acting -- The Parts of Matter, in what Order soever we may
suppose them to be disposed, neither gravitate, nor communicate Motion, nor in
any Respect, act upon one another, but in Consequence of God's immediate and
marvellously assisting Hand. What are the Motions of all the heavenly Bodies,
and their regular succeeding Revolutions -- The Revolution of Day and Night,
and the return of annual Seasons, but the mavelous Work of Almighty God?

Again, with regard to the vegetable World: They have neither Sense nor Reason
to discern the Periods of their growth, yet before they wither and die, they
run up into Seed, as if they foresaw their approaching End, and so were
solicitous to leave a numerous Posterity behind them. -- What is this, but the
mavelous Cooperation of God Almighty.

I might descant largely upon the Concurrence and Cooperation of God's
Providence, as to the brute and irrational World; but what has been said, is
enough to suffice any Person of Contemplation.

I proceed then to take a View of the rational World.

I do not pretend to say, that Man acts without the Concurrence and
Cooperation of Almighty God, in whom we live and move and have our Being: To
suppose the contrary, would be impious, and inconsistent with the Dependence we
owe to our great Creator. -- But this I must say, and I hope without Offense to
any Persons that allow themselves to exercise the Faculty of thinking, indulged
them by the Creator, though at the same Time, I think my self under no Obligation
to please any particular Sect in Religion; but to speak the Sentiments of the
Heart, not to pin my Faith upon the Antinomian Sleeve, or to imbibe any Notion
started by the fiery Homo-thumadon Brethren; that the Case is not with Men as
with Brutes. God has not only endowed him with natural Powers, and Principles
of Action, but an Understanding and Will too, whereby he judges, reasons and
determines for himself -- and therefore it is thought by the Judicious, that
the divine Cooperation, with respect to Man, seems to extend no farther, than
the natural Power of acting, and not to any specific Acts. It makes no
Alteration in the Powers of Nature, but only enables them to act according to
their Natures: God sets these Powers a going indeed, but gives them no
preter-natural Motion* this is something like the winding up of a Watch,
leaving its Motion to be guided by its Springs and Wheels. Mavelous indeed is
this Work of God!

The Scene opens to our View a fourth Act of God's Providence; viz. The
Government of Causes, natural, accidental and moral. -- All natural Causes are
under the immediate and absolute Government of God: He keeps the Springs of
Nature in his Hands, and turns them as he pleases. -- He guides the heavenly
Bodies, impresses the Degree, and chalks out the Path of their Motions -- His
almighty Hand turns round those stupendous Wheels, in a perpetual Revolution.
This is evident from the Expostulation God holds with Job -- Know thou the
Ordinances of Heaven, and can thou set the Dominion thereof on the Earth?
etc. There are indeed different Virtues and Powers bestowed by God, on natural
Causes; in ordinary Cases he makes use of these Powers to serve the wise Ends
of his Providence in the Government of Mankind. Though every Thing in the
material World, exerts it is natural Powers, and acts necessarily: The great and
everlasting God, can suspend its Motions, and direct its Influences, without
reversing the Laws of Nature. Fire and Water, Wind and Rain, Thunder and
Lightening, have their natural Powers and Qualities; and God produces such
Effects with them, as they are apt to produce of themselves: He warms us with
Fire, invigorates the Earth with the kind Influence of the Sun; cools the Air
with Winds; and clarifies it with Thunder and Lightnings. -- But, when and
where the Winds shall blow, and the Rains fall, and in what Measure and
Proportion. Times and Seasons, and other natural Causes, shall give or with
hold their Influences: this God keeps in his own Power, -- hereby he governs
the World, and can reward or punish Men as they deserve, without altering the
standing Laws of Nature -- Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, and stormy Winds
fulfill his Word: He calls to the Clouds, that abundance of Water may cover the
Earth at one Time; gives the former and latter Rain in its Season: as God of
his abundant Goodness has dealt with us, not long since; and has given us as
great Plenty perhaps as ever was known in this Land; so that we have been able
to supply our Forces, both by Sea and Land, with Provisions of all Kinds;
notwithstanding the long Continuance of the sore Judgment of War. -- At another
time, God shuts up the Heavens, that it does not Rain, or causes it to rain
upon one City, and not upon another; so that two or three Cities wander to one
City to drink, and are not satisfied; as you are sensible was the Case the last
Year: and these are our Circumstances at present

But in the midst of Judgment, He is remembering Mercy; in granting us one
Success, after another, against our Enemies; which is the Occasion of our
meeting together, to render Thanks unto Him for his Benefits in this Respect.
-- God has set Prosperity and Adversity the one over against the other. In the
Day of Prosperity, we are to be joyful, and in the Day of Adversity, to
consider. But what shall we do, when they both happen together? I answer; The
highest Piece of Wisdom, is to live in a serious Sense of the Power of God; and
to consider, that nothing comes to pass without his Providence; with which we
must not be uneasy, when he is pleased to cross us in any of our private
Designs, or to send any public Calamity, which by all our Art and Power we can
neither avoid nor remedy. -- No, we ought rather to accommodate our selves to
the present State of Things; and when we are in Prosperity, to enjoy God's
Blessings cheerfully with thankful and charitable Hearts: But so soberly, as
not to forget that Affliction may come, and when it does* let us take it
patiently, considering among other Things, that there may be a Change for the
better: For as both the one and the other come from God; so he has ordered
they should have their Turns in such due Season, and balanced one with the
other so exactly, that the meanest Man has no Reason to complain; nor the
greatest to fancy himself more than a Man; who cannot invent any Means to
dispose Things otherwise, much less, better than God has done. Bp Patrick's
Comment.


There are many strange, casual and accidental Events, which happen to us all,
and are of great Consequence to the Happiness or Misery of human Life; which
Observation the wise Man made long ago: I returned and saw under the Sun, that
the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong; neither yet Bread
to the wise, nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of
Skill; but Time and Chance happens to them all. Sherlock.
Some strange and unaccountable Accidents change the Fortunes of Men, and
disappoint the most proper Means of Success. What should conquer in a Race, one
would think, but Swiftness? or win the Battle, but Strength? What should supply
Men's Wants, and increase Riches, but Wisdom and Understanding in human
Affairs? What more likely Way to gain a general Favor and Esteem, than a
skilful Application and Address? And yet the Preacher observed in his Days,
what is abundantly verified in our's, that Time and Chance, some favorable
Conjunctures, and unforeseen Accidents, were of more Avail to this Purpose,
than all the Means and Methods that Men can devise. "It was this Observation,
that caused the Heathen World, to deify Fortune, and attribute all Things to
her Government: -- But Christians know of no such Thing as Chance or Fortune.
We know that God alone governs the World, and disposes of all Events. So that
how fortuitous soever Things may be, in respect of the Design, and natural
Tendency of second Causes, yet they depend upon the Will and Power of the first
Cause: and they never happen without the Purpose and Intention of God, who
foresees them before they come to pass. -- What can be more uncertain, than an
Arrow shot at a venture? and yet that, wherewith Ahab was slain, was pointed
and directed by the unerring Hand of God."

We cannot but think that these Things are the proper Province of God, and the
more immediate Objects of his Care and Attention, since they are such powerful
Instruments in his Hands -- If we consider how the Lives and Fortunes of Men,
the Fate of Kingdoms and Empires, the Successes of War, and Changes of
Government, many Times are determined and effected, by those Events, which we
call fortuitous; and how Chance defeats the wisest Counsels, and strongest
Powers; rewards good Men unexpectedly, and punishes the bad remarkably -- If we
exclude God from the Disposal of these, we not only rob him of a great Branch
of his Dominion, but our selves too, of the comfortable Sense of our Security
under the Wing and Shadow of the Almighty.

Let us now pass to moral and rational Agents. -- Moral and rational Agents are
immediately under the Government of God; He not only overrules the Actions,
but sways the Wills, and guides the Passions, and directs the Designs of
Mankind, as it best suits with the Ends of his Providence -- This we learn from
the sacred Records, where it is said, That Man's goings are of the Lord; and
though his Heart devises his Ways, yet the Lord directs his Paths -- That the
Way of Man is not in himself -- That the Heart of Kings is in the Hand of the
Lord, which he turns as he will; and that though there be many Devices in Man's
Heart, nevertheless, the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand etc. -- But then
you may reply, that this destroys the Liberty of Choice, and consequently the
Nature of Virtue and Vice, and the Reasons of Rewards and Punishments -- To
this I answer -- That we must distinguish between God's Government of Men as
reasonable Creatures and free Agents, and his Government of them, as the
Instruments of his Providence: The first considers them in their own private
and natural Capacity; the second in Relation to the rest of Mankind; which
makes a great Difference, both in the Reason and Acts of Governnment. --
Mavelous is this Act of God's Providence!

Lastly, I shall exhibit one Branch more of the Providence of God, to your
View, viz. His ordering and directing all the Events that attend human Affairs,
-- such as long Life, and sudden Death, Health and Sickness, Honor and
Disgrace, Riches and Poverty, Famine and Plenty, War and Peace; and those many
great and surprising Changes and Revolutions, which many Times happen in
Kingdoms and States. That all the Blessings and Comforts of human Life, are of
God's immediate sending upon us, is acknowledged by all that believe a
Providence. The only Difficulty is about the Calamities of it. -- This is
familarly exemplified by a Divine of our own. Dr. Sherlock on Providence, which
see.
-- God suffers one bad Man to execute his Vengeance upon another bad Man --
There are bad Men enough in the World, that deserve Correction, and others that
are ready enough at all Times to fall upon their Brethren, if the Restraint was
taken off; and if we make this Supposition, that a Man has forfeited his Life,
or Estate, or Reputation to Providence, or without any Forfeiture whatever, God
thinks fit for other Reasons, to remove him out of the World, or to reduce him
to Poverty or Contempt: There are always Men enough, forward to execute such
Decrees: It Is but the bringing such Persons as he appoints for Suffering, into
the reach of such Men as he designs shall be the Executioners of his Will; and
their own Malice and Wickedness will do the rest. -- This is the Method used by
God in bringing Calamities upon particular Persons; and all the Hand he has in
it, is only withdrawing the Restraint, and suffering bad Men to be driven by
the Impulse of their own Lust. -- And supposing the Restraint never to be
withdrawn but only to execute his righteous Judgments, nothing is more
honorable to Providence, or a greater Security to Mankind."

By the Account we have in Scripture, we may suppose that both good and bad
Angels are made Use of by God in the Government of the World: but how well
qualified, and how far appointed to be the Instruments of public Blessings and
Calamities, I need not determine -- It was usually by the ministry of those
Spirits, or by the unruly Passions of Princes, that the sore Judgments of
Heaven, the Sword and the Famine, and the noisome Pestilence, fell upon a
guilty Land. -- God gives the Commission, the Execution is entirely done by
them -- As is represented in Ezekiel's Vision; where the Angels of God are
busily employed in the Destruction of Jerusalem Ezekiel. ix. 1, 2.
. Cause them that have Charge over the City, etc.

It seems therefore to comport with the Majesty and Purity of God, to suppose
that the Calamities which are sent upon a guilty World, are fomented by the
unruliness of Men's Spirits, or inflicted by the Ministry of Angels: But the
Hand of God seems more eminently visible, in Changes and Revolutions, which
many Times happen in Kingdoms and States. Atterbury.
For the Providence of God concerns it self more especially in producing these
amazing Events, so that its Influence on Things below, may be observed and
acknowledged; which would come near to be forgotten, were there not some
remarkable Instances of his Interposition in human Affairs, by raising Men up
at fit Times, to a lively and vigorous Sense of it. -- Though we are sensible,
that we live, move, and have our being in God -- that we are supported
constantly by his almighty Power, and all our Actions conducted by his unerring
Wisdom and Goodness; yet the Impression which this Knowledge makes upon our
Minds, is but faint, and is quickly effaced. It is so difficult to distinguish
his secret concurring Influences, from the Workings of natural and moral
Causes, that we are apt to rest in the Contemplation of the one, without
considering the other; and we resolve all at last into the Power of such
Principles, as lie nearest to us.

And, even in the greater and more public Transactions of the World, when they
appear to be the Effects of human Foresight and Contrivance, we are apt to stop
in our Reflections, and consequently cease in our Contemplations, upon that
invisible Hand, which wields the vast Machine, and directs all its Springs and
Motions. But then, when the Scene shifts suddenly, and those visible Causes
that contributed toward the producing this Effect, are not in Proportion to
this sudden Change; then we are checked in our Insensibility; being
sufficiently roused, we begin to perceive a Divine Providence that influences
human Affairs, and adore it is Footsteps. And God is pleased now and then to
awake our Attention, and to present to our View some astonishing Revolution of
State, so that our groveling Thoughts may be raised above the World, to the
Author of Nature, that a deeper Awe of Super-intendency, may be imprinted on
our Minds, that for the future, we may remember his Administration of the great
Affairs below, though they proceed with the greatest Regularity.

But, there is a farther Reason, for these surprising Revolutions of State,
brought about by the Hand of God: He makes use of these unexpected Turns of
State, to baffle the mistaken Policy of Men, so as to discover to them the
Vanity and Emptiness of a Pretense to consummate Wisdom, which belongs only to
the great Governor of the Universe, though the falsely wise of this World please
themselves often with this Chimaera.

Ministers of State, Men of Experience and Ability, in Affairs of Importance,
who have been long at the Helm of Government, and have been often right in
their Conjectures of Things, and prosperous in their Projects -- These very
Persons, after a Series of Prosperity which attended their Administration, are
apt at last, to strut and swell with a munificent Conceit, giving themselves
the Honor of all their good Luck, and presently grow vain upon it; saying
proudly in their Hearts, according to the elegant Expression of the Prophet,
Isaiah, x. 13, 14.
"By the Strength of my Hand, I have done it, and by my Wisdom, for I am
prudent; and I have removed the Bounds of the People, and have robbed their
Treasures, and I have put down their Inhabitants, like a valiant Man, and my
Hand has found as a Nest, the Riches of the People; and as one gathers Eggs
that are lest, have I gathered all the Earth, and there was none that moved the
Wing, or opened the Mouth, or peeped." -- Thus they are apt to pride themselves
in mere Vanity, to adore all those Schemes that brought these Things to pass,
and esteem them as infallible for the future: But God often gives them a
convincing Proof of their Folly, and shows them the Defect, ( viz. robbing him
of the Honor due to him considered as universal Monarch) by disconcerting all
their Measures at once, and exhibiting a new Scene of Things, which they could
not foresee with all their pretended Omniscience, nor prevent by Prudence,
consummate Prudence, as they though it it: That so the wise Man may learn not to
glory in his Wisdom, and the mighty Man, not to glory in his Might: but he that
glories may glory in this, that he understands and knows me; that I am the
Lord, which exercise Loving Kindness, and Judgment, and Righteousness in the
Earth; for in these Things I delight, says the Lord.

Atterbury's Sermons.
Were it not for such surprising Revolutions of Affairs, which disappoint the
Devices of the crafty Ones, and make the Heads of the ablest and most
experienced Lookers-on giddy at the Sight, God would, in the Opinion of many of
his Creatures, be shut out from the Government of the World; and the Honor of
his Conduct devolved upon some of the mean and subordinate Instruments of it.
Those poor Insects, that sit upon the Wheels of State, and imagine themselves
to be the Authors of all it is Motions, and able to check or quicken them, at
their Pleasure!

These are some of the Acts, great and mavelous Acts and Offices of God
Almighty: those wherein his Providence consists, and whereby he makes Himself
known to be the most High, that rules in the Kingdoms of Men.

Thus I have finished what I proposed from the Words. But who among Mortals,
can fathom these Depths of infinite Wisdom -- These mavelous Works of
Creation and Providence? How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past
finding out! Who can by searching find out God? Who can find out the Almighty
to Perfection -- It is high as Heaven, what can we do? Deeper than Hell, what
can we know? The Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the
Sea.

It remains that we improve the Subject -- I shall pass by some useful
Reflections that might be made upon Creation, which I shall leave for every one
to do, at convenient Opportunities -- This any Man can do, that has the
Exercise of his rational Faculties, and is a Man of Contemplation: For let him
be where he will, something of God will present it self to his View, sufficient
for Contemplation.

From what has been said upon the mavelous Works or Acts of Divine
Providence; let us reflect upon the Duties we owe to Providence. And

1. Let us have a lively Sense of it impressed upon our Minds. -- The Prophet
Isaiah has exhibited a very lively Description of some gay unthinking People,
that in a continual Round of Pleasures, fill up the Vacancies of Time: The Harp
and the Viol, the Tabret and the Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts, but they
regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the Operation of his Hands.
But it is to be hoped, that neither you my Hearers, nor Mankind in general, are
so giddy and inconsiderate: Mankind in general, indeed the most of them, have
some Notion and Belief of a Providence: But their Error is this; in imputing
most Events to the immediate and visible Causes, and so overlook the Divine
Hand, in every Thing that befalls them, and consequently rob God of the Glory
of his Dispensations, and themselves of the Benefits, that naturally flow from
such a sober Recollection. -- We must not be contented with a general Belief of
God's Super-intendency, in human Affairs, if we own a Providence, to the true
Ends and Purposes of Religion. -- But whatsoever our State and Condition is in
this World, we must consider it to be thus ordered by God: -- If we are Poor or
Rich, we must be contented, knowing it is God that makes us so: that it is the
Will of Heaven, that we should be Poor; and the Blessing of Heaven that makes
us Rich -- Or if we loose our Estates by any adverse Providence, we ought to
make this submissive Acknowledgement -- The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away: And whatever our Miseries and Misfortunes are, we should imitate David's
Practice and Behavior; I was dumb, and opened not my Mouth, because it was thy
Doing. --

2. From what has been said in the preceding Discourse; let us learn
submission to the Divine Will -- For after we have affected our Minds with a
due Sense of the Divine Super-intendency, in every Thing that befalls us, the
next Thing to be done, is to compose our Souls into a humble Submission to the
Almighty's Will, so that we may bear with Decency the Sufferings he lays upon
us, and continue in the State in which God has placed us, with content. It is
not inconsistent with the Christian neither, that he should desire a removal of
Calamities inflicted. -- But this is inconsistent with the Christian Character,
to reproach and censure Providence, and to think it severe and merciless: We
should always put the most favorable Construction upon God's Dispensations,
with reverend and submissive Thoughts* and Eyes lift up to Heaven, wait with
Patience, until God have Mercy upon us.

Though we are to bear Afflictions in Obedience to our great Creator's Will, yet
we are to bear them as human Nature will permit. With Pain and Grief, and
Reluctance; with Sighs and Groans, and Complaints; with vehement and
importunate Desires and Prayers to God and Man, to help and deliver us -- God
indulges us in this too -- Our blessed Redeemer who is the best Pattern for our
Imitation in our Behavior, expresses himself to the same Purpose -- Father, if
it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; but when he considered the Hand that
held it out, he adds with Submission, Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will -- We should consider God as wise and good in all his Dispensations, not
as sovereign and arbitrary, but tender and compassionate to all his Creatures,
who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men; but corrects us
for our profit, that we may be Partakers of his Holiness: Being thus resolved
to acquiesce in God's good Pleasure.

3. From hence we also learn, to trust and confide in Divine Providence, as our
best and greatest Safeguard in all our Concerns; and our Security both in Want
and Danger. -- Now God is a Friend unto us; He loves us; He desires our
Happiness; He knows the Means that are effectually conducive to secure it: And
those that have Faith in the Promises, should first of all apply themselves to
that Source from whence is derived every Blessing -- Apply, earnestly, and
importunately to him, to take them and their Concerns under the Wing of his
Protection. -- Now, if God has taken this Care upon Himself, (which I think is
evident) ought we not to rejoice in it, as our greatest Happiness? Yes verily
--. For what Reason has any Person to be afraid, that has a Being of infinite
Power for his Protector? Or to be anxiously solicitous, that has a God of
infinite Goodness so near? It was from the Consideration of God's great Care in
providing for his Creatures, that our great Lord and Master, gave this Advice
following -- Take no Though It for your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on? is not the Life more than
Meat? Is it not more difficult, to make a living Creature, than to find out
Means to feed it? Is not the Body more than Raiment? Is it not more difficult
to form a Body, than to provide for it is clothing? Behold the Fowls of the
Air, consider the Lillies of the Field; and if God feed and clothe them; shall
he not much more you? O ye of little Faith. -- It was this Consideration of
God's providential Care in protecting Mankind, that gave the Psalmist such
Boldness -- The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord
is the Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid? Again, in another Place
he proceeds with the greatest intrepidity of Mind; We will not fear, though the
Earth be moved, and though the Hills be carried into the midst of the Seas, though
the Waters thereof rage and swell, and though the Mountains shake at the Tempest
of the same: the Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. --
There is nothing in these Texts of Scripture that Countenances a supine
Negligence, without any Concern for our Maintenance and Preservation: this
would not be trusting, but tempting God: The Meaning therefore is this -- That
we must do the best we can, and accquit our selves as diligent and provident,
in a humble Dependence upon God, without perplexing our Minds, or terrifying
our selves, with empty Fears; considering our selves as under the Defense of
the most High, and that nothing can hurt us without the Divine Permission.

4. From hence I infer two Duties -- viz. Prayer and Thanksgiving -- For when
we have fixed our Trust and Dependence on Providence, these two Duties
continually call upon us. -- In Prayer we request of God those Mercies and
Blessings we stand in need of -- And in Thanksgiving, we return our most
grateful and devout acknowledgements for every Thing we receive -- Indeed if we
are thoroughly convinced that all our Enjoyments of what Name or Nature soever
come originally from God the giver of every good and perfect Gift; and that He
who is sovereign Lord of all Things; is good and gracious, full of
Long-suffering; is concerned for us as his Offspring* and is willing to show us
Protection, considered as his Creatures; and to provide for us, as we are
dependent. -- A God to whom we may disclose all our secret Wants, and upon whom
we may cast all our Burden, being fully persuaded, that he will comfort and
relieve us -- If we consider this I say, we must think that it is, not only our
inestimable Privilege, but our Duty, to ask for Help in a Time of Need,
imploring his Aid and Assistance in all our lawful Undertakings, as well
spiritual as temporal, and his Protection against every Evil; especially Sin,
the greatest Evil, and it is necessary Consequents, the Sword, the Famine, and
the Pestilence.

Nor can we once reflect upon the Number and Extent of his Benefits to us,
considered as Individuals -- as a Town, Province or Nation: How our Life and
Motion, (as an english Dr. Scot's Sermon.
Divine excellently expresses it) our Health and Vigor, our Sense and
Perception, our Reason and Understanding, are his Gift; How we move upon his
Earth, and breathe in his Air, drink of his Springs, and are fed from his
Graineries, and are clothed from his Wardrobe; and I may add with Regard to
the public Transactions in the World, and in particular with regard to War;
How he has supported the English Nation, though but few in comparison with the
other Nations of Europe, but the Bulwark of the Protestant Interest --
supported I say, the British Nation, with the Prussian Hero, when surrounded
with potent Enemies -- An evident Demonstration this, of God's superintending
Power, that he can cause one to chase a Thousand, and two to put ten Thousand
to flight -- That he can save by few, as well as by many -- But besides these
beforementioned, from the same inexhaustible Bounty, many inestimable
Benefits, are extended to our better Part -- How can we enumerate these
Benefits, and our Hearts not swell with grateful Sense of them -- Our Tongues
should break forth into that devout Rhapsody of the Prophet David, "How
precious are thy Thot's, thy kind and merciful Tho'ts, unto me, O God, how
great is the Sum of them! If I should count them, they are more in Number than
the Sand."

We my Hearers, that enjoy the Light of the glorious Sun of Righteousness, have
this Advantage above the Heathen; they were puzzled how to reconcile Prayer and
Thanksgiving, with their Notion of Necessity and Fate -- And there are some at
this Day, that hug the old Pagan Principle. But let us suppose Providence to be
nothing else, but a necessary Chain of Causes, where would be the Encouragement
to present our Prayers, or Praises to God: or which is the same, let them be
fixed and immutable Decrees, upon this Supposition, God can help us no more
than he can alter Destiny; and consequently upon this Supposition, for whatever
befalls us, deserves no Thanks: -- But if he governs the World with Liberty and
Freedom, it is highly reasonable, that we should pray to him, and praise him
for the Benefits we daily receive -- This is as reasonable as to offer our
Petitions, or returns our Thanks, to our Parents, or our Prince, nay infinitely
more, as God is the Original of all, they only the Conduits, that convey some
few of his Blessings to us.

5. Let us close all with an Enumeration of God's Providential Dealings with us
in Years past; adding something (though briefly) on the Occasion of our
assembling together at this Time, in Obedience to the Authority set over us. --
Let us consider, that God has instituted Prayer and Thanksgiving, not only as a
proper Acknowledgement of the Divine Goodness, super-intending the World, but
as a Thing necessary, both to our own Happiness, and the wise Improvement of
his Blessings -- Let us have the Qualifications to make all Services of this
Kind acceptable, which is to keep a Conscience void of Offense, toward God,
and toward Man, and to have a lively Sense of the Divine Providence, always
present with us, observing our Ways, and directing our Concerns -- The Lord
Jehovah, the Everlasting King, who super-intends universal Nature, who reared
the vast Fabric of the Universe, and wields this vast Machine; as you have
heard in this Discourse; in short, he not only created all Beings, animate and
inanimate, but governs them by certain Laws -- He upholds all Things by the
Word of his Power; and his Providence influences in all the Concerns of Men
here below. -- He sets Prosperity and Adversity, the one over against the
other; for this End, that Men may find out none of those Things which shall
befall them hereafter; that so being perfectly ignorant of what is to come, we
neither presume in Prosperity, nor Despair in Adversity.

God in his Providence, has exhibited this Lesson unto our View this Year, and
the last, amidst our Successes against our Enemies; He is still threatening us
with want of Bread, and cleanness of Teeth, by withholding the Rain from
Heaven; so that we may not forget that Adversity may come.

But let us take a cursory View of God's Kindness, repeated Kindness to us.
Though there was something of Adversity in the Beginning of the War -- Our
Enemies gained upon us for a while -- Yet what a Series of Fauvors has the
All-powerful Jehovah indulged us withal? What great and mavelous Successes
has our gracious Protector granted to us against our Heathen and Antichristian
Enemies? Our perfidious and common Enemy cannot but see, and know, that the God
of the English Israel, has exhibited glorious Acts of his Power, in behalf of
the Protestant Cause; and that he can conquer, as well in the Valleys as upon
the Hills -- What mighty Acts of Power and Goodness, has he displayed in behalf
of our Nation in Europe and America -- Surely God has showed himself to be Lord
of our Hosts, and the God of our Armies, and to be indeed a Man of War, as he
is styled by a poetical License in the Song of Moses -- He has made known unto
us in a Variety of Instances, that he super-intends all human Affairs; and in
War in particular, that he can save by few as well as by many; as may be
instanced in our Nation, which is small, when compared with either of the
Nations, we are now engaged with in War, especially as to Number: And more
particularly, in upholding the The King of Prussia.
Hero of the Times, encompassed with so many potent Enemies, and exposed to so
many Dangers -- These are great and mavelous Works of God! --

And now let us, my Hearers, more especially contemplate with Amazement, and be
carried away in a Transport of Gratitude, when we consider the great and
mavelous Works of God's Providence, in succeeding the British Arms in
America. -- No sooner had the American Dunkirk surrendered to the brave American
Sir J. Amherst, Knight.
General, but Providence opens a Door for the Reduction of the Enemy's Capital
in Canada, by that brave and generous Genesis James Wolf.
Hero, who resigned his Breath in Action; and whose Memory will last as long as
Time -- After this, all the other strong Fortresses surrendered at Discretion:
their Defenders, who were resolute in the beginning of the War, to prosecute a
Plan, laid by Louis and Hell, to engross the whole of America to France --
These resolute Defendants now come with Arms reversed, and surrender upon our
own Terms -- Great and mavelous is this Work of thy Providence, O Lord God
Almighty!

And now, let us, who are met together with Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving,
in the Presence of the All-seeing Jehovah, that searches the Hearts, and tries
the Reins of the Sons of Men; see to it, that we are in a right Temper of Mind
to render Thanks to God, who is the Fountain of eternal Love, and to
contemplate on his Mercies toward us (though unworthy) these two Years past. --
God has instituted Prayer and Thanksgiving, as was observed before, not only as
a proper Acknowledgement of the Divine Goodness, super-intending the World, but
as a Thing necessary, both to our own Happiness, and the wise Improvement of
his Blessings.

In the Course of the last Year, we should not forget to take thankful Notice
of his overruling Hand, in subjecting Martineco, and Islands adjacent, to the
British Crown. Now an Opportunity presents, let us return our grateful
Acknowledgements, taking proper Notice of the Goodness of God toward us in
thus repeatedly humbling our common Enemy.

And furthermore, we should not forget to express our Thankfulness, for the
favorable concurring Circumstances, that attend our military Operations in
Germany: marvellously has God appeared of late on our Side, by enabling Prince
Ferdinand, to defeat so large a Body of the Enemy, with so inconsiderable a
Loss -- Bless the Lord, O our Souls, and may all that is within us, bless his
holy Name! --

But above all, with Hearts elate in Gratitude and Amazement, we must
contemplate the glorious and important Conquest of the HAVANNAH. -- If we
consider the Strength of the Place, -- the Resolution of the Defendants, and
the Unhealthiness of the Climate, we shall find the Hand of God visible in its
Reduction; and ourselves have great Reason to rejoice, and be thankful. Who
knows but that this is designed in Providence, to humble the King of Spain,
that haughty Monarch; for his Injustice in unnecessarily entering into a War
with our Nation.

The Reduction of this Place, was attempted not many Years since, as some now
upon the Stage of Action, can well remember. At that Time the English came off
with Disgrace; -- but not so now. -- Now glorious News indeed! Vid. Atlas
Geographus Disc. Havan.
The old Prophecy which has been among the Inhabitants, for many Years, is now
accomplished, viz. That Englishmen should some Time or other, walk as freely
about the City, as Spaniards: And for this Reason, they always blind-folded
every Englishman, whether in Time of War or Peace, when traveling about the
City; least their vast accumulated Wealth, should be discovered; being sensible
that if ever a War should happen between the two Nations, the English would
endeavor to spoil them of their Wealth, by cutting off the Communication this
Way, between old Spain and New: At the same Time sensible of their
Pusillanimity and Unskilfulness in defending themselves in War, though Nature, as
much as Art formed it almost impregnable. But their brave Defense at this Time,
will redound greatly to the Honor of the Spanish Arms.

But amidst these Successes, let not our Hearts be elate with Pride: Let us not
glory in our Strength; but let us glory in the Strength and Power of the
almighty Arm: And not forget that Adversity may come.

To conclude: Let us all this Day, give Thanks to God in a right Manner;
considering that there is this one Qualification requisite to make all Services
of this Kind, acceptable; and that is a Conscience void of Offense, toward God,
and toward Man; with a constant lively Sense of the Divine Providence, always
present with us, always over-looking us, observing our Ways, and directing our
Concerns, pursuing us with Punishments, when we do amiss, and crowning us with
Blessings, when we do our Duty; is the most effectual Means to attain. Let us
then consider him at all Times, as the all-powerful Jehovah, who rules in the
Armies of Heaven above, and among the Inhabitants of this World. That his
Dealings with us, are consummately wise: -- That all his Providence, whether
prosperous or adverse, are for our spiritual Good; for our awakening out of our
Lethargy in Sin, and quickening in the Ways of Virtue and Godliness. Don't let
us misimprove these gracious Dealings toward us; may they be the Means of
making us look up for the future, to the good Hand that is continually over us;
and see that it is by God, that we live, and move, and have our Being.

Let us take due Notice of every Instance of his Favor, with Regard to the
War; and let us all Pray, that the God of Peace, would in his own Time, conduct
us to an honorable permanent Peace. That he would hasten the happy and
glorious Time, when Wars and Fightings shall cease among Mankind; when all
Nations shall be united under Jesus, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and
great Head of the Church.

And finally, may we all be bro't at last, to the eternal World, and there join
with the general Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, in singing the Song
of Moses, the Servant of God; and the Song of the Lamb, saying, in one
comprehensive Strain; Great and mavelous are all thy Works of Creation,
Providence and Grace, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy Ways, thou King
of Saints.

AMEN.
Subscribers Names.
Shrewsbury North-Parish.
DOct. Edward Flint Daniel Hastings Isaac Temple Aaron Newton David Child's
Nath. Davenport Jonath. Cutting Aaron Sawyer Jotham Bush Ameriah Begelow Joseph
Bigelow, Jun. Edward Newton Ephraim Beeman John Hastings Ephraim Allen Job
Cushing John Pearson Benjamin Hinds Jonas Ward Charles Bigelow Jonas Bellows
Joseph Smith Mephibosheth Bixby Daniel Wheeler Jonas Temple Joseph Morse
Francis Temple William Whitney William Thomas William Goss David Tailor John
Glazier Jun. Asa Harris Eben. Ingalesbe Nathan Far^r Moses Goodale Abel Holt
Thomas Sawyer Jotham Flagg Jonathan Gale Jonathan Foster Aaron Temple Sylvanus
Morse Ephraim Temple John Maynard Stephen Keys John Wright Ephraim Holland
Noman Seaver Edward Raiment Nathanael Bixby Peter Joslin Luke Drewry Benj.
M'callester Micah Tailor Cyprian Keys.
Old Rutland.
JOhn Murray, Esquire Doct. John Frink Doct. Alpheus Fletcher David Rice Peter
Moore Samuel Man Benjamin Reed Ebenezer Hunt Eben. Hunt, Jun. Absalom Cutting
Samuel Stone Aaron Hunt William Martin Jonas Newton Ralph Earl Thomas Cutler.
Worcester.
Josiah Pierse Ezekiel How.

