AN AUTHENTIC ACCOUNT OF THE

PROCEEDINGS AGAINST JOHN WILKES, Esquire Member of PARLIAMENT for Aylesbury, AND
LATE Colonel of the Buckinghamshire Militia.

CONTAINING All the Papers relative to this interesting Affair, from that
Gentleman's being taken into Custody by his Majesty's Messengers, to his
Discharge at the Court of Common Pleas.

WITH An Abstract of that precious JEWEL of an Englishman, The Habeas Corpus
Act.

ALSO The NORTH BRITON, No. 45. Being the Paper for which Mr. WILKES was sent
to the Tower.

Addressed to all Lovers of Liberty.

LONDON, Printed,

PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted: And to be Sold by W. DUNLAP, in Market-Street,
M,DCC,LXIII.

THE PROCEEDINGS, etc.
THE Attention of the public being at this Time entirely taken up with the
affair of John Wilkes, Esquire member of parliament for Aylesbury, in
Buckinghamshire; a gentleman of the greatest honor and abilities, and friend to
liberty and his country, and a steady asserter of the invaluable rights and
privileges of Englishmen; we hope the following impartial state of the case,
and authentic account of all the proceedings and papers relative to that
interesting and alarming encroachment on the prerogative of the subject, lately
exhibited by the most arbitrary and unjust extension of power ever yet known,
will meet with the approbation and protection of every honest man, and
well-wisher to his Country.

Indeed such is the frame of our government, so prudently and strongly have our
ancestors secured liberty and property (rescued by inches out of the hands of
encroaching violence) that we cannot be enslaved but by chains of our own
making. By the wisdom of our forefathers, the meanest subject in this kingdom
is protected from being given up as a prey to the arbitary pleasure, not only
of the Prince, if he should attempt it, but (which is far more grievous) to the
unreasonable passions and lusts of Favorites, Chief Ministers, and Women.

There are three things that the Law of England (which is the law of Mercy)
principally regards and takes care of, viz. Life, Liberty, and Estate. Next to
a man's Life, is the freedom of his person; for what is imprisonment but a kind
of civil death? And Fortescue, Cap. 42. justly remarks, Anglioe jura in omni
casu libertati dant favorum. "The laws of England do, in all cases, favor
liberty."

The Writ of Habeas Corpus, is a remedy granted by the common law, for such as
are unjustly detained in custody, to procure their liberty; but before this
statute was rendered less useful than it ought to be, partly by the judges
pretending a power to grant or deny the said writ at their pleasure, in many
cases; and especially by the ill practice of sheriffs and goalers, in putting
the prisoner to the trouble of an alies and pluries; that is a second and third
writ, before they would obey the first (as at that time there was no penalty
till the third) and after all, the judges would frequently allege, that they
could not take bail, because the party was a Prisoner of State, etc. Therefore
to remedy these inconveniences, this wholesome law was provided. And as no man
is sure but at one time or another he may have occasion to make use of it, we
shall give a brief explanation of it to the meanest capacities, by dividing it
into its several branches.

The Habeas Corpus Act concerns either, 1. Persons committed for some other
criminal, or supposed criminal matter, besides Treason or Felony, and these are
to have an Habeas immediately. 2. Such who in their Mittimus are charged with
Treason or Felony; and these shall have the said writ after the time herein
limited. 1. If any jailer, or under-keeper shall not deliver a true copy of the
Mittimus within six hours after the prisoner demands it, the head jailer or
keeper forfeits to the prisoner, for the first offense, the sum of 100 l. for
the second offense 200 l. and loses his place; nor is there any fee to be paid
for the same, the turnkey must deliver it at his peril. -- Note, If any
prisoner shall be locked up, or no one suffered to come near him, any friend
may demand it on his behalf.

2. Whatever the criminal matter may be, if Treason or Felony be not expressly
charged, any person on the prisoner's behalf, carrying such true copy of the
commitment to the Lord Chancellor, or any of the Judges, or Barons of the
Exchequer, or upon oath made that a copy was demanded, and denied, he shall
grant an Habeas Corpus, or forfeit 500 l. to the prisoner. But such request
must be made in writing, and attested by two witnesses.

3. If the sheriff or jailer do not carry up the prisoner, and return the true
causes of his detainer within three days, if within 20 miles distance; or
within ten days, if above 20 and under 100 miles; or within twenty days if
above 100 miles, he forfeits 500 l. to the prisoner. -- Note, The prisoner must
pay the charges of his carrying up, and the Judge when he grants the writ may
order how much; but it must not be above 12d. a mile.

If upon the return of such Habeas Corpus it appears that the prisoner is not
charged with Treason of Felony, especially and plainly expressed, or for such
matters as by law are not bailable, the Judge shall discharge the prisoner on
bail.

4. If a person once so bailed out shall again be imprison'ed for the same
offense, those that do it forfeit 500 l.

5. If there be High Treason for Felony, plainly and specially expressed, that
is, not only generally for Treason or Felony, but Treason in conspiring to kill
the King, or counterfeiting the King's coin, or Felony for stealing the goods
of such an one to such a value, etc. then the prisoner cannot have his Habeas
Corpus, till be has, on the first week of the Term, or first day of sessions of
Oyer and Terminer, or general goal delivery, pertitioned in open court, to be
brought to his trial the next term or sessions following; on the last day
thereof he shall be bailed; and if not indicted the second term or sessions,
shall be discharged.

6. This act extends to all places within England and Wales; the Tower cannot
be supposed to be exempted, nor Windsor Castle, Anno 13. Rich. II. "It is
ordained and assented, That the King's castles and goals, which were wont to be
joined to the bodies of the counties, and be now severed, shall be rejoined to
the same counties."
nor any such royal forts, for the words are general. And besides, there is a
special Act of Parliament, that unites the King's castles to the counties
wherein they stand; there having formerly, it seems, been some pretensions, and
ill practices, to hold them distinct, that therein they may detain prisoners
against law, and not admit any writ to enlarge them.

Lastly, No person shall be sent prisoner out of England or Wales, into
Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey, or any other place beyond the seas.

This Act took its rise in 1674, when it was calculated to set bounds to the
arbitrary proceedings of Ministers. In 1679 the House of Commons brought in a
bill for excluding placemen and pensioners from seats in Parliament. They also
voted the standing army, and even the King's guards, to be illegal. But to
compensate for the faction and violence into which they had been led by their
prejudices, they got the ever-memorable Habeas Corpus Act pasted into a law;
which crowned the security of the subject, by ratifying one of the most
essential parts of MACNA CHARTA, and the PETITION of RIGHTS.

Having thus given a concise account of the above act, which we hope will not
be unentertaining to our Readers. We shall proceed with the case of Mr. Wilkes.

The North-Briton of Saturday, April 23, 1763, was the cause of Mr. Wilkes's
being taken into custody by a warrant from the Secretary of State, for writing
the said paper; he was accordingly taken into custody on Saturday the 30th of
April, and, after being examined, was committed to the Tower. The same
afternoon and Habeas Corpus was granted by the Lord Chief Justice of the Court
of Common Pleas.

The following papers being authentic, will give a farther insight into the
matter.

The NORTH BRITON, No. 45.
THE King's Speech has always been considered by the legislature, and by the
public at large, as the speech of the Minister.

This week has given the public the most abandoned instance of ministerial
effrontery ever attempted to be imposed on mankind. I am in doubt, whether the
imposition is greater on the Sovereign, or on the nation. Every friend of his
country must lament that a Prince of so many great and amiable qualities, whom
England truly revers, can be brought to give the sanction of his sacred name to
the most odious measures, and to the most unjustifiable, public declarations,
from a throne ever renowned for truth, honor, and unfullied virtue. I am sure,
all foreigners, especially the King, of Prussia, will hold the Minister in
contempt and abhorrence. He has made our Sovereign declare, My expectations
have been fully answered by the happy affects which the several allies of my
crown have derived from this salutary measure of the definitive treaty. The
Powers at war with my good brother, the King of Prussia, have been induced to
agree to such terms of accommodations as that great Prince has approved; and
the success which has attended by negotiation has necessarily and immediately
diffused the blessings of peace through every part of Europe. The infamous
fallacy of this whole sentence is apparent to all mankind: For it is known,
that the King of Prussia did not barely approve but absolutely dictated, as
conqueror, every article of the terms of peace. No advantage of any Kind has
accrued to that magnanimous Prince from our negociations but he was basely
deserted by the Scottish prime Minister of England. He was known by every Court
in Europe to be scarcely on better terms of friendship here, than at Vienna;
and he was betrayed by us in the treaty of peace. What a strain of Insolence,
therefore, is it in a Minister to lay claim to what he is conscious all his
efforts tended to prevent, and meanly to arrogate to himself a share in the
fame and glory of one of the greatest Princes the world has ever seen? The
Kings of Prussia, however, has gloriously kept all his former conquests, and
stipulated security for all his allies, even for the Elector of Hanover. I know
in what light this great Prince is considered in Europe, and what manner he has
been treated here; among other reasons, perhaps, from some contemtuous
expressions he may have used of the Scot: Expressions which are every day
echoed by the whole Body of Englishmen through the southern part of this island.

The Preliminary articles of peace were such as have drawn the contempt of
mankind on our wretched negociators. All our most valuable conquests were
agreed to be restored, and the East India company would have been infallibly
ruined by a single article of this fallacious and baneful negotiation. No
hireling of the Ministry has been hardy enough to dispute this; yet the
Minister himself has made our Sovereign declare, the satisfaction which he felt
at the approaching re-establishment of peace upon conditions so honorable to
his crown, and so beneficial to his people. As to the entire approbation of
parliament, which he so vainly boasted of, the world knows how that was
obtained. The large debt on the civil list, already half a year in arrear,
shows pretty clearly the Transactions of the Winter. It is, however,
remarkable, that the Minister's speech dwells on the entire approbation given
by parliament to the preliminary articles, which I will venture to say, he must
by this time be ashamed of; for he has been brought to confess the total want
of that knowledge and Precision, by which such immense advantages both of trade
and territory, were sacrificed to our inveterate enemies. These gross Blunders
are, indeed, in some measure set right by the definitive treaty; yet the most
important articles, relative to cessions, commerce, and FISHERY, remain as they
were, with respect to the French. The proud and feeble Spaniard too does not
RENOUNCE, but only DESPOTS from all pretensions, which be may have formed, to
the right of fishing -- where? Only about the island of NEWFOUNDLAND -- till a
favorable opportunity arises of insisting on it, there, as well as elsewhere.

The Minister cannot forbear, even in the King's Speech, insulting us with a
dull repetition of the word Economy. I did not expect soon to have seen the
more again, after it had been so excluded, and more than once, by a numerous
audience, hissed off the (...) of our English theaters. Let the public be
informed of a single Instance of economy, except indeed in the household: Is a
(...) which was completed as to its compliment of officers, on the Tuesday,
and broke on the Thursday, a proof of economy? In the pay of the Scottish
Master Elliot to be voted by an English parliament under the head of economy?
Is this, among a thousand others, one of the convincing proofs of a firm
resolution to form government on a plan of strict economy? Is it not
notorious, that in the reduction of the army, not the least attention has been
paid to it? Many unnecessary expenses have been incurred, only to increase the
power of the crown, that is to create more lucrative jobs for the creatures of
the minister, The Staff indeed is broke, but the discerning part of mankind
immediately comprehended the mean subterfuge, and resented the indignity put
upon so brave on Officer, as Marshal Ligonier. The step was taken to give the
whole power of the army to the crown, that is to the minister. Lord Ligonier is
now no longer at the head of the army; but Lord Bute in effect is: I mean that
every preserment given by the crown will be found still to be obtained by his
enormous influence, and to be bestowed only on the creatures of the Scottish
faction. The nation is still in the same deplorable state, while he governs,
and can make the tools of his power pursue the same odious measure. Such a
retreat, as he intends, can only mean that personal indemnity, which, I hope,
guilt will never find from an injured nation. The negociations of the late
inglorious Peace, and the Excise, will haunt him wherever he goes; and the
terrors of the just resentment which the must be in to meet from a brave and
insulted people, and which must finally crush him, will be for ever before his
eyes.

In vain will such a minister, or the soul dregs of his power, the tools of
corruption and despotism, preach up in the speech that spirit of concord, and
that obedience to the laws, which is essential to good order. They have sent
the spirit of discord through the land, and I will proprecy, that it will never
be extinguished, but by the extinction of their power. Is the Spirit of Concord
to go hand in hand with the PEACE and EXCISE through this nation? It is to be
expected between an insolent EXCISEMAN, and as Peer, Gentleman, Freeholder, or
Farmer, whose private houses are now made liable to be emered and searched at
pleasure? Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, and is general all the Cider
countries, are not sarely the serveral countries which are alluded to in the
speech. The spirit of concord had not gone forth among them, but the spirit of
liberty has, and a noble opposition has been given to the wicked instruments of
opression.

A despotic minister will always endeavor to dazzle his prince with high flown
ideas of prerogative and honor of the crown, which the minister will make a
parade of firmly maintaining. I wish as much as any man in the kingdom, to see
the honor of the crown maintained in a manner truly becoming Royalty. I lament
to see it sunk even to prostitution. What a shame was it to see the security of
this country, in point of military force, complimented away, contrary to the
opinion of Royalty itself, and sacrificed to the prejudices and to the
ignorance of a set of people, the most unfit from every consideration to be
consulted on a Matter relating to the security of the House of Hanover? I wish
to see the honor of the crown religiously asserted with regard to our allies,
and the dignity of it scrupulously maintained with regard to foreign Princes.
Is it possible such an indignity can have happened; such a sacrifice of the
crown of England, as that a minister should already have kissed his Majesty's
hand on being appointed to the most insolent and ungrateful court in the world,
without a previous assurance of that reciprocal nomination which the meanest
court in Europe would insist upon, before the proceeded to act otherwise so
derogatory to her honor? But Electoral Policy has ever been obsequious to the
court of Vienna, and forgets the insolence with which Count Colloredo left
England. Upon a principle of dignity and economy, Lord Stormont, a Scottish
Poer, of the loyal house of Murray, kissed his Majesty's hand, I think, on
Wednesday in the Easter Week; but this ignominious act has not disgraced the
nation in the London Gazette. The ministry are not ashamed of doing the thing
in private; they are only afraid of the publication. Was it a tender regard for
the honor of the late King, or of his present Majesty, that invited to court
Lord George Sackville, in these first days of peace; to share in the general
satisfaction, which all good countiers received in the indignity offered to
Lord Ligonier, and on the advancement of -- --? Was this to show princely
gratitude to the eminent service of the accomplished General of the house of
Brunswick, who has had so great a share in rescuing Europe from the Yoke of
France; and whose nephew we hope soon to see made happy in the possession of
the most amiable Princess in the World? Or, is it meant to assert the honor of
the crown only, against the united wishes of a loyal and affectionate people,
founded in a happy experience of the talents, ability, integrity, and virtue of
those who have had the glory of redeeming their country from bondage and ruin,
in order to support, by every art of corruption and intimidation, a weak,
disjointed, incapable set of -- -- I will call them any thing but Ministers --
by whom the Favorite still meditates to rule this kingdom with a rod of iron.

[ End of the North-Briton.]

MAGNA CHARTA. CAP. 29.
No Freeman may be apprehended, or imprisoned, or disseissed of his Freehold,
or LIBERTIES, or free Customs, or be outlawed or banished, or any wise
destroyed. Nor will we pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by the lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

As the Apprehension and Commitment of John Wilkes, Esquire Member of Parliament,
to the Tower, must have raised the curiosity of many people to know the
circumstances attending it; the following detail of simple facts (upon which
every reader will make his own comments) cannot be unseasonable, and are
perhaps absolutely necessary to be laid before the public.

On Saturday the Thirtieth of April, at Ten in the Forenoon, three of his
Majesty's messengers, by a warrant from the Secretary of State, seized on the
Person of the said John Wilkes, Esquire Member of Parliament; of which warrant the
following is a true copy.

George Montagu Dunk Earl of Halifax Viscount Sunbury and Baron Halifax one of
the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council Lieutenant General of
his Majesty's Forces, and Principal Secretary of State.

L.S.

THESE are in his Majesty's Name to authorize and require you (taking a
constable to your assistance) to make strict and diligent search for the
Authors Printers and Publishers of a seditious and treasonable Paper entitled
the North Briton Number XLV Saturday April 23 1763 printed for G Kearsly in
Ludgate Street London and them or any of them having found to apprehend and
seize together with their papers and to bring in safe custody before me to be
examined concerning the premises and further dealt with according to law and in
the due execution thereof all Mayors Sheriffs Justices of the Peace Constables
and all other his Majesty's officers civil and military and loving subjects
whom it may concern are to be aiding and assisting to you as there shall be
occasion and for so doing this shall be your warrant. Given at St. James' the
twenty-sixth day of April in the Third Year of his Majesty's Reign.

Signed Dunk Halifax,
Directed to Nathan Carrington John Money James Watson and Robert Blackmore
Four of his Majesty's Messengers in ordinary.



N. B. The Officers had a verbal order to put this warrant in execution, by
entering forceably into the house of John Wilkes, Esquire Member of Parliament, at
midnight; and those officers are (the hand bill says) now threatened with the
loss of their places, for not complying with such verbal Instructions.

On the intimation of Mr. Wilkes, Member of Parliament, being in custody, a
motion was made in the Court of Common Pleas, then fitting in Westminster Hall,
for a Habeas Corpus, which was granted; though by reason of the prothonotory's
office not being open, such Habeas Corpus could not be sued out till four
o'clock in the afternoon.

Several Gentlemen, Friends, and Acquaintance of the said John Wilkes, Esquire
Member of Parliament, applied for admittance into his house, which was then
peremptorily refused by a pretended order from the Secretary of State; which
order, though repeatedly requested, was not, nor could not be produced.

As no proper of legal authority appeared to countenance such refusal, the
Gentlemen thought themselves no ways obliged to obey the verbal commands of
officers acting only under verbal authority; and entered accordingly without
further question or molestation from those officers.

Mr. Wood, the Deputy Secretary of State, being sent for, demanded the reason
of such forcible entry: It was replied, that no force had been used, and that
the Gentlemen thought themselves legally justified in what They had done.

Soon after this (whether sent for, or not, does not appear) Phillip Carteret
Webb, Esquire Solicitor to the Treasury, came into the room, and some private
conversation between him and Mr. Wood having past, the latter asked, if any
Gentleman then present would attend or inspect the officers while they were
sealing up all the papers in the house of Mr. Wilkes; or used words to the like
effect.

Mr. Wilkes having declined to accept of the like offer, no person then present
thought himself authorized to take upon him such inspection.

Notwithstanding it was known, that the Court of Common Pleas had granted an
Habeas Corpus, of which fact Philip Carteret Webb, Esquire Solicitor to the
Treasury, at that time at Lord Halifax's, was then well assured; yet was the
said John Wilkes, Esquire Member of Parliament, committed to the Tower of London.

His Solicitor and one of his council, soon after they heard of such
commitment, went to the Tower, in order to consult with the said John Wilkes,
about the legal methods to be pursued for his enlargement; but were denied
admittance; Major Ransford informed them, that he had received orders from the
Secretary of State, not to admit any person whatsoever, to speak with, or see
the said John Wilkes: And further informed them, that he has just before
refused the right honorable the Earl of Temple such admittance.

On Sunday, May the first, the same gentlemen, between the hours of 12 and 1,
called again, upon Major Ransford, on the same occasion, but were again denied
admittance, as were soon after many Noblemen and Gentlemen of the first
distinction, and Mr. Wilkes's own Brother.

After such denial, Mr. Wilkes's Solicitor demanded of the Major, a copy of the
warrant under which Mr. Wilkes was committed to the Tower; which was readily
granted by the Major, and of which the following is a true copy.

Charles Earl of Egremont and George Dunk Earl of Halifax, Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretaries of State.

These are, in his Majesty's Name, to authorize and require you, to receive
into your Custody the Body of John Wilkes, Esquire herewith sent you, for being the
Author and Publisher of a most infamous and seditious Libel entitled the North
Briton Number 45: tending to inflame the Minds and alienate the Affections of
the People from his Majesty and to excite them to traitorous Insurrections
against the Government. And to keep him safe and close until he shall be
delivered by due Course of law and for so doing this shall be your Warrant
Given at St. James', the 30th Day of April 1763 in the third Year of his
Majesty's Reign.

L.S. Signed EGREMONT. DUNK HALIFAX.
L.S. To the Right Honorable John Lord Berkeley of Stratton Constable of his
Majesty's Tower of London or to the Lieutenant of the said Tower or his Deputy.



Philip Carteret Webb, Esquire Solicitor to the Treasury, then being present in the
said Major Ransford's room, Mr. Wilkes's Council and Solicitor applied to the
said Mr. Webb for admittance to the said Mr. Wilkes.

Philip Carteret Webb, Esquire re-answered, He believed there must have been a
mistake in the Orders, and that, if either of the Secretaries of state were in
Town, He would apply to Them, are obtain such admittance as aforesaid; and that
he would either send or bring, an order for such admittance in the afternoon.

Upon this assertion the said Mr. Wilkes's Council and Solicitor, between Eight
and Nine o'Clock in the evening of the same day, again went to the Tower, and
applied for admittance as aforesaid. The Major, having received no instruction
from either of the Secretaries of State, of Philip Carteret Webb, Esquire refused,
as before.

On the morning of this day ( Monday, the second of May) the Court of Common
Pleas ordered a return to their writ of Habeas Corpus; which return not the
appearing to the court to be sufficient, the court ordered, that the said
return should not at present be filed: But, upon motion, granted another Habeas
Corpus, directed to the constable and so forth of the tower of London.

Mr. Wilkes's solicitor and council, this same day, between the hours of two
and three, again went to the tower, and made application to major Ransford for
admittance to the said John Wilkes, Esquire but were refused such admittance; major
Ransford declaring, that he had received no orders from either of the
Secretaries of State to that purpose. There appeared upon the table of the said
major Ransford a written order for him to take down the names of all persons
applying for admittance to Colonel Wilkes.

MAGNA EST VERITAS.

During his consinement, in order to divert the hours of iolitude, he wrote to
his Daughter at Paris; and, having obtained a copy (which was sent open to the
Earl of Halifax, in order to be forwarded) we take the liberty of presenting it
to the public.

Tower, Sunday May 1, 1763. My dearest Polly,
I Have got half an hour's leisure to pay my compliments to you, and to relieve
you from the anxiety you will, from the kind affection you bear to me, be in at
hearing of my commitment to this place. Be assured that I have done nothing
unworthy of a man of honor, who has the happiness of being your father. You
shall never in future life blush for me. I am only accused of writing the last
North-Briton, yet my sword has been taken from me, all my papers have been
stolen by ruffians, and I have been forceably brought here. I have not yet seen
my accusers, nor have I heard who they are. My friends are refused admittance
to me. Lord Temple, and my Brother, could not be allowed to see me yesterday.
As an Englishman, I must lament that my liberty is thus wickedly taken away.
Yet I am not unhappy, for my honor is clear, my health good, and my spirit
unshaken, I believe, indeed, invincible. The most pleasing thoughts I have, are
of you, and the most agreeable news I can hear, will be the continuance of your
health.

I beg you not to write a word of politics. -- The knives you desired are
almost finished, and are very elegant. If you with for any thing from England
for yourself, or your friends, let me know, and I will give orders for it.

A propos, my dear girl, can you get me made Membre du Parliament de Paris, for
our's has lost all their privileges? yours has a few lest. -- My best
compliments to Madam W
. I hope to kiss her hands by the end of June, and that we shall all make our
Tour together, and laugh at all the follies and rogueries of this country. Pray
tell Baron J
that I have finished the business he recommended to me. Kiss for me once --
and twice --. Have you been yet on any parties with them? Comment trouvezvous
l'Opera, l'Comedie, etc. Is your old acquaintance Miss Wriothelly still with
the Duchess of Bedford? How does the Person at the Ambassador's Chapel preach?
Does M. Neville make love to you? How do you like Mr. Pottinger? etc. etc. etc.
etc. etc. Continue to love me, and believe, me with the greatest warmth of
affection,

Your obliged Father, J...W.....


On Tuesday, May 3, at half an hour past ten in the morning, Mr. Wilkes was
brought to the Bar of the Court of Common Pleas, where he made the following
Speech, truly becoming a Man, and a member of the House of Commons.

My LORDS,
I Feel myself happy to be at last brought before a Court, and before Judges,
whose Characteristic is the love of liberty. I have many humble thanks to
return for the immediate order you were pleased to issue, to give me an
opportunity, of laying my grievances before you. They are of a kind hitherto
unparalleled in this free country, and I trust the consequences will teach
ministers of Scottish and arbitrary principles, that the liberty of an English
subject is not to be sported away with impunity, in this cruel and despotic
manner.

I am accused of being the author of the North Briton, No. 45. I shall only
remark upon that paper, that it takes all load of acculation from the sacred
name of a prince, whose family I love and honor, as the glorious defenders of
the cause of liberty, whose personal qualities are to amiable, great, and
respectable, that he is deservedly the idol of his people. It is the peculiar
fashion and crime of these times, and of those who hold high ministerial
offices in government, to throw every odious charge from themselves upon
Majesty. The author of this paper, whoever he may be, has, upon constitutional
principles, done directly the reverse, and is therefore in me, the supposed
author, meant to be persecuted accordingly.

The particular cruelties of my treatment, worse than if I have been a Scots
rebel, this court will hear, and I dare say, from your justice, in due time
redress.

I may perhaps still have the means left me to show that I have been superior
to every temptation of corruption. They may indeed have flattered themselves,
that when they found corruption could not prevail, persecution might
intimidate. I will show myself superior to both, my papers have been seized,
perhaps with a hope the better to deprive me of that proof of their meanness,
and corrupt prodigality, which it may possibly, in a proper place, be yet in my
power to give.

He then pleaded by his council, Mr. Sergeant Glynn, for his discharge,
alleging that his commitment was not valid. The point in debate lasted from
eleven o'clock till a quarter past two; he was offered the liberty of being
bailed, which he refused; and after several learned arguments on both sides, he
was remanded back to the tower; and his friends had, for the first time, the
opportunity of free access to him. -- At his departure from the hall, the
acclamations of the people ecchoed, Liberty! Liberty! Whigs for ever, and no
Excise! -- The court then adjourned till Friday the 6th of May, at which time
he was ordered to be brought up, in order that the affair should be finally
determined.

His friends now embraced the opportunity of visiting him; and perhaps no
prisoner in the tower of London ever before, was attended by such an
illustrious train of Wellwishers.

During this respite his Majesty was pleased to issue orders to Lord Egremont,
to discontinue him from his being a colonel in the militia of the county of
Buckingham, which was signified to him in the following letters.

Whitehall, May 4, 1763. MY LORD,
THE King having judged it improper, that John Wilkes, Esquire should any longer
continue to be colonel of the militia from the county of Buckingham, I am
commanded to signify His Majesty's Pleasure to your Lordship, that you do
forthwith give the necessary Orders for displacing Mr. Wilkes, as an Officer in
the Militia for the said county of Buckingham.

I am, with great Respect, MY LOD. Your Lordship's most obedient Humble
Servant, EGREMONT.
Copy. To the Earl Temple.




Pall Mall, May 5, 1763. SIR,
AT my Return last Night from the Tower, I received the enclosed Letter from
the Earl of Egremont: In consequence of his Majesty's Commands therein
signified, you will please to observe, that you no longer continue Colonel of
the Militia for the County of Buckingham.

I cannot, at the same Time, help expressing the Concern I fell in the Loss of
an Officer, by his Deportment in Command, endeared to the whole Corpse.

I am, SIR, Your most obedient And most humble Servant, TEMPLE
To John Wilkes, Esquire




To which Mr. Wilkes made the following sensible and genteel Answer.

Tower, May 5, 1763. My LORD,
I Have this moment the honor of your Lordship's Letter, signifying his
Majesty's Commands, that I should no longer continus Colonel of the Militia for
the County of Buckingham. I have only to return your Lordship my warmest Thanks
for the Spirit and Zeal you have shown in the Support of that Constitutional
Measure from the very Beginning. Your Lordship will please to remember, that I
was among the foremost who offered their Services to their Country at that
Crifis. Buckinghamshire is sensible, and has always acknowledged, that no Man
but your Lordship could have given Success to that Measure in our inland
Country. I am proud of the Testimony your Lordship is pleased to give me, and I
am happy, in these Days of Peace, to leave so amiable a Corpse in that perfect
Harmony which has from the Beginning subsisted.

I have the Honor to be, With unfeigned Respect, MY LORD, Your Lordship's most
obedient, And most humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.
Copy To the Earl Temple.




Here it will not be improper to insert some detached Pieces published in the
Public Papers relative to the Affair, in order to render this Publication more
entertaining and complete. The two following were printed in the Public Ledger,
on Friday, May 6th, the Day fixed for the Decision of this important Affair.

To the Printer of the PUBLIC LEDGER.
Remember, O my Friends, the LAWS, the RIGHTS,
The generous Plan of Power delivered down,
From Age to Age, by your renowned Forefathers;
So dearly brought, the Price of so much Blood:
O let it never perish in your Hands,
But piously transmit it to your Children.
Do thou, great LIBERTY, inspire our Souls,
And make our Lives in thy Possession happy,
Or our Death GLORIOUS in thy just Defense.
CATO. IS there one man, one Englishman, I mean that will not now subscribe to
the above quoted lines?

When the people in Westminster Hall shouted Mr. Wilkes with a plaudit of
approbation, it was said to be the voice of clamor. His reply was, No, Sir, it
is the voice of LIBERTY. We are now fluctuating between hopes and fears; we are
alarmed for our liberty, and it is this, is the crisis by which we may judged
of both PREROGATIVES.

However trifling this present contest concerning the legality of a particular
warrant, may seem, to the inattentive part of this nation, thinking persons
cannot help being alarmed, greatly alarmed, at what may be the consequence,
especially when persons already begin publicly to give it as their opinion,
that those who expressed themselves by the common methods of approbation, such
as clapping of hands, ought to be committed for it.

But thank God, our laws, our liberties, our rights, are not in such peoples
possession; they would deal about their power as Phaeton, when driving the
fun's chariot, did his father's rays, to the detriment and destruction of the
world he should have cherished.

I am yours, etc.

To the Editor of the PUBLIC LEDGER.
The CONTRAST.
COL. WILKES is a contrast to those that have been prisoners, in that
repository of rebellious and tyrannical SCOTS, the Tower, of London.

He is a staunch Whig; they were notorious Jacobites.

He is zealously attached to our present royal family of Brunswick, the
glorious maintainers of our civil and religious rights.They were bigoted to
the tyrant family of the Stuarts, who for repeated attempts to enslave a free
people, and reduce them to the state of SCOTCH VASSALS, was BANISHED.

His conduct has been steady. He was a Whig by family, and he remains so,
though Whigs are discarded, and Tories promoted. He was a Whig in 1745, when
the Scotch were in Arms against our KING, our LAWS, and our RELIGION. He was at
that time a friend to LIBERTY. When the Scotch were in arms, in the cause of
Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power. He was a Friend, may he revered the Duke
of Cumberland, because he crushed the Scotch Rebellion; for which reason he is
deserted by the Scotch.

Col. Wilkes's Attachments to the present Royal Family has been gratis: Where
is the SCOT that can say the same?

Col. Wilkes, with all his true English Merit, his Zeal for our KING, his
Detestation of his MINISTRY; his Opposition to the Extension of the EXCISE; his
Support of the LIBERTY of the PRESS; his Attention to the Privilege of
PARLIAMENT; and his Attachment to the HABEAS CORPUS, is, in the Scotch
Administration, rewarded with being a close Prisoner in the Tower, and treated
with a Severity unknown to a Rebel SCOT. While the Scotch, who supposed
Affection, and whose Change of Principles, bear Date with their Commissions, or
Patents, and whose Loyalty is an Appurtinance to Office, and will expire with
the Loss of it, are the Rulers of the English. OTERRIBLE!

I, and every other WHIG, and true Englishman most devoutly pray for the
Welfare of our present excellent Sovereign GEORGE the THIRD; and that his Reign
may be long, and happy. To obtain the latter, they with him a Ministry not
totally obnoxious to the People; nor absolutely ignorant of their duty, not
quite regardless of our liberties. A Ministry who neither loves the EXCISE, nor
detests, through FEAR, the liberty of the PRESS.

I am, Sir, yours, etc.

On Friday, May 6, about eight o'clock in the morning, Mr. Wilkes was brought
from the Tower, attended by the proper officers, and reached Westminster Hall
about nine. The Lord Chief Justice and the other Judges came about the, and the
court being assembled, Mr. Wilkes himself opened the business upon which they
were met, with the following Speech, which was handed about the next day.

My Lords,
FAR be it from me to regret that I have passed so many more days in Captivity,
as it will have afferded you an opportunity of doing, upon mature reflection,
and repeated examination, the more signal justice to my Country. The Liberty of
all Peers, and Gentlemen, and what touches me more sensibly, that of all the
midling and inferior class of people, who stand most in need of protection, is
in my case this day to be finally decided upon: A question of such importance
as to determine at once whether English Liberty be a Reality or a Shadow. Your
own freeborn hearts will feel with Indignation and Compassion all that load of
oppression under which I have so long labored. Close Imprisonment, the effect
of premeditated malice; all access for more than two days denied to me; my
house ransacked and plundered; my most private and secret concerns divulged;
every vile and malignant infination, even of High Treason itself, no less
industriously than falsely circulated, by my cruel and implacable enemies,
together with all the various insolence of office, form but a part of my
unexampled ill treatment. Such inhuman principles of Star Chamber Tyranny will,
I trust, by This Court, upon this solemn occasion, be finally extirpated, and
henceforth every innocent man, however poor and unsupported, may hope to sleep
in peace and security in his own house, unviolated, by King's Messengers and
the arbitrary Mandaates of an over-bearing Secretary of State.

I will no longer delay your justice. The Nation is impatient to hear, nor can
be safe or happy, till that is obtained. If the same persecution is after all
to carry me before another court, I hope I shall find that the genuine Spirit
of Magna Charta, that glorious inheritance, that distinguishing characteristic
of Englishmen, is as religiously revered there, as I know it is here, by the
great personages, before whom I have now the happiness to stand; and (as in the
ever memorable case of the imprisoned Bishops) that an independent Jury of
freeborn Englishmen. will persist to determine my sat as in conscience bound,
upon constitutional principles, by a vereict of Guilty or Not Guilty. I ask no
more at the hands of my countrymen.

When Mr. Wilkes had made an end, that distinguished ornament to justice and
humanity, Lord Chief Justice Pratt, stood up, and delivered the opinion of the
Court to the following purport, arranging the matter in question under these
three separate heads.

First, The legality of Mr. Wilkes's Commitment.

Secondly, the necessity for a specification of those particular passages in
the 45th number of the NORTH BRITON, which had been deemed a Libel. And,

Thirdly, Mr. Wilkes's Privilege as a Member of Parliament.

In regard to the first, his Lordship remarked, That he would consider a
Secretary of State's Warrant through the whole Affair, as nothing superior to the
Warrant of a common Justice of the Peace; and that no Magistrate had in reality
a Right ex officio to apprehend any Person, without stating the particular
Crime of which he was accused; but at the same Time he observed there were many
Precedents where a nice Combination of Circumstances gave so strong a suspicion
of Facts, that though that Magistrate could not be justified ex officio, he was
nevertheless supported in the Commitment, even without receiving any particular
Information for the Foundation of his Charge. The Word Charge, his Lordship
took Notice, was in general much misunderstood, and did not mean the Accusation
brought against any Person taken up, but his Commitment by the Magistrate
before whom be might be brought. Upon the Whole of this Point, according to the
customary Rule, which had been for a Series of Years observed by the Sages of
the Law, even in the Reign of Charles the Second, when this Matter was to
frequently contested, his Lordship was of Opinion, that Mr. Wilkes's Commitment
was not illegal.

In relation to the next Article, which required a Specification of the
particular Passages in the 45th North Briton, which were deemed a Libel, his
Lordship took Notice that the Insertion of these Passages, so far as they
related to the Point in Question, was not at all necessary; for even supposing
the Whole of the 45th North Briton had been inserted in the Body of the
Warrant, yet it by no Means came under his Lordship's Cognizance at that Time;
for the Matter in Consideration then was, not the Nature of the Offense, but
the Legality of the Commitment; the Nature of the Offense not resting in the
Bosom of a Judge, without the Assistance of a Jury; and not being a proper
subject of Enquiry, till regularly bro't on to be tried, in the customary Way
of Proceeding.

With respect to the third and last Point, How far, Mr. Wilkes had a Right to
plead his privilege as a Member of Parliament, my Lord Chief Justice remarked,
that there were but three Cases which could possibly affect the Privilege of a
Member of Parliament, and these were Treason, Felony, and the Peace. The Peace
as it is written in the Institutes of the Law, his Lordship explained to
signify a Breach of the Peace: He remarked, that when the Seven Bishops were
sent to the Tower, the Plea which was used when the Spiritual Lords contended
for their Privilege, was, that they had endeavored to disturb the Peace. This,
at that Arbitrary Time, was judged sufficient to forfeit their Privilege, but
remarked his Lordship, out of the four Judges then upon the Bench, there was
but one honest Man; that was Powel, and he declined giving any Opinion. This
great and good Man then answered, that the Privilege of Parliament should be
held sacred and inviolable, and as there were but three particular Cases in
which that Privilege was forfeited, it only remained to examine how far Mr.
Wilkes's was endangered. Mr. Wilkes stood accused of writing a Libel, a Libel
in the Sense of the Law was a High Misdemeanour; but did not come within the
Description of Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace, At most it had but a
tendency to disturb the Peace, and consequently could not be sufficient to
destroy the Privilege of a Member of Parliament.

Thus this Point of Privilege was determined, and Mr. Wilkes immediately
discharged, through the universal Acclamations of an incredible Number of
Spectators, all impatient to know the Result of so important a Question. He had
however been scarcely discharged, when a Gentleman of Eminence in the Law stood
up, and told my Lord Chief Justice, that he had just received a Note from the
Attorney and Solicitor General, to entreat his Lordship would not give Mr.
Wilkes leave to depart till their coming, which would be instant, as they had
something to offer against his Plea of Privilege. The Motion was however
heartily laughed at by the whole Court, as that Gentleman had been discharged
already, and the Question finally ended.

It Is impossible to do sufficient Honor to that amazing Power of Elocution,
and Depth of Understanding which My Lord Chief Justice displayed upon this
Occasion; he was florid without Parade, and profound without Oftentation; to
say all, in one Word, he was a perfect Image of Integrity the most refined, and
Wisdom the most elegant. After the Court had proceeded to give their Opinion,
and Mr. Wilkes, was ordered to be discharged, he then addressed himself to the
Court in the Words following:

My Lords,
GREAT as my Joy must naturally be at the Decision which this Court, with a
true Spirit of Liberty, has been pleased to make concerning the unwarrantable
Seizure of my Person, and all the other consequential Grievances, allow me to
assure you, that I feel it far less sensibly on my own Account, than I do for
The Public. The Sufferings of an Individual are a trifling object, when
compared with the Whole; and I should blush to feel for Myself in Comparison
with Considerations of a Nature so transcendently superior.

I will not trouble you with my poor Thanks. -- Thanks are due to you from the
whole English Nation, and from all the Subjects of the English Crown. They will
be paid you together with every Testimony of Zeal and Affection to the learned
Sergeant Glynn.
Sergeant who has so ably and so constitutionally pleaded my cause, and in mine
(with pleasure I say it) the Cause of Liberty. Every Testimony of my Gratitude
is justly due to you, and I take Leave of this Court with a Veneration and
Respect, which no Time can obliterate, nor can the most grateful Heart
sufficiently express.

When Mr. Wilkes had ended, the Audience burst into an universal Shout, which
was often repeated. Mr. Wilkes said some little Time in a Room adjoining to the
Court, in Expectation that the Crowd would disperse: At last, finding there was
no Likelihood of their dispersing, he walked out of the back Door of the Common
Pleas, and was received by a prodigious multitude of People, who attended him,
amidst continual Acclamations, to his House in Great GeorgeStreet, Westminster.
As soon as he got in, he went into his Dining Room fronting the Street, and
throwing open his Windows, politely paid his Compliments to the People, who
joined in the most servent Prayers and Wishes for the Continuance of his Health
and Life.

The Evening concluded in several Parts of the Town in a different Manner from
the preceding one (though it was the Day appointed for a general Thanks giving
on account of the Peace Bonefires and Illuminations were displayed, and the
Friends of Liberty spent the Night with an uncommon Satisfaction and Festivity.
In short, there never was so much Pleasure to be seen in the Countenances of
all Ranks of People on any other occasion.

The next Day the following Letter was printed, and some Thousands dispersed
through this Metropolis.

A Copy of a Letter.
Great George Street, May 6, 1763.
On my Return here from Westminster Hall, where I have been discharged from my
Commitment to the Tower under your, L -- -- 's Warrant, I find that my House
has been robbed, and am informed that the Stolen Goods are in the Possession of
one or both of your L -- -- ps. I therefore insist that you do forthwith return
them to

Your humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.


Having given the foregoing candid and complete Account of the Proceedings
relative to Mr. Wilkes, we cannot quit the Subject without making some
Reflections on this unconstitutional Affair.

By the Laws of England, every Man is supposed to be innocent, till it be
proved that he is guilty, and has a Right, when accused of any Crime, to make
Use of the best Means he can for his Defense. This fundamental Principle was so
far violated in the Case of Mr. Wilkes, that, for more than two Days, he was
denied the Privilege of seeing any Person whatsoever. This surely is making an
English Prison but little better than the French Bastile, where Men are often
taken up, confined, and executed, without so much as knowing any Thing of the
Crime they are charged with, or even seeing the Face of their Accusers.

Justice and Humanity demands that every man should be allowed the Advice and
Assistance of his Friends, to clear up his Character and Reputation to the
World. It is the Business of Justice to furnish every Opportunity, instead of
denying it; and whenever a man is refused this, we cannot avoid thinking that
his Enemies are less solicitous about the Nature of his Offense, than studious
about his destruction; and that so far from prosecuting from and equitable
View, they rather proceed from Motives of a Nature easily to be guessed at,
though not so safe to be named.

It is impossible for a man to make a regular Defense without the Help of legal
Advice. Therefore to refuse a Prisoner the Benefit of Council, is diametrically
opposite to the fundamental Spirit of the British Constitution, which, so far
from wanting to condemn, wishes nothing more than to give every Advantage of
proving the Innocence of the unhappy Culprit: For if a man is not allowed to
prepare for his Defense, Sentence may as well pass upon him at once, without
the useless Parade and idle Formality of a Trial. How far this had like to have
been the Case with Mr. Wilkes, let every unbiassed Person decide within
himself, had not the spirited and patriotic Efforts of Lord Temple, and other
noble Patrons of Liberty, gone Hand in Hand with his Resolution, Steadiness,
and persevering Disposition.

What heavier Crime can be laid to a Subject's Charge than Treason against so
gracious a Sovereign as this Nation is at present blessed with? -- And what
Reparation is to be made Mr. Wilkes, for the Confinement of his Person, and
Injury intended his Character? Shall a British Senator suffer such Violence and
Indignity without finding Redress from the Laws of his Country, merely for
standing foremost in the Cause of Liberty! -- Forbid it Heaven!

It we look through the whole Course of Mr. Wilkes's Life, we shall find that
Liberty has been the governing Principle of all his Actions. He has always been
ready to serve our gracious Sovereign and his Family, knowing his Government to
be founded on Liberty. His was the daring Task to rescue the Royal Person from
ill-placed Imputations, and fix them on the Ministers, who alone ought to bare
the Blame, nay, the Punishment, of their unconstitutional Proceedings. He had
the Virtue in these Days of Corruption, to resist the most advantageous and
lucrative Offers, in order to seduce him to their Party; and rather than
associate with Men, who are Enemies to the Liberty of this Country, he chose to
suffer the severest Persecutions. Hitherto he has had the Happiness to surmount
every Difficulty, in a Manner becoming an Englishman, and the Friend and
Guardian of our Liberties; and as the Validity of the Warrant by which he was
committed, will soon be called in Question by Mr. Wilkes, in the Court of
Common Pleas, we shall say no more on that Head, until its Legality shall have
received a Judicial Determination in that Court; when we shall resume the
Subject, and give a further Account of the Affair.

We shall conclude at present with some entertaining Pieces relative to the
Subject:

To John Wilkes, Esquire Member of Parliament for Aylesbury, in the County of
Buckingham.
SIR,
I Take this public Occasion to congratulate you upon your having been
committed to the Tower; and to express my Gratitude to you, as I am an
Individual of this Free People, of whose Rights and Liberties you stand forth
as a Zealous Asserter.

To suffer in the Cause of Virtue, and of public Virtue in particular, is the
highest Merit, but beieve me, Sir, ministerial Rage has done quite another
Thing than it intended; it has committed an Act, which has laid a certain
Foundation for transmitting your Name to Posterity, among the (...) of Patriots
famous for the Love of their country. The Liberty of the Subject has been
^^acked in your Person; and is therefore concerned in your Safety; and there is
not a Man in England who has not been conversant in Bribery or corruption, or
the Writer or Tool of such, but will hereafter mention your Name with Love and
Honor.

Vain have been the Attempts, and (if there be any judging with Certainty of
the human Kind) always vain will be any Attempts to brand you with Disaffection
to your Sovereign. Those who know you well, must testify your Loyalty,
Affection, and Zeal for his most gracious Majesty, and the illustrious House of
Hanover; and your public Conduct has been constantly animated by Re^^^tion
Principles (the only Support of this free Nation) which will never admit the
Glory and Honor of the Crown, and the Prosperity and happiness of the People,
to have opposite or different Interests, or that either can flourish while the
other languishes; and there is not a Man of Sense who is your Opposer, but is
in his Consci^^en convinced that such are your Principles, though he be too
much warped by Prejudice arising from private Views, to allow you your just
Applause.

When such Men as you charge evil Ministers with pernicious Measures, their
trite Artifice you know is to cry out that Disrespect is levelled at the
Sovereign, and the Measures imputed to him What is this, but in Effect vesting
themselves with Sovereignity! But as we all know that the (...) is fenced about
by our Laws in so sacred a Manner, that it is impossible for him to do wrong
and that every Misconduct is therefore charges upon the Minister only, who
advises; that M^^^ter who tells his Sovereign that bad Measures, imputed to
him, taking Shelter at the same Time under his Wing; this, I say, is the proper
(...) upon whom the Violation of Majesty should charged: This is he who should
be deemed guilty of Tr -- son.

It is an unhappy circumstance which (...) almost all Princes, that from the
Instant they be to govern, they are forever precluded from (...) Advantages of
sincere Friendship, and are surrounded only by those who act from no other
Motives than those of Self-interest and Design and are under a Necessity to
conduct themselves by the Informations of such. Go on then, generous Sir, to
exert that honest and active Spirit which has already gained you so great an
Intend in the Hearts of your Fellow Subjects, as by your Perseverance in public
Virtue will doubtless become universal: Assert the Rights of your (...)
citizens, and keep a watchful and jealous Eye over the Servants of your Prince,
and bring into the Light the iniquitous Attempts of corrupt Ministers, to
separate the Interest and Glory of his Majesty from the Prosperity and
Happiness of his People, or to raise Distrusts between them: This will make
those of your Fellow Subjects who shall never see your Person, take Pleasure in
your Name, and call your their Friend; and will gain you an Appellaition of the
truest and greatest Honor in Human Life, that is a Guardian of the Rights of a
Free People.

I am, Sir, Your most obliged Fellow-subject, and Humble Servant, N. F.
May 6, 1763.

ORDERS issued by the Lieutenant Governor of the Tower, respecting the
Detention of JOHN WILKES, Esquire
THAT the Warders appointed to keep a close Prisoner, shall not presume to
leave him for a Moment alone, either Nights or Day, or to change their Duty
with other Warders, but by particular Leave or Order from the Constable,
Lieutenant, Deputy Lieutenant, or in their Absence the Major of the Tower.

They are to permit no Person to have admittance into the Room he is confined
in, or to speak to him but by a particular Order brought them by the Major or
Gentleman Jailer.

To the Editor of the public Advertiser.
SIR,
I Make Use of the Channel of your Paper to invite the Public to join with me
in Admiration of the Sentiments and Expression of the Letter of a noble Earl.
Cautious, you see, and, like the Person it was addressed to, double guarded,
(for it was to be conveyed into the Tower, among Messengers who might seize,
and might be copied by Secretaries who might give verbal Orders to misinterpret
it) and yet so expressive, that it will suit one Person and one Subject full as
well as another; for Instance, it was originally written from Lord T --
7mdash;to J. W. Change but the Names, and it might with equal Properiety be
sent back from J. W. to Lord T -- --

Pray observe.

My LORD, May 6, 1763,
At my return this Morning from the Tower, I saw the enclosed Copy of a Letter
from the Earl of -- -- In consequence of his Majesty's Commands therein
signified, you will please to observe that you no longer continue Lord
Lieutenant fro the County of Buckingham.

I cannot at the same Time help expressing the Concern I feel at the Loss of an
Officer (a Lieutenant is an Officer) by his Deportment in Command endeared to
the whole Corpse.

I have the Honor to be, etc.

Show me a Letter from either of the S -- -- s of State which bears this double
Edge, I shall cease to wish the Noble E. in Possession of the Seals.


SIR,
IN case a late close-confined Offender dares to give the Public any Comments
on his deserved Treatment, I beg Leave (begging Pardon for this Intrusion on
your Press) to recommend the following by Way of Motto.

One, two, three, four, and five,
I caught a Hare alive;
Six, seven, eight, nine, and ten,
I let him go again.
J. FLIMZY.
St. Clement's Coffee-house.

A LETTER versified.
SIR,
RETURNING last Night to Pall Mall from the Tower,
It Is needless to tell you exactly the Hour,
I found on my Table, and read, though 'twas late,
A Letter (enclosed) from the Secretary of State.
You Will ask, was it a Warrant? No -- we have nothing to fear,
You Have the Mob, I Have the J..dg..s, and you know I Am a Peer,
But Commoners now may do any thing there.
The King (and in this I must see him obeyed)
Directs you no longer to wear a Cockade;
So you will please to observe, as I do to my Sorrow,
That you're turned out to day -- as I may be tomorrow.
To be turned out just now, and the Service so pressing,
The Concern I feel at it, I cannot help expressing;
This is one of those grievances much want redressing.
Such an Officer too -- so esteemed throughout Life,
So virtuous, so honest, so fond of his Wife.
By Department humane, to the Corpse so endeared,
So patient in Marches, in Quarters so feared.
They could hardly treat worse that Scottish Lord S -- -- ll,
Then judge how it grieves your Affectionate

POLITICAL INTELLIGENCE.
Great George-Street, May 1. SIR,
IN answer to your Letter of Yesterday, in which you take upon you to make use
of the indecent and scurrilous Expressions of your having found your House had
been robbed, and that the stolen Goods are in our Possession; we acquaint you
that your Papers were seized in Consequence of the heavy Charge brought against
you, for being the Author of an infamous and seditious Libel, tending to
inflame the Minds, and alienate the Affections of the People from his Majesty,
and excite them to traitorous Insurrections against the Government; for which
Libel, notwithstanding your Discharge from your Commitment to the Tower, his
Majesty has ordered you to be prosecuted by his Attorney General.

We are at a Loss to guess what you mean by stolen Goods; but such of your
Papers as do not lead to a Proof of your Guilt, shall be restored to you: Such
as are necessary for that Purpose, it was our Duty to deliver over to those
whose Office it is to collect the Evidence, and manage the Prosecution against
you. We are,

Your humble Servants, EGREMONT, DUNK HALIFAX.
To Mr. Wilkes.




MY LORDS, Great George-Street, May 9, 1763.
LITTLE did I expect when I was requiring from your Lordships what an
Englishman has a Right to, his Property taken from him, and said to be in your
Lordship Possession, that I should have received in answer, from Persons in
your high Station, the Expressions of indecent and scurrilous applied to my
legal Demand. The respect I bear to his Majesty, whose servants it seems you
still are, though you stand legally convicted of having in me violated, in the
highest and most offensive Manner, the Liberties of all the Commons of England,
prevents my returning you an Answer in the same Billinsgate Language. If I
considered you only in your private Capacities, I should treat you both
according to your Deserts; but where is the Wonder that Men, who have attacked
the sacred Liberty of the Subject, and have issued an illegal Warrant to seize
his Property, should proceed to such libellous Expression? You say, that such
of my Papers shall be restored to me, as do not lead to a Proof of my Guilt. I
owe this to your Apprehension of an Action, not to your Love of Justice; and in
that Light, if I can believe your Lordships Assurances, THE WHOLE will be
returned to me. I fear neither your Prosecution, not your Persecution; and I
will assert the Security of my own House, the Liberty of my Person, and every
Right of the People, not so much for my own Sake, as for the Sake of every one
of my English Fellow Subjects.

I am, my Lords, your humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.
Directed to the Earls of Fgremont and Halifax, two of his Majesty's principal
Secretaries of State.




On Saturday Morning Mr. Wilkes in Person, attended only by Mr. Grignion, of
Russel Street, Covent Garden, went to Sir John Fielding's in Bow-Street, and
demanded a Warrant to search the Houses of the Earls of Egremont and Halifax,
his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, for Goods stolen from the House
of the said Mr. Wilkes, which he had received Information were lodged at the
said Houses, or one of them. John Spinnage, Esquire the Sitting Justice, refused to
issue the said Warrant.

To the Printer of the PUBLIC ADVERTISER.
SIR,
I BEG Leave to observe, that there was lately an Impropriety in a certain
Gentleman's Manner of Franking, but he can now write himself, as usual, FREE,
JOHN WILKES. Yours, etc.

A WARDER of the TOWER.

The following Extracts from the MONITOR of last Saturday, being aplicable to
the Subject, we think proper to insert here.

THIS Writer proceeds to enquire, what those Things are, which a Man ought not
to utter either in Speech or Writing; and what a good Subject has a Right, and
is bound in Duty, as well as Interest, to say.

"He ought not to speak Evil of the Ruler of the People, to cause Disaffection,
or to raise Clamor, Murmurs of Discontent. He that rules with Justice,
Judgment and Righteousness, is entitled not only to our Obedience, but to our
Applause."

"He ought not to solicit any one to sell his Vote or Interest either in or out
of Parliament. A free Election, and an incorrupt Parliament is the best
Security of our Constitution."

"He ought not to commend bad Men, nor bad Measures; nor defend Men in Power,
whose Actions discover their Ignorance or bad Intentions."

"He ought not to favor passive Obedience, and Non-resistance; or to deny the
Subject his Right to petition to the King against any Usurpation upon Liberty
in a free State. One Step more would reconcile such Advocates to Insallibility:
For, if the Subject must take every Thing upon the Word and Authority of a
Minister, it is no Matter whether he lives at London, or Rome."

"He particularly ought to be cautious whom he commends; for very often
Praises, where not deserved, fit as aukwardly upon the great Man, who does not
fill his Post with Satisfaction to the Public, as fine Clothes upon those, who
has not been used to Dress; and be careful how he detracts from the Merit of
him, that has met with universal Applause for his Wisdom and Virtue; because it
is not only the Height of Injustice, but it raises this Reflection, If this Man
with all his Virtues, Graces, and Successes be so despiseable; what must be
thought of those that succeed him, should they not be able to plume themselves
with the Graces of his Person, and Virtues, and glorious Events of his
Administration?

"In a Word, it is equally unreasonable and unjust to praise and support, the
great undeserving Man, as it is to slight, abuse, and run down the Man, who
deserves every Thing of his King and Country."

The following Letters, we are assured, are genuine, and the Originals of some
of them in the Possession of the Earls of Egremont and Halifax. They are
presented to the Public, because they bear an immediate Relation to the
North-Briton, although they relate to a Paper of the 21st of August of the last
Year.

LETTERS, etc.
MR. Secker presents his Compliments to Mr. Wilkes: He has been three Times at
his House to wait on him from Lord Tolbot. Mr. Secker would be obliged to Mr.
Wilkes to let him know, by a Note directed to him at Mr. Holford's, St. James's
Palace, where and at what Time Mr. Secker could speak to him this Afternoon. If
he does not hear from Mr. Wilkes, will wait on him by 9 o'Clock Tomorrow
Morning at his House.

Sept. 10. Half an Hour past 2 o'Clock. Directed to John Wilkes, Esquire




MR Wilker's Compliments to Mr. Secker, was not acquainted till this Minute by
his Note, that Mr. Secker had once called in Great George-Street. Shall be at
Home from seven till eight this Evening, and as Mr. Wilkes shall be alone, he
supposes at this Meeting Mr. Secker will bring no Company.

Great George Street, Friday Afternoon, Five, Sept. 10. Directed to Mr. Secker,
at Mr. Holford's, St. James's Palace.




MR. Secker's Compliments to Mr. Wilkes, he will wait on him alone this Evening
between Seven and Eight.

St. James's. Directed to John Wilkes, Esquire




Bolton-Street, Sept. 10, 1762. SIR,
AS I have received no Answer to a Letter I wrote to you on the 25th of August,
and find, by sending to your House in Town, that I have no immediate
Opportunity of seeing you, I am forced again by Letter to ask if you avow or
disclaim being Author of the Paper entitled the North-Britain of the 21st of
August.

TALBOT.
Directed to Colonel Wilkes.




My LORD, Great George-Street, Friday, Sept. 10.
I BEG your Lordship to do me the Justice to believe that I have never yet
received the Letter to me at Winchester, which Mr. Secker tells me was sent
there a Fortnight ago. I have just now the Honor of your Lordship's by that
Gentleman. Your Lordship asks if I avow or disclaim being Author of the Paper
entitled. The North-Britain of the 21st of August. My Answer is, that I must
first insist on knowing your Lordship's Right to catechize me about any
anonymous Paper. If your Lordship is not satisfied with this, I shall ever be
ready to give your Lordship any other Satisfaction becoming me as a Gentleman.

I am, my Lord. Your Lordship's most obedient, humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.
Directed to Earl Talbot




MY LORD, WINCHESTER, Sept. 14. 1762.
I LEFT Winchester, with Lord Effingham's Leave, on the second of August, and
did not return to this City, till the 12th of this Month. My Drum-Major brought
me your Lordship's Letter Yesterday. I now return it with the Seal unbroke, as
the clearest Demonstration that I never have read the Contents of it. I suppose
they are the same, with the Letter I had the Honor of receiving and answering
by Mr. Secker.

I am, my Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.
Directed to Earl Talbot.




Bolton-Street, Sept. 12, 1762. SIR,
I SUPPOSE you have, by this time, found the Letter I wrote directed to you at
Winchester, and that has acquainted you, why I addressed myself to Mr. Wilkes
to enquire if the North-Briton of the 21st of August was written by him. I well
know every Gentleman, who contributes to support periodical Papers by his Pen,
is not answerable for all the Papers that appear under the Title of that which
he affists: But I cannot conceive that any Man should refuse to assure a
Person, who has been the Object of the Wit of any Paper, that he was not the
Author of a Paper he did not write. Every Man's Sense of Honor ought to direct
his Conduct; if you prefer a personal Engagement to the Denying being the
Author of a Paper that has been so free with my Name; I, who am publicly
affionted by that Paper, cannot, in Honor, avoid requiring the Satisfaction
your seem most desirous to give. Be pleased to write or send to me as soon as
you have determined what Part you will act. I shall be in London Thursday and
Friday next, and this Day Se'nnighr, after which I shall not be in London till
Thursday the 23d.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant, TALBOT.
Directed to Colonel Wilkes.




My LORD, WINCHESTER, Sept. 16, 1762.
I HAD not, till Yesterday, the Honor of your Lordship's Letter of the 12th,
and embrace this earliest Opportunity of acknowledging it. Your Lordship has
not yet, in my poor Idea, ascertained the Right you claim in interrogating me
about the Paper of the 21st of August, and I will first know the very good
Authority on which I am thus questioned, before I will return any Answer
Whatever.

Your Lordship desires me to write or send to your as soon as I have determined
what Part I shall act. I intended my first Letter should have made that
sufficiently clear.

I am, my Lord, Your Lordship's very humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.
Directed to Earl Talbot.




Bolton-Street, Sept. 17, 1762. SIR,
I HAVE this Instant received yours of the 16th, it is your own Declaration
before Men of Truth and Honor, that you occasionally assisted the Paper called
The North-Briton with your Pen: That is the Foundation of my interrogating you
about the North-Briton of the 21st of August -- and whatever may be your Idea,
mine is, that, when a Gentleman owns himself an occasional Author of an
anonymous satirical Paper, any Person by Name ridiculed in such an Hebdomadal
Performance has a Right to ask the occasional avowed Writer, if he was the
Author of the offending Paper.

You may now, Sir, answer my Question or not, I have offered to put myself on
that Footing with you, that became a Man who has Spirit, and is influenced by
Honor -- If you do not deny the Paper, I must and will conclude you wrote it.

Your humble Servant. TALBOT.
Directed to Colonel Wilkes.




My LORD, Winchester, Sept. 21, 1762.
SUNDAY's Post brought me your Lordship's of the 17th, and by the Return of it
this waits on your Lordship.

You are pleased to say that it is my own Declaration before Men of Honor,
that I occasionally assisted the Paper called The North-Briton. I wish your
Lordship had been more explicit, and had mentioned the Name of any one
Gentleman before whom I made that Declaration. Was it made in public? Or was
it in private Conversation? Still I have the Misfortune of not yet seeing your
Lordship's Right of putting the Question to me about the Paper of the 21st of
August, and till I do, I will never resolve your Lordship on that Head, though
I would any Friend I have in the World, who had the Curiosity of asking me, if
it was in a civil Manner.

Your Lordship says, that if I do not deny the Paper, you must and will
conclude I wrote it. Your Lordship has my free Consent to make any Conclusions
you think proper, whether they (...) or ill grounded; and I feel the most
perfect Indifference about what they are, or the Consequences of them.

I intend at present to make a Tour on Thursday to the Isle of Wight. I shall
return to this City the Beginning of the next Week.

I am, my Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant. JOHN WILKES.
Directed to Earl Talbot.




SIR, Winchester, Sept. 30, 1762.
LORD Talbot by your Message has at last brought this important Question to the
precite Point, where my first Answer to his Lordship fixed it, if he preferred
that. As you have only seen the two last Letters. I must entreat you to cast
your Eye over those proceeding, because I apprehend they will justly an
Observation or two I made this Morning, when I had the Honor of paying my
Compliments to you at Camp.

Be assured that if I am between Heaven and Earth, I will be on Tuesday Evening
at Tilbury's, the Red Lion at Bagshot, and on Wednesday Morning will play this
Duet with his Lordship.

It is a real Satisfaction to me that his Lordship is to be accompanied by a
Gentleman of Col. Berkeley's Worth and Honor.

This will be delivered to your by my Adjutant, who attends me to Bagshot. I
shall not bring any Servant with me, From the Fear of any of the Parties being
known. My Pistols only, or his Lordship's, at his Option, shall decide this
Point.

I beg the Favor of you to return me the Letters, as I mean to leave
Winchester this Evening. I have Lord Bruce's Leave of Absence for ten Days.

I am with sincere Regard, SIR, Your very humble Servant, JOHN WILKES.
I hope that we may make a Party quarrie for Supper on Tuesday, at Bagshot.
Directed to Colonel Berkely.




SIR,
I HAVE read all the Letters and shall depend upon the Pleasure of supping with
you at Tilbury's the Red-Lion at Bagshot, Tuesday Evening. My Servant will
attend me, as the going alone would give room for Suspicion, but you may depend
upon his following your Direction at Lagshot, and that he shall not be seen
where you would not have him -- I am much obliged by your favorable Opinion,
and am

Your very humble Servant, N. BERKELEY.
Camp near Winchester, Sept. 30th, 1762.

FINIS.

