A plain and faithful NARRATIVE OF THE Original Design, Rise, Progress and
present State OF THE Indian Charity-School At LEBANON, in CONNECTICUT.

By Eleazar Wheelock, A.M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN LEBANON.

The Liberal devises liberal Things, and by liberal Things shall he stand.
ISAI. xxxii. 8. The liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall
also be watered himself. PROVE. xi. 25. BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL
DRAPER, in Newbury-street. M.DCC.LXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, MARQUIS OF LOTHIAN.
May it please your Lordship,
THAT CHARITY and disinterested CARE for the Souls of Men, which make so
amiable a Part of your Lordship's Character, and give a Luster and Grace to all
those worldly Honors with which God has dignified you, and entitle you to the
kindest Wishes, and sincerest Prayers of all who love our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
and long for the Enlargement of his Kingdom in the World; do now embolden me to
inscribe the following Narrative to your Lordship, as a Testimonial of my
Gratitude, for that repeated Liberality, whereby you have testified your
Approbation of our feeble Attempts in the important Affair here related, and
given your Sanction to the Plan we have been prosecuting.

AND as you have animated and encouraged our small Beginnings, when we had most
need of such Countenance and Assistance; so your Condescension and Generosity
have made me solicitous how to manifest my Gratitude suitably to a Personage of
such Distinction.

BUT as your Lordship could propose no other End, besides that which we were
pursuing, when you thus opened your Hand for our Assistance therein, while it
was yet small and obscure; so I may reasonably suppose, nothing I can return
will give your Lordship more Satisfaction, than a plain, and concise Account of
the Progress of it, and our still growing and increasing Prospects of those
good Effects, which will be the only Reward which your Lordship could have in
View.

AND though it be presented to your Lordship in a very plain and unfashionable
Dress, agreeable to the Country from whence it comes, yet I am persuaded your
Lordship will not despise it on that Account, since the Dress, plain and
unfashionable as it is, does so much excel the savage, and sordid Habit, and
Appearance of those miserable Creatures, who have so moved your Lordship's
Compassion as to become the Objects of your Charity and Beneficence. Nor will
Modesty itself under such endearing and inviting Expressions of your Lordship's
Condescension, and Goodness, forbid our reposing Confidence in you as our
Patron, or indulging the animating Expectation of future Benefit by your smiles
on this infant Institution.

MAY the Blessing of many, who shall, in the present and succeeding
Generations, reap the Benefit of your generous Donations, come upon you.

AND that God may graciously lengthen out your valuable and important Life, to
refresh the Bowels of his Saints, and encourage THIS, and every Attempt to make
known the Name of CHRIST, "and manifest the Savor of his Knowledge in every
Place," and late confer upon you a Crown of Life with distinguished Honors, is
the earnest Prayer of,

May it please your Lordship,

Your Lordship's much obliged, and most obedient humble Servant, Eleazar
Wheelock.
LEBANON, Dec. 16. 1762.
A NARRATIVE OF THE Original DESIGN, RISE, PROGRESS and PRESENT STATE of the
INDIAN CHARITY-SCHOOL in Lebanon.
UNDERSTANDING there are Numbers of religious and charitably disposed Persons,
who only wait to know where their Charities may be bestowed in the best Manner
for the Advancement of the Kingdom of the great Redeemer; and, supposing there
may also be in some, evil Surmisings about, and a Disposition to discredit a
Cause which they don't love, and have no Disposition to promote; I have, to
gratify the one, and prevent the Mischiefs of the other, thought it my Duty to
give the Public a short, plain, and faithful Narrative of the Original Design,
Rise, Progress, and present State of the Charity-School here, called Moor's
Indian-Charity School, etc. And I hope there is need of little or nothing more
than a plain and faithful Relation of Facts, with the Grounds and Reasons of
them, to justify the Undertaking, and all the Pains and Expense there has been,
in the Prosecution thereof. And to convince all Persons of Ability, that this
School is a proper Object of their Charity; and that whatever they shall
contribute for the Furtherance of it, will be an Offering acceptable to God,
and properly bestowed for the promoting a Design which the Heart of the great
Redeemer is infinitely set upon.

THE Considerations first moving me to enter upon the Design of educating the
Children of our Heathen Natives were such as these; viz.

THE great Obligations lying upon us, as God's Vovenant People, who have all we
have better than they in a Covenant Way, and consequently are under
Covenant-Bonds to improve it in the best Manner for the Honor and Glory of our
liberal Benefactor. And can such Want of Charity to those poor Creatures, as
our Neglect has shown; and, our Neglect of that which God has so plainly made
to be the Matter of our Care and Duty; and that which the Heart of the great
Redeemer is so set upon, as that he never desired any other Compensation for
all the Travail of his Soul, can it, I say, be without great Guilt on our Part?

IT has seemed to me, he must be stupidly indifferent to the Redeemer's Cause
and Interest in the World; and criminally deaf and blind to the Intimations of
the Favor and Displeasure of God in the Dispensations of his Providence, who
could not perceive plain Intimations of God's Displeasure against us for this
Neglect, inscribed in Capitals, on the very Front of divine Dispensations, from
Year to Year, in permitting the Savages to be such a sore Scourge to our Land,
and make such Depredations on our Frontiers, inhumanly butchering and
captivating our People; not only in a Time of War, but when we had good Reason
to think (if ever we had) that we dwelt safely by them.

AND there is good Reason to think, that if one half which has been, for so
many Years past expended in building Forts, manning and supporting them, had
been prudently laid out in supporting faithful Missionaries, and Schoolmasters
among them, the instructed and civilized Party would have been a far better
Defense than all our expensive Fortresses, and prevented the laying waste so
many Towns and Villages: Witness the Consequence of sending Mr. Sergeant to
Stockbridge, which was in the very Road by which they most usually came upon
our People, and by which there has never been one Attack made upon us since his
going there; and this notwithstanding there has been, by all Accounts, less
Appearance of the saving Effects of the Gospel there than in any other Place,
where so much has been expended for many Years Past.

AND not only our Covenant Bonds, by which we owe our all to God, and our
divine Redeemer -- our Pity to their Bodies in their miserable, needy State --
our Charity to their perishing Souls -- and our own Peace, and Safety by them,
should constrain us to it; but also Gratitude, Duty, and Loyalty to our
rightful Sovereign. How great the Benefit which would hereby accrue to the
Crown of Great Britain, and how much the Interests of His Majesty's Dominions,
especially in America, would be promoted hereby, we can hardly conceive.

AND the Christianizing the Natives of this Land is expressly mentioned in the
Royal Charter granted to this Colony, as a Motive inducing His Majesty to grant
that Royal Favor to our Fathers. And since we are risen up in their Stead, and
enjoy the inestimable Favor granted to them, on this Consideration; What can
excuse our not performing to our utmost, that which was engaged by, and
reasonably expected from, them? But that which is of greatest Weight, and
should powerfully excite and persuade us hereto, are the many Commands, strong
Motives, Precious Promises, and tremendous Threatenings, which fill so great a
Part of the sacred Pages; and are so perfectly calculated to awaken all our
Powers, to spread the Knowledge of the only true God, and Savior, and make it
as extensive and common as possible. It is a Work, in which every one in his
Place, and according to his Ability, is under sacred Bonds to use his utmost
Endeavors. But for Brevity sake, I omit a particular Mention of them,
supposing none have read their Bibles attentively, who do not know, that this
is a darling Subject of them; and that enough is there spoken by the Mouth of
God himself, to obviate and silence all the Objections which Sloth,
Covetousness, or Love of the World can suggest against it; and to assure them
it is not a Course to Penury, and outward Want, but to Fullness, and worldly
Felicity; while they are at the same Time laying up a Treasure to be remitted
by CHRIST himself, a Thousand Fold, when he shall say to them on his
Right Hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
-- For I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat, etc. If denying Food and Raiment,
when we have them in our Power, to supply the bodily Necessities of the Poor
and Needy, does in the Apostle's Account, evidence, that the Love of God is
wanting in our Hearts; how much more does the Neglect of the precious Souls of
our Fellow Creatures, who are perishing for lack of Vision, when we have such
Fullness to impart, fall below our high Profession of Love to CHRIST. Can the
Objection that there is extraordinary Expense and Difficulty in accomplishing
it, be esteemed weighty enough to excuse and justify our Neglect, in a Case of
such Necessity and Importance? And especially if we consider, there is not so
much necessary hereto, as would render the Attempt any Thing like an
intolerable Burden, or a Burden to be felt, if those who are concerned therein,
i.e. the Christian World, were in any Measure united and agreed in it. And
considering further, that the Advantage thereby to the Crown of Great Britain
(supposing the Success of Endeavors should be only in Proportion as have been,
the Successes of feeble Endeavors in Times Past) would abundantly compensate
all the Expense, besides all those temporal and eternal Rewards of such Charity
and Liberality, which are secured in the many great and precious Promises of
God.

THESE were some of the Considerations which, I think, had some Influence to my
making an Attempt in this Affair; though I did not then much think of any Thing
more than only to clear myself, and Family, of partaking in the public Guilt of
our Land and Nation in such a Neglect of them.

AND as there were few or none who seemed so much to lay the Necessity and
Importance of the Cafe to Heart, as to exert themselves in earnest, and lead
the Way therein, I was naturally put upon Consideration and Enquiry what
Methods might have the greatest Probability of Success; and upon the whole was
fully persuaded that this, which I have been pursuing, had by far the greatest
Probability of any that had been proposed, viz. by the Mission of their own
Sons in Conjunction with the English; and that a Number of Girls should also be
instructed in whatever should be necessary to render them fit, to perform the
Female Part, as House-wives, School-Mistresses. Tayloresses, etc. and to go and
be with these Youth, when they shall be hundreds of Miles distant from the
English on the Business of their Mission: And prevent a Necessity of their
turning savage in their Manner of Living, for want of those who may do those
Offices for them, and by this means support the Reputation of their Mission,
and also recommend to the Savages a more rational and decent Manner of Living,
then that which they are in -- And thereby, in Time, remedy and remove that
great, and hitherto insuperable Difficulty, so constantly complained of by all
our Missionaries among them, as the great Impediment in the Way to the Success
of their Mission, viz. their continual rambling about; which they cannot avoid
so long as they depend so much upon Fishing, Fowling, and Hunting for their
Support. And I am more and more persuaded, that I have sufficient and
unanswerable Reasons to justify this Plan.

AS,

1. THE deep rooted Prejudices they have so generally imbibed against the
English, that they are selfish, and have secret Designs to incroach upon their
Lands, or otherwise wrong them in their Interests. This Jealousy seems to have
been occasioned, nourished, and confirmed by some of their Neighbors, who have
got large Tracts of their Lands for a very inconsiderable Part of their true
Value, and, it is commonly said, by taking the Advantage of them when they were
intoxicated with Liquor. And also, by unrighteous Dealers, who have taken such
Advantage to buy their Skins and Furrs at less than half Price, etc. And
perhaps these Jealousies may be, not a little, increased by a Conciousness of
their own Perfidy and Inhumanity toward the English. And it seems there is no
Way to avoid the bad Influence and Effects of these Prejudices, at present,
unless it be by the Mission of their own Sons. And it is reasonable to suppose
their Jealousies are not less, since the late Conquest in this Land, by which
they are put into our Power, than they were before.

2. AN Indian Missionary may be supported with less than half the Expense, that
will be necessary to support an Englishman, who cannot conform to their Manner
of Living, and who will have no Dependence upon them for any Part of it. And an
Indian who speaks their Language, it may reasonably be supposed, will be at
least four Times as serviceable among them, supposing he be otherwise equally
qualified as one who can communicate to or receive nothing from them, but by an
Interpreter: He may improve all Opportunities not only in Public, but, "when he
sits in the House, walks by the Way, when he lies down, and when he rises up:"
And speak with as much Life and Spirit as the Nature and Importance of the
Matter require, which is very much lost when communicated by an Interpreter.

3. INDIAN Missionaries may be supposed better to understand the Tempers and
Customs of Indians, and more readily to conform to them in a thousand Things
than the English can; and in Things wherein the Nonconformity of the English
may cause Disgust, and be construed as the Fruit of Pride, and an Evidence and
Expression of their Scorn and Disrespect.

4. THE Influence of their own Sons among them will likely be much greater than
of any Englishman whatsoever. They will look upon such an one as one of them,
his Interest the same with theirs; and will naturally esteem him as an Honor
to their Nation, and be more likely to submit patiently to his Instructions and
Reproofs than to any English Missionary. This is quite evident in the Cafe of
Mr. Occom, whose Influence among the Indians, even of his own Tribe, is much
greater than any other Man's; and when he shall settle and live decently, and
in Fashion, among them, will likely do more to invite them to imitate his
Manner of Living, than any Englishman.

5. THE Acquaintance and Friendship which Indian Boys from different and
distant Tribes and Places, will contract and cultivate, while together at
School, may, and if they are zealously affected will, be improved much for the
Advantage and Furtherance of the Design of their Mission; while they send to,
hear from, or visit one another, confirming the Things which have been spoken.
And this without so much Ceremony to introduce one another, as will be
necessary in the Case of English Missionaries; and without the Cumber and
Expense of Interpreters.

6. INDIAN Missionaries will not disdain to own English ones, who shall be
Associates with them, (where the English can be introduced) as elder Brethren;
nor scorn to be advised or reproved, counseled or conducted by them;
especially so long as they shall be so much dependent upon the English for
their Support; which will likely be till God has made them his People; and
then, likely, they will not stand in such need of English Guides and
Counselors. And they will mutually help one another, to recommend the Design
to the favorable Reception and good Liking of the Pagans, remove their
Prejudices, conciliate their Friendship, and induce them to repose due
Confidence in the English.

7. IN this School, Children of different Nations may, and easily will learn
one another's Language, and English Youth may learn of them; and so save the
vast Expense and Trouble of Interpreters; and their Ministry be much more
acceptable and edifying to the Indians. But,

8. THERE is no such thing as sending English Missionaries, or setting up and
maintaining English Schools to any good Purpose, in most Places among them, as
their Temper, State and Condition have been and still are. It is possible a
School may be maintained to some good Purpose, at Onoboquagee, where there have
been heretofore several faithful Missionaries, by the Blessing of God upon
whose Labors the Indians are in some Measure civilized, some of them baptized,
a Number of them in a Judgment of Charity, real Christians; and where they have
a Sachem, who is a Man of Understanding, Virtue, Steadiness, and entirely
friendly to the Design of propagating the Gospel among them, and zealous to
promote it. And where the Hon. Scotch Commissioners, I hear, have sent two
Missionaries, and have made some Attempt to set up a School. But at Jeningo, a
little beyond, they will by no means admit an English Missionary to reside
among them. And though they were many of them under great Awakenings and Concern,
by God's Blessing on the Labors of a Christian Indian from these Parts; yet
such was the violent Opposition of Numbers among them, that it was thought by
no means safe for an Englishman to go among them, with Design to tarry with
them. And like to this is the Case with the Parties of Indians, for near an
hundred Miles together, on the West Side of Susquehanath River. Another School
or two may possibly be set up with Success among the Mohawks, where Mr. Ogilvie
and other Episcopal Missionaries have bestowed much Labor, to good Purpose;
and where they have got into the Way of cultivating their Lands for a Living,
and so have more Ability to support their Children, and less Occasion to ramble
abroad with them. But even in these Places we may find it more difficult than
we imagine before the Trial be made (though I would by no means discourage the
Trial of every feasible Method for the accomplishing this great Design) but by
Acquaintance with the Schools which the Hon. London Commissioners have with
pious Zeal, set up and maintained among the several Tribes in these Parts, I am
much confirmed in such Sentiments. These Parties live amongst, and are
encompassed by the English, have long had good Preaching, and Numbers of them
appear to be truly godly. Yet such is the savage Temper of many, their want of
due esteem for Learning, and Gratitude to their Benefactors, and especially
their want of Government, that their Schoolmasters, though skilful and faithful
Men, constantly complain they cannot keep the Children in any Measure constant
at School. Mr. Clelland the Schoolmaster at Mohegan has often told me what
unwearied Pains he has taken by visiting, and discoursing with their Parents,
etc. to remedy this Evil, and after all cannot accomplish it. The Children are
suffered to neglect their Attendance on Instruction, and waste much Time, by
which means they don't learn so much in several Years as they might, and others
do in one, who are taken out of the reach of their Parents, and out of the way
of Indian Examples, and are kept to School under good Government and constant
Instruction. I the rather mention this Instance, because of the well-known
Fidelity and Skill of that good Gentleman, and because that Tribe are as much
civilized, and as many of them Christianized, as perhaps any Party of them in
this Government. And by all I can learn, it is no better in this respect with
any other. They are so disaffected toward a good and necessary Government,
that as gentle an Exercise of it as may be, and answer the Design of keeping up
Order and Regularity in any Measure among them, will likely so disgust them as
to render the Case worse rather than better. Captain Martin Kellog complained
of this as his great Discouragement in the School at Stockbridge, not
withstanding he understood as well as any Man the Disposition of Indians, and
had the Advantage of knowing their Language and Customs, having been so long a
Captive among them, and was high in their Affection and Esteem; yet he was
obliged to take the Children home to Weathersfield with him, quite away from
their Parents, before he could exercise that Government which was necessary in
order to their profiting at School. But as to most Places, there is no such
thing at present as introducing either English School- Masters or Missionaries
to continue with them; such are their Prejudices in general, and such the
malevolent, and ungovernable Temper of some, that none but an Indian would dare
venture his Life among them.

AND besides all this, they are so extremely poor, and depend so much upon
Hunting for a Livelihood, that they are in no Capacity to support their
Children at School, if their Disposition for it were ever so good.

MR. Occom informed me by a Letter from the Oneida Country last Summer, and the
same Account I had also from the young Man which I sent there, that the Indians
were almost starved, having nothing to live upon but what they got by Fishing,
Fowling and Hunting, that he had no other Way to come at them, to preach to
them, but by following them from Place to Place in their Hunting. And though
the Condition of all may not be quite so indigent as of these, not the
Condition of these at all Times quite so bad as it was then, yet it is well
known that they universally depend upon Roving and Hunting mainly for their
Support; and whoever has heard the constant Complaint of Missionaries, and the
Matter of their Discouragement, or has only read what the Reverend Messi'rs.
Sergeant and D. Brainerd have wrote upon this Head, cannot charge me with
writing without sufficient Evidence, and good Authority, if I had no other but
theirs.

AND what are a few Instances, where Schools may possibly be maintained to some
good Purpose, compared with those Tribes and Nations of them, where there are
no Circumstances at present, but their Misery and Necessity, to invite us so
much as to make the Trial.

BY the Blessing of God on his late Majesty's Arms, there is now, no doubt, a
Door opened for a hundred Missionaries; and (unless we can find such as can
speak to them in their own Language) for as many Interpreters; and perhaps for
ten Times that Number, provided we could find such as are suitable for the
Business, and such as may be introduced in a Way agreeable to the Savages, and
so as to avoid the bad Effects of their Prejudices against the English. But,

9. THERE are very few or no Interpreters, who are suitable and
well-accomplished for the Business, to be had. Mr. Occom found great Difficulty
last Year in his Mission on this Account. And not only the Cause, but his own
Reputation suffered much by the Unfaithfulness of the Man he employed.

I SUPPOSE the Interpreters now employed by the Hon. Commissioners are the best
that are to be had at present. But how many Nations are there for whom there is
no Interpreter at all, except, it may be, some ignorant and perhaps vicious
Person, who has been their Captive, and whom it is utterly unsafe to trust in
Matters of such eternal Consequence. And how shall this Difficulty be remedied?
It seems it must be by one of these two Ways, viz. either their Children must
come to us, or ours go to them. But who will venture their Children with them,
unless with some of the civilized Parties, who have given the strongest
Testimonies of their Friendship? If it be said, that all the Natives are now at
Peace with us: It may be, their Chiefs, and the better-temper'd Part of them
are so. But who does not know that their Leagues and Covenants with us are
little worth, and like to be so till they become Christians? And that the
tender Mercies of many of them are Cruelty? Who is so unacquainted with the
History of them, as not to know, there is Reason to think, there are many among
their lawless Herds, who would gladly embrace an Opportunity to commit a secret
Murder on such English Youth? -- Even Mr. Occom, though an Indian, did not
think it safe for him, being of another Tribe and Language, and in such
Connections with the English, to go among the numerous Tribe of the Seneca's,
where he had no Avenger of his Blood for them to fear.

WHEN, and as soon as the Method proposed by the Rev'd Mess. Sergeant and
Brainerd, can be put into Execution, viz. to have Lands appropriated to the Use
of Indian Schools, and prudent skilful Farmers, or Tradesmen, to lead and
instruct the Boys, and Mistresses to instruct the Girls in such Manufactures as
are proper for them, at certain Hours, as a Diversion from their School
Exercises, and the Children taken quite away from their Parents, and the
pernicious Influence of Indian Examples, there may be some good Prospect of
great Advantage by Schools among them.

AND must it be esteemed a wild Imagination, if it be supposed that
well-instructed, sober, religious Indians, may with special Advantage be
employed as Masters and Mistresses in such Schools; and that the Design will be
much recommended to the Indians thereby; and that there may be special
Advantage by such, serving as occasional Interpreters for Visitors from
different Nations from Time to Time; and they hereby receive the fullest
Conviction of the Sincerity of our Intentions, and be confirmed and established
in friendly Sentiments of us, and encouraged to send their Children, etc.?

I AM fully persuaded from the Acquaintance I have had with them, it will be
sound, whenever the Trial shall be made, to be very difficult if not
impossible, unless the Arm of the Lord should be revealed in an eminent Manner,
to cure them of such savage and fordid Practices, as they have been inured to
from their Mother's Womb, and form their Minds and Manners to proper Rules of
Virtue, Decency and Humanity, while they are daily under the pernicious
Influence of their Parents Example, and their many Vices made familiar thereby.

10. I HAVE found by Experience, there may be a thorough and effectual Exercise
of Government in such a School, and as severe as shall be necessary, without
Opposition from, or Offense taken by, any. And who does not know, that Evils so
obstinate as those we may reasonably expect to find common in the Children of
Savages, will require that which is severe? Sure I am, they must find such as
have better Natures, or Something more effectually done to subdue their vicious
Inclinations, than most I have been concerned with, if it be not so. And
moreover, in such a School, there will be the best Opportunity to know who has
such a Genius and Disposition, as most invite to bestow extraordinary Expense
to fit them for special Usefulness.

11. WE have the greatest Security we can have, that when they are educated and
fitted for it, they will be employed in that Business. There is no likelihood
at all that they will, though ever so well qualified, get into Business, either
as Schoolmasters or Ministers, among the English; at least till the Credit of
their Nations be raised many Degrees above what it now is, and consequently
they cannot be employed as will be honorable for them, or in any Business they
will be fit for, but among their own Nation. And it may reasonably be supposed,
their Compassion toward their "Brethren according to the Flesh" will most
naturally incline them to, and determine them upon such an Employment as they
were fitted and designed for. And besides all this, abundant Experience has
taught us, that such a change of Diet, and manner of Living as Missionaries
must generally come into, will not consist with the Health of many Englishmen.
And they will be obliged on that Account to leave the Service, though otherwise
well disposed to it. Nor can this Difficulty be avoided at present (certainly
not without great Expense.) But there is no great Danger or Difficulty in this
Respect as to Indians, who will only return to what they were used to from
their Mother's Womb.

AND there may also be admitted into this School, promising English Youth of
pregnant Parts, and who from the best Principles, and by the best Motives, are
inclined to devote themselves to that Service; and who will naturally care for
their State.

DIVINE Skill in Things spiritual, pure and servent Zeal for the Salvation of
Souls, shining Examples of Piety and Godliness, by which Pagans will form their
first Notions of Religion, rather than from any Thing that shall be said to
them, are most necessary Qualifications in a Missionary; and promise more real
Good than is to be expected from many Times the Number who have never "known
the Terrors of the Lord," and have no experimental, and therefore no right
Understanding of the Nature of Conversion and the Way wherein it is wrought.
Such were never under the governing Influence of a real Sense of the Truth,
Reality, Greatness and Importance of eternal Things, and therefore will not be
likely to treat them suitable to the Nature and eternal Consequences of them,
surely they will not naturally do it. And how sad are like to be the
Consequences to those who are watching to see whether the Preacher himself does
really believe the Things which he speaks.

IN such a School their Studies may be directed with a special View to the
Design of their Mission. Several Parts of Learning, which have no great
Subserviency to it, and which will consume much Time, may be less pursued, and
others most necessary made their chief Study. And they may not only learn the
Pagan Languages, but will naturally get an Understanding of their Tempers, and
many of their Customs, which must needs be useful to Missionaries. And instead
of a delicate Manner of Living, they may by Degrees, as their Health will bear,
ensure themselves to such a Way of Living as will be most convenient for them
to come into when on their Mission.

AND if the one half of the Indian Boys thus educated shall prove good and
useful Men, there will be no Reason to regret our Toil and Expense for the
whole. And if God shall deny his Blessing on our Endeavors, as to the general
Design, it may be these particular Youth may reap eternal Advantage by what we
do for them; and if but one in ten does so, we shall have no Cause to think
much of the Expense. And if a Blessing be denied to all, "we shall not
withstanding be unto God a sweet Savor of Christ in them that perish."

AFTER the Trial I made of this Nature some Years ago, by the Assistance of the
Honorable LONDON Commissioners, in the Education of Mr. Samson Occom, one of
the Mohegan Tribe, who has several Years since been a useful Schoolmaster and
Successful Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians at Montank on Long Island,
where he took the Place of the Rev. Mr. Horton, Missionary; and was, under God,
instrumental to cure them, in a good Measure, of the Wildness they had been led
into by some Exhorters from New England, and in a Judgment of Charity was the
Instrument of saving Good to a Number of them. He was several Years ago
ordained to the sacred Ministry by the Reverend Presbytery of Suffolk County on
said Island; and has done well, so far as I have heard, as a Missionary to the
Oneida Nation, for two Years past. May God mercifully preserve him, amidst loud
Applauses, from falling into the Snare and Condemnation of the Devil! -- I say,
after seeing the Success of this Attempt, I was more encouraged to hope that
such a Method might be very successful.

WITH these Views of the Case, and from such Motives as have been mentioned,
above Eight Years ago I wrote to the Reverend John Brainerd, Missionary in
New Jersey, desiring him to send me two likely Boys for this Purpose, of the
Deleware Tribe! He accordingly sent me John Pumshire in the 14th, and Jacob
Woolley in the 11th Years of their Age; they arrived here December 18th, 1754.
and behaved as well as could be reasonably expected; Pumshire made uncommon
Proficiency in Writing. They continued with me till they had made considerable
Progress in the Latin and Greek Tongues; when Pumpshire began to decline, and
by the Advice of Physicians, I sent him back to his Friends, with Orders, if
his Health would allow it, to return with two more of that Nation, whom Mr.
Brainerd had at my Desire provided for me. Pumshire set out on his Journey,
November 14th. 1756. and got Home, but soon died. And on April 9th. 1757.
Joseph Woolley and Hezekiah Calvin came on the Horse which Pumshire rode.

THE Decline and Death of this Youth was an instructive Scene to me, and
convinced me more fully of the Necessity of special Care respecting their Diet;
and that more Exercise was necessary for them, especially at their first coming
to a full Table, and with so keen an Appetite, than was ordinarily necessary
for English Youth. And with the Exercise of such Care, as one who understands
the Case, and is willing to take the Trouble of it, may use, I am persuaded
there is no more Danger of their Studies being fatal to them, than to our own
Children. There have been several long Fits of Sickness of one and another in
this School, with a nervous Fever, Pleurisies, Dysenterys, etc. but perhaps not
more than have been among so large a Number of common laboring People in so
long a Time.

SOMETIME after those Boys came, the Affair appearing with an agreeable Aspect,
it being then a Time of profound Peace in this Country, I represented the
Affair to Colonel Elisha Williams, Esquire late Rector of Yale-College, and to the
Rev'd Messi'rs Samuel Moseley of Windham, and Benjamin Pomeroy of Hebron, and
invited them to join me; they readily accepted the Invitation; and a Gentleman
learned in the Law supposed there might be such an Incorporation among
ourselves as might full answer our Purpose. And Mr. Joshua Moor, late of
Mansfield, deceased, appeared to give a small Tenement in this Place, for the
Foundation, Use and Support of a Charity-School, for the Education of Indian
Youth, etc. But it pleased God to take the good Colonel from an unthankful
World soon after the Covenant was made and executed, and thus deprived us of
the Benefit of his singular Learning, Piety and Zeal in the Affair. Not
withstanding, a Subscription was soon made of near L500 lawful Money, toward a
Fund for the Support of it at 6 per Cent. But several Gentlemen of the Law,
doubting of the Validity and Sufficiency of such an Incorporation; several
Steps were taken to obtain the Royal Favor of a Charter, but none effectual.
The War soon commenced, and the Reports from Day to Day of the Ravages made,
and Inhumanities and Butcheries committed by the Savages on all Quarters,
raised in the Breasts of great Numbers, a Temper so warm, and so contrary to
Charity, that I seldom thought it prudent so much as to mention the Affair.
Many advised me to drop it, but it appeared to others so probable to be the
very Method which God would own, that I thought better to scrabble along with
it, as well as I could, till divine Providence should change the Scene.

THE Prospects, notwithstanding our outward Troubles, seemed to be increasing:
Such was the orderly and good Behavior of the Boys, through the Blessing of
God on Instruction and Discipline, that Enemies could find but little or
nothing that was true where with they might reproach the Design; and those
whose Sentiments were friendly, observed with Pleasure the good Effects of our
Endeavors: And the Liberalities, especially of Gentlemen of Character,
encouraged me more and more to believe it to be of God, and that he designed to
succeed and prosper it, to the Glory of his own great Name; and that I ought in
Compliance with such Intimations of Providence from Time to Time,
proportionably to increase the Number.

I HAVE had two upon my Hands since December 18th. 1754, and Four since April,
1757, and Five since April 1759, and Seven since November, 1760. and Eleven
since August 1st. 1761, and after this Manner they have increased as I could
obtain those who appeared promising. And for some Time I have had Twenty-five
devoted to School as constantly as their Health will allow, and they have all
along been so, excepting that in an extraordinary Crowd of Business, I have
sometimes required their Assistance. But there is no great Advantage, excepting
to themselves, to be expected from their Labor, nor enough to compensate the
Trouble of instructing them in it, and the Repair of the Mischiefs they will
do, while they are ignorant of all the Affairs of Husbandry, and the Use of
Tools. The principal Advantage I have ever had in this Respect has been by
David Fowler and Joseph Woolley, and more by David than all the rest: These
Lads will likely make good Farmers, if they should ever have the Advantage of
Experience in it.

THREE of this Number are English Youth, one of which is gone for a Time to
New Jersey College, for the sake of better Advantage for some Parts of
Learning: He has made some Proficiency in the Mohawk Tongue: The other two are
fitting for the Business of Missionaries. One of the Indian Lads is Jacob
Woolley, who is now in his last Year at New Jersey College, and is a good
Scholar; he is here by the Leave and Order of the President, designing to get
some Acquaintance with the Mohawk Tongue. Two others are sent here by the Rev.
Mr. Brainerd, and are designed for Trades; the one for a Blacksmith (a Trade
much wanted among the Indians) and is to go to his Apprenticeship as soon as a
good Place is ready for him; the other is designed for a Carpenter and Joiner,
and is to go to an Apprenticeship as soon as he has learned to read and write.
Another of the Indians is Son to the Sachem at Mohegan, and is Heir-aparent; he
is somewhat infirm as to his bodily Health: For his Support last Year I have
charged nothing more than 101. lawful Money, granted by the Hon. London
Commissioners. Several of my Scholars are considerably well accomplished for
School Masters, and 7 or 8 will likely be well fitted for Interpreters in a few
Years more. And four of this Number are Girls, whom I have hired Women in this
Neighborhood to instruct in all the Arts of good Housewifery, they attending
the School one Day in a Week to be instructed in writing, etc. till they shall
be sit for an Apprenticeship, to be taught to make Men's and Women's Apparel,
etc. in order to accompany these Boys, when they shall have Occasion for such
Assistance in the Business of their Mission. THIS Part of my Plan seems to be
abundantly justified by that which the Rev. Dr. Colman of Boston, and the Rev.
Mr. Sergeant of Stockbridge, have wrote upon this Head. See Mr. Sergeant's
Letter to the Doctor, printed at Boston 1743, Page 15. The Doctor writes thus:
-- Another thing suggested by Mr. Sergeant, and a most wise and necessary one
in the present Case is -- his taking in Girls as well as Boys, if Providence
succeed the Design, and a Fund sufficient to carry it on can be procured: -- I
must needs add on this Head, that this Proposal is a Matter of absolute
Necessity, wherein we are not left at Liberty, either as Men or Christians; for
there cannot be a Propagation of Religion among any People, without an equal
Regard to both Sexes; not only because Females are alike precious Souls, formed
for God and Religion as much as the Males; but also because the Care for the
Souls of Children in Families, and more especially in those of low Degree, lies
chiefly upon the Mothers for the first 7 or 8 Years: Which is an Observation or
Remark which I had the Honor to make unto my dear and honored ancient Friend,
Henry Newman, Esquire Secretary to the Hon. and Rev. Society for promoting
Christian Knowledge; which when he had communicated to them they put into
Print, and sent it to the Directors of the 1764 Schools: (if I have not
miscounted) that so a greater Proportion of Girls might be taken into them to
receive a religious Education for the sake of their Posterity, and therein for
the more effectual answering the very End of their Charity Schools. --
And six of them are Mohawks, obtained pursuant and according to the Direction
of the Honorable General Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, and
are learning to speak, write, and read English: And the most of them make good
Proficiency therein.

I HAVE, by the good Providence of God, been favored with religious, faithful
and learned Masters, in general, from the first setting up of this School, at
the Expense of about L 56 lawful Money per Annum, i. e. L 3 per Month, with
their Board, and all Accommodations, and a Horse kept or provided when needed;
which I suppose cannot be esteemed less than the Sum which I mention: And if
this seems to any to be large, I have only this to say, that I could not have
the Choice of Masters at less Expense. But the Expense for Tuition will likely
be saved for some Time, by the Generosity of a young Gentleman, who proposes to
keep it gratis a few Months.

THE Method of conducting this School has been, and is designed to be after
this Manner, viz. they are obliged to be clean, and decently dressed, and be
ready to attend Prayers, before Sunrise in the Fall and Winter, and at 6
o'Clock in the Summer. A Portion of Scripture is read by several of the Seniors
of them: And those who are able answer a Question in the Assembly's Catechism,
and have some Questions asked them upon it, and an Answer expounded to them.
After Prayers, and a short Time for their Diversion, the School begins with
Prayer about 9, and ends at 12, and again at 2, and ends at 5 of Clock with
Prayer. Evening Prayer is attended before the Daylight is gone. Afterward
they apply to their Studies, etc. They attend the public Worship, and have a
Pew devoted to their Use, in the House of God. On Lord's Day Morning, between
and after the Meetings, the Master, or some one whom they will submit to, is
with them, inspects their Behavior, hears them read, catechises them,
discourses to them, etc. And once or twice a Week they hear a Discourse
calculated to their Capacities upon the most important and interesting
Subjects. And in general they are orderly and governable: They appear to be as
perfectly easy and contented with their Situation and Employment as any at a
Father's House. I scarcely hear a Word of their going Home, so much as for a
Visit, for Years together, except it be when they first come.

AND the Success of Endeavors hitherto, the general Approbation of great and
good Men, and the Testimonies many have given of it, by their seasonable
Liberality toward it is Support, have seemed to me such evident Tokens of a
Divine Hand in Favor of it, and so plain Intimations of the Divine Will
concerning it, that I have, as I said before, thought it Duty, notwithstanding
all Discouragements, to pursue the Design, and endeavor to keep Pace with the
Providence of God in Favor of it as to their Number, and trust in Him, "whose
the Earth is, and the Fullness thereof," for further Supplies. And I have hoped
this would be esteemed sufficient to clear me of the Imputation of Presumption
and Rashness in risquing my own private Interest, as I have done.

THE Honorable LONDON Commissioners hearing of the Design, enquired into it,
and encouraged it by an Allowance of 121. lawful Money, by their Vote November
12. 1756. And again in the Year 1758 they allowed me 201. -- and in November
4th, 1760, granted me an annual Allowance of 201. for my Assistance -- and in
October 8th, 1761, they granted me 121. toward the Support of Isaiah Uncas,
Son of the Sachem of Mohegan, and 101. more for his Support the following Year.
In October 1756, I received a Legacy of fiftynine Dollars of Mrs. Ann Bingham
of Windham. In July 1761, I received a generous Donation of Fifty Pounds
Sterling from the Right Hon. WILLIAM, Marquis of Lothian. And in Nov. 1761, a
Donation of 251. Sterling. from Mr. Hardy of London -- and in May 1762, a second
Donation of 501. Sterling. from that most Honorable and noble Lord, the Marquis of
Lothian; and at the same Time 201. Sterling. from Mr. Samuel Savage, Merchant in
London: And a Collection of Ten Guineas from the Rev. Dr. A. Giffords in
London: And 101. Sterling. more from a Lady in London, unknown, which is still in
the Hands of a Friend, and to be remitted with some additional Advantage, and
to be accounted for when received. And also for 7 Years past I have, one Year
with another, received about 111. lawful Money Annually, Interest of
Subscriptions. And in my Journey to Portsmouth last June, I received in private
Donations 661. 17s. 7d. 1-4th. lawful Money. I also received for the Use of
this School, a Bell of about 801b. weight, from a Gentleman in London. In
November 1761, the Great and General Court or Assembly of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, voted, That I should be allowed to take under my Care six
Children of the Six Nations, for Education, Clothing and Boarding, and be
allowed for that Purpose, for each of said Children, 121. per Annum for one
Year, which Boys I have obtained, and they have been for some Time in this
School.

THE Honorable SCOTCH Commissioners in and near Boston, understanding and
approving of the Design of sending for Indian Children of remote Tribes, to be
educated here, were the first Body, or Society, who have led the Way in making
an Attempt for that Purpose. Which because of the Newness and remarkable
Success of it, and because it may encourage such a Design in time to come, I
suppose it may not be disagreeable, if I am a little particular in my Account
of it: While I was in Boston they passed a Vote to this purpose, May 7, 1761,
"That the Reverend Mr. Wheelock of Lebanon be desired, to fit out David Fowler,
an Indian Youth, to accompany Mr. Sampson Occom, going on a Mission to the
Oneidas, that said David be supported on said Mission for a Term not exceeding
4 Months; and that he endeavor on his Return to bring with him a Number of
Indian Boys, not exceeding three, to be put under Mr. Wheelock's Care and
Instruction, and that 201. be put into Mr. Wheelock's Hands to carry this
Design into Execution; and that when said Sum shall be expended, he advise the
Treasurer for it, and send his Accounts for Allowance."

PURSUANT to this Vote I clothed and furnished said David with Horse and
Money, for his long Tour into the Wilderness, which he set out on June 10th, in
Company with Mr. Occom, by the Way of New York; in which Journey he rode above
a thousand Miles, and by the Advice, Direction and Assistance of Sir WILLIAM
JOHNSON, obtained three Boys of the Mohawk Nation, who were willing to leave
their Friends and Country and come among Strangers of another Language, and
quite another Manner of Living, and where, perhaps, no one of their Nation then
living had ever been; and among a People of whom their Nation have been of a
long Time inclined to entertain Jealousies. Their Names were Joseph, Negyes,
and Center. They arrived here August Is It, 1761, but had so much Caution in the
extraordinary Enterprise, that they brought each of them an Horse from their
own Country. Two of them were but little better than naked, and could not speak
a World of English. The other being of a Family of Distinction among them, was
considerably clothed, Indian-fashion, and could speak a few Words of English.
They let me know, as soon as I could understand them, that Sir WM. JOHNSON had
told them they should return and visit their Friends in the Fall of the Year. I
took speedy Care to cleanse and cloth them. They many Ways discovered some
Jealousies respecting the Design of their coming; but by Acquaintance and
Freedom with other Indians in the School, and by constant Care for them and
Kindness to them, those Jealousies seemed in a little Time to wear away, and
they appeared to feel and enjoy themselves as though they had been at home in a
Father's House. Daily Care was exercised for them, and particular Caution that
they might in no Instance appear to be, through Disrespect, distinguished from
any in the School. Such Distinction, or any thing which they apprehend to be
so, I find will at once occasion Jealousies and Disaffection. And this seems to
be agreeable to a settled Principle among themselves, (according to which they
are wont to treat their Captives) viz. that those who take the Patronage of
Children, not their own, shall treat them in all respects as their own.

Center's Countenance, as I thought when he came, discovered that he was not in
Health. My Suspicions increased, and the issue proved they were not groundless.
He continued with me till the Fall, when the Physician I employed advised me,
that his Disorders threatened his Life, and prevailed to such a Degree that he
looked upon him to be incurable, and that he judged it best to send him back to
his Friends, and that soon, or it would be too late to send him at all; and
according to this Advice I sent him away with Negyes, having furnished them
with Money for their Journey into the Mohawk Country, on the 23d Day of
October. Joseph tarried longer to accompany young Kirtland, who was learning
the Mohawk Language of him, and whom I sent into that Country to obtain six
Boys of those Nations, to partake of the Benefit of Sir PETER WARREN'S Legacy,
according to the Instructions of the General Assembly of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, before mentioned.

Center reached home, but died soon after. Negyes, I hear, was captivated by a
young Female and married. Mr. Kirtland and Joseph set out for the Mohawk
Country November 4th, and returned November 27th, and brought two Mohawk Lads
with them, viz. Moses and Johannes, by whom Sir WM. JOHNSON informed me that he
expected to be able to send the Rest when they came in from hunting. I informed
the Hon. Commissioners of the State of the Case, and by a Letter from the
Reverend Dr. CHAUNCY, Chairman of their Committee, in the Name of the rest, was
desired to let them have in their Pay and under their Direction these two who
came last with Joseph, which I consented to, provided they would remit the
necessary Charges which I had been at in procuring and clothing them, and give
me as I afterward charged them for their Support and Tuition, upon which
Conditions they took them. I immediately sent to Sir WM. JOHNSON for other fix
to partake of Sir PETER WARREN'S Legacy. These three, viz. Joseph, Moses and
Johannes, continued with me in the Pay of the Commissioners till May 27, 1762,
when I offered said Committee my Account, the whole Amount of which, that is,
for clothing and furnishing David with Horse and Money for his Support in his
long Journey of several Months, the Expense of the Boy's Journey home above 200
Miles. The Expense of Kirtland's Journey (excepting his Horse) into that
Country to bring down Moses and Johannes. The pasturing the Horses of the first
three the time they continued here, in a dry and difficult Season; the
clothing all five, and repairing their Clothing the whole Time they tarried;
the Boarding and Schooling them, finding Washing, Lodging, Firewood, Candles,
Books, Paper, etc. I say, the Amount of the Expense for the Five and in the
whole Affair for near twelve Months, Errors excepted, was but just 581. 17s.
7d. 1-4th. Sterling. But in this Account I charged nothing for several
expensive Journeys in this Government, taken by myself, and another preparatory
and necessary to the Design of David's Mission, nor for any Labor, Care or
Pains of my own therein from first to last -- For their Board, Washing and
Lodging but 5s. per Week; the lowest common Price in these Parts was 6s. L. M.
What Clothing, etc. they had of me, I charged at the lowest Cash-price, and
what I got for them of our Traders, Shoemakers, Tailors, etc. I charged just as
they charged me, without any Advance in our Instance. I charged nothing for
extraordinary Trouble and Care for Center, in his declining State; nor did the
Physician Charge for what he did for him. And there were other Provisions made
to Prevent Expense of Money in their Journeyings more than is common, for which
there was nothing charged, by all which the Account was somewhat less than it
would otherwise have been -- But then on the other Hand it may be considered,

1. THAT Provisions of all Sorts were then, and still are, at an higher Price
than ever before in these Parts, occasioned by the preceding Wars and extreme
Drought. When they are reduced to their usual Price, the Expense of educating
Indian Youth will be much less.

2. THE Circumstances of this Undertaking were extraordinary, and the necessary
Expenses of it were consequently so, and such as there may never be such
Occasion for again. This was the opening a Door which never had been opened for
such a Purpose of these Nations; and it was thought by many who knew their
great Fondness for their Children, that it could not be soon accomplished, i.
e. to make either Parents or Children willing to comply with an Invitation to
come such a vast Length, and under such Circumstances as have been mentioned.
But the Report of David confirmed by the Boys on their Return, has given such
Conviction of the Sincerity and Kindness of our Intentions toward them, as has
removed all Objections. And nothing more is now necessary to our obtaining as
many well-chosen Boys and Girls as we please, but to employ some faithful
Missionary among them for that Purpose.

I HAVE been the more particular in this Account, because I would remove the
unreasonable Prejudices raised against this Method, by partial and unfair
Accounts, and a Cry of enormous Expenses, etc. And to let the World know there
is nothing in it worthy to be objected by one who is in earnest to accomplish
this great and important Design.

WHAT I have done for this School since its Beginning, in many expensive
Journies; (for none of which have I ever charged any Thing at all); in constant
Care for their Health, in Endeavors to cure their savage Disposition, and form
their Minds and Manners to right Rules of Virtue and Religion, in extraordinary
Care and Trouble for several of them in Sickness, in Expenses by Company, not
only of English but Indians at my House, occasioned thereby; and incidental
Charges in many Instances, none are able justly to estimate, or likely so much
as to think of many of them, but one who is intimately acquainted with the
Business: In Consideration for which I have had the Assistance of several of
them a few Times in an extraordinary Crowd of Business; and of late some
Advantage by the School to two of my own Children. Which Reward I suppose
impartial Judges will not think to bear a very considerable Proportion to these
Expenses which are not charged, and which in my Judgment is not the one Tenth
Part of them.

MR. MOOR'S Grant contains about two Acres of Pasturing, a small House and
Shop; for the Use of which from the first I have received about L. 4 lawful
Money, clear of the Charge of Repairing, which is not equal to the Money I have
paid to Physicians which is not charged.

I HAVE professed to have no View to making an Estate by this Affair: What the
Singleness and Uprightness of my Heart has been before GOD, he knows; and also
how greatly I stand in need of his Pardon.

MY Account with the School has been charged after the following Manner, viz.
For the whole Expense of Clothing, Boarding and Tutoring the Boys from
December 18th. 1754, to November 26th. 1760. at the Rate of L.16 lawful Money
per Annum, for each; but when their Number was so increased I found it
necessary to come nearer to the true Value of it, and have since used greater
Exactness; but have never charged higher than at the lowest Money Price for
what they have had of me, and for what I have bought for them of our Traders,
Shoemakers, Tailors, etc. I have charged just what I have given, and no more. I
have charged for their Tuition, as for English Scholars, i.e. for Latin
Scholars, and such as were savage and needed much Care and Instruction, at 2
s.L.M. per Week, or L.4. 10 s. per Annum; and for others proportionably. The
whole School, one Year with another, has not quite cleared my Expense for the
Master. Last Year it did a little more; and since the 27th of May last, it has
over-done my Expense for the Master 15 s. 8 d. besides the Tuition of the
Girls. I have charged for the Girls but 4 d. per Week, i.e. for one Day's
Schooling and Dinner; and the whole Expense for their Education will be but
little more than their Clothing.

THE total Amount of all my Disbursements in this whole Affair, for near Eight
Years, that is, since December 18. 1754, to November 27. 1762, charged in the
Manner, and after the Rate beforementioned, is, (Errors excepted) L. 566 2 s.
5 d. Sterling. -- And the total Amount of all the Donations beforementioned,
together with smaller ones, which I suppose needless to mention particularly,
received within the said Term, is, (Errors excepted) L. 509 2 s. 5 d. Sterling.

AND as this School was set up when there was no Scheme devised, or Plan laid,
which this could be in Opposition to; so it is not continued in Opposition to
any other Measures which are proposed or pursued by others.

AND, blessed be GOD that he has put it into the Hearts of a Number of
Gentlemen of Ability in and near BOSTON, to contribute so liberally toward the
Furtherance of the general Design. And is it not a Pity that Christians of all
Denominations should not unite their utmost Endeavors for the Accomplishment
of it; and especially now while the Door is so widely opened for it? And what a
Pity is it that any Time should be lost? And how exceeding mean, and infinitely
beneath those noble Sentiments, and that generous Love to the Souls of Men, and
to our KING and Country, which true Religion inspires, will it be to fall into
Parties; and on Account of differing Opinions respecting the most probable
Methods for accomplishing the End, to obstruct and hinder one another therein?
There is enough for all to do; and the Affair is of so great Importance, that
it calls for the Trial of every Method that has the least Probability of
Success; and different Methods may greatly subserve and assist one another.

WE can none of us boast such Perfection of Understanding and Skill in the
Affair as to set up safely for Infallibility. Many Attempts have been made by
wife and good Men; and the Issue has taught them their Want of that Knowledge
which is got by Experience; and that their pious Labor and Expense had been in
a great Measure lost for want of it.

AND I would take this Opportunity to express my Gratitude for those generous
Benefactions whereby this Infant Institution has been hitherto supported; and I
hope through the Blessing of GOD upon our our Endeavors, those pious
Benefactors will have Occasion for the most easy and comfortable Reflections,
as having made an Offering acceptable to GOD, and bestowed it well for the
Advancement of the Kingdom, and Glory of the great REDEEMER: And that the
Blessing of many of our American Heathens, who shall in the present and
succeeding Generations, reap the Benefit thereof, may come upon them: And that
others understanding that this School stills lives, under GOD, upon the Charity
of good Men, will be moved to open their Hands to minister further, and
necessary Supplies for it.

HEBRON, December 31. 1762. To the PRINTERS.
WE having been informed that the Rev'd Eleazar Wheelock of Lebanon has lately
prepared and sent to your Press, A Narrative of the INDIAN Charity School under
his Care; and being willing to contribute to the Furtherance of that truly
noble and Charitable Undertaking, which, though new and untried before he
entered upon it, appears to us to have the greatest Probability of Success, and
to afford the most encouraging Prospect of spreading the Gospel far and wide
among our American Pagans, of any Method that has yet been attempted: And we
cannot but hope that a recommendatory Letter, which was some Time since sent to
a private Friend, signed by a Number of neighboring Ministers, may serve to
satisfy the World, that the charitable Design which that Gentleman is pursuing,
is, in the Judgment of his Neighbors, who are well acquainted with him, and
with the Affair of his School, neither selfish, nor enthusiastic; nor the Plan
proposed so expensive, as may be any reasonable Objection against making a
thorough Trial thereof: And we having consulted several of the Subscribers who
join with us (as we believe all would do if they had Opportunity for it) in
desiring that said Letter might be published at the End of said Narrative; that
so far as the Credit and Reputation of the Clergy in this Neighborhood will
influence thereto, all Prejudices may be removed from the Minds of Christians
of every Denomination, and all be excited to unite their Endeavors according
to their Ability to encourage and promote so noble and important an
Undertaking: Wherefore please to give said Letter (a Copy whereof you will
receive with this) a Place at the Close of said Narrative, and you will oblige

Yours to serve, Benjamin Pomroy, Elijah Lothrop, Nathaniel Whitaker.

COPY of the LETTER.
CHELSEA, in Norwich, July 10. 1762. SIR,
WE Ministers of the Gospel, and Pastors of Churches hereafter mentioned with
our Names, having for a Number of Years past heard of, or seen with Pleasure,
the Zeal, Courage and firm Resolution of the Reverend ELEAZAR WHEELOCK of
Lebanon, to prosecute to Effect a Design of Spreading the Gospel among the
Natives in the Wild of our America, and especially his Perseverance in it,
amidst the many peculiar Discouragements he had to encounter during the late
Years of the War here, and upon a Plan which appears to us to have the greatest
Probability of Success, viz. by the Mission of their own Sons. And as we are
verily persuaded, that the Smiles of divine Providence upon his School, and the
Success of his Endeavors hitherto, justly may and ought to encourage him and
all, to believe it to be of GOD, and that which he will own and succeed for the
Glory of his own great Name in the Enlargement of the Kingdom of our divine
Redeemer, as well as for the great Benefit of the Crown of Great Britain, and
especially of his Majesty's Dominions in America; 10 we apprehend, that the
present Openings in Providence ought to invite Christians of every Denomination
to unite their Endeavors, and lend a helping Hand in carrying on the
charitable Design; and we are heartily sorry if Party Spirit and Party
Differences shall at all obstruct the Progress of it, or the old Leaven in this
Land ferment upon this Occasion, and give a watchful Adversary Opportunity so
to turn the Course of Endeavors into another Channel, as to defeat the Design
of spreading the Gospel among the Heathen.

To prevent which and encourage Unanimity and Zeal in prosecuting the Design,
we look upon it our Duty as Christians, and especially as Ministers of the
Gospel, to give our Testimony, That, as we verily believe, a disinterested
Regard to the Advancement of the Redeemer's Kingdom, and the Good of his
Majesty's Dominions in America were the governing Motives which at first
induced the Reverend Mr. WHEELOCK to enter upon the great Affair, and to risque
his own private Interest as he has done since in carrying it on; so we esteem
his Plan to be good, his Measures prudently and well-concerted, his Endowments
peculiar, his Zeal servent, his Endeavors indefatigable for the accomplishing
this Design; and we know no Man like-minded who will naturally care for their
State. May God prolong his Life, and make him extensively useful in the Kingdom
of CHRIST!

WE have also some of us at his Desire examined his Accounts, and find that
besides giving in all his own Labor and Trouble in the Affair, he has charged
for the Support, Schooling, etc. of the Youth, at the lowest Rate it could be
done for, as the Price has been and still is among us; and we apprehend the
generous Donations already made, has been, and we are confident will be laid
out in the most prudent Manner, and with the best Advice for the Furtherance of
the important Design. And we pray God abundantly to reward the Liberality of
any upon this Occasion; and we hope the Generosity, especially of Persons of
Distinction and Note, will be a happy Lead and Inducement to still greater
Liberalities, and that in Consequence thereof the wide extended Wilderness of
America, will blossom as the Rose, Habitations of Cruelty become
Dwelling-Places of Righteousness, and the Blessing of Thousands ready to perish
come upon all those whose Love to Christ, and Charity to them, has been shown
upon this Occasion, which is the hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your sincere Friends and humble Servants, Ebenezer Rosseter, Pastor of
the1 st Church in Stonington. Joseph Fish, Pastor of the 2d Church in
Stonington. Nathaniel Whitaker, Pastor of the Church at Chelsea, in Norwich.
Benjamin Pomroy, Pastor of the 1 st Church in Hebron. Elijah Lothrop, Pastor of
the Church of Gilead, in Hebron. Nathaniel Eells, Pastor of a Church in
Stonington. Mather Byles, Pastor of the 1 st Church in New London. Jonathan
Barber, Pastor of a Church in Groton. Matt Graves, Missionary at New London.
Peter Powers, Pastor of the Church at Newent, in Norwich. Daniel Kirtland,
former Pastor of the Chapter at Newent, in Norwich. Asher Rosseter, Pastor of the 1
st Church in Preston. Jabez Wight, Pastor of the 4 th Church in Norwich. David
Jewett, Pastor of the 2 d Church in New London. Benjamin Throop, Pastor of a
Church in Norwich. Samuel Mosely, Pastor of a Church in Windham. Stephen White,
Pastor of a Church in Windham. Richard Salter, Pastor of a Church in Mansfield.
Timothy Allen, Pastor of the Church in Ashford. Ephraim Little, Pastor of the 1
st Church in Colchester. Hobart Estabrook, Pastor of a Church in East-Haddam.
Joseph Fowler, Pastor of a Church in East-Haddam. Benjamin Boardman, Pastor of
the 4th Chapter of Christ in Middletown. John Norton, Pastor of the 6th Chapter of
Christ in Middletown. Benjamin Dunning, Pastor of a Chapter of Christ in
Marlborough.
N. B The Names of the Subscribers stand in the same Order in which they
subscribed, and not according to Seniority; and it is hoped any Inaccuracies
observable in the Draught will be excused, at least not charged upon more than
one of the Number, inasmuch as they signed separately, not having the Advantage
of a Convention for that Purpose.

THE END.

