METHODISM anatomized; OR AN ALARM to PENNSYLVANIA.

BY A LOVER OF TRUE PIETY, In Opposition to ENTHUSIASM.

With some REMARKS on a DISCOURSE delivered September 24th, 1763.

Thus little Villains must submit to Fate,
That great ones may enjoy the World in State.
GARTH. Printed for the Author, and sold by JOHN MORRIS, at the Green-Man in
Fishamble-street. -- MDCCLXIII.

Methodism anatomized, etc.
BEWARE! ye Men of Pennsylvania! -- shun false Doctrine, and false Preachers;
-- the Arch-Deceiver is among you! Confusion is making her Entry, and nothing
can be expected from it but Disorder and Madness. --

I here declare to Mr. --, his Friends and Followers, that I am not an Enemy,
personally, either to him or them; but the Tenets of Methodism I will display,
anatomize and discover.

Let us take an impartial View of those enthusiastical Zealots, by which we
shall find them to be Animals of the oddest Composition the Creation affords;
made up of Ignorance and Stupidity, and their Skulls are of so comfortable a
Thickness, that they cannot discern Right from Wrong: Whenever they meet
(though in Company with Strangers) their Conversation is on the New Birth This
has been often canted to the Author.
The Gospel shines like the Sun in the Firmament; what Pity it is that there
are so many Reprobates, at a Time when there are so many fine Men to lead them
into Light; when perhaps the Fellow they have been commending, is no more than
a poor Tailor, sprung from a Shopboard; or an inspired Snob, who has sold his
Awl and Ends to purchase a few of Mr. -- Sermons, from which he can bawl out --
Fly! fly! fly to the Mountains! Death, Hell, Revenge! the Devil is at your
Heels! -- and such like blasphemous Stuff, is all that comes from them; by
which they take in the Ignorant and Unwary, deceive the Silly, and lead away
many foolish Women, who are oftener inspired with the outward than the inward
Man.

As for the R -- d. Mr. --, (who, had he been wise, would not have made his
Appearance here at this Time) he has made it for these twenty Years past, his
constant Practice not only to deceive the World himself, but to encourage
others to do so, -- to make Priests (as he calls them, but I think they may
with more Propriety be termed miserable gospel Haberdashers) of Tinkers,
Portsmouth.
Tailors, Pattin-makers, London.
Weavers, superanuated Dragoons, Isle of Wight.
Shoplifters and Highwaymen: Sarum.
With such a Train at his Heels, he endeavors to knock down all Order and
Regularity in divine Service, allowing and prompting Villains, who have left
their Ears at the Pillory, Wichester, etc. etc. etc.
to preach and vend his enthusiastical Nonsense; taking absolute
Predestination, Damnation, Perfection, and Salvation, whiningly and confusedly,
as in a Scavenger's Shovel, and scatters them abroad; Free Will being canted
off the Corner of the same. This is the Marrow of Methodism! Bigotry is the
main Beam, supported by Stupidity; -- for nothing else but that would draw
Crowds of People together to hear, -- to hear what? nothing at all -- to hear
an old Woman; for their very General is no more, as I shall in its proper Place
prove, from a late Discourse At Phil -- el -- ia.
. -- Incoherent, Phrases, Sham-crying, and Distortion of Phiz, with bawling
out, The Lord Jesus Christ! ten Times in a Sentence, and a little Memory, are
the Qualifications, and the only ones, necessary for a Methodist Preacher.

I beg the Reader's Pardon; he must know how to snarl, bite, and cousin, or he
will not imitate his great Master. -- An inspired Snob At Manchester.
after kicking the Devil into Hell, driving him out again, and blinding him in
the Air, says, My dear Hearers, what think ye? What do you think this old Devil
did? he took our Blessed Lord and Savior on the Pinnacle of the Temple, and
showed and promised him all the World if he would but worship him; when, to my
certain Knowledge, that old surly Devil, at that Time, was not worth a Groat!
What a Cheat! is it any Wonder to hear that Satan is a Cheat? I think not, we
always looked upon him as such; but we generally expect to hear Truth from the
Pulpit. Sorry I am that I Am forced to say, I have very lately heard many
absolute Contradictions, and little less than Untruths from thence! But it is
no Wonder, if we will but consider who it comes from: A Man as I said before,
who delights in making Divisions, tramples on Order; dubbs a Man a Priest (As
Kite says of a Gentleman) in the drawing of a Triger. -- The Priesthood, by all
sensible People, at all Times, was looked upon as sacred; and it is declared to
be so both in the Old and New Testament: For Instance, Numb. xvith Chapter.
Korah, Dathin, and Abiram were swallowed up, and two hundred and fifty burnt
for pretending to assume the Office! We likewise read in the New Testament that
certain Persons Acts xix, 14.
seeing the Miracles performed by St. Paul, in the Name of our blessed Lord,
endeavored (though vainly) to assume the same Authority, and made use of the
Name of the Apostles, and that of our Savior, to cast out Devils. -- The
Consequence was; the Man in whom the evil Spirit was, overcame them and made
them fly stark naked and wounded; and these were seven in Number. A Man would
think, that two such Marks of the divine Wrath, given at two different Times,
and to different People, and so great a Period between, was sufficient to deter
any Person from assuming the like again; as any reasonable Soul must expect and
know, that, sooner or later the divine Hand, at his own appointed Time, would
punish such Audaciousness, and not let such glaring Crimes pass with Impunity.

Many more Instances might be brought to prove the Sacredness of the
Priesthood, but I shall only mention an Injunction of St. Paul's, who foresaw
the Divisions that would happen; it may be called a Prophecy, which in this
Age, is fully verified, -- it runs thus: Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them
which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctine which ye have
learned, and avoid them. -- For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Belly, and by good and fair Speech deceive the Hearts of
the Simple. Romans xvi, 17 and 18.


That Methodism (as they call it) is a Doctrine contrary to what we have been
taught, is very certain; that it causes Divisions and Offenses is as true; for
what we have from the Holy Gospel, the Apostles, and all regular Divines, is
Holiness, Humility, Meekness, and Salvation for all Mankind that follow its
glorious Precepts. Mr. -- and his Crew of P -- k-P -- ts, deals Damnation round
the World, sends Souls to Hell, that when living, their Bodies was not a Span
long! At London, Portsmouth, etc.
Preaches absolute Predestination; damns a Man before he is born; denies it
when called upon; falls into the same again, and yet is credited by many simple
Ones.

That they are Ministers of their Own Bellies, is as certain as their false
Doctrine: For Instance; A certain Man beging or (rather Robing) the World under
Pretense of an O -- n-H -- e in G -- a, and putting it in his Purse. It is
true, there is such a House, but it is affirmed, that there is not above six
People in it. A fine Place to build such a House; amongst Wolves and Bears!
there may be O -- 's enough of that kind. A fine Handle he made of it, and a
very pretty Farce he acted. We have no Occasion to go out of this Province for
the Verity of this; for it is well known how he crammed his Pockets at his
Departure. -- His Doctrine is full of Inconsistencies, Craft and Design; his
Design being no other than plundering the Purse, deceiving the Understanding;
and, under Pretense of uniteing all Parties in one, sets all Sectaries together
by the Ears, that he may have an Oppertunity of picking up Pence from the Whole.

It is well known that the same Person, when in a neighboring Province, Boston.
preached down the wearing of Rings and other Ornaments of Gold, declaring them
to be a Profanation of the Gospel of our blessed Lord; by which Means many
weak People were induced to pull off those Ornaments and present them to him,
as an Offering: He very soon after, at a well known Place, Philadelphia.
recommended the wearing of Rings, as fit Ornaments for those that were
enligtened by the New Birth; turned Ring-Merchant and sold them! -- The
Lumber-House, near T -- m-Court, is, as it were, a Playhouse, none being
admitted into the Gallery without a Ticket.

Another Instance of the Belly; -- An inspired Tailor in the Isle of Wight (a
Priest of the New Light) often visited an honest Farmer's Wife, in Absence of
the Husband, under Prentence of enlightening her Understanding, and
administrating spiritual Comfort to her. One certain Day, his Visit being over
and Leave taken, he was met at the Door by the honest Man, who, observed his
Coat stick out, demanded what he had under it? The Practice of Piety, he
answered; the Farmer shook him, and down droped a Gammon of Bacon! Fine Piety!
the Fellow received a hearty Drubbing, the Courtecy of the Horse-Pond, and lost
his Bacon; or rather the Farmer found his.

I think this proves them Ministers of the Belly with a Vengeance. Those Facts
alone, are sufficient to prove them not Ministers of the Gospel; for, if we
believe the Apostle before mentioned, we must look upon them as Deceivers and
Aliens, but they have every Mark about them foretold by that learned Disciple;
a smooth Tongue, a deceitful Heart, and leading away the Unwary and Simple, are
Terms that justly belong to them. Mr. -- has them all himself, and that to
Perfection; and inculcates them firmly both in the Minds of his underling
Haberdashers, and nonsensical Hearers. -- They are likewise known to lead away
many weak and simple Women; indeed all that follow them ought to be called so,
for if they are not so at their first setting out, they will not follow him
long before they will be either mad, stupid, simple, or in Despair! Therefore I
say, Beware, lest you should be obliged to build more Cells for poor Wretches,
drove beside themselves by this pernicious Doctrine, or perhaps (which is
worse) have Occasion to go there yourselves. -- The miserable Effects that
their mad, enthusiastic, wild and rambleing Way of preaching has produced,
cannot but be too well known in every Place where it has gained any Footing. It
has caused Suicide in all its Shapes, institigated some to hang, others to
drown, others to cut the Throats of themselves, some to burn Powder, and others
to throw themselves off of Precipices, besides filling Mad-Houses, Hospitals
and Jails: And it is no wonder it has this Effect, if we consider the
Principles of absolute Predestination, which leaves no Room for Salvation for a
poor Sinner, that by that was doomed to be damned five Thousand Years before he
was born; -- he cannot, says the Enthusiast, repent, no he was doomed a
Reprobate from the Beginning of Time. This is strikeing hard at two of the
noblest Attributes of the Divine Being, his Justice, and his Mercy. Yet this is
the Doctrine that is taught by Methodism, and bellowed over the World, by a
Set of Fellows that would better adorn the G-ll -- s than a Pulpit. Their
Chief, it is allowed has Learning, but his Judgment has been araigned, and
found not weighty enough to regulate his mad and extravagant Fondness for Fame,
which last seems to be his ruling Principle. It is hardly known how far this
Principle will carry those who are enthusiastically fond of it. I remember of
reading of one of their Cast of Mind, that set the Temple of Diana, at Ephesus,
on Fire, for no other Purpose but to endeavor to preserve his Name to
Posterity; to defeat which, the Senate decreed his Name should never be
mentioned or wrote. I hope the Reader will pardon this Digression. But to
return: It signifies not a Straw where they take their Text, for they ramble
over the World, from London to Bristol, from thence to Scotland, Virgnia,
Carolina* dear Boston, and then takes a kick at Phi -- phia, boasting
Self-sufficiency and good Works performed by themselves, whining and crying
(Crocodile like) in order to dtaw Tears from their Auditors, and move them to
open their Purses.

In England the Church, in Scotland the Kirk, and here every Thing, but good at
Nothing, but sowing Disention and Discord; encouraging Women to run from their
Husbands, and Children from their Parents: These are known Facts, and may be
found in a certain Person's Journal. They make it their Business to whine, and
under the Cloak of Religion (the greatest Cloak in the World) to insinuate
themselves into every House that will let them; having gained Admittance, they
ingratiate themselves into the Favor of the Women, in order to introduce a
Love-Feast; which is this, they meet in an Evening at a Christian Friend's
House by Pairs, and Feast both Spiritually and Temporally; it begins with Hymns
and Spiritual Songs, and then a Lecture; after this they refresh their
Appetites with good wholesome Viands; when presently (as by Accident) they are
all left in the Dark, and then (if they Please) each may feast on their
Partners. I do not imagine this Feast has made its entry here as yet; and some
may doubt its Veracity, but I assure the Readers it is common in England, and
we, who have been admitted behind the Grand Scenes, cannot but know the Craft
and Deceit carried on there.

The whole Plan is Craft and Deceit, although cloaked and blended with
Superstition, ever so cunningly, cannot escape a discerning Eye; or indeed any
Eye that is not blinded by Enthusiasm. -- I remember an eastern Proverb which I
have formerly read; -- says its not good to jest with God, Death, or the Devil;
for the First neither can nor will be mocked; the Second mocks all Men, one
Time or other; and the Third puts an eternal Sarcasm on all those that are too
familiar with him. -- That Methodism Jests with all three is very evident, --
with our blessed Lord, in renting his holy Gospel and making Divisions and
Offenses in his Church, and tearing the sacred Order, enjoined to be observed
in it, all to Pieces. -- They have amongst them tore so large a rent in
Religion, that its almost impossible to be repaired; -- They jest with Death,
in pretending to be always wishing for his Stroke, and begging it on the
Instant; but I am persuaded was he to make his grim Appearance, the stoutest of
them all would plead for a Respite, -- They are continually jesting with the
Devil, for they are pretending to be constantly buffeting him from Place to
Place, and from Post to Pillar. -- Says one of them some Time ago; I have,
(call me what they please) done some good in my Generation; for I have drove
the Devil out of Tat -- ham Court, where he formerly kept his chief Residence,
and have set up a Taber -- e for Christ. -- If he has drove Satan from thence,
there still remains devilish Works enough there: But its but very lately, one
declared himself Turn-key of Hell; Says he, (after telling before, that we all
deserved Damnation) did any one tell you this Morning, when you was coming to
hear me, that I should preach Damnation to you! if they did I Will deceive you
and them; I will not my dear Hearers, I want to frighten you, but I will do it by
showing the Love of Christ! Had I a Mind to open Hell-Gates, I might frighten
you for a Moment, but you would fall into the same Way again, -- Query could he
open them without a Key? Since I have mentioned this Remark, I shall be so bold
as to make a few more on that famous Discourse, in which, Design appeared through
the Whole. -- The very Prayer was such; after beginning with one of our
Collects, he began to pray for the Sectaries of whatever Denomination that
their Pastors might labor in the good Work and sow good Seed, and that they
would prepare the Ground for the same, so that it might grow, and some produce
Twenty, some Fifty, and some an Hundred Fold; -- then for the Reverend
Gentleman of the Regular Churches; His Honor; the Assembly, Magistrates, and
all inferior Officers under them; and who after that, -- His Most Sacred
Majesty, the Royal Family, Privy Counselors, etc. etc. etc. By which its plain
to be seen, that in order to ingratiate himself in the Opinions of the
Inhabitants of this City; he either forgot or trampled on the Duty he owed to
his Majesty; placing Constables, Bomb-Baily's, and even the Hangman before him;
he would not have dared, bold as he is, to have said this in England.

The Subject of the Discourse is known to be the only Foundation we have to
rely on, that of our Blessed Savior. -- But, in order to please some
Sectaries, here he struck a severe Blow at the very Foundation of Christianity,
I mean Baptism. -- These are his Words or the Purport of them. -- Perhaps you
think you are Christians, because you were baptized? Is that your Foundation?
It is a watery Foundation; and did you ever know any Thing stand that was
founded in the Water? its true, It Is an Ordinance of Christ, but it is an
Ordinance founded on Water: He then recommends us to obtain Christ in our
Hearts, and, in his mad Way, insists on all being of his Opinion; wishes for
the Voice of an Archangel to make all the World hear him at once. -- And then
he says, What you want to go to Heaven! do you, for what? You imagine Heaven to
be a fine Place I suppose? But its no such Thing -- Indeed if you read the
Revelations, you will there find it to be a fine Place; the Streets paved with
Gold, and the Gates of Emerald and precious Stones: The avaritious Man would be
glad to go to such a Heaven, if he could unhinge the Gates and keep them to
himself! -- The Gamester there too would be very well satisfied! -- The Ladies
would expect Balls and Assemblies there too; such a Heaven as this would please
the worldly Man, but Heaven is no such Place. -- It Is allowed by those that
best understand the Works of St. John the Divine, that there is a Mystery
couched under this Sentence, that they were not able to penetrate the Bottom:
However, no Man of Sense ever denied its being a fine Place; nor none was ever
Fool enough to think he could unhinge and keep the Gates to himself: Its a
Place prepared for for the just Men made perfect, where is promised Happiness
and Fullness of Joy for ever more, in Company with Christ and his Angels; --
Would any Thing but a mad crack-brained Enthusiast deny this being a fine
Place? surely no; but they will affirm any Thing: For after taking a Trip to
Scotland, and acquainting us with the last Moments of an inspired young
Clergyman, who was perfectly sure of Thousands and Thousands of Crowns of
immortal Glory being placed on his Head, in less than an Hour. He then tells us
of a Woman in Virginia, who, twenty Year ago, when talking of the New Birth,
said it must be after this Life was ended: And of an inspired young Man, whose
last Words were, he was afraid the Foundation was not laid in his Father's
Heart: Do, Sir, pray for my Father; that the Foundation may me laid in his
Heart: He says, You will call this Enthusiasm I suppose! I wish all were such
Enthusiasts! But do you know what an Enthusiast is? Enthusiasm is God in you!
But I tell him he is mistaken in his Definition: An Enthusiast in Religion, is
one that vainly imagines he is inspired by the Spirit of God; when he is only
actuated by the Warmth of his own overheated Imagination.

After giving his Difinition of Enthusiasm, he snarls out Would you go to
Heaven with the Devil in your Bellies? -- Then we are led into a Garden to view
"a fine Cobweb," from thence to a Tyburn Execution; poor Lord F -- s must be
hauled over the Coals, and his Ashes raked up to prove his Foundation; --
jumbling and filling each Interval in a confused Manner with his " Love for
Christ; -- " and his dear, dear Philadelphia. --

In short, I am quite weary of repeating his Jargon; the whole being a Mixture
of, Damnation, whimsical Salvation and absolute Nonsense. --

Perhaps some Persons may think I have been too satiracal; but if they will but
consider what it was wrote for, I am persuaded they will think there is not a
drop too much Gall made use of. -- The Design was to paint Methodism in its
natural and odious Colors, in order to prevent its pernicious Effects
spreading any farther. Glad should I be could I live to see these Divisions at
an End, and those Renagadoes return to the Church, established by our noble
Constitution. As a Member of the Church, I declare I am no Hypocrite, nor am I
fond of Fame; but let us not be less than ourselves, that is MEN. There is no
Reason we should be imposed on by fabulous Reports of designing Men, or give
Credit or Faith to every credulous Fool. -- It is hoped some abler Pen will
take the Cause in Hand, so that an entire Stop may be put to it; in that Hope I
rest, and beg an impartial Judgment on this my first Essay.

FINIS.

