Dr. Sewall's SERMON On the Death of the Reverend Mr. Alexander Cumming.

The Character and Reward of the faithful Ministers of CHRIST. A SERMON
Preached at the South Church in Boston, On the LORD'S DAY after the Funeral Of
the REVEREND Mr. Alexander Cumming, Late Colleague Pastor of said Church. Who
departed this Life, August 25. 1763. Aetat. 37

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor of said Church.

Rev. xiv. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their Labors; and their Works do follow them. BOSTON:
Printed by S. Kneeland, 1763.

A Funeral SERMON.
PHIL. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
THESE are the Words of the Apostle Paul. In the 20th ver. he declares, that it
was his earnest Expectation and Hope, that Christ should be magnified in his
Body, whether by Life, or by Death. In this Ver. he gives a Reason of his Hope:
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. i. e. says an Expositor, "If I
live, Christ shall be the Scope of my Life, and End of my Living; I resolve to
live to his Service: if I die, Death will be a real gain to me." Others read
the Words, "Christ is to me in Life and Death, Advantage or Gain."

I. It is the Character of every true Christian, and faithful Gospel Minister;
that for them to live is Christ.

II. It is their great Privilege and Happiness, that for them to die shall be
gain.

1. It is the Character of every true Christian, and faithful Gospel Minister;
that for them to live is Christ.

1. This is the Character of every true Christian. All such as are given up to
Christ in Baptism, and profess to be his Disciples; are under solemn
Obligations to seek the Spirit of Christ, that they may live to him; and it is
the Character of those who are Christians indeed, that they make the Gospel of
Christ, the Rule, and the Glory of God in Christ, the great End of their
living. It is their great Concern and Endeavor, to depart from all Iniquity,
and to walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing, by walking as becomes the
Gospel, even as the Grace of God, that brings Salvation teaches us, that
denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present World: Tit. ii.12.
They not only call Christ, Lord; but do the Things which he says. They devote
their Time and Talents, yea, their Lives to his Service.

2. It is the Character of every faithful Gospel Minister, that for him to live
is Christ. The Apostle Paul calls himself a Minister of the Gospel: Ephesians. iii.6,
7.
and it was his Care to live as became such an one.

To illustrate and confirm this Head, I would observe,

1. It is the great Concern of such to obtain the Evidence of their Union with
Jesus Christ, and of his dwelling in their Hearts by Faith. They are sensible,
that unless they are united to him by his Spirit, and a living Faith; they can
have no spiritual Communion with him in his saving Benefits. He that is joined
to the Lord, is one Spirit 1 Cor. vi.17.
. And unless they are thus in Christ, they cannot derive Grace from him to
fulfill their Ministry; nor in a right Manner depend upon him to fulfill his
Word; I am with you always. If destitute of that Faith, which works by Love,
though they had the most shining Gifts, and could speak with the Tongues of
Angels, yet they are but as sounding Brass; an empty Noise: and whatever Good
others might receive by their Ministry, they themselves must be cast away.
Accordingly, they are earnestly concerned that they may be able to say with the
Apostle, I knew a Man in Christ: and that they may be found in him, clothed
with the Righteousness of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus.

2. This implies their sincere Concern and Endeavor to be acquainted with the
Gospel in such a Measure, that they may be qualified to lead Souls to Christ,
and build them up on their holy Faith. They are sensible, that this is the
great Design and Use of the Gospel Ministry, to lead Men to Christ, as the only
Savior of perishing Sinners. The same Apostle teaches, that it is for the
edifying of the Body of Christ; 'till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
and of the Knowledge of the Son of God. Ephesians. iv.12, 13.
-- And therefore the faithful Minister, determines not to know any Thing
among his People, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Now, under this, is
comprehended, the Knowledge of the Truths, Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel
of Christ; concerning the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; his
divine and human Natures united in one Person; his Offices, Laws, and saving
Benefits. Accordingly, the faithful Minister of Christ, gives himself to
Reading, Meditation and Prayer, that his Lips may preserve and communicate this
Knowledge to his Hearers; that his Light may shine before others, to give them
the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. And this leads
me to say,

3. That the great Care and Endeavor of the faithful Minister, is to preach
Jesus Christ; and teach the Things which concern his Kingdom and Glory. Thus
Paul preached the Kingdom of God; and taught those Things which concern the
Lord Jesus Christ. Act. xxvili.31.
And in another Place, he tells us, 2 Cor. iv.5.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. They dare not impose
their own Notions, nor teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; but labor
to keep close to the pure Doctrines of the Gospel, teaching Men to observe all
Things whatsoever Christ has commanded. The End and Scope of their Ministry, is
not to gain the Applause of Men, by proselyting them to any darling Opinions of
their own, but to teach them the Knowledge of God and Christ, and the Way of
Salvation as revealed in the infallible Oracles of the old and new Testament;
that their Faith may stand not in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God. 1
Cor. ii.5.


4. The faithful Ministers of Christ, live by the Faith of the Son of God. And
in this Respect, for to live to them is Christ. The Lord Jesus is the
Believer's Life, and every faithful Pastor is sensible of this. Agreeably, the
Apostle says to Timothy, 2 Epist. ii 1. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in
the Grace that is in Christ Jesus. And declares concerning himself: The Life
which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. Gal. ii.
20 He acknowledges that his Furniture and Ability for his sacred Work, were
from the Lord, and that he lived upon Him, who counted him faithful, putting
him into the Ministry. Such realize it, that all their Sufficiency is of God,
and is communicated to them through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, the glorious
Head of the Church; and accordingly, they run the Race set before them, looking
unto Jesus, as the Author and Finisher of their Faith: who said to this
Apostle, in a time of Extremity, My Grace is sufficient for thee; for my
Strength is made perfect in Weakness. 2 Cor, xii.9.


5. It implies, that it is their great Care and Endeavor to follow the Example
of Jesus Christ. When the Apostle says, for me to live is Christ, it intends,
that he looked unto Jesus, as his Pattern and Exemplar, and labored that the
same Mind might be in him, which was in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. xi. 1. Be ye
Followers of me, even as I am of Christ. The true evangelical Pastor is
concerned, that the like Zeal for the Glory of God, the Purity of his Worship,
and the Salvation of the Soul's of Men; the like Humility, Patience and
Submission to the Will of God; may be in him, which were so conspicuous in the
Man Christ Jesus. It is his Care, that he may show forth the Virtues of this
lovely Person, who was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners: He
not only preaches, but lives the Gospel in some good Measure; bearing in Mind
what our Lord said, when he had washed his Disciples Feet, Joh. xiii. 14, 15.
If I then your Lord and Master, have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash
one another's Feet, For I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I
have done to you.

6. The Scope and End of their Lives and Ministry are, that God in Christ may
be glorified. They seck not their own primarily, or chiefly, but the Things
which are Jesus Christ's; that God in Christ may be glorified: many being
brought to trust in him, to turn to God by him, and live as the obedient
Subjects of the Lord. It is not their own Honor or Profit, which they are
principally concerned for, but the honor of Christ; that many may ascribe Glory
and Honor and Blessing to Him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb
forever. Thus for them to live is Christ; when the great End of their Lives is
to exalt the Redeemer, and that his Gospel may run and be glorified in the
Salvation of many, formed to show forth his Praise. 1 Pet iv. 11. if any Man
speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any Man minister, let him do it
as of the Ability which God gives: that God in all Things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ; to whom be Praise and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

7. The principal Joy of their Lives is to behold the Kingdom of Christ, set up
with Power, and flourishing in their own Souls, and in the Hearts of God's
People. It is the Spirit and Temper of every faithful Minister, to rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the Flesh. They love the Lord Jesus;
and from love to Him, they feed his Sheep, and feed his Lambs. And from this
cordial Affection, wish Prosperity to the Son of David. The Blessings of his
Kingdom, which are Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, are more
to them, than the Joy of Harvest. 1 Thessalonians. iii, 8, 9. For now we live, if ye
stand fast in the Lord: For what Thanks can we render to God again for you, for
all the Joy wherewith we Joy for your Sakes before our God. It was the Comfort
of their Lives, to behold the Thessalonians steadfast in the Belief and Practice
of the Religion of Jesus; yea, they were their Crown and Joy 1 these. ii.20.
.

8. They count not their Lives dear, that they may finish their Conrse with
Joy, and the Ministry which they have received of the Lord Jesus. It was the
Spirit of the Apostle Paul, Act. xx.24
and every faithful Pastor labors after the same Mind. He would not miss of
the great End of living to the Lord Jesus; no, not for the sake of prolonging
this frail Life, and the Comforts of it. They spend, and are spent for the
Service of their great Master; and their great Care is to finish well, and
receive the Reward of good and faithful Servants, Romans xiv. 7, 8. For none of
us lives to himself, and no Man dies to himself: For whether we live, we live
to the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live
therefore, or die, we are the Lard's.

And this brings me [to the second Head: Which is to consider,

II. The great Privilege and Happiness of such, for whom to live is Christ:
for them to die shall be gain.

Christians, and Gospel Ministers, must die, as well as others. It is appointed
unto Men once to die. Heb. ix.27.
We have all sinned; and the Wages of Sin, is Death. Romans v.12. -- By one Man
Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death has passed upon all
Men, for that all have sinned. In this Respect, there is one Event to the
Righteous and to the Wicked. There is no Discharge in that War: We must all
encounter this last Enemy, and fall by his Handdelivered Indeed, by Faith in
Christ, every true Believer is delivered from Sin, the Sting of Death; but not
from the Stroke of Death. These all died in Faith Heb. xi.13.
God will have this Mark of his holy Displeasure against Sin abide in all Ages,
even upon his own Children. They must in this Respect be conformed to the Son
of God, who first suffered Death, and through this dark Valley, passed into
Glory. Yea, the Ministers of the Everlasting Gospel, who have spoken to us the
Word of Life, must die as well as others. Paul must be offered: 2 pet. i.14.
Peter must put off this Tabernacle. 2 pet. i.14.
Our Fathers, where are they; and the Prophets, do they live for ever? No
surely; the Treasure is in earthen Vessels, which must in a little time be
broken to Pieces. A Consideration this, which should excite Ministers and their
People, to wait all the Days of their appointed Time, until their Change come,
in a believing Expectation of it, and a diligent Preparation for it; for then,
the Day of Death, will be better to them than the Day of their Birth.

1. At Death they are delivered from Sin, and made perfect in Holiness. Here
they complain, that when they would do Good, Evil is present; and they cry out
with the Apostle Paul, Romans vii. 24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death. But when they put off this mortal Body,
they put off the old Man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts;
and are joined with the Spirits of just Men made perfect, in the Kingdom of
Glory, where they behold God's Face in Righteousness, and are satisfied with
his Likeness. Heb. xi.13.
O blessed Change!

2. They are delivered from every distressing Evil. Man that is born of a
Woman, is of few Days, and full of Trouble, Job xiv. 1. While Sin, that
abominable Thing, remains in them, Psalm. xvii.15.
God sometimes hides his Face, and they are troubled. Psalm. xxx.7.
But in Heaven, the Light of his Countenance shines upon them, without any
interposing Cloud; and they are satisfied in the full Manifestations of his
Love. Here, their Bodies are subjected to painful Diseases: The Psalmist cries
to God, O Lord, heal me, for my Bones are vexed: I am weary with my groaning:
But in Heaven, there is neither Sorrow nor Crying; neither shall there be any
more Pain. Rev xxi.4.
In this World, they are annoyed by Satan's Temptations; at Death they are
convoyed by holy Angels, to the heavenly Paradise, where this old Serpent
cannot come to shoot his fiery Darts at them. Here they sympathize with others
under their Afflictions: At Death, these Tears are wiped from their Eyes. Here,
they are subject to various Injuries from the Men of this World; there the
Wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at Rest. Here, they are subject
to painful Bereavements, and are called to weeping and mourning. Thus heavy
Tidings were brought to Job, that the young Men were dead; upon which, he rent
his Mantle, fell down upon the Ground, and worshipped; in Heaven, there is no
more 'Death; but the Saints reign in Life by Jesus Christ.

3. At Death they leave this World, and go ever to be with the Lord. O blessed
Exchange! This evil World is devoured by the Curse; there, in the heavenly
Jerusalem, shall be no more Curse. Rev. xxii.3.
While they are at home in the Body, they are absent from the Lord; but when
absent from the Body, they are present with the Lord, and go to be with Christ,
which is far better: v. 23. Context. Heaven is compared to an House, Joh. xiv.
2. In my Father's House are many Mansions. To a City, whose Builder and Maker
is God. Heb. xi.10
It has no need of the Sun to shine in it; for the Glory of God does lighten
it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. Rev. xxi.23.
In this blessed Place, our Savior's Prayer is fully answered, Joh. xvii. 24.
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am;
that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me. And they are by their
Redeemer presented to the Father faultless, and with exceeding Joy. They stand
in God's Presence; in which is fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.

4. They have the blessed Society of holy Angels, and perfected Saints. These
faithful Disciples of Christ, go to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable Company of Angels; to the general Assembly, and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven. Heb. xii 22, 23.
They have an intimate Communion with the Angels, who in this Life are
ministering Spirits to the Heirs of Salvation; and no Doubt, do many good
Offices for them, under Him, who is the Head over all Things to the Church. And
being made perfect in Knowledge and Love, there is not the least Jar to disturb
the Harmony of their united Praises to God and to the Lamb.

5. They serve God after the most perfect Manner, in the sublime Exercises of
Devotion. While here, they loved the Habitation of God's House, and esteemed a
Day in his Courts, better than a Thousand. But alas! while in the Body, they
find both natural and moral Infirmities, hindering them in these spiritual
Exercises; and when most raised in devout Affections toward God and Christ,
the Day of spiritual Rest is soon ended: In Heaven they keep an eternal and
uninterrupted Sabbatism. Here their Fellowship with the Father and the Son, is
mediate; there they have no need of the outward Means of Grace in the
Administration of the Word and Sacraments. Now they see thro'a Glass, darkly;
but then, Face to Face. Now they taste of the Fatness of God's House, and sip
of the River of his Pleasures; then they shall cat of the Tree of Life in the
heavenly Paradise; and drink of the pure River of Water of Life, clear as
Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Rev. xxii.1.
In a Word, they wait in a joyful and certain Expectation of the Redemption of
their Bodies, and a full Reward at the Resurjection of the Just. At Death, they
commit their Spirits into the Hands of Christ, and receive that blessed Euge
from their Lord and Judge, Matthew, xxv. 21. Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant; thou have have been faithful over a few Things, I will make thee Ruler
over many Things: enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord: A Reward of free Grace,
through the Merits of the Redeemer. However, their Bodies must sleep in the Dust,
till Christ, who is their Life, shall appear; then shall they appear with Him
in Glory, and awake to everlasting Life; for Christ is risen from the Dead, and
become the first Fruits of them that slept. For since by Man came Death, by Man
came also the Resurrection from the Dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ, shall all be made alive. Then this corruptible must put on
Incorruption, and this mortal, must put on Immortality. 1 Cor. xv.52.
And to this Effect speaks the same Apostle, Phil. iii. 20, 21. Our
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue all Things unto himself. And in that illustrious Day, when the Son of
God shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with Him, and shall sit
upon the Throne of his Glory, He will set these his Sheep on his right Hand,
and say to them, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the Foundation of the World: And these shall go away into Life
eternal. Mat. xxv.31.
Surely then, for them to die, is Gain. And this Honor and Happiness have all
the Saints. 2 Timothy iv. 7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day:
and not to me only, but unto all them that love his appearing. However, where
Persons have been called to eminent Services, and have by the Grace of God been
faithful to the Death, they shall reap bountifully, according to God's Riches
in Glory by Jesus Christ. Our Savior speaks of a Prophet's Reward. Mat. x 41.
And the Apostle Peter says of faithful Shepherds, 1 Pet. v. 4. When the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not away.
And the Prophet Daniel, Chap. xii. 3. They that be wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the
Stars for ever and ever. But Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the Heart of Man, the Things which God has prepared for them that
love Him. However, these few imperfect Hints may show us, that such as live to
Christ, shall happily find, that to die is gain.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. From what has been said, we learn, that the Soul is a spiritual
Substance, which lives, acts and enjoys, when separated from the Body by 'Death.

If the Soul perished with the Body, or was laid asleep in a State of
inactivity, until the Resurrection, the Apostle, who had such a Zeal for his
Master's Service, could never have desired to depart this Life. We read, Genesis
ii. 7. The Lord formed Man of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into him the
Breath of Life; and Man became a living Soul. God forms the Spirit of Man
within him; which is a living, active and intelligent Being, spiritual and
immortal; and in this Respect, bears some Resemblance to it is Creator, who is a
Spirit, and the Father of Spirits. Agreably, the Word of God assures us, that
when the Dust returns to the Earth as it was, the Spirit shall return to God
who gave it Eccl. xii, 7
. Let us not then, my dear Brethren, be so much concerned about our Bodies;
What we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we shall be clothed;
as to neglect our precious and immortal Souls. O let it be our first and chief
Care, to seek that these may be clothed with the perfect Righteousness of
Christ, sanctified by his Spirit, and fed with that living Bread, which
nourishes the inward Man, to eternal Life. Let the Words of the Redeemer, sink
deep into your Hearts, Mark viii. 36, 7. What shall it profit a Man, if he
shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul?

USE II. Then, if we would die the Death of the Righteous, we must live his
Life.

Balaam said, let me die the Death of the Righteous, and my last End be like
his; but this cannot be, if like him, we love the Wages of Unrighteousness, and
die in our Sins. The Children of God, are blessed in their Death. Death is
their's, and a Messenger of Peace to them; which declares, that their Warfare
is accomplished. Isai. lvii. 1, 2. The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays
it to Heart; and merciful Men are taken away, none considering that the
Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come. He shall enter into Peace: they
shall rest in their Beds, each one walking in his uprightness. But unless we
are in Christ, this Enemy will come armed with a deadly Sting, by Reason of
Sin, and the Curse of the Law. The second Death will follow the first, and that
is eternal. Rev. vi. 8 I looked, and behold a pale Horse; and his Name that sat
on him was Death, and Hell followed with him: Whereas, it is said of such as
are washed in the Blood of Christ, Rev. vii 17. The Lamb which is in the midst
of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto Fountains of living
Waters: and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes. O, let such then as
are dead in their Sins, be awakened to seek Grace, that they may hear the Voice
of the Son of God, and live. you must be united to Christ, by his Spirit
dwelling in you: You must live to Him, or you perish for ever. Joh. iii. 36. He
that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life: and he that believes not the
Son. shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him.

USE III. Let such as are invited to the Lord's Table this Day, thankfully
remember his dying Love, and encourage themselves in the Lord. Come, and behold
Jesus, evidently set forth crucified, having his Bod broken, and his Blood
poured out unto Death; that through Death, he might destroy him that had the
Power of Death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them, who through fear of
Death, were all their Lifetime subject to Bondage. Come, and behold your
Redeemer, purchasing the Victory by his Death on the Cross. Come, and behold
Him risen a Conqueror over Sin and Satan, Death and the Grave; and now ever
living to make Intercession for us. Having such an Advocate with the Father,
who appears in Heaven for us, as a Lamb that had been slain, we should trust in
the Lord for ever, and say as Romans viii. 32. He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us
all Things? Behold! the Son of God in our Nature, lives and reigns in Heaven
for us: and when this glorious Head of the Church ascended on high, received
Gifts for Men, and gave Apostles; and also Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians. iv.11.
Let us then continue instant in Prayer, that God would supply our Wants,
according to his Riches in Glory by Jesus Christ. And let us cast our Cares and
Burdens on Him, who cares for us: and then sing with the Psalmist, The Lord is
my Shepherd, I shall not want.

USE IV. Here we see the solid Ground of Consolation which we have respecting
our departed Friends, who we have good Reason to hope, sleep in Jesus.

Their Death is gain. God takes not his Children out of this World, until he
prepares them for that better Country, which is an heavenly. When they are
absent from the Body, they are present with the Lord, and go to be with Christ.

Let this then comfort us under the sorrowful Bereavements of those worthy
Persons, who were carried to their Tombs the last Week. The Rev. Mr. DANIEL
GREENLEAF, and Mrs. MARTHA BRATTLE, late Consort of the honorable WILLIAM
BRATTLE, Esquire were buried in the same Week.


Let what has been said, direct and comfort this Church and Congregation. under
the heavy Stroke of God's Hand, in the Death of our late worthy Pastor, the
Rev. Mr. ALEXANDER CUMMING. He was truly of this Spirit, and might adopt the
Words of the Apostle in a good Degree; For me to live, is Christ. We have
abundant Reason to believe, that he received Christ into his Heart, as his Lord
and Redeemer: And it was the Spirit of his Ministry, to show us our Sin and
Misery by the Fall, and to lead us unto Christ, as the Lord our Righteousness,
for our Justification before God; and as our Head of Influence, of whose
Fullness we must receive Grace to live to God, and perform vital Acts of new
Obedience.

He was an able Minister of the New Testament, endowed with rich Gifts from our
ascended Savior. He was an hard Student, an excellent Scholar; and a Scribe
well instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. It is true, his lively active Soul,
dwelt in a crazy feeble Body: however, under his bodily Weakness, he did
willingly spend, and was spent in his Lord's Work. -- He was a Man of Prayer;
and in his Addresses to that God. who is the high and losty One, he lay low
under an abasing Sense of our Meanness and Vileness, and well expressed his
entire Dependence on the Merits and Intercession of Jesus, our Advocate with
the Father.

He showed his esteem and value for these Churches, and for the Doctrines of
Grace exhibited in their Confession of Faith.

This Man of God was a burning and shining Light, who not only preached, but
lived the Gospel, holding forth the Light of it in a Conversation becoming the
Doctrines and Precepts of our holy Religion.

He showed his Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, and against the prevailing Errors
and Corruptions of the Times wherein he lived.

He followed Christ, bearing the Cross; and under Returns of distressing Pain,
showed his Patience and reverend Submission to the Will of his heavenly Father.
-- And although a sovereign God took him from us in the midst of his Days; yet he
expressed himself to me, as desirous rather to die, than live; and to another,
his Hope and Trust in Christ. But his Pain was so great, there was not that
Opportunity to Discourse with him, which was to be desired.

However, from my own Knowledge, and the Testimony of others. I am satisfied,
that he was a close Walker with God; and now rests from his Labors and
Sufferings in the heavenly Paradise.

He has left a sorrowful Widow, soon after Marriage, mourning for the Hussband
of her Youth. May she be espoused to Christ, who is fairer than the Children of
Men; and have that good Word spoken to her. The Maker is thy Husband, -- And
may we all hear the Voice of God in this awful Providence! 1 Cor. vii. 29 --
31. -- Brethren, the Time is short. It remains that both they that have Wives
be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and
they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though
they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not abusing it: for the
fashion of this World passes away.

And as we of this Flock, have a peculiar Share in the public Loss sustained by
the Death of this excellent Person; may we humble our selves before God, and
duly resent his correcting Hand, stretched out against us, and make a wise
Improvement of it.

May such as have not yet been persuaded to close with Christ, who saves from
Sin, the Sting of Death; now hear the loud Calls of God's Word and Rod; and fly
for Refuge to lay hold on the Hope set before them in Him, who has abolished
Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to Light thro'the Gospel. O cry
for the Holy Spirit, that you may turn at his Reproof, who said, My Spirit
shall not always strive with Man: Lest that awful Threatening be fulfilled in
you, Jer. vi. 29, 30. The Bellows are burned, the Lead is consumed of the Fire,
the Founder melts in vain; for the Wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate
Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. -- May such as
are in the middle of Life, take heed least the Cares and Business of this short
Life, should hinder them from minding the one Thing needful, and choosing the
good Part, which shall not be taken away -- May God's Children awake and trim
their Lamps, and stand as they that wait for the coming of their Lord -- May
the Ministers of Christ, hear the Voice of God, and be excited to work the
Works of him that sent them, while it is Day; the Night comes when no Man can
work. -- And in particular, may the Associated Pastors in this Town, now that
God has taken away the youngest of of them by Death; be quickened to watch for
Souls, as those that must give an Account; and double their Diligence in their
Lords Work. -- And now, that God again alarms us, by the sudden Seizure of his
Servant, The Rev. Mr. CHECKLEY.
who was to have preached to you this Day; may your Ministers so preach, and
you hear, as sensible we know not how soon we may be silent in the Grave. For
all Flesh is as Grass, and all the Glory of Man as the Flower of Grass. The
Grass withers, and the Flower thereof falls away: but the Word of the Lord
endures for ever. And this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you 1 Pet. i.24, 5.
.

And now, may your aged Pastor, who has lived to bury three worthy Colleagues,
The Rev. Mr. EBENEZER PEMBERTON, who died Feb. 13. 1717. And the Rev. Mr.
THOMAS PRINCE, Oct. 22. 1758.
the second, not five Years past, beseech you, to strive together with me, in
your Prayers to God for me, that I may be supported and comforted by the Lord
Jesus: that now I am a third Time called to take up that Lamentation: Lover and
Friend have thou put far from me: and mine Acquaintance into Darkness: I may
find I am not alone, having the Presence of the Comforter with me: Pray for me,
that I may bear Fruit in old Age, and be ready for the coming of my Lord.

And may the Father of Lights, from whom every good Gift, and every perfect
Gift comes down; close this wide Breach in his due Time, with another able and
faithful Pastor: and be the Repairer of every Breach he has made upon us. --
The Lord help us to wait upon Him, in a diligent observance of the Rules of his
Word; keeping the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace. -- And thus let us
encourage ourselves in the Lord, who has said, Because I live, ye shall live
also.

And may we now, so show forth the Lord's Death at his Table, as to be prepared
for our own. -- May we by Faith feed on Christ, the Bread of Life, who has
said, Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life, and I
will raise him up at the last Day. I conclude with those Words, 1 Thessalonians. iv.13
-- 18. I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if ye
believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the Word of the
Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a Shout with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God: and
the Dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and
so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these
Words.

FINIS.
From the Massachusetts Gazette, etc. Of September 1. 1763. By another Hand.
Boston, August 30. 1763.
ON Thursday the 25th of this Instant died, in the thirty-seventh Year of his
Age, the Reverend Mr. ALEXANDER CUMMING, one of the Pastors of the South Church
in this Town; to the Grief of all who were acquainted with his just Character.

THE Father of Spirits was pleased to form him with superior intellectual
Abilities: His Apprehension was quick and piercing; his Imagination lively and
fruitful; his judgment accurate and solid.

THESE Gifts of Nature were greatly improved by close Thought and diligent
Study; and, being sanctified by divine Grace, were employed to promote the
Interests of Religion.

HE early devoted himself to the Service of the Sanctuary, and in his public
Performances you might discern the Marks of a strong Mind. -- It was easy to
him to write on Points that to others were intricate and abstruse; this might
lead him to frequent Discourses on such Subjects: but even in these, there were
the evident Traces of a serious Spirit, deeply impressed with the great and
important Truths of Religion.

His practical Discourses were clear, animated and judicious; they evidenced
that he was himself well acquainted with the Christian Temper, and being
delivered with a grave and striking Elocution, they were adapted to reach and
better the Hearts of his Hearers.

HIS Conversation was amiable and useful, He was serious without Affectation,
and affable without Levity or Meanness. You saw at once the polite Gentleman,
the fair Reasoner, the accomplished Divine, and the exemplary Christian.

THOUGH he wanted not Sensibility, he had a great command of his Passions, not
easily ruffled in his Temper, or betrayed to rashness in his Expressions;
knowing how to be firm and resolved, without losing the composure of his Mind,
or the gentleness of his Manners.

HONESTY and uprightness were distinguishing Parts of his Character; He was a
Stranger to Dissimulation himself, and abhorred it in others.

HIS Religion was pure and substantial; free from the Follies of Superstition,
or the Reveries of Enthusiasm.

HIS Constitution, naturally tender, was severely tried with frequent Paroxisms
of Pain, which were of a threatening Aspect; he bore these with Christian
Patience: When in moderate Health, he was a pleasant Companion, and went
through the Duties of his Station with Diligence and Cheerfulness.

HIS last Illness came upon him with such Violence, as exhausted his Spirits,
and rendered him incapable of saying much to his Friends. He continued however
in full Possession of himself, till just before he expired, and spoke of his
Departure with calmness and Serenity. He was willing to die, though he had almost
every earthly Inducement to make him desirous of living -- He knew in whom he
had believed, and expressed his firm Reliance on the Merits of the
compassionate Redeemer of Men. He met the Approaches of Death, like one who
believed and hoped for Immortality.

HIS Removal is a Loss to the Public -- It peculiarly affects the Church and
Congregation to whom he minister'd: They with Pleasure beheld him serving as a
Son with the venerable Dr. SEWALL, who having obtained help from GOD still
survives, to lead and comfort them under this melancholy Bereavement.

MR. CUMMING'S Remains were interred Yesterday, with every Mark of Respect.


