THE DOCTRINE OF REPROBATION BRIEFLY CONSIDERED: BEING THE Substance of some
LECTURES IN HARVARD COLLEGE.

By Edward Wigglesworth, D. D. And HOLLISIAN Professor of Divinity.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL DRAPER in Newbury-street
and THOMAS and JOHN FLEET in Cornhill, 1763.

THE PREFACE.
THE Subject of the following Pages was as much disputed in the last century,
as perhaps any one controverted point in divinity; and very often, with too
much warmth and uncharitableness. When it came in my way in the course of my
public lectures, some time before the last winter vacation, I could not avoid
considering it; but I determined to do it as briefly as would be consistent
with giving the Students of the College any tolerable view of the arguments and
objections of the contending parties. And these I exhibited, in a great
measure, though not always exactly, in their own words.

SOON after delivering the last of my lectures upon the subject, I was very
unexpectedly surprised with a request from some of my hearers, who told me it
was also the desire of many others, that I would consent to their being made
public by the press. I put them off from time to time for several months, in
hopes they would grow cool and drop the motion; but finding it quite otherwise,
I at length yielded with reluctance to repeated solicitations.

I SHALL not wonder if I am censured by some of all parties, for offering but a
very small part of what they could have said for themselves. It would have been
easy to have heaped up much more on every side; but I was unwilling to tire my
audience with the length of a difficult argument; which, for the sake of some,
into whose hands it may now fall, I have made much shorter than it was
delivered in the college: For I am sensible that controversial tracts soon
become tedious to persons who have not been used to close and long attention.

AS I was far from expecting that I should ever be desired to publish what is
here emitted, I was not careful, when writing, to note in the margin from whom
I made extracts; and I have not been able now, at six months distance, to
recollect some of them, and give them credit for what was taken from them.

IF a view of the difficulty of the subject here considered, may be improved to
promote charity between such as differ in their sentiments about it; or if any
serious enquirers for truth, shall find assistance in their search after it,
from what is here put into their hands; I shall be humbly thankful to God for
it, and not be sorry that I consented to permit, what at the time of doing it,
I had much rather have forborne.

The Doctrine of REPROBATION considered with Candor. PART I.
JUDE, ver. IV. FOR there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God
into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.


HAVING spoken largely of the doctrine of Election in several late discourses;
I must now proceed to consider the doctrine of Reprobation also, and see what
account the scriptures give us of it. And I do this the rather, because I
believe it is very much owing to misapprehensions, or want of due consideration
of what the scriptures teach us concerning the latter of these points; that so
many prejudices have arisen in the minds of men against the whole doctrine of
the divine decrees. -- Now the words which have been read at this time, may
serve well enough as an Introduction to the scripture account of Reprobation.

IN the preceding verse the apostle tells those to whom he directs his epistle,
that it was needful for him to write unto them, and exhort them, that they
should contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the saints.
The reason why this exhortation was so necessary, we have in the words before
us, For there are certain men crept in unawares -- ungodly men -- denying the
only Lord God, etc. There were certain men, ungodly in life, and damnably
heretical in doctrine, who had craftily slipped into the church unobserved. And
there was great danger lest by the wicked practices and damnable heresies,
which these brought in privily; others also should be induced to put away a
good conscience, and make shipwreck of their faith. And lest any should think
it was only a chance which had happened unto them that the church was at this
time so infested with these deceitful workers, and sons of perdition; the
apostle therefore assures them, that this whole matter came to pass by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God; that these very men were before
of old ordained to this condemnation. Nor need any wonder to hear him say so,
for it was nothing but what had been spoken of before by the apostles of our
Lord; v. 14. And even Enoch, the seventh from Adam, had prophesied of them. v.
17.

BY the condemnation to which these men were before of old ordained -- some
understand, that reprobate mind to which God gave them over to do those things
which are not convenient, and to corrupt and pervert the doctrines of the
gospel. -- Others understand the just dereliction of God, by which they were
permitted, for their former sins, to make shipwreck of their own faith, and to
become the authors of damnable error and heresy in others, and at last to be
condemned themselves forever. -- In fine, by this condemnation, some understand
eternal damnation itself. For so the original word (...) is often used
elsewhere in the New Testament. Vid. Matt. XXIII. 14. Mark XII. 40. Luke XX.
47. Romans III. 8. 1 Timothy III. 6.
And it is certain from the whole progress of this epistle, that the apostle
Jude is here speaking of those very persons, as already crept into the church,
whom the apostle Peter had foretold would creep into it; and concerning whom he
says, that their judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation
slumbreth not. 2 Pet. II. 3. Upon the whole, in whichever of these senses we
take the expression, it will amount to much the same thing. For if by this
condemnation we understand, either only the divine dereliction, or only that
reprobate mind consequent upon it; yet we must understand it of such a
reprobate mind, or such a dereliction, as will certainly end in the damnation
of hell; because the apostle expressly tells us, [ver. 13.] that to the persons
under this condemnation is reserved the blackness of darkness forever.

AND to this condemnation, he says, they were before of old ordained, or, as it
is in the original, (...) before of old written. That is, say some, (...)
concerning whom it was before written. Thus they suppose it was in those
remarkable words of the apostle Paul, 2 These. II. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And then
shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit
of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: Even him
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, in them that
perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie: That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. The same persons they suppose to have been
written of before by Peter also, when he says, 2 Pet. II. 1, 2, 3. There shall
be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness shall they with feigned words
make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and
their damnation slumbreth not. -- Others again suppose, that the expression
refers to the words of our blessed Savior recorded Matt. XXIV. 4, 5, 10, 11,
14. Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying,
I am Christ: and shall deceive many. And then shall many be offended, and shall
betray one another, and shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall
arise, and shall deceive many. -- And this gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the
end come.

NOW though it be certain, that Peter (at lest) had written before of these very
persons, and of their condemnation to eternal punishment; who are here said to
be before of old written to this condemnation: Yet I cannot persuade myself,
that they are said to be before of old written to this condemnation, upon
account of them and their condemnation's having been written of before by
Peter, or any other apostle. For what had been written by Peter, or possibly by
any other apostle, concerning these persons, could not be said to have been
written of old, but of late, when Jude wrote this epistle. -- Moreover, the
prophesies which went before concerning these persons, and their condemnation,
are manifestly spoken of as a thing distinct from their being before of old
ordained or written to condemnation. For after the apostle has said, that the
men who were crept in unawares, were before of old ordained to condemnation; he
goes on to say, v. 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of
these. And then he proceeds, v. 17, 18, to put his beloved in remembrance of
the words which were spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:
How that they told them there should be mockers in the last time, who should
walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves --
not having the spirit. -- From all which it appears to me that their being
before of old ordained or written to condemnation, must be understood according
to the sense, of perhaps the bigger and better part of protestant expositors of
the last century, to refer, not to any thing which had been spoken or written
about these persons, either by prophets or apostles under the inspiration of
God; but to the determination of the divine mind concerning them, namely, to
the decree of Reprobation (as it has been called) which was before of old,
even from the days of eternity. -- This may suffice for the meaning of the
Condemnation spoken of in my text; and of certain men's being before of old
ordained to it. -- The next thing to be considered is,

THE character of the persons ordained to this condemnation. -- And this is,
ungodly men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, denying the only
Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: or as the apostle Peter prophesying of the
same persons expresses it, 2 Pet. ii. 1. False teachers who privily shall bring
in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. -- The sum of the
matter then may be taken up in the two following propositions, namely, --

I. THAT there are certain men from eternity ordained of God to condemnation.
-- And,

II. THAT these are men of wicked lives, or damnably heretical principles, or
both. -- The great controversy between the Supralapsarian Calvinists and the
Arminians concerning the decree of Reprobation, will fall in most naturally to
be discussed under the second of these propositions. However it may not be
amiss, before I proceed to that, to speak something briefly to the first, viz.

I. THAT there are certain men from eternity ordained of God to condemnation.
-- The election (says the apostle) has obtained it, and the rest were blinded,
or hardened. Romans xi. 7. And again, Romans ix. 22. What if God willing to show his
wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. -- The proposition before us may be
illustrated and proved under three particulars, viz.

1. THAT some of mankind are certainly ordained of God to condemnation.

2. THAT this divine ordination is from eternity. -- And,

3. THAT the persons so ordained to condemnation are determined. -- What I
intend by each of these, I think will be almost allowed me by all parties,
except Socinians.

1st THEN, Some of mankind are certainly ordained of God to condemnation. -- By
condemnation I intend eternal damnation itself; or that misery which will be
the everlasting portion of them, who die in their sins. By being ordained to
this misery or condemnation, I intend, that there is a determination of the
divine will concerning it; that none drop into perdition without the will of
God, or without his antecedently determining (in some sense) that they should.
Not that the determination of the divine will is either the moral or the
physical cause of men's sin and misery. The Calvinists generally reject such a
thought as this. And I here only suppose, that a determination of the will of
God, is necessarily antecedent to the condemnation of men; that since the
kingdom of God rules over all, so that not a sparrow falls to the ground
without him; much less can any of his reasonable creatures perish, without his
determining before, at least to permit that they should.

NOW it is certain that some of mankind shall be miserable forever, from the
express words of our blessed Lord, Matt. xxv. 46. These shall go away into
everlasting punishment: And if some of mankind shall be miserable forever, we
must suppose they are antecedently ordained of God to this condemnation; or
else we must suppose that God don't know of it before it happens; or lastly,
that though he knows of it, yet he is not able to prevent it. For if God knows of
men's falling into condemnation before it happens; and could prevent it, if he
thought fit; we must certainly conclude, that he determines not to prevent, but
suffer it (which is all I intend by ordaining or writing it) or else it could
never happen. Now that God knows of men's falling into condemnation before it
happens is certain, from his foretelling of it: And it is no less certain that
he could prevent it, if (all things considered) he judged it wisest and best so
to do; for all things are possible with him; and especially the hearts of all
men are in his hands, and he can turn them whithersoever he pleases. And
therefore, it cannot but be allowed, that he determines not to prevent it; or
in other words, by which I intend the same thing, that they who fall into
condemnation, are ordained of God to it, not by an effective, but only by a
permissive decree. -- I proceed to say

2. THAT this divine ordination is from eternity. Or that God has from
eternity determined to permit some of mankind to fall into condemnation.

THE truth of this will appear undeniably from considering the perfection of
the knowledge and power of God. For it is impossible to suppose that he, whose
kingdom rules over all, and who is able to prevent what he pleases, should
know that any thing will come to pass, which he does not at the same time
determine to permit, and not to hinder. And therefore, since God did from
eternity know of the falling of some of mankind into everlasting condemnation,
he must from eternity have determined to permit it.

3. THE very persons so ordained or written to condemnation are determined. --
This likewise follows from the certainty and exactness of the foreknowledge of
God. For whether we suppose the decree of God to be antecedent in order of
nature to his foreknowledge, or his foreknowledge antecedent to his decree,
(which it would be beside my purpose to dispute here) yet since he knows
beforehand the very persons, who will fall into condemnation; he must determine
beforehand, at least to permit those very persons so to do.

UPON the whole, if some of mankind are certainly ordained, or written of God
to condemnation; if this divine ordination is from eternity; and if the very
persons so ordained or written to condemnation are determined; then it is true
that there are certain men from eternity ordained or written of God to
condemnation; which was my first proposition. -- I shall conclude at present,
with just observing, that this doctrine, as I have explained it, is far from
making God the author of those sins which he has determined to punish
everlastingly. -- For the dimmest eye may see, that they who affirm, that God
has from eternity decreed to permit those sins to be committed, which he
certainly knew would be committed if he prevented them not; and that he
accordingly does permit them, do not hereby make him the author of sin. God's
suffering his creatures to sin, when it is in his power to hinder them, is not
to be the author of sin, nor is God in justice, or in mercy obliged to exert
his power in hindering persons (in a state of trial) from sinning, though he knows
they will sin if he does not, and that their sinning will bring ruin upon them.
If it was inconsistent with the justice or mercy of God, to leave creatures in
a state of trial, to exercise the freedom of their own wills, whatever the
foreseen event may be; it would be inconsistent with the wisdom of God, ever to
put any of his creatures in a state of trial for eternity.

PART II.
IN the former part I proposed to consider the two following propositions, viz.

I. THAT there are certain men, from eternity, ordained of God to condemnation.
-- And

II. THAT these are men of wicked lives, or damnably heretical principles, or
both. -- The first of these propositions, viz.

THAT there are certain men, from eternity, ordained of God to condemnation,
has been dispatched. -- By the condemnation to which these men are ordained, I
have explained my self to mean, eternal damnation itself, or that misery which
will be the everlasting portion of those, who die in their sins. -- For whether
this be the primary intention, or not, of the condemnation spoken of in my
text; yet it is, at least, such a condemnation, as will certainly end in this;
since the apostle tells us v. 13. that to the persons under this condemnation
is reserved the blackness of darkness forever.

BY being ordained of God to this condemnation, I have said that I intend, not
that the determination of the divine will, is either the moral, or physical
cause of men's sin and misery; but only, that a determination of the will of
God, is necessarily antecedent to the condemnation of men; that since the
kingdom of God rules over all; so that not a sparrow falls to the ground
without him; much less can any of his reasonable creatures perish, without
God's determining before, at lest to permit that they should. Bshp. Burnet's
Exp. P. 160.
Things which happen thus, under a permissive and directing providence, are
ascribed in scripture to the will and counsel of God. For a permissive and
directing will, is as really a will, as an effective one; though it be not alike
causal. And what comes to pass according to it, may therefore, in some sense,
be said to be ordained of God.

THIS divine ordination, I have proved to be from eternity; and that it reaches
to the very individual persons, who shall go away into everlasting punishment,
upon the judicial sentence of the great day. -- I proceed now to the second
proposition, which is

II. THAT they who are thus ordained of God to condemnation, are men of wicked
lives, or damnably heretical principles, or both. -- My text calls them ungodly
men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. And the apostle Peter prophesying of the same
persons, tells us, that they shall privily bring in damnable heresies. 2 Pet.
II. 1. So that the persons, whom my text immediately refers to, were both
ungodly in life, and damnably heretical in doctrine. And one, or the other, or
both of these, is certainly the case of all, who were before of old ordained of
God to condemnation. But here the great question arises, upon which the
controversy about the doctrine of reprobation very much turns, viz.

Whether God has ordained certain men to condemnation upon a foresight of
their ungodliness and infidelity? or whether the ungodliness and infidelity of
men are in consequence of their having been before of old ordained to
condemnation, and follow such ordination necessarily? -- The Arminians maintain
the former, the Supralapsarian Calvinists the latter; and both of them go great
lengths in the prosecution of their opposite schemes. The Sublapsarian
Calvinists take a middle way, which (to me at least) appears to be much more
agreeable to the scriptures, and to our natural notions of the divine
perfections; and to be free from the principal difficulties, with which the two
other schemes are encumbred.

THE Supralapsarians then affirm, that the decree of God is in order of nature
antecedent to his foreknowledge, and that his foreknowledge is founded in it;
that the will of God is universally efficacious, and is the first cause of all
things; that if the reason of the being of things be followed up to the top, we
shall find it in the decree; that there are a vast company of possible beings
in the knowledge or understanding of God; and that the decree appoints which of
them shall be; and therefore by the decree they pass from possibility to
futurition! Vid. Willard, p. 102, 103.
-- And in consequence of these positions they affirm, that God does by an
efficacious power and influence move and praedetermine men, unto all their
natural actions, even those that have sin inseparably annexed to them; that he
secretly, but effectually inclines and applies the wills of men to the entative
acts of such things. Vid. GALE's Court of the Gentiles, Part 4th, p. 27, 73.
And to avoid the consequence of making God the author of sin, they make a
distinction between the positive act of sin, which they say is not evil; and
the want of its conformity to the law of God, which being a negation, is no
positive being; so that it is not produced. And thus, though the action is
produced jointly by God as the first cause, and by the creature as the second,
yet God is not guilty of sin, but only the creature. BURNET's Exposi. p. 147.
-- To this the Arminians reply,

THAT as for that nicety of saying that the evil of sin consists in a negation,
which is not a positive being, so that though God should determine men to the
action which is sinful; yet he is not concerned in the sin of it: They think it
is too metaphysical, to put the honor of God and his attributes upon such a
subtlety. For in sins against moral laws, there seems to be an antecedent
immorality in the action itself, which is inseparable from it. -- But supposing
that sin consisted in a negative, yet that privation does immediately and
necessarily result out of the action, without any other thing whatsoever
intervening. So that if God does infallibly determine a sinner to commit the
action to which that guilt belongs, though that should be a sin, only by reason
of a privation, which is dependent on it; yet it does not appear but that he is
really the author of sin; since if he is the author of the sinful action, on
which the sin depends as a shadow on its substance, he must be esteemed (say
they) the author of the sin, if this hypothesis be true. -- And though it may be
said, that sin being a violation of God's law, he himself, who is not bound by
his law, cannot be guilty of sin; yet an action which is immoral, is so
essentially opposite to infinite perfection, that God cannot be capable of it;
as being a contradiction to his own nature. Nor is it to be supposed, that he
can damn men for that, which is the necessary result of an action, to which he
himself determined them. Vid. BURNET's Exposi. p. 161.
-- Thus the Arminians object to the hypothesis of their adversaries.

And others, who are far from being Arminians, yet think, that the doctrines of
efficacious permission, and praedeterminative concourse to actions
intrinsically evil (which two notions seem inseparably twisted with the
Supralapsarian scheme) are both of them founded upon false principles, and
attended with consequences too shocking to be endured.

THE true principles (say they) upon which these notions seem to be founded,
are,

I. THAT God cannot form a creature with a power of moving itself, and
determining any of its own actions; without his efficacious power and
influence, first moving and praedetermining it to the substrate matter of them.
And,

II. THAT it is impossible he should foreknow any action of a free agent, but
what he has determined secretly and effectually to incline and apply its will
to the performance of. -- Now the former of these principles (say they) cannot
be true, because it destroys the distinction between natural and voluntary
agents; and brings all the operations of the latter, under laws of equal
necessity with those, according to which the motions of the former are excited.
-- Nor is the latter principle any more necessary to be admitted. For though it
be readily granted, that God's praescience of things future is so far founded
on his decree, as that it is impossible he should know any thing as future, but
what he has determined either to effect or permit; yet it will not from hence
follow, that he cannot foreknow any action of a free agent, but what he has
determined secretly and effectually to incline and apply its will to the
performance of. For it is evident from the scriptures, that God not only knows
what possibly might, but even what certainly would have been determined by free
agents, if the antecedent course of things had been otherwise disposed than it
was. He answered David, that Saul would come to Keilah, and that the men of
Keilah would deliver him up. 1 Samuel XXIII. 11.12.
And yet both the one and the other was upon condition of his staying there;
and he going from thence, neither the one nor the other ever happened. So God
knew, that if the mighty works had been done in Tire and Sidon, which were done
in Chorazin and Bethsaida, they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. And
that, if the mighty works which were done in Capernaum, had been done even in
Sodom, it would have remained to our Savior's day. Matt. XI. 21, 23.
-- Now if his knowledge reaches to such things as these, which never happen;
it cannot be thought strange, that it should reach to such determinations as do
happen, even where he don't exert his own power to lead men into them. And
therefore, from God's foreknowledge and permissive decree, we can never infer,
that he does by an efficacious influence move and determine men to all their
actions; even to those which have sin inseparably annexed to them. -- But this
may suffice for the principles upon which the doctrines of efficacious
permission and praedeterminative concourse to evil actions are supposed to be
founded.

AS for the shocking consequences, with which they are thought, by others
beside Arminians, to be chargeable, I shall represent some of them in the words
of the learned and judicious Mr. How, Vol. II. P. 501.
which are better than any of my own. These sentiments (says he) must, I
conceive to an impartial understanding, leave it no way sufficiently
explicable; how the influence and concurrence which the holy God has to the
worst of actions, is to be distinguished from that which he affords to the
best; or wherein such inherently evil actions are less to be imputed to him,
who forbids them; than to the malicious tempter, who prompts to them; or the
actor who does them; or wherein not a great deal more. And they leave it
undeniable, that the matter of his laws to Adam and his posterity, was an utter
impossibility; nothing being more apparently so, than either not to do an
action, whereto the agent is determined by an infinite power; or to separate
the malignity thereof, from an intrinsically evil action. And this utter
impossibility of not sinning, was the ineluctable fate of his (at first)
innocent creatures; who must also (upon this hypothesis) be understood to be
irreversibly condemned to the suffering of eternal punishment, for the doing of
what it was (upon these terms) so absolutely impossible to them to avoid. --
These consequences (if justly drawn from the doctrines abovementioned, as I
think they are) must be sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man, that those
doctrines cannot be true. Indeed, I know very well, that the maintainers of the
doctrines reject and abhor these consequences; but the question is, whether
they have ever yet been able, with all the nice distinctions, and metaphysical
subtleties, which they make use of upon this occasion, satisfactorily to clear
themselves from them. For fear, as it seems, of these difficulties in the
Supralapsarian scheme, the Arminians go into extremes on the other hand, which
I shall give some account of in the next part.

PART III.
THE Supralapsarian Scheme, so far as it obviously refers to the question under
consideration, has been exhibited; together with some of those difficulties,
wherewith its adversaries endeavor to perplex and oppress it. I shall now
endeavor in like manner, faithfully to set forth the hypothesis of the
Arminians in the case before us; and shall mention some of the difficulties
with which that also is pressed by its adversaries.

THE Arminians then affirm, Bshp. Burnet's Exp. P. 144.
that God considered all the free motions of those rational agents, that he did
intend to create; and according to what he foresaw they would choose and do, in
all the various circumstances in which he might put them, formed his decrees:
That he intended in particular to create all men free, and to deal with them
according to the use that they should make of their liberty: That therefore he
foreseeing how every one would use it, did upon that decree all things which
concerned them in this life, together with their salvation or damnation in the
next; that sufficient assistances are given to every man; but that all may
choose whether they will use them, and persevere in them, or not: And that no
man is under irresistible motions, either to good or evil. Burnet's Exp. p.
160, 161.
Nor can it be thought that grace is so efficacious of itself, as to determine
us; otherwise why are we required not to grieve God's Spirit? Why is it said,
Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye? Acts vii. 51.
How often would I have gathered you under my wings but ye would not? Matt.
xxiii. 37.
What more could I have done in my vineyard, that has not been done in it?
Isai. v. 4.
These (say they) seem to be plain intimations of a power in us, by which we
not only can, but often do resist the motions of grace.

NOW if the determining efficacy of grace is not acknowledged, it will be yet
much harder to believe that we are efficaciously determined to Sin. This seems
to be not only contrary to the purity and holiness of God, but is so manifestly
contradictory to the whole strain of the scriptures, which every where charge
sin upon men, that in so copious a subject it is not necessary to multiply
proofs. O Israel, thou have destroyed thyself, but in me is thy help. Hos.
xiii. 9.
And, Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have life. John v. 40.
Why will you die O house of Israel? Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
-- This is the hypothesis of the Arminians relating to the question under
consideration. I have expressed it mostly in their own words, as it is set down
by the learned and catholic-spirited Bishop Burnet, who was in the main on
their side of the question; and therefore may very well be supposed to have
stated their notions truly.

I SHALL now go on to collect pretty much from the same learned writer, the
objections of the Supralapsarians to these things. For it must be allowed, that
he has set forth the principles, arguments and objections of the
Supralapsarians, as well as Arminians, with great clearness, and strength, and
spirit. -- However, I cannot help remarking, that (by what means soever it came
to pass) he has not done the like justice to the Sublapsarian scheme; but has
set that in a weak imperfect light, and placed the maintainers of it between
the two other contending parties, as well-meaning men, who have but very little
to say for themselves. Whether this be their case will appear hereafter.

THE Supralapsarians then reply to the Hypothesis above, that there can be no
certain prescience of future contingencies; that it implies a contradiction,
that things which are not certainly to be, should be certainly foreseen; for if
they are certainly foreseen, they must certainly be: So while they are supposed
to be contingent, they are yet affirmed to be certain, by saying that they are
certainly foreseen. When God decrees that any thing shall be, it has from that
a certain futurition, and as such it is certainly foreseen by him. An uncertain
foresight is an act in its nature imperfect, because it may be a mistake, and
so is inconsistent with the divine perfections. And it seems to imply a
contradiction to say that a thing happens freely, that is, may be, or may not
be, and yet that it is certainly foreseen by God. God (say they) cannot foresee
things, but as he decrees them, and so gives them a futurition, and therefore
this prescience antecedent to his decree, must be rejected as a thing
impossible.

THEY say further, that decrees upon a foresight of what men will do, if they
did not involve any contradictions are yet imperfect in their nature, and
subject the will and acts of God to a creature, and so are inconsistent with
the independency of the nature and will of God. And that such a conditionate
decree is an act in suspense, whether it shall be or not, and therefore
inconsistent with infinite perfection.

AND as to what the Arminians say concerning the inefficacy and resistibleness
of divine grace, they object, that the scriptures teach us every where to offer
up all praise and glory to God; to acknowledge that all is of him, and to
humble ourselves, as being nothing before him. Now if we were elected, not by a
free act of his, but by what he foresaw that we would be; so that his grace is
not efficacious by its own force, but by the good use that we make of it; then
the glory and praise of all the good we do, and of God's kind purposes to us,
were due to ourselves. He designs, according to the other doctrine, equally
well to all men; and all the difference among them will arise neither from
God's intention to them, nor from his assistances; but from the good use that
he foresaw they would make of these favors, which he was to give in common to
all mankind. Man should have whereof to glory, and he might say, that he made
himself to differ from others. The whole strain of the scripture in ascribing
all good things to God, and in charging us to offer up the Honor of all to
him, seems very expressly against such doctrine; since if all our good is from
God, and is particularly owing to his grace; then good men have something from
God, which bad men have not, for which they ought to praise him. The style of
all the prayers that are used, or directed to be used in the scriptures, is for
a grace that opens our eyes, that turns our hearts, that makes us to go, that
leads us not into temptation, but delivers us from evil: All these phrases do
plainly import, that we desire more than such a power or capacity to act, as is
given to all men; and such, as after we have received it, may still be
ineffectual to us. For to pray for such assistances, as are always given to all
men, and are such that the whole good of them shall wholly depend upon
ourselves, would sound very odly; whereas in truth we pray for something that
is special, and that we hope shall be effectual. We do not, we cannot pray in
earnest for that, which we know all men, as well as we ourselves, have at all
times. Humility and earnestness in prayer seem to be among the chief means of
working in us the image of Christ, and of deriving to us all the blessings of
heaven. That doctrine therefore which blasts both, which swells us up with an
opinion, that all which is peculiar comes from ourselves, and that we receive
nothing from God, but what is given in common with us to all the world, is
certainly contrary both to the spirit and design of the gospel.

THE grace of God in scripture is set forth by such figures and expressions, as
do plainly intimate its efficacy; and that it does not depend on us to use it,
or not to use it, at our pleasure. It is said to be a creation, We are created
unto good works, Ephesians. II. 10.
and we become new creatures. 2 Cor. V. 17.
It is called a Regeneration or a new birth. Phil. II. 3.
It is called a quickening, and a resurrection; as our former state is compared
to feebleness, a blindness, and a death. God is said to work in us both to will
and to do. His people shall be willing in the day of his power. Psalm. CX 3.
He will write his laws in their hearts, and make them to walk in them. Jer.
XXXI. 33, 34.
Mankind is compared to a mass of clay in the hand of the potter, Ezekiel. XXXVI.
26, 27. Romans IX. 2.
who of the same lump makes at pleasure, vessels of honor, or of dishonor.
These passages, this last in particular, do intimate an absolute and a
conquering power in grace. And that the love of God constrains us, as St. Paul
expressly speaks.

AFTER all, they think, that if a debate falls to be between the sovereignty,
acts and purposes of God, and the freedom of man's will; it is modest and
decent, rather to make the abatement on man's part, than on God's; but they
think there is no need of this. They maintain, that beside the outward
enlightening of a man by knowledge, there is an inward enlightening of the mind,
and a secret forcible conviction stamped on it. Otherwise what can be meant by
the prayer of Paul for the Ephesians, who had already heard the gospel
preached, and were instructed in it; That the eyes of their understanding being
enlightened, they might know what was the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints: and what was the
exceeding greatness of his power toward them that believe. Ephesians. I. 17, 18, 19.
This seems to be somewhat that is both internal and efficacious.

IN fine, Christ compares the union and influence that he communicates to
believers, to the union of an head with its members, and of a root with its
branches; which imports an internal, a vital, and an efficacious influence. And
though the outward means that are offered, may be, and always are rejected, when
not accompanied with this overcoming grace; yet this never returns empty. These
outward means coming from God, the resisting of them is said to be a resisting
God; Acts VII. 51.
and grieving or quenching his spirit; Ephesians. IV. 30.
and so in that sense we may resist the grace or favor of God; but we can
never withstand him when he intends to overcome us.

BUT this may suffice for the Supralapsarian objections against that part of
the Arminian scheme which relates to the question under consideration.

AND now upon a view of each scheme, and the objections which lie against it,
it is obvious to remark,

THAT the Objections of both sides against some part of the scheme of their
opponents, are difficult, if not impossible to be answered; which is at least a
strong presumption, that there are some things amiss in both schemes. The
Supralapsarian objections against an election upon a foresight of faith and
good works; and their arguments for the freedom, and the efficacy of divine
grace (at least in many instances) seem to be of great force, if not
irresistible. Nor is there less weight, on the other hand, in what the
Arminians and others object, against God's concurring immediately by a
determinative influence to the production of intrinsically evil actions. And
this leads me to observe what seems to me to be the fundamental mistake of both
parties in the point before us, which is,

That they are both agreed in joining some things together, which have no
connection with each other in the nature of them, and which the scriptures have
set far asunder. Or in other words, They are both agreed that election and
reprobation must be set upon much the same foot. And that men must be much
alike free, or much alike determined, to all their actions, whether good or
evil. And their agreement in these two points, necessarily keeps them at
everlasting disagreement in almost all others. Thus for instance, the
Supralapsarian apprehends it to be impossible, that the elect should be chosen
of God upon a foresight of their faith and good works; and partly for that
reason thinks it to be impossible also, that the reprobate should be ordained
to condemnation upon a foresight of their wickedness and infidelity. Whereas,
on the other side, the Arminian can never persuade himself, that God would
ordain any to condemnation otherwise than upon a foresight of their wickedness
or infidelity; and therefore he concludes, that neither does he elect any to
everlasting life, but upon a foresight of their faith and obedience. And so
again, the Supralapsarian, that he may the more effectually maintain the
determining efficacy of divine grace, affirms that men are determined to the
substrate matter of all their actions, even those that are intrinsically evil.
This the Arminian thinks is to make God the author of sin, and yet seems to
allow it to be true upon a supposition of the determinative efficacy of grace,
and therefore is forced to deny that, and to maintain what the Supralapsarian
thinks equivalent to saying, that it is not God, but men, that make themselves
to differ. And thus from an unhappy agreement in a false supposal or two, they
are led into an endless opposition to each other in many other points.

BUT now the scriptures take a quite different course in treating of the moral
good or evil which is in us, or done by us; ascribing the one to God, and
imputing the other to ourselves; teaching us to ascribe the honor of all that
is good to God, and to cast the blame of all that is evil on ourselves; from
whence we have the highest reason to conclude, that God has not the same
influence and causality in the one, which he has in the other.

PART IV.
THE very opposite schemes of the Supralapsarians and Arminians have both been
considered in the foregoing parts, together with some of the difficulties
wherewith the two contending parties mutually press each other. My business
will now be to exhibit the hypothesis of the Sublapsarians, so far as it
relates to the question under consideration, and examine how far it escapes the
difficulties which attend and perplex either one or the other of the other
schemes.

THE Sublapsarians then maintain,

1. That the Supralapsarian doctrine of God's concurring immediately, by a
determinative influence, to the production of all the actions of men, whether
good or evil, ought not to be admitted. -- For, they say, this doctrine
supposes, that God cannot form a creature with a power of moving itself, and
determining any of its own actions, without his efficacious power and influence
first moving and predetermining it to the matter of them; that this highly
reflects on the wisdom and power of God, and entirely takes away the very
possibility of exercising divine justice; it being utterly inconceivable, that
any creature should be a proper object of rewards and punishments, which
neither has, nor ever had, or could have, a power of determining any of its
own actions. That this doctrine also destroys the distinction between natural
and voluntary agents, and brings all the operations of the latter, under laws
of equal necessity with those, according to which the motions of the former are
excited. For if what we call voluntary agents are efficaciously determined by
God to all their operations, then they can no more refrain from doing what they
do, than the fire can cease from burning, when it is supplied with proper
fuel, and fanned with sufficient air.

THE Sublapsarian Calvinists farther allege, that this doctrine of being
determined by God to all our actions is AN UTTER STRANGER TO ANTIQUITY. That it
was first started by Aquinas in the thirteenth century. That before, it was in
general held, that the providence of God extended itself to all things
whatsoever: He thought this was done by God's concurring immediately to the
production of every thought, action, motion, or mode; so that God was the first
and immediate cause of every thing that was done. And in order to the
explaining of the joint production of every thing by God as the FIRST, and by
the creatures as the second cause, he taught (at least so his followers have
understood him) that by a physical influence the will was predetermined by God
to all things whether good or bad; so that the will could not be said to be
free in that particular instance in sensu composito, though it was in general
still free in all its actions in sensu diviso: A distinction so sacred, and so
much used among them (as Bishop Burnet observes) that I choose to give it in
their own terms, rather than translate, or attempt to explain them. This passed
down among the Papists with the Dominicans, who were of Aquinas's own order;
and has since been received by the Supralapsarian Calvinists among
Protestants; but neither one nor the other can pretend to any earlier author for
it than Aquinas.

NOR do the SCRIPTURES know any more of this doctrine than the Fathers do.
Indeed the scriptures teach us, that in God we live and move, Acts 17.28. But
this cannot intend, that God excites and determines all our motions; for that
would make Him much more the author of the worst of our actions, than we
ourselves are: And therefore the meaning can only be, that as God at first
gives us a power of moving, so he continually supports and preserves that power
in all its exercises.

TO conclude, Mr. How, Vol. II. p. 531.
the Sublapsarians assert more to be necessary to actions, to which men are
wickedly disinclined; but that less will suffice for their doing of actions, to
which they have inclination more than enough. They reckon it sufficient to the
production of actions of this latter sort, that a man's powers be actually
habile, and apt for any such action in the general, as is con-natural to them,
supposing there be not a peccant aversion; as there is to all those actions,
which are holy and spiritual; which aversion a more potent (even a
determinative) influence, may be often necessary to overcome. They explain
themselves by instance thus,

A MAN has from God the powers belonging to his nature, by which he is capable
of loving or hating any apprehended good or evil. These powers being by a
present divine influence rendered habile, and apt for action, he can now love a
good name, health, ease, life; and hate disgrace, sickness, pain, death; but he
does also by these powers thus habilitated for action, love wickedness and hate
God. They say now, that to these former acts God should over and besides
determine him, is not absolutely and always necessary; and to the latter it is
impossible. But that to hate wickedness universally, and as such, and to love
God, the depravedness of his nature by the apostasy, has made the
determinative influence of efficacious grace often, if not always necessary;
which therefore he has indispensable obligation (nor is destitute of
sufficient encouragement) most earnestly to implore and pray for.

THUS the Sublapsarians, while with the Arminians they utterly deny any
determinative divine influence to evil actions, do at the same time with the
Supralapsarians earnestly maintain the efficacy of divine grace, whenever God
pleases, and the necessity of its influence in order to our being and doing
good. And in this way they think they secure the holiness, justice, and
goodness of God from the least imputation; and yet render all due honor to the
freedom and efficacy of his grace. Nor do they at all exempt man hereby, from
his dependence on the will and providence of God. For a created being that was
entirely from God, Mr. H^^ Vol II. p. 527.
with all the powers and faculties belonging to it, that has its continual
subsistence in him, and all these powers continued and maintained by his
influence every moment; that has these powers made habile, and apt for all its
natural motions and operations whatsoever, by a suitable influence, whenever
it moves and operates; and that is always under the check and control of
divine providence; may with great propriety be said to depend on God as to all
its motions and operations, without being unavoidably impelled to do every
thing which it does, even its intrinsically evil actions.

TO conclude, by maintaining always the necessity, and whenever God pleases,
the efficacy of his grace, and denying a determinative influence to evil
actions, the Sublapsarians apprehend they avoid the difficulties with which
both the other schemes are pressed, by maintaining both, or denying both.

BUT I proceed to say, that in consequence of the Sublapsarians denying that
men are efficaciously determined by God to all their actions, even those which
have sin inseparably annexed to them, they are obliged to maintain,

2. THAT God foreknows what rational agents will do, when he thinks fit to
leave them entirely to the freedom of their own wills, without interposing his
own power to determine them one way or the other. This principle necessarily
follows from the former; for if God does not determine men to their sinful
actions, he must either foreknow what they will do, when he don't determine
them, or else he must be ignorant beforehand of a great part of the actions of
mankind.

IT IS true it is not easy to show how those future contingencies, which depend
upon the free choice of the will, should be certain and infallible; Burnet's
Exposition, p. 158.
but we are from sufficient evidence persuaded that it is so. For we see through
the whole scriptures a thread of very positive prophesies, the accomplishment
whereof depended on the free will of men; and these predictions, as they were
made very precisely, so they were no less punctually accomplished. Not to
mention any other prophesies, all those which relate to the death and
sufferings of Christ, were fulfilled by the free acts of the priests and people
of the Jews: They sinned in doing it, which proves that they acted in it with
their natural liberty. By these, and all the other prophesies, which are in
both testaments, it must be confessed, that these things were certainly
foreknown, but where to found that certainty, cannot easily be resolved. Nor is
it of any importance, whether we can resolve it, or no. The infinite perfection
of the divine mind ought here to silence all objections. A clear idea by which
we apprehend a thing to be plainly contrary to the attributes of God, is indeed
sufficient ground to reject it. And therefore they think they are in the right
to deny that God efficaciously determines men to sinful actions, because they
apprehend it to be plainly contrary to justice, goodness and holiness: But if
the objection against any thing supposed to be in God, lies only against the
manner, and the unconceivableness of it, there the infinite perfection of God
answers all. How, Vol. II. p. 504.
It cannot therefore be so frightful a thing, to suppose God's foreknowledge of
the most contingent future actions, well to consist with our ignorance how he
foreknows them; as that we should think it necessary to over turn and mingle
heaven and earth, rather than admit it.

IT is further to be considered, Burnet's Exposition, p. 159.
that this prescience does not make the effects certain, because they are
foreseen; but they are foreseen because that they are to be: So that the
certainty of the prescience is not antecedent or causal, but subsequent and
eventual. -- Whatsoever happens was future before it happened; and since it
happened, it was certainly future from all eternity; not by a certainty of
fate; but by a certainty which arises out of its being once; from which this
truth, that it was future, was eternally certain: Therefore the divine
prescience being only the knowing all things which were to come, it does not
infer a necessity of causality.

THE scripture plainly shows on some occasions a conditionate prescience, as in
the case of the men of Keilah, of Tire and Sidan, Sodom and Gomorrah. Since
then this prescience may be so certain, that it never can be mistaken, nor
misguide the designs and providence of God; and since by this, both the
attributes of God are vindicated, and the undetermined freedom of the will of
man to sin is asserted, all difficulties seem to be easily cleared this way.

THEY further add, that God having made man a free creature, his governing him
accordingly, and making his own administration of the world suitable to it, is
no diminution of his own authority; it is only carrying on of his own creation,
according to the several natures which he has put in that variety of beings,
of which this world is composed, and with which it is diversified. Therefore if
some of the acts of God, with relation to man, are not so absolute as his other
acts are, and as the Supralapsarians suppose necessary to the ultimate
perfection of an independent being; this arises not from any defect in the acts
of God; but because the nature of the creature, which he intended to make free,
is inconsistent with such acts.

THE divine omnipotence is not lessened when we observe some of God's works to
be more beautiful and useful than others are: And the irregular productions of
nature do not derogate from the order in which all things appear lovely to the
divine mind. So if that liberty with which God intended to endue thinking
beings, is incompatible with such positive acts, and so positive a providence
as governs natural things, and this material world; then this is no way
derogatory to the sovereignty of his mind. This also gives such an account of
the evil which is in the world, as does no way accuse or lessen the purity and
holiness of God: Since he only suffers his creatures to go on in the free use
of the powers which he has given them; about which he exercises a special
providence, making some men's sins to be the immediate punishment of their own,
or of other men's sins; and restraining them often in a great deal of that evil
which they do design, and bringing out of it a great deal of good, which they
did not design; but never efficaciously determining them to design or act
sinfully. N. B. Most of what is above extracted from Bishop Burnet, is by him
urged in the name of the Arminians. But forasmuch as the Sublapsarians (at
least the more moderate of them) agree in these things with the Arminians; what
is here alleged equally served them, and accordingly I have so improved it.


THUS far the Sublapsarians evidently both admit and reject something of the
schemes of both the other parties, and think that by doing so they come nearer
to the truth than either of them, and avoid the principal difficulties which
attend them both.

3. THEY maintain that God's foreknowledge of futurities is always subsequent
to his decree; but that his decree does not give a futurition to many things
that come to pass. They readily grant to the Supralapsarians, that there are a
vast number of possible beings in the knowledge or understanding of God; and
that the decree appoints which of them shall be, and which shall not: for since
the kingdom of God rules over all, so that not a sparrow falls to the ground
without him; it is impossible that any thing should ever come to pass, but what
God is pleased, if not to effect, yet at least to permit. And if nothing can
come to pass without the divine permission, then nothing can be known as
future, but what God has determined, at least to permit to be so, and so the
foreknowledge of God will in all cases be founded either in his effective or
permissive decree, and be subsequent unto it: For it is impossible, that he who
is able to prevent what he pleases, should know a thing will actually come to
pass, without having first determined, at least, not to prevent it. And yet
this is far from proving, that his decree gives a futurition to whatsoever
comes to pass. For if the knowledge of God reaches to what rational agents will
do, when he thinks fit to leave them entirely to the freedom of their own
wills, without interposing his power to determine them one way or other; then
there will be no need to suppose, that the decree of God gives futurition to
all things whatsoever, because the certainty of the futurition of many things,
may then be resolved into the infallibility of the knowledge of God, and not
into the efficacy of his decree. -- Again, if God often does think fit to leave
rational agents entirely to the freedom of their own wills, and be sure never
interposes his power to determine them to intrinsically evil actions; then we
must suppose, that many things come to pass, which the decree does not give
futurition to. For the Supralapsarians themselves don't suppose the decree to
be the cause of the futurition of any thing, but what God in consequence of his
decree, efficaciously determines his creatures to, in the course of his
providence.

IN a word, both Supra and Sublapsarians are agreed, to distinguish the decrees
of God into effective and permissive. The effective decree (say the
Sublapsarians) puts a certain futurition into things; but the permissive does
not so. The effective decree may respect both natural and moral good; the
permissive decree principally regards moral evil, which God does not, either
immediately or mediately, effect by his own power; but only permits to the
power of his creatures: having thought fit, for wise reasons, not always to
hinder them (though many times he does) from abusing the powers he has given
them for better purposes, to the commission of it. -- This distinction between
an effective and permissive decree, they think, is rendered a distinction
without a difference, by the Supralapsarian doctrines of efficacious
permission, and predeterminative concourse to actions intrinsically evil; that
God does by an efficacious power and influence move and predetermine men unto
all their actions, even to such as have sin inseparably annexed to them; that
he does secretly, but effectually, incline and apply the wills of men to the
entative acts of such things. For if these doctrines be true, the Sublapsarians
think it will follow, that all the decrees of God are alike absolute and
effective. Not to repeat here, that they think these doctrines to be founded
upon false principles, and to be necessarily attended with consequences too
shocking to be endured; their reasons for both which I have given before.

4. THEY maintain, that the ordaining of certain men from eternity to
condemnation was upon a foresight of their ungodliness and infidelity; though on
the other hand, they deny that any were elected to everlasting life, upon a
foresight of their faith and obedience. These two things they apprehend in
their own nature to stand upon as different a foo^ as possible; and to be
everywhere so represented in the scriptures. They think the scriptures all
along represent the destruction of man to be of himself; and never intimate his
being determined by divine influence to any evil action. And they think it
clear from scripture, that God knows what men will do, when left entirely to
the freedom of their own wills: from whence they conclude, that God foresaw the
apostasy of man, if left to the freedom of his own will, and thought fit so to
leave him; and that he foresaw the corruption which would follow upon the
apostasy, that the wickedness of man would be great in the earth, and every
imagination of the tho'ts of his heart evil, and determined not to hinder it:
but ordained certain men to that condemnation, which he foresaw they would
deserve by their sins.

WHEREAS of his mere good pleasure he elected others, whom he foresaw would be
alike involved in sin and guilt, to eternal life; and entered into a covenant
of grace, to deliver them out of that state of sin and misery, and to bring
them into a state of salvation by a redeemer. Now forasmuch as they who are
thus elected to everlasting life, are supposed to be really involved in sin and
guilt with the rest; and forasmuch as the scriptures represent eternal life
itself, and all the things which immediately qualify and prepare men for it,
such as faith, repentance and new obedience, to be not of men themselves, but
the Gifts of God: therefore the Sublapsarians think it impossible that any
should be elected to everlasting life, upon a foresight of their faith and
obedience. For (say they) men cannot be elected upon a foresight of those
things, which they would never have, if God had not though it fit of his good
pleasure to bestow them on them. So that while the Sublapsarians maintain, that
certain men are ordained to condemnation upon a foresight of their wickedness
and unbelief, they at the same time resolve the election of others principally
into the good pleasure of the divine will. And in keeping this middle-way, they
think they both follow the guidance of the scriptures, which always teach us to
arrogate no good to ourselves, and do impute no moral evil to God; and that
they also secure the honor of all the divine attributes. For, on the one hand,
no man can reasonably complain, either that he is left to the freedom of his
own will, or that he is ordained to such condemnation, as God foresaw he would
deserve, by his abuse of that freedom. Nor ought any man's eye to be evil,
because God's eye is good. For may he not do what he pleases with his own? And,
if he thinks fit, may he not bestow that grace and favor upon some, which none
deserve, and which he might justly have withheld from all? -- And again, on the
other hand, what man can glory in the presence of the Lord, when the great
things in which he is not as other men, are not of himself; but are the gifts
of God?

BUT I proceed to say in the last place, that though the Sublapsarians hold, that
God has ordained certain men to condemnation upon a foresight of their
ungodliness and infidelity, yet they maintain,

5. THAT ungodliness and infidelity foreseen are not the proper causes, but
only the antecedent conditions of reprobation. Thus the celebrated Turrettine
Vol. I. p 422
represents their sentiments, Si obsolute consideratur reprobatio recte
adscribitur corruptioni hominis nativae, quae eum effecit just reprobabilem:
si vero comparate, ad solum Dei beneplacitum, etc. If (says he) Reprobation be
considered absolutely, it is justly ascribed to man's native corruption, which
has rendered him a proper object of it; but if it be considered comparatively,
it must be resolved entirely into the good pleasure of God, who according to
his sovereign right and freedom, chooses whom he will and passes by the rest.
If therefore it be enquired, why this, or the other man was reprobated? The
answer is, Because God foresa^^^ that he would deserve it by his sins. Not that
sin is properly the cause of reprobation, for then all must have been
reprobated, who were alike sinners; but it is a condition or antecedent
quality, by which a man becomes a proper object of reprobation: Or it is a
cause sine qua non; for if a man had not been a sinner, he had not been
reprobated of God; though every one be not necessarily reprobated, who is a
sinner. But when the enquiry is, why God has reprobated this man, rather than
the other, when they were both equally sinners, and so alike proper objects of
reprobation? Here sin cannot be alleged, because it is common to them both;
and what is common to them both, cannot (so far as we can see) cause a
difference to be made between the one and the other. And therefore no reason
can be rendered by us for it in many cases, besides the mere sovereign pleasure
of God, even so Father, for so it has seemed good in thy sight. I say in many
cases, because it appears in fact from many instances, that such persons as
seemed to men the most unlikely, nevertheless belonged to the election of
grace. For there have been not a few Instances of very profligate sinners, who
like Manassah have wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him
to anger; and yet, through the mercy and grace of God, have been stopped in their
carreer, to their own destruction, and made to all appearance, sincere
penitents, and sound believers.

AND yet all this don't hinder, but that far the bigger part of those who
attain the mercy of God unto eternal life, may have been chosen to it, upon a
foresight not of their faith and repentance, but of their diligent improvement
of the means of grace, and earnest prayer for the aids of God's holy Spirit.
And so notwithstanding any thing in the decrees of God, there may be a certain
connection between striving to enter in at the strait gate, and admission into
it. For our blessed Lord himself has assured us, that if earthly parents who
are evil, know how to give good gifts unto their children; MUCH MORE shall our
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? And the wisest of
mere men, under the inspiration of him whose understanding is infinite, has
said; If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding: If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Prove. II. 3, 4, 5.

THE END.

