Dr. Mayhew's TWO Thanksgiving SERMONS December 9th. 1762.

TWO SERMONS On the Nature, Extent and Perfection of the Divine Goodness.

Delivered December 9. 1762.

BEING THE Annual THANKSGIVING Of the PROVINCE, etc.

On PSALM 145.9.

Published with some Enlargements.

By Jonathan Mayhew, D. D.

Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by D. and J. KNEELAND, opposite to the
Probate-Office, in Queen Street. 1763.

SERMON I. Of the Nature, Extent and Perfection of GOD's Goodness.
PSALM CXLV.9. THE LORD is good to ALL; and his tender Mercies are over ALL his
Works.


NO great variety either of subject or sentiment, can well be expected in
sermons on these common annual occasions. A minister who has preached on them
statedly twice a day, in the same place, for fifteen or sixteen years
successively, will probably have little or nothing that is new, to gratify the
curiosity of his hearers. Neither is this what he ought chiefly to aim at, or
they to desire, at any time; particularly not on such occasions as the present.

A DAY of religious thanksgiving, calls for sincere gratitude, love and praise
to almighty God, with hearty resolutions, by his grace assisting, to make a
proper return to him for all his benefits and unmerited favors, by obeying his
commandments, and living to his glory. The divine GOODNESS is, accordingly, a
subject to which One's thoughts ought to be, and are naturally turned, on such
occasions. This can never be an unsuitable subject, whatever be the more special
ground of our thankfulness; since we can enjoy no good, whether public and
common, or private and personal, whether pertaining to the present life, or to
the future, but what flows from the same eternal and inexhaustible fountain of
divine goodness. Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. James I.17.
A day of thanksgiving cannot, indeed, be properly observed at any time, unless
the meditations of the worshippers are in a great measure, if not principally,
employed upon this divine attribute, and the manifestations of it in and
toward the works of God.

IT is therefore supposed that no apology needs to be made, for the choice of
so common a subject or text, as that which I just now mentioned; even though I
should have formerly discoursed upon the same words, as I may have done, but am
uncertain. My method of treating the subject at present, however, will at least
be different: Which is mentioned to obviate the prejudices of some persons, who
cannot, perhaps, at all relish a sermon the second time, which they might not
have wholly disapproved of the first.

LET me add, that I have a farther design at present, in the choice of this
subject, than merely to lead you to such reflections on the divine goodness, as
may be particularly suitable to this occasion. I have it in my view, by God's
help, to give you such a representation and idea of his goodness, as ought to
be habitual to you; to animate your piety, to support and rejoice your hearts
at all times, and to have a powerful influence on your whole lives. Right
conceptions, I mean rational and truly scriptural ones, of God's adorable
attributes, are the foundation of all true religion. And these conceptions, if,
instead of floating in the brain, they sink into the heart, and are formed into
a fixed principle there, called FAITH in the language of scripture; are really
the substance of religion, and not merely the foundation of it, as being
necessary in order thereto. No man that has these conceptions of, or is thus
rightly and habitually affected toward God, as being what he is, can possibly
live a wicked life. He will as certainly bring forth good things out of this
good treasure in his heart, as a good tree will bear good fruit in the season.
And this will be at once delightful to himself, and pleasing and honarary to
God. We shall then indeed, and not till then, offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: Who has himself said, Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.

WHAT has now been observed concerning the attributes of God in general, is
very particularly and especially true of his goodness. A scriptural idea or
conception of, and a firm faith in it, habitual to the mind, through the
influences of the Spirit of grace, will be at once the source of great peace
and comfort to ourselves, of hope and confidence toward God, of holiness in
life, of happiness in death, and like a well of living water within us,
springing up into everlasting life: 'As our Lord said of the water which he
should give. Which the evangelist explains by saying, This he spoke of the
spirit which they that believe on him should receive. Let all then, not only
believe, but, in the language of scripture, taste and see, that the Lord is
good; without fear that they may err by thinking him better, or more
extensively good, gracious and merciful than he actually is. This is
impossible. For if we can believe those holy men who spoke, wrote and
prophesied as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; or, in other words, if we can
believe God himself, who "cannot lie," The LORD is indeed GOOD to ALL; and his
TENDER MERCIES are over ALL his works! -- And, surely, no One's ideas can
exceed, no One's conceptions go beyond, such a goodness and mercy as this; a
goodness, which is itself without measure, without bounds; eternal, unlimited,
immutable goodness; and a mercy, that is from everlasting to everlasting. Your
most exalted ideas will fall far below this goodness. Man that is a worm, though
he may have some general and just, can yet have no adequate, no perfect
conception of it; which is true of this, in common with the other attributes of
God, which are all infinite; and therefore not to be comprehended by the
highest angels, those heavenly ministers, who, as a flame of fire, do his will
with alacrity and ardor, hearkening unto the voice of his word. Can THOU
then, a mortal man, find out the Almighty unto perfection! Can thy conceptions
rise so high as his goodness! It is as high as heaven, what can thou do?
Deeper than hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the
earth, and broader than the sea! Job XI.7, 8, 9.


THAT the true scriptural doctrine of God's goodness, may be abused and
perverted; that there is great danger of this; yea, that it is actually
perverted and abused by many, to the most impious and destructive purposes; all
this, I say, is very readily allowed. But what follows from hence? that it
should not be preached to the world? But why then, preach the gospel to the
world? Is not that perverted and abused also? Indeed the gospel itself cannot
be preached as it ought to be; -- as Jesus Christ and his apostles themselves
preached it, without preaching, at the same time, the boundless goodness of
God. Wrong inferences from, and perversions of the truth, ought indeed, as far
as may be, to be guarded against. But the truth, especially the most important
and glorious truths, ought not to be even suppressed, and much less denied,
lest bad men should abuse them. The total suppression, at least the denial of
them, in those whose business it is to declare the truth, is as criminal, in my
opinion, as any perversion of them by their hearers could possibly be. If any
will, through the wickedness of their hearts, "wrest" this doctrine, as they
sometimes also do the other scriptures, it will be to their own destruction.
But I humbly hope in God, that it will not be to mine, to preach any doctrine
contained in his holy word; and particularly this, That the Lord is good to
ALL; and his tender mercies over ALL his works: Which, my honored and beloved
hearers, I shall, in his fear, or rather in his love, endeavor more distinctly
to explain to you.

IT will be proper,

I. To make some observations on the goodness of God in general.

II. To consider the extent and perfection of it, according to the
representation in the text: Wherein the LORD is declared to be "GOOD to ALL,"
etc.

III. To take a cursory notice of some of the principal objections against the
divine goodness. And,

IV. To make some application of the subject, by reminding you of the great
goodness of God to Us, both in temporal and spiritual respects; and by such
inferences and reflections, as may at once tend to the honor of God, and show
what influence the consideration of his goodness ought to have upon our hearts
and manners. -- Let me then,

I. MAKE some observations on the goodness of God in general. And here,

1. BY the goodness of God is primarily intended the kindness, benevolence and
bounty of his nature; or goodness as it is an attribute, or property, inherent
in, and essential to him. All beings whatsoever, exist after some determinate
manner, having certain attributes, qualities or properties inherent in them,
which make them to be what they are. This is equally true of all beings without
exception, whether animate or inanimate, rational or irrational, created or
increated. We cannot speak, or think of any particular being or thing, but as
it exists, or is supposed to exist, under certain determinate properties, which
distinguish it from all others. For no man, surely, can conceive of any thing
abstracted from, or stripped of, all its known properties, qualities and
attributes; which are its essence, or all that is known of it. Derived,
dependent beings are, indeed, mutable or changeable as to their properties.
They may either lose some which they originally had, or receive others which
they had not; and yet, in common language, remain the same. And whatsoever may
be thus lost, or acquired, is considered as an accident, or a non-essential
property, in contradistinction from those which cannot be lost without the
destruction of the being itself; and which are therefore called its essential
properties, as being necessary to its very existence.

BUT in God, of whom we ought ever to think and speak with the profoundest
reverence: In God, I say, there is no such distinction, or distribution of
attributes, into essential and non-essential. In him nothing, whether power,
knowledge or goodness, or any other quality, is accidental or adventitious,
acquired or derived from without." For who has first given unto him! All is
eternal, all essential, all equally necessary: And nothing that is so, can ever
be lost. And if God can neither acquire any property or attribute, which did
not originally and necessarily belong to him as part of his essence, nor lose
any thing which did, he is of consequence, in the strictest sense, as the
scriptures express it, "without "variableness, or shadow of turning;" -- wholly
and absolutely, necessarily and immutably the same, even "from everlasting to
everlasting." Accordingly, whenGod is spoken of as good, the primary meaning
is, that he is so in his very nature, or essentially good; as necessarily and
essentially good, as he is eternal, wise, powerful or omnipresent: And
consequently, equally good at all times, and in all parts of the universe; though
the appearances, or manifestations of his goodness are, indeed, very various,
as they must needs be, if there is a great variety of creatures produced in
time, to behold, or to partake of his goodness. But of the extent of God's
goodness hereafter: At present it is considered only in general, as one of his
essential attributes, or as a property of his nature, equally underived and
unalienable; no borrowed or precarious excellency, as the goodness of men and
angels is in them, but as necessary as his being. Indeed, One need not scruple
to call it a part of God himself, only as there may be an impropriety in that
manner of expression concerning the infinite God, in all other respects in
general: But it is no doubt as truly and as properly a part of him, as any
other divine perfection.

2. THE goodness of God comprehends his beneficence, or his good and bountiful
acts, as well as the goodness of his nature. All beings act, at least in
general, according to their respective natures, or the qualities inherent in
them. And if the great God be supposed to be essentially good, it is hardly, if
at all supposeable, that he should not also do good: Though to say, it was or is
necessary for him to do it, would be an improper way of speaking; since we very
seldom, if ever, speak of what is done by choice, or with design, as done
necessarily. Be that as it may, still this distinction betwixt the goodness of
God in his nature, or as it is an attribute inherent in him, and his goodness
as manifested in his works or doings, is by no means an insignificant and
unscriptural one, like many others in common use; and more especially with
reference to religious subjects, where such trifling is the most inexcuseable.
"Thou "art good," says the royal Psalmist, "and do "good." The same
distinction frequently occurs in the holy scriptures. And indeed, what is more
natural, than from contemplating goodness in its source, to descend in our
thoughts to the apparent effects of it in the works and providence of God? Or,
on the other hand, what is more natural, than from considering the effects of
divine goodness and mercy, which we either experience or behold, or rather
both, to ascend in our imaginations to that fountain of goodness in the divine
nature itself, from whence they flow?

IT is by what creatures do, that we form the best and surest judgment of their
natures, qualities and dispositions respectively. For we have not the faculty
of looking immediately at the heart or spirit, and seeing what is therein, as
God does, clearly, perfectly, and without the least difficulty: A faculty,
however, which some orders of creatures above us, may in a degree be possessed
of, though not of omniscience. Nay, we know that God has, on certain occasions,
endowed even men with this faculty. For the "discerning "of spirits" was one of
the miraculous powers conferred on the apostles, and, most probably, on some
other christians in the apostolic age. But, as was said before, we judge of the
internal characters and qualities of other men, chiefly at least by what they
do; by their actions and conduct. And this is one way in which we arrive at the
knowledge of the divine goodness. God "does good;" and therefore we justly
infer that he "is good," even essentially so. This way of reasoning is at once
conclusive and plain, being accommodated to people of all capacities in
general. But I am far from saying or thinking, that this is the only method of
attaining to the knowledge of God's goodness. On the contrary, the divine
goodness admits of strict demonstration, a priori, to speak in the language of
metaphysicians. And though this latter kind of reasoning and proof, is much less
adapted to the understandings of people in general, than the former; yet it has
its uses, and is really of vast importance. Yea, in some cases it is much the
best, and most convincing, to those who are accustomed to speculations of this
nature. So that though it is not so proper to be introduced into a common popular
discourse, as the other; yet it is by no means to be given up as unsolid, or
inconclusive. Which is what would, to be sure, highly gratify men of a
skeptical turn; who might flatter themselves, that if this argument were out of
the way, they could find objections enough against the visible, apparent works
of God, to disprove the essential goodness of his nature, or at least to make
others very dubious about it.

THE reason why I do not mention revelation as a strict, proper proof of the
divine goodness, is this: That none who believe the scriptures pretend to doubt
of it, however wrong their conceptions, in some respects, may be concerning it.
And to produce the testimony of scripture in the case, could answer no end with
those who disbelieve and deny their authority. It may be added, that whosoever
believes any thing to be true, upon the testimony or authority of God speaking
in his holy word, presupposes him to be good, and to be before proved so, by
arguments of another kind. For veracity, or truth, is certainly one branch of
goodness. If God were not good, he might deceive his creatures, and delight
therein. He that supposes any thing is actually true, merely because God has
declared it, has set to his seal that God is true. He takes it for granted
herein, that God himself is a most faithful, and therefore a good being; not a
false or evil One, or One of a justly suspected character. For, upon the
impious supposition of his being so, who could rely upon -- who believe his own
word? even though the Lord spoke face to face unto him, as a man speaks unto
his friend; and as he is said to have spoken to Moses. Exodus XXXIII.II.


3. THE goodness of God, as it is a property of his nature, should always be
considered as inseparably connected with his wisdom; and regulated thereby in
all its operations. It is not to be considered as a sort of blind instinct, or
goodnature, detached from reason and right, or a regard to fitness and
propriety. The goodness of God is not simply a disposition in his nature to do
good, uncontrouled, undirected by wisdom; similar to what is observed in some
of his creatures in certain instances. Infinite wisdom, or the most consummate,
the most perfect reason, is indissolubly connected with goodness in the great
God: And the former is, undoubtedly, if One may so express it, the leading,
regulating, and all-directing attribute of his nature; in such sort, that there
are no exertions of mere power, or of mere goodness and benevolence in him; but
every thing that is done by him, is done according to the immutable rule of
wisdom, or perfect reason; of which He himself, and only He, is in all cases an
adequate judge. If God be indeed an infinitely knowing, reasonable, and wise
being; it is surely no presumption to say, and even a duty firmly to believe,
that he never, in any case whatever, acts unreasonably, or unwisely. And if
this be the case, as, I suppose, is universally acknowledged in words at least,
by all professed christians; what was said above, undeniably follows; viz. that
none of the actions of the great God, are merely and solely the exertions
either of power or of goodness; but all conducted by a wisdom that cannot err.

IT is well for the creatures of God, for the whole creation, that this is the
case. For, in so wide-extended, not to say boundless an universe of things, so
various and complicated, what might be the consequence -- I speak it with
reverence and awe -- what might be the consequence of omnipotence exerting and
giving a-loose to itself, without wisdom to direct its operations! Yea, what
might be the consequence, if goodness or benevolence itself, accompanied with
irresistible power, but not under the conduct of wisdom, were to exert itself
in the management of so various, extended and complicated a system? What
disorders and confusions? what dreadful consequences might naturally be
expected from the exertions of omnipotence without wisdom, even though it were
accompanied by such a blind, instinctive benevolence as that spoken of above?
What mischiefs and miseries do we often see produced in this world, by weak
mortal men that mean well, but have little or none of that wisdom which is
"profitable to direct," to regulate their benevolent intentions? How often do
very kind parents destroy their children, even by their kindness itself, for
want of reason and discretion proportioned thereto? What prodigious mischiefs
are sometimes produced, almost to the destruction of whole countries, kingdoms
and mighty empires, by well-intention'd governors, kings and emperors, who
really regard the people under them with a paternal affection; but yet want
wisdom adequate to their high stations, and the business of ruling and
directing nations? From hence we may in some measure conjecture, if we are not
afraid even to think, what might be the consequence of boundless power, though
accompanied with universal benevolence, but not adequate wisdom, exerting
itself at once throughout the universe. The very though it is sufficient to fill One
with dread and terror!

IT may admit of some doubt, whether the effects of benevolence thus exerted by
an almighty Being destitute of wisdom, might not be near as fatal to the
universe in the end, as positive malevolence, ill will and cruelty, exerted
after the same manner. For even in this latter case, some good might possibly
be done, contrary to the intention of the doer; as evil would certainly be done
contrary thereto, in the former case. I do not indeed assert, that the
mischiefs produced on the former supposition, would be equally great with those
done in the latter. But, that they must needs be very great and terrible, is
obvious. What would become of laws, order and, in a word, of good government,
without wisdom to constitute them at first, and to support them afterward?
Every thing of this sort, on which the good of the universe essentially
depends, must soon come to an end, if he that rules it were not wise, as well
as good and powerful: Or, which comes nearly to the same thing, if he did not
govern wisely. For there is no material difference, as to the effects and
consequences, in these supposed cases, betwixt not having, and not exercising
wisdom. What is not used, is as nothing: He that has wisdom, but does not
employ it in what he does (though this very supposition seems absurd in itself)
will act altogether as wrong and irrationally, as if he had none. And a blind
man will find his way through an unknown country, altogether as well as one that
has good eyes, but will not use them. We have therefore, as was intimated
before, the greatest reason to rejoice, when we reflect that the goodness of
almighty God, is necessarily and immutably connected with unerring wisdom;
always directed thereby in its operations; never exerted without it, and much
less contrary to it; which it were blasphemous to suppose. It is because the
Lord of hosts is so "wonderful in counsel," that he is so "excellent in
working." Isai. 28.29.


4. THE goodness of God is what all men are nearly concerned and interested in.
It is perhaps, strictly speaking, the most amiable of the divine perfections;
since God may be loved on account of it, without particularly taking his other
attributes into consideration, in a manner in which he cannot be loved for any
of the rest, without the consideration of this. Even wicked men may think with
some sort of pleasure, on that goodness of God which they abuse; though the
thought of his other attributes rather ministers disquietude and terror to
them, than comfort and delight. If it were proper to make any comparison
betwixt the divine attributes, or to say that one of them is more glorious than
another, mankind in general, to besure, would not hesitate much at calling this
the most glorious. In a relative consideration of them, this might not,
perhaps, be justly liable to any exception. Indeed, God himself seems to allow
us to consider his goodness in this view; or as having, with reference to us, a
peculiar pre-eminence and glory. For divine revelation dwells much longer upon,
and treats far more fully and distinctly of this attribute of God, and the
various manifestations thereof in his works and providence, and particularly in
the redemption of the world by his Son, than of any of his other perfections,
though all glorious and adoreable. It is also worthy of particular observation,
as, indeed it has often been remarked, that when Moses besought God to manifest
his glory to him, saying, "I beseech thee, show me thy glory;" the answer which
he received was, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and -- will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show
mercy. Exodus 33.18, 19.
By which answer it is plainly intimated, that the glory of God does in an
eminent manner consist in his goodness, grace and mercy: So that the prayer of
Moses would be most effectually granted, by God's giving him a manifestation
hereof.

THE eternity, immensity and immutability of God; his infinite knowledge,
wisdom and boundless power; his perfect purity, holiness, and punitive justice;
though all adoreable attributes, yet being considered independently of his
bounty, clemency and mercy, rather astonish and confound, than please or
delight us, by appearing amiable to us: Especially when we consider, not only
our own weakness, dependence, and absolute need of continual support and
succor from the guardian care, and kind providence of God, but our sinfulness
and guilt, which at once render us unworthy thereof, and naturally excite
distrust, diffidence and fear in us. What consolation can weak and sinful
creatures draw from a consideration of those other divine attributes alone, or
independently of goodness and mercy? They rather inspire such creatures with
terror and amazement, than with comfort, hope and joy. Whereas, being
considered as inseparably connected with goodness, which is equally essential
to the divine nature, and exercised toward all the works of God; those
otherwse formidable attributes, are, in a great degree, stripped of their
terror. And not only so, but goodness does, if One may so express it,
communicate its own amiable luster and glory to them: So that even we guilty
creatures, if penitent, may contemplate them, as well as goodness itself, with
delight and joy; as being a firm support to our hope, and such a foundation of
security and happiness to us, as even the most perfect goodness could not be
without them. The divine goodness, therefore, being so interesting a subject to
us; the ground of all our hopes as to time and eternity, it demands a very
particular attention. And let me add, that it would be very unnatural, as well
as impious in any, to restrain, limit or confine it, in a manner not warranted
either by reason or the holy scriptures. It is 10 or 12 Years since the Author
saw the learned Dr. S. CLARKE's Sermon on the Goodness of God: But, if he
mistakes not, there is a Passage in it, of which some Things in this Paragraph
may appear an imperfect imitation.


5. IT should be observed that the goodness of God, when spoken of in a general
way, comprehends many, if not strictly all of his particular moral attributes:
Such, for example, as are distinguished by the terms mercy, clemency, kindness,
compassion, pity, grace, patience, forbearance, long-suffering, and even
justice itself. That all these, except the last-mentioned, are only so many
different branches or modes of goodness, denominated respectively with
reference to the persons to whom, or the particular manner and circumstances in
which, God manifests that goodness to his creatures, which in him is one
simple, uniform principle: That this is true, I say, is very easy to see; and,
indeed, so generally allowed, that it seems quite needless to spend time in the
proof of it. But there are many persons, who seem to conceive and speak quite
differently of the justice of God; as if it were not a mode or branch of
goodness, and comprehended therein, but an attribute distinct from, if not in a
degree repugnant to goodness. These different conceptions of the matter, though
they may at first appear immaterial, are yet respectively followed by
consequences of a very important nature. I shall therefore very briefly
explain, and endeavor to establish, that sentiment respecting this point,
which was hinted above. This I would do at once with all reverence to God, and
with all due respect to those, who have different conceptions of the matter.

And here it may be observed,

(1.) THAT in a wise and good earthly parent, there is really no such
distinction as that which has been mentioned, betwixt goodness and justice, not
even in punishing; but the former includes the latter, as being one mode or
manner of exerting itself, and attaining its end. For example; why does a truly
wise and good parent, when under the influence, not of mere passion and
resentment, but of reason only, correct his children, or punish them for their
faults? Is it not in order to reform, and do them good? -- or at least with a
view to the benefit of his other children, or those of the household; that they
may be kept under due subjection, and restrained from the like evil and hurtful
practices? In this case, inflicting adequate punishment, or such as is adapted
to the good ends proposed, is plainly goodness. Though it is, and may properly be
called justice; yet it is so far from being either opposite to, or any thing
really distinct from kindness and goodness, that the parent would be less kind
and good than he is, if he did not punish. If any parent examines himself, upon
what principle he corrects his children, he will either find that it is this of
goodness, or else find reason to censure himself as having been actuated
therein by some impotent, irrational and unjustifiable passion; mere cruelty,
anger, resentment, or the like. And, indeed, the frail "fathers of our flesh,"
though in general kind and good, may yet sometimes have corrected us thus, "after
their own pleasure," or from a sudden, transient resentment, rather than with
any formal and possitive good design. In which case, they must needs censure
themselves upon reflection, as having acted unreasonably. So that in a good
parent, as was said before, there is no such quality as justice, really
distinct from goodness; not even in punishing: For it is goodness itself that
gives the blow.

(2.) THE case is the same in civil government. The most absolute sovereign on
earth, supposing him to be wise and good, makes no laws but such as he at least
thinks for the benefit of his subjects; whom he also considers as his children,
to be governed by him for their good. Neither does he inflict any punishments,
but what he considers as needful for the support of his government; -- if not
for the particular good of those that suffer, as in capital cases, yet for the
good of his people in general, by way of example and terror, that good order
may be preserved. So that even in this case of excision, or capital punishment,
the justice of the sovereign is no real quality in him, distinct from goodness.
It is goodness, or a regard to common good, that takes off the head of the
traitor, that hangs the robber or murderer, and that "punishes other
evildoers:" Without which, the sovereign would "bear the sword in vain;" i. e.
would not answer the good and important end of his bearing it, the preservation
of order, public good and happiness. I here is not the least color, in this
case, for supposing any distinction betwixt goodness and justice in the prince;
only as the former is a general principle, which comprehends the latter as one
particular mode of it. And the earthly prince, in the sense of all mankind,
degenerates into a tyrant, if he punishes his subjects for no better end, than
to gratify his own anger and resentment. This leads me to observe,

(3.) THAT truly wise and good parents and princes, always overlook or pardon
the faults of their children and subjects respectively, whenever they suppose
this may be done, as in some cases it may, consistently both with the good of
the offenders themselves, and of others; or both with private and common good.
In these cases, what wise and good parent, or sovereign prince of the same
character, thinks himself bound in justice to punish the transgressor? nay,
does not think himself obliged in reason to remit the fault, or to show
clemency? Would it not be apparently contrary to true goodness, in these
supposed cases, to punish for no good end, either with respect to the
delinquint himself or others? Would not this be, to give another pain and
sorrow merely for the sake of doing it? And what is this called amongst men,
but cruelty? which is in truth contrary both to goodness and justice. It being
therefore manifest, that in all wise and good earthly parents and sovereigns,
justice even in punishing, is only another name for goodness in one particular
view, or under a certain modification of it, instead of being either opposite
to, or any thing really distinct in nature from goodness itself: This, I say,
being evident and undeniable, I proceed to observe,

(4.) THAT the great and blessed God is pleased, in his word, to represent
himself to us very often under the character both of a Father and of a King.
For, There is One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all, says the apostle. "We are the Offspring of God," says the the
same apostle: And of Him the whole family in heaven and in earth is named. --
The title of King, is one of his usual titles in scripture. He is called
emphatically by our Savior, "the great King." He is styled the "King of
heaven," as well as "King "over all the earth." And in my context, the "glory
of his kingdom" is spoken of; which is an "everlasting kingdom."

(5.) THOUGH the analogy will not hold in all respects betwixt an earthly
parent or king, and our "Father who is in heaven," or that great "king
"eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God," who has "prepared his
throne in the heavens;" yet there can be no doubt in general, but that, when
these titles are given to God in his word, the design is, to represent him
under the character of the wisest and best Father, the wisest and best King;
not that of an unreasonable, unnatural, and cruel parent; not that of an unwise
and unreasonable, a cruel and unmerciful king. None can doubt of this.

(6.) WE may therefore conclude from hence, That that wisdom and goodness,
which are very imperfect in the best earthly parents and kings, are in
perfection in the blessed God. And that he governs his great family, his
universal kingdom, according to those general rules and maxims which are in
themselves most wise and good; such as the wisest and best kings govern by;
only, as was intimated before, in an infinitely more perfect manner. From
whence, I think, (though it does not become a mortal man to speak confidently in
such cases) that it follows,

(7.) THAT there is not really in the great and glorious God, any such
distinction betwixt goodness and justice, as has been objected against. For if
any earthly parent or king should act according to what that distinction
supposes, and so punish his children or subjects, not as goodness directs, or
without a positively good and valuable end, such parent or king would be
reckoned therein, neither wise nor good, nor even just, but unreasonable and
cruel. What ground is there then to imagine, that there is any such kind of
justice in God, distinct from, or rather opposite to goodness? Does reason
suggest any such thing? No. Do the holy scriptures assert or suppose it? No:
nothing like it. There is therefore, great reason to think, that this is a
distinction only of man's making. There can, I think, be no conceivable
fitness, propriety or congruity in inflicting punishment, independently of an
end to be answered thereby. Those terms, when used with reference to punishing
transgressors, suppose and refer to some end; otherwise they are
unintelligible. And this end must be either positively bad, or positively good:
For what is, in every respect, indifferent, can be no end worthy even of human,
much less of divine wisdom. And to say that the all-wise and good God, has a
bad or evil end in any thing which he does, were impious indeed! The conclusion
from which premises, is too obvious to need mentioning.

(8.) THAT God, our heavenly Father, chasteneth and punishes his children in
this world for their good, is evident from numberless passages in scripture.
And there is one which deserves a more particular attention here, on account of
the reference therein to the conduct of earthly parents, who sometimes correct
their children only for their own "pleasure:" Whereas God corrects his for
their "profit" -- Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth -- We have had fathers of
our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: Shall we not much
rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? For they verily
for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but He for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness -- Afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness. Heb. 12.6 -- 12.
No Man will deny, but that God is at once just and good in these chastenings.
Goodness and justice in him, therefore, are not to be considered as opposites:
They may, in all other cases without exception, be co-incident; the latter
being, perhaps, only a particular modification of the former, and tending to
positive good, at least the public or common.

(9.) SHALL we? -- can we really suppose, That He who is good to all, and whose
tender mercies are over all his works, ever punishes his creatures without any
good end, either with respect to themselves, or to the other members of his
household and kingdom? Would not this be in effect making his creatures
miserable, either for no end at all, or a positively bad and evil one? Would
not this be, what is always called unreasonable and cruel amongst men? To say
that the infinitely wise and good God, punishes any of his creatures merely for
his own glory, without any regard to the preservation of order and happiness,
and even contrary to the common good of those, to whom he was pleased to give
being, appears to me at best very irrational. For what glory could possibly
redound to any being by acting unreasonably, or contrary to the dictates of
true goodness? It is peculiarly absurd to suppose that He, who accounts
goodness his glory, should aim at advancing it by such a conduct!

(10.) THE great, blessed and glorious God, is indeed an absolute Sovereign: He
has an indisputable right as well as power, to dispose of all his creatures
according to his own pleasure. But it ought not to be inferred from hence, that
he is an arbitrary being, in that ill sense in which the word arbitrary is used
respecting tyrants; implying that they govern in an unreasonable, unjust and
cruel manner. Though God is, in the highest sense, an absolute sovereign; yet in
that ill sense, he is not certainly an arbitrary Being; and it were blasphemous
to think him so. The blessed God, though omnipotent, though over all, and not
accountable to any, yet exercises no power, no authority, but according to his
infinite wisdom and goodness. To act contrary to them, would be to "deny
himself," and to act contrary to his own glory instead of advancing it; which
are both impossible. So that the great and blessed God may, with the strictest
propriety, be styled, A sovereignly wise and good Being. If his power and
dominion, on one hand, are without bounds, without limits, his wisdom and
goodness are equally unbounded, unlimited, on the other; and no less essential
to him than existence itself. And let him that glories, says the most High,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which
exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth: for in these
things I delight, says the LORD. Jer. IX.24.


BUT I proceed to consider more particularly,

II. THE extent and perfection of the divine goodness, according to the
representation in the text: Wherein it is declared, that "the Lord is good to
"ALL," etc. And there are several observations to be made here, preparatory to
a distinct explanation of these words. The first is,

1. THAT the creatures and works of God, rational and irrational, animate and
inanimate, are exceeding numerous. How vast is the number and variety of them,
only in this lower world? How many different ranks and orders of living
creatures, exclusive of men, people this earth, air and water, from the
mountainous elephant, and enormous whale, down to the mite, too small to be
seen but by a borrowed microscopic eye? And how prodigiously numerous are the
individuals of almost every of these different species? But when we raise our
eyes and imaginations from this comparatively little globe, to the numerous and
stupendous world above and around us, to whose extent in space there are no
apparent limits, any more than to space itself; and when we reason analogically
from this to those, we may with great probability conclude, that they are also
peopled by a number and variety of creatures, proportionably greater than are
in our own. How astonishing? -- how surpassing imagination itself, then, must
their variety and number be! -- "O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom
have thou made them ALL!" -- Psalm. 104.24.


2. THE exercise of benevolence or goodness, in the strict notion of it,
supposes creatures that are at least sensitive and perceptive, though they may be
irrational. None besides such, are in nature capable of enjoying the divine
goodness, the effects of it, or of having goodness and mercy exercised toward
them. God cannot properly be said to be good or kind to the earth and water, or
to mere inanimate, lifeless, unperceiving matter.

3. On the other hand you will observe, that ALL such creatures as are endowed
either with reason, or a perceptive faculty only, in how low a degree soever,
are actually capable of happiness, or agreeable sensations. They are therefore
naturally capable objects of the divine goodness and mercy. I mean, it is
supposeable, or implies no natural impossibility, that all such creatures may
actually experience the effects of God's beneficence. As to the fact, I do not
at present concern myself with it: But it is manifest that the Creator and Lord
of all, may, without any inconsistency or absurdity, be supposed actually good
to all that are, by the nature which he has given them, rendered capable of
participating in the effects of his goodness.

4. OF those creatures that are capable of enjoyment or pleasure, some are
doubtless capable of it in far higher degrees than others. Some have
apparently, not only quicker senses, but more in number than others. Some are
but one little remove from lifeless, unsensed matter: And the capacity for
happiness in all, is probably in proportion to the number and quickness of
their senses, or perceptive faculties. It should be added here, that all the
inhabitants of this earth, men excepted, are apparently incapable of the
greatest and sublimest pleasures that we know of; those of reflection, moral
virtue, religion, the knowledge and love of God, and hope in him. These are
pleasures of a peculiar kind, belonging only to reasonable creatures.

5. FROM hence it follows, that though all are, in a degree, capable objects of
the divine beneficence; yet some may be so in a far higher and more eminent
sense than others. God may easily be conceived actually good to all, and yet
not equally so to all. Or rather, it is evident that he is not so; as certain,
almost, as it is, that he is actually good to any, in any degree.

6. GOD may properly be said to be good and merciful to all those, for whose
welfare he provides according to their respective natures and capacities,
however inferior. If these are upon the whole happy, or if those of an higher
order might be so, did they not abuse the divine goodness, God is certainly
good to them: And this, though a degree of pain should attend their enjoyments;
yea, though an end should be put to the existence of some of them so soon after
they began to be, that their term of life would be but as a moment. There is
real goodness and kindness shown them, even upon this supposition, however
little: For whatever any enjoy, be it more or less, it is from the mere
goodness of the Creator.

7. IT is supposeable, that in producing such a wonderful, and almost infinite
variety of worlds and creatures; -- creatures with such different capacities of
enjoyment, the infinitely wise Author of all, had a view to the general, common
good of his creation; and consequently, that this variety itself may contribute
thereto. Even we, who are so short-sighted, can in many cases clearly see how
variety, due subordination of parts, etc. actually contribute to the beauty,
perfection and real benefit of an whole, or what is considered as such. May not
then, the amazing variety observed in the one real whole, the UNIVERSE,
possibly tend to the beauty, advantage and perfection thereof? Or must we
conclude, that because we cannot particularly see and comprehend all the
relations and connexions of things throughout the universe, so as to perceive how
this variety in every instance actually contributes to the perfection thereof,
therefore HE that made it cannot, or did not design it for that end? A
presumptuous conclusion indeed!

8. THERE is positive and strong reason to think in general, that this is
actually the truth: And the manner of reasoning is such, -- so plain, that all
in general may easily perceive the force of it. The argument may be reduced to
a very few words, thus: -- This variety was not undesigned, or produced for no
end. Nor can it be supposed an indifferent thing in itself, whether it should
be, or not: No man of the least reflection can imagine so. If then, it was
neither undesigned, nor a matter of indifference in its own nature, it must
have been intended either for a positively wise and good, or a positively
unreasonable and malevolent end. There is no medium; this is the dilemma. To
say the latter, is nothing short of a blasphemous imputation of folly and
malevolence to the Creator. The former therefore, is even demonstratively the
truth; viz. That this almost infinite variety amongst the creatures of God, was
designed by him for, and therefore actually tends to, the ornament, perfection
and real good of the universe. -- And God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold, it was very good; superlatively, perfectly good.

9. THIS variety, order, and particular arrangement of the creatures and works
of God, being supposed in the whole "very good;" all such questions as these,
Why one was not made another? Why men were made men, rather than brutes or
angels? Or angels, angels, rather than either of the other? Why birds were not
made beasts, and beasts birds; and fishes were made fishes, instead of beasts
or fowls? Why the lowest individual of the lowest species, was not made the
highest of the highest; and vice versa, the highest, not the lowest? -- All
such queries, I say, carry their own futility and self-repugnance in their very
face. They imply a plain contradiction, as much as it would be to ask, Why
Noah's dove was not originally made the ocean, the moon or a comet? Or, Why the
sun that now lightens the heavens, was not made a glowworm? -- Is it not
plainly impossible, that a dove should have been an ocean, a moon or comet; or
the sun a glowworm! And is it not equally impossible, that men should have
been angels, or angels men, etc? There is, therefore, as much folly as impiety,
in the thing formed saying to Him that formed it, Why have thou made ME thus?

10. ALTHOUGH such creatures as are in their natures capable of pleasure, are
alone capable objects of the divine beneficence, strictly speaking; yet the
goodness of God may be made manifest in and by all his other works in general;
-- though inanimate and senseless. Thus the earth, the sea and this lower air,
with all that is therein, may serve to manifest the goodness and mercy of the
Creator, while the heavens declare his glory.

THESE things being premised, we may now proceed to a more particular
consideration of the text. And the doctrine of the inspired Psalmist here,
comprehends the following particulars; viz.

FIRST, That the Lord of all is actually good and kind to all the different
ranks, orders or species of his intelligent and sensitive creatures; all the
species that are capable of happiness, in whatever degree.

SECONDLY, That he is likewise good and kind to all the individuals of which
these species consist.

THIRDLY, That all his other works in general, though incapable of enjoying his
goodness and mercy, or the effects of them, yet serve for the manifestation
thereof. And,

FOURTHLY, That God is therefore an absolutely, a perfectly good and merciful
Being, or good in the highest conceiveable sense.

THESE propositions are very fairly contained in the general doctrine, or
assertion of the text; That the Lord is good to ALL, and his tender mercies
OVER ALL his works. Accordingly, I propose to consider and illustrate these
points, rather as being the express doctrine of revelation, and to be believed
on the authority thereof, than as things which are demonstrable by natural
reason, observation and experience. For though this is in general a most rational
doctrine, for the proof whereof, arguments of the latter kind are not wanting,
some of which may be briefly hinted at; yet a proper discussion of it in this
way, would require many discourses, and such a kind of reasoning also, as is
not so convenient for the pulpit.

To return then:

FIRST, The Lord of all is actually good and kind to all the different ranks,
orders or species of his intelligent and sensitive creatures; all the species
that are capable of happiness, in whatever degree That God is good to angels,
is doubted by none; and, that he is good and merciful to mankind, is, in words,
allowed by all. The principal design of the holy scriptures, is indeed to show
the "riches of his goodness" to the children of men; especially in their
redemption by his Son. He is good to the beasts of the field and forest, to the
fowls of the air, to the fish of the sea, to all the species of reptiles, to
every kind of insects, the most inferior not excepted; such as shun the naked
eye. All these he upholds in the being which he gave. He preserves the
respective orders distinct, from age to age. He makes suitable provision for
them all, and opens to them his stores. The holy scriptures, particularly the
book of Job, of Psalms, and the writings of Solomon, abound with reflections
upon the provision which the Author of nature has made, for the subsistence and
comfort of the animal and sensitive creation. The 104th Psalm, which is a
pretty long one, is chiefly taken up with reflections of this kind. The beasts,
fowls and fishes a e particularly mentioned as the objects of God's
providential care: These wait all upon thee, says the Psalmist, that thou
may give them their meat in due season -- Thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good. Psalm. 104.27, 28.
So in my context (ver. 15 and 16.) The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou
give them their meat in due season Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest
the desire of every living thing Many sorts of beasts, fish and foul, and even
more insignificant creatures are particularly instanced in, in the holy
scriptures, as examples of God's universal care, and objects of his kindness:
Whales, oxen, sheep, horses, the ostritch, stork, etc. And our Savior himself
disdains not to speak more than once, of the goodness of God to "ravens" and
"sparrows."

IF there are other planets or worlds inhabited, we may be certain that God
takes a similar care of the various orders of creatures in them, answerable to
their respective natures and wants. It were highly irrational to suppose, that
He has made any one species of creatures, capable of sensation in any degree,
and then neglected it as below his providen ial care. All kinds of living
creatures that we know of, manifest the wonderful wisdom of the Creator in
their frame and structure. And if he thought proper to exercise such a truly
divine art in the formation of them, surely he would not leave them unprovided
for, and so, to unavoidable misery, when formed. Nothing, no species, surely,
which God has created, is too insignificant for God to take care of. And how
could it be said with any propriety, that his tender mercies are over all his
works, if any one whole species were neglected and abandoned by him?

BUT is it only the various species, that God is good and kind to? -- not the
particulars of which they consist? That would be strange indeed! And this
brings us to the second thing implied in the text; viz.

SECONDLY, That God is likewise good and kind to all the individuals of which
these species consist. Every whole being made up of parts, and every species
consisting of individuals only; it is not very easy for common sense to
conceive how an whole, or a species can be kindly provided for by the God of
all, as some have supposed, Ld. Bolinbroke, etc.
and yet the parts, the individuals, be disregarded and neglected by him. Is
God the maker of the species only, not of the individuals? That were a very
mysterious position; a curious discovery to match the other! Indeed, they must
needs go together. For if God is supposed to be the maker of the individuals,
it follows as undeniably from hence, that he will take care of individuals, as
it does from his creating the species, that he take care of the species. The
reasoning that will hold with respect to one, will hold equally with respect to
the other: If it fails in one, it will fail in the other also. And, as was
hinted before, if individuals are neglected or overlooked, it is plain that the
species themsevlves are not provided for, unless the species can be preserved,
when all the individuals are left to perish! A providential care of the
species, evidently involves the like care of the individuals thereof; at least
of some of them. And if God takes care of some, why not of all? Is this too
laborious a task for Him that is at once omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent?

BUT how can God be said to be good to all? -- how could it be affirmed, that
his tender mercies are over all his works, if there were some of his creatures,
his works, originally unprovided for? To say that this means only all the
species of creatures, but not the individuals, is taking an unnatural and
unwarrantable liberty with the holy scriptures, besides the absurdity of the
very supposition itself, and the setting of bounds and limits to the divine
goodness. Nay, would not this be to suppose God positively cruel to some of his
creatures? There is no medium betwixt his being actually kind and merciful to
all, and his being positively cruel and unmerciful to some. For, please to
consider, that when God makes creatures capable of happiness and misery, in
whatever degree; if he does not also make provision for their comfortable
subsistence, and take a kind care of them, he of consequence dooms them to
inevitable pain and misery, even without any fault of theirs; since if a
creature is actually made, and preserved in a state of sensibility, it must be
either in a degree of pleasure or pain. If it be not the former, it must of
course be the latter. And, upon the present supposition, this is wholly owing
to God's not making that provision for the creature, which was absolutely
necessary for its well-being, according to the nature given it by himself. Now,
let some very acute distinguisher show the difference betwixt this and positive
cruelty: It would be in vain for an ordinary genius to attempt it. And when any
One has fairly made out this distinction, he will probably be able to reconcile
such a conduct in the Creator, with the express doctrine of scripture, that he
" satisfies the desire of every living thing." But

IT will perhaps be said, that the universal terms all, every, and the like,
are sometimes used in a restrained, limited sense: And that there are plain
reasons for, and an absolute necessity of, understanding them in this limited
sense in many places of scripture. This is granted: But then, they ought never
to be thus limited, but understood in their proper, natural and unconfined
sense, unless there is positive reason, or some real necessity for such a
limitation of them. Let any One who thinks it reasonable and necessary to limit
the goodness and mercy of his Creator, show it to be actually so, and I will
then acknowledge the reasonableness and necessity of limiting the signification
of those universal terms, in which he is declared to be good and merciful to
all, to every living thing. For unless you can prove the former, it is
impossible you should ever be able to prove the latter. Limiting the sense of
these terms in the present case, is plainly limiting and setting bounds to that
goodness, which is declared in and by them to be unlimited in its extent.
Neither will any man, who really believes God to be good to all, ever desire to
find out any reason for putting a restrained sense upon the term all in the
text.

BUT let us, for a few minutes, take it for granted that all, here, does not
literally mean all, or every individual; but that there are some individuals of
every species, to which God is NOT good; -- some of his works, over which his
mercy is NOT extended. How many then, of each species, shall we suppose in this
situation; -- thus forgotten or neglected by him that made them?

LET us, for example, suppose one half of every species, thus abandoned by the
"God and Father of all." I ask then, Whether all these individuals, to which
God is not good and merciful, must not inevitably be wretched; each of them
being left destitute of a proper supply to its natural wants? No One can doubt
of this. All, for whose well-being God makes no provision, must of course be
miserable: For who besides Him can provide for them? I ask, in the next place,
Whether this supposition is consistent with the spirit, and manifest design of
the text, even though the term all, twice used therein, did not literally intend
every individual? I ask, in the next place, Whether the supposition, that one
half of every species are thus abandoned to unavoidable misery by their
Creator, is consistent with his acknowledged general character, as a good and
merciful Being? Is not this supposition highly, and very obviously repugnant to
that character; and therefore, to the honor of God? It may be again demanded,
Whether they who think this to be the truth (if any such there are) do not, in
effect, unite in their imaginations the two independent and opposite principles
of the Manichaeans, the one good, the other evil, into one self-contradictory
being, whom they call, and whom they worship under the name of, the "One God
and Father of all!" -- Let me ask once more, Whether this supposition of one
half of every species thus abandoned, be not a very moderate and modest
supposition, according to the representations which some persons have given of
God's conduct toward one of the most considerable species that we have any
particular knowledge of?

BUT you will allow, perhaps, that the supposition of one half, is too large;
that it is not agreeable to the text, to reason, or to the general idea of God
as a good, kind and merciful being -- " Half is, indeed, too many, and shocks
the mind at once!" -- I understand you well. Instead of saying one half then,
we will say only, one quarter. Will this supposition stand the test? What! One
quarter part of every species, both of sensitive and rational creatures,
abandoned thus to inevitable misery by their Creator; and yet this same Creator
declared in his own holy word, to be good to all! -- A quarter of all God's
creatures of every kind and order, are a great many, surely, to be thus cast
off and forsaken by Him, whose tender mercies are said to be over all his
works! -- If you consider, and recollect yourselves, I believe you will think
the number still somewhat too large -- What! a quarter part of the whole! But
if you will not yet give this up, let me vary the language of the text a
little, and paraphrase it so as precisely to express your sense of it, thus --
The Lord is good to three quarters of his creatures, and his tender mercies are
over three quarters of all his works: But to the other quarter he is not good,
kind or merciful; but leaves them to unavoidable misery and destruction. --
Will you allow this to be a natural praraphrase, or to give the genuine sense
of the text? -- No: it sounds harshly; and seems too much to limit the divine
goodness:

WELL then, let us suppose only a tenth, twentieth, fiftieth, hundredth, or, to
cut the matter still shorter, only one thousandth part of the whole rational
and sensitive creation, doomed to inevitable misery in the manner before
expressed -- Will you abide by this? Will you abate nothing of it? -- When you
consider the innumerable millions of creatures, many of them rational ones,
that must, even on this supposition, be wretched, does it sit easy upon your
minds? -- Is not the number, in the whole, too large still? -- A thousandth
part of all, of every species, in all worlds; -- probably enough to people
thousands of such worlds as this! -- How can that be; and yet God be an
exceeding good, kind and merciful being? I am persuaded that, upon reflection,
you will not stand to this.

SUPPOSE then, but ten individuals, or five, nay, two only of every species,
nay, but one; yet these must amount to a vast number. For the number of the
species even in this little globe, is great; how prodigious then, must it
probably be in all worlds taken collectively? And will not one individual of
each of them, amount in the whole to too great a number to be thus doomed to
unavoidable misery, by Him who gave them being? Is even this consistent with
his acknowledged general character as a good and merciful Being? If you think
soberly and impartially, you will choose rather to lessen the number still, than
to defend this supposition.

WELL then, suppose but a single individual of one species -- Only let that be
a reasonable creature, capable by nature of knowing and enjoying God eternally,
whom he never displeased by any act of his! -- No -- It shall be but an
irrational creature, and that of the very lowest, the most inferior species,
that is thus doomed to all the pain which it is in its nature capable of
enduring. -- And can you seriously think that the Creator and "Father of all,"
has pitched upon this poor mite, to make the existence which himself gave,
wretched! Why? sin it could not: And is it agreeable to wisdom, goodness and
mercy, to make an innocent creature miserable through the whole term of its
existence, whether longer or shorter? -- If you are resolved to defend even
this lowest of all suppositions which the nature of the question admits, you
should, I think, paraphrase the text thus -- The Lord is good to all but one,
and his tender mercies are over all his works, excepting a single insignificant
creature, which either escapes his notice, or at which he is angry, and so
makes it miserable, though it neither has, nor is capable of offending Him How do
you like this paraphrase? You must needs adopt one to this purpose, if you
oppose what I am endeavoring to establish; -- the universal goodness and mercy
of God, in the highest and most literal sense of the terms "all," and "every
living thing," used in scripture with express reference to the extent of his
goodness.

OUR Lord Jesus Christ speaking of those sparrows, "five of which were sold for
two farthings," says that " not one of them is forgotten before God." Lk. u
12.6.
This may doubtless be said with equal truth, even of creatures inferior to
sparrows. And One need not scruple to say, that the supposition of any of them
being forgotten, forsaken and abandoned by him, in the sense so often
mentioned, is dishonorable to God; an unworthy imputation upon his wisdom,
goodness, mercy, and his providential care respecting a creature which he
thought proper to call into existence. So that though some things and creatures,
of which I have been speaking, are in one view, indeed, very inconsiderable;
yet the end pursued all along is of the last importance But if it would be
dishonorable to God, to charge him with treating only one of the most inferior
of his creatures in such a manner, what shall we think of that doctrine, which
represents him as treating millions of millions of his rational creatures after
the same manner! -- or rather, after a manner almost infinitely harder to be
reconciled with wisdom, goodness and mercy! -- I will not say, what ought to be
thought of it; but leave it to your calm and serious reflections. To proceed,

THIRDLY, All God's other works in general, though incapable of enjoying his
goodness and mercy, or the effects of them, yet serve for the manifestation
thereof. In agreement hereto, by those words, "all his works," we may fairly
understand, not only his reasonable and sensitive creatures, but all his other
works without exception. As if it had been said, that God is not only kind to
all his creatures that are capable objects of his kindness, but has left the
vestiges, the marks, and plain indications of his goodness, even of his tender
mercies, impressed upon all parts of the creation; all things being adapted to
answer benevolent purposes respecting the creatures that are capable of
enjoying good. This is no harsh construction of the words: But whether it is
just or not, in point of criticism, it is undoubtedly true; and this sentiment
corresponds to what is declared in many other places of scripture. "God saw
every thing that he had made; and behold, it was very good." All his works are,
accordingly, said to be made by him in wisdom, to praise him, and the like.
Such passages must be supposed to have some reference to the goodness of God's
inanimate works, considered with relation to his reasonable and sensitive
creatures, to whose pleasure and use they are adapted; either by affording
subsistence to them, or pleasing the eye, ear and imagination; or being really
beneficial in some other respect. It is not easiy to conceive, why they should
be called "very good," or said to "praise him," but upon the supposition of
their being wisely and kindly adapted to afford subsistence, pleasure and
delight to creatures capable of enjoyment.

IT is indeed evident to sense and reason, that the whole visible creation is
the work of a good and merciful Being, not merely of a most intelligent and
powerful One. The structure, the admirable order and adjustment of the various
parts, nothing superfluous, nothing wanting, from whence results the harmony
and beauty of the whole, prove the former as certainly as they do the latter;
loudly proclaiming at once the power, wisdom and goodness of the adoreable
Creator. The air, heavens, earth and sea, besides affording habitation and
subsistence to so many millions of other creatures, are all adapted in some
degree at least, to the use and delight of man in particular. Here are hamony
to ravish his ear, beauty to feast his eye, grateful odors to regale his nose,
delicious fruits, liquors, etc. to gratify almost all his senses at once. So
that ample provision is made, not only for his necessary support, but his
pleasure and delight also, within the bounds of reason, or a virtuous
moderation. And if nature, or rather its Author, sends diseases, he also sends
remedies: Nor are there fewer antidotes than poisons in the natural world; though
there is, indeed, now no "tree of life" to be seen therein, of which we may
"eat, and live forever" here. But wisdom is a tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her; -- even immortally
happy through the second ADAM, the Lord from heaven, who has abolished death,
and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. -- But not to
digress. -- There is no one sense, natural appetite or want, either in man, or
in the other inferior inhabitants of the earth, but the beneficent Author of
all, has made provision for the regular gratification and supply thereof. Every
visible object in the natural world, has a beneficent end; if not with relation
to man, yet with respect to the other creatures; not one of which is below the
care of, or "forgotten beforeGod." Even the extended barren sands and deserts
in some parts of the earth, the equally barren rocks and promontories in
others, and the inaccessible precipices, mountains and wildernesses in others,
have their good and merciful ends, or uses. They serve at least for shelter,
and a secure retreat to the fowls of heaven, where they may hatch and nurse
their young: And also for four-footed beasts, and creeping things, lest their
species should, perhaps, be otherwise destroyed by MAN, that "mighty hunter
before the Lord."

THE benevolent uses and ends of almost all parts of the visible creation, are
very obvious. And as to those particular things, the final causes, or good ends
whereof lie less open to common view; the more attentively they are examined,
and the better understood, the more clearly do they manifest both the wisdom
and goodness of God; showing that the "earth is (indeed) full of his riches,"
while the heavens proclaim his glory. In which view particularly, the writings
of King David, Solomon, and many other men of philosophic, comtemplative minds,
are of singular advantage, and redound greatly to the honor of God. The works
of the Lord are great, sought out of all those that have pleasure therein. His
work is honorable and glorious, and his RIGHTEOUSNESS endures for ever. He
has made his wonderful works to be remembered. Psalm III.
The works of God, as has been intimated before, are honorable, and declare
his glory more especially, considered as "good," and as having his "tender
mercies" manifested in and by them. Yea, it may be questioned whether they are
truly glorious at all, considered merely as the effects of great knowledge and
power, or without any relation to benevolent ends. Certainly, no One could
think the works of a malevolent or unmerciful being, tended to his praise and
honor, whatever art, contrivance and power appeared in them. This art,
contrivance and power, being applied to evil and malicious purposes, would be
rather a proper ground for reproaches and execrations, than for such praise and
glory as are justly due to the ever-blessed God, who is good to all, and whose
ten-mercies are "over all his works."

FOURTHLY, God is therefore an absolutely, a perfectly good and merciful Being;
or good in the highest conceivable sense. This follows evidently from the text,
and what has been discoursed upon it. According to this character of him and
his works, goodness and mercy are the most pre-eminent, the most distingushed
attributes of God: For his unsearchable wisdom and infinite power, if One may
so express it, are but the ministers of his infinite goodness, being wholly
employed to accomplish his good and gracious purposes respecting his creatures.
Accordingly, the construction which some learned men have put upon the latter
part of the text, is this, that God's tender mercies are above all his other
works, or the most conspicuous, great and excellent. However the critics may
settle this point, still the important conclusion is equally obvious and
certain; That God is absolutely, universally and perfectly good. It is
accordingly said of him, by One that came down from heaven to declare and make
him known to the inhabitants of the earth, that there is "none good but ONE,
that is GOD." Agreeably whereto St. John says, "God is LOVE:" Words which
express, in the strongest and most emphatical manner, his essential, boundless
and perfect goodness. And it is worthy of particular remark, that though God is
infinitely wise and powerful, etc. as well as good, yet he is never styled in
scripture, wisdom or power in the abstract, as he is here styled LOVE. Perfect
goodness, love itself, is his very essence, in a peculiar sense; immeasurable,
immutable, universal and everlasting LOVE. And nothing that is in any manner or
degree inconsistent with such love, has any place in God: For "God is light,
and in him there is no darkness at all." 1 John I.5.


To me it seems at once impious and absurd, as involving a contradiction, to
suppose that we can even conceive, or have any idea of, a goodness and mercy
more consummate, more perfect than any which actually exists in nature, or the
God of nature. From whence should this idea, this conception of absolute,
perfect and unchangeable goodness come? Or how could we have it, any more than
these of unbounded space, and of time without beginning, i. e. of immensity and
eternity, if there were in nature no such thing? In these cases, there
doubtless is, and must be, something which answers to the ideas; at least, our
mental conceptions, the copies, cannot surpass and exceed, cannot be greater or
more perfect than any existing original.

GOD being supposed all-knowing, independent and almighty, the absolute
perfection of his goodness may be deduced from hence, together with all moral
qualities in the highest possible degree. Such a Being must know what is in
itself good, as an END, viz. happiness; and also know whatever is right and
reasonable, excellent and glorious: Which may all be comprehended in doing
good. He must also know all the possible means, or ways of doing it; and, which
are the best, properest, and most effectual; so as to be subject to no mistake
or error. Moreover; being independent and all-powerful, he cannot be under any
wrong bias, or have any difficulties to discourage him in pursuing what is
right; -- any end truly great, noble and excellent. From these premises, which
I do but hint at, it follows undeniably, that such an all knowing, independent
and infinitely powerful being, must also be infinitely, perfectly good. The
fitness and reasonableness of being so, would undoubtedly determine him to be
so. By which last expression, I am far from designing to suggest, either that
there was a time when God was not good, or that he might possibly have been
otherwise. I mean the direct contrary in both respects, viz. that as this
fitness was eternally seen, God was eternally good; and as he saw it
necessarily, he was as necessarily good; and yet not contrary to his own will
or choice, which were a contradiction; but in conformity thereto, even from
eternity. For nothing was prior, not even the existence of God, to his will to
be good; or, in other words, to his goodness: For these are the same thing in
the ever-glorious God.

BESIDES: If God is allowed to be now good in any degree, it will from hence
follow demonstrably, that he is eternally and necessarily, universally and
perfectly so; essentially and equally good in all times and places. Nothing is
now a property in God, which was not so from eternity. If he had ever been
destitute of goodness, whence should it be derived to him? He must have
eternally remained destitute of it, unless you suppose some other being greater
and better than Him, "of whom are all things," to communicate an excellency to
him, which he originally wanted in himself! -- God was, therefore, both
eternally and independently good. And if so, then necessarily. For there was
not a prossibility of that which is eternal, underived and independent, being
otherwise than it is. The supposition that it might have been otherwise, would
involve the absurdity of supposing something prior to eternity, able to make it
otherwise: So that it would be, strictly, neither eternal nor independent, though
it is supposed to be both. God is therefore eternally, independently and
necessarily good, at least in some degree. And if in any degree, then
absolutely, infinitely and perfectly good. For whatever is necessary in God, is
essential to him, or a part of his very nature: And God being himself infinite,
or unlimited, all his properties or attributes must be so likewise; since it
would be a repugnancy, to suppose finite and limited essential qualities in a
Being, who is himself necessarily infinite. God is then, not only eternally,
necessarily and essentially, but infinitely or perfectly good. And if so, then
equally, universally and immutably good in all times and places. For it were a
contradiction to suppose what is eternal, necessary, essential, infinite and
perfect in God, to be various or changeable; -- different in one time or place,
from what it is in all others. Such variety, such mutability and
changeableness, are demonstrations of a temporary, precarious, dependent,
unnecessary, finite and imperfect nature. -- Thus it follows from God's being
now in any degree good, that he is eternally, necessarily, essentially,
universally, perfectly, invariably and immutably good.

THAT the appearances, or manifestations of divine goodness, are various and
manifold in different times and places, is not the least objection against the
absolute perfection and sameness of that goodness itself, in all others. This
is no more than the natural, necessary consequence of perfect goodness, in
calling such a wonderful variety of creatures into existence; who, if they
exist at all, must exist in certain particular times and places. And the
external manifestations of God's goodness, must be just as various as the
creatures which he has made to partake of it. Which latter variety among the
creatures being positively good, right and best, the former variety in the
appearances of goodness, are so likewise; instead of being any sort of
objection against the universality, perfection or unchangeableness thereof. The
manifestations of divine power and wisdom, are also different in different
times and places. And yet no one is so absurd as to infer from hence, that God
is not essentially and equally, perfectly and invariably wise and powerful in
all others: Though the inference would be altogether as justly drawn in the
latter cases, as in the former: Or rather, in both it would be wholly
groundless and irrational.

LEAVING the particular objections that were to be taken notice of, and the
proposed reflections upon this subject to the afternoon; I shall beg leave to
conclude this discourse with two or three short remarks. And,

1. THOUGH it is demonstrably certain upon principles reason, that God is
perfectly good and merciful; yet, whatever sinful creatures might imagine, they
could not, without an express revelation from heaven, know that God would
certainly pardon their sins on repentance. This might seem probable; but it
could not be entirely depended on, to the exclusion of doubt, and all just
cause for uneasy apprehensions. The reason is, that punitive justice is a
branch of goodness, in such sort that a perfectly good and merciful being may
in money cases be obliged to punish transgressors, in pursuance of his general
benevolent designs toward his creatures; for the support of order, right, etc.
on which the common good essentially depends. And how should a vicious man,
especially One who has been so to a great degree, know, upon principles of
reason only, that he is not himself One of those whom it is, in this view,
necessary for an infinitely wise and good God to punish, for a terror and
warning to others? None butGod himself, who knows all things, certainly
knows who may, or may not be pardoned, consistently with the eternal rule of
right, of wisdom and goodness; and under what particular circumstances. The
light of nature leaves us more at a loss respecting this matter, than his own
reason leaves a common mechanic, (who is quite ignorant about affairs of state
and policy) whether his Prince should, in pursuance of the public good, pardon
a rebel, or strike off his head. A man may, indeed, very probably leap to this
comfortable conclusion, that he himself is One of those who may, and certainly
shall be, forgiven of God. Pride, self-love and mere vanity, may buoy up his
hopes, and preserve him from any great concern about futurity. But if he goes
no faster nor farther than reason, or the light of nature actually leads him,
he must at best be left (like an half-founder'd vessel) to be tossed upon the
billows of anxious doubt and uncertainty, if not to sink into the abyss of an
horrible despair!

2. ONE principal end of Jesus Christ's coming into this apostate world, was to
proclaim the glad tidings of pardon and eternal life to sinners, as the free
gift of God through his mediation; particularly through the atonement to be made by
his blood, when he should "offer himself up to God, as a lamb without blemish
and without spot": Thereby supporting the honor of God's violated
commandments, and the dignity of his government; in such sort, that guilty
creatures might receive the forgiveness of sins and eternal life, in a way the
most agreeable to infinite wisdom; and therefore really more agreeable to
infinite goodness and mercy also, than if they had been pardoned and saved
without any intervening sacrifice for sin. Thus, by the christian revelation,
-- a light indeed from heaven, sinful men are delivered from that state of
darkness and perplexity respecting pardon and a future state, in which the mere
light of nature actually leaves them. In this dispensation of grace, the
goodness of God to, and his tender mercies over the sinful children of men, are
most clearly and gloriously manifested. It is both a faithful saying, my
brethren, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world
to save even the chief of sinners. Take heed therefore, that ye receive not the
grace of God in vain; for he is not willing that "ANY should perish, but that
ALL should come to repentance."

3. IT is greatly to be lamented, that this gospel of the kingdom, -- the glad
tidings of great joy to all people; so full of heavenly peace, comfort and
hope, and such a wonderful manifestation of the love of God to mankind: It is
much to be lamented, I say, that this "glorious gospel of the blessed God,"
should be so perverted by many; so restrained as to the number of those, for
whose salvation it was designed; so narrowed, so clogged with needless
difficulties and unscriptural mysteries, by dark systems of divinity produced
in dark and corrupt ages, as to become rather an engine for disturbing truly
pious and good christians with doubts and fears, than to be an adequate relief
to awakened sinners, by really manifesting the riches of God's goodness to a
guilty world in its proper extent, through Him that gave himself a RANSOM FOR
ALL, to be testified in due time. 1 Timothy II.6.
And I seriously declare, that if I were to form my conceptions of God's moral
character, by such discourses as I have sometimes heard and read, and such as
were, by many, thought to be truly evangelical; instead of thinking Him really
"good to ALL, and his tender mercies over ALL his works;" -- essentially good,
and infinitely the best of Beings, I could not but conclude Him to be
infinitely more unjust and cruel, than any other being in the universe!

To conclude: It is to hoped that the blessed God, the Father of all, has no
children here before him, so depraved as to suspect that I have extolled his
goodness too much, or represented him better than he is! -- O that I could
praise him more! For "who can show forth all his praise!" Psalm 106.2.
-- But if there are any persons so degenerate, as to think their Father in
heaven too much honored; instead of telling them, there is another title
better adapted to persons of such a depraved mind, than that of Sons, I must
again refer them to my TEXT, to the apostle John, to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the holy scriptures in general. I have said nothing, as to the extent and
perfection of God's goodness, but what I first learnt from them; nothing more
than God has revealed as truth. And if it is truth at all, it is certainly most
interesting, important truth; to be known, and joyfully received by all, to the
glory of God; at once to show men what sentiments, dispositions and affections,
ought to possess their hearts with relation to Him, and to form their temper
and behavior toward others -- Thus shall ye be, indeed, the children of the
HIGHEST; for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil. Be ye therefore
merciful, as your FATHER also is merciful. Luke 6. Chap.


The end of the first Sermon.
SERMON II. Some Objections against the Goodness of GOD considered; and the
Subject applied to the Occasion, with practical Inferences and Reflections.
PSALM CXLV.9. THE LORD is good to ALL; and his tender Mercies are over ALL his
Works.


THE first thing proposed in handling this important subject, was,

Is It. To make some observations on the goodness of GOD in general: And the

IId. To consider the extent and perfection of it, according to the
representation in the text: Wherein the LORD is declared to be "GOOD to ALL,"
etc.

THESE things were done in the morning. I proceed therefore, by divine
assistance, without repeating any thing said under these two heads, to the
third proposed; viz.

IIIdly. To take a cursory notice of some of the principal objections against
the divine goodness.

HOWEVER demonstrable it may be from certain known and acknowledged principles,
that the great and glorious God is perfectly good; or how frequently and
clearly soever it may be declared in the holy scriptures, that he is thus good;
yet it cannot be denied, that there are many things, both in the visible world,
and in the scriptures themselves, which may, at first view at least, have the
appearance of considerable objections against it. This is not, indeed, a proper
occasion for entering very minutely into such matters as these. There is not
time for it, if One were so disposed. But yet it might, perhaps, be thought a
material omission, if I passed over ALL the difficulties that occur with
reference to what is asserted in the text, in total silence. And the present
season of the year December.
itself, suggests one objection; with which I shall therefore begin.

1. SOME have found fault with the constitution of the world, or that course of
nature which subjects the inhabitants of this earth, both man and beast, to the
extremes of heat and cold. A great part of the year, it is said, we are half
frozen; and another considerable part of the year, we are parched with
excessive heat. Is not this a great infelicity? And how came such a course of
nature to be established, if the Author of it is "good to all,"? etc.

LET it be here briefly observed,

THAT if this is any real fault or defect, it might be attributed as properly
to a want either of wisdom or of power, as of goodness. Why should it be
imputed rather to a defect of the latter, than of either of the former, in the
Author of nature? But,

THE objection does, in effect, amount to no more than this: That we are not
placed in so agreeable a situation, or in so delightful a world, as we may
ourselves imagine and desire. Which, though true, is not a more solid objection
against the goodness of God, than that we are not angels instead of men, and
were not originally placed in heaven instead of earth; or that there is variety
inGod's works. That this variety is the consequence of his being infinitely
wise and good, and therefore no objection against either, was observed in the
foregoing discourse. And if that which falls to our lot, is not the most
agreeable situation of any; yet, surely, we had not originally any right to a
better. See the 7th, 8th and 9th observations in the preceding discourse, p.
29, etc.


GOD mercifully provides us fuel and clothing to defend us from the frosts of
winter, and rains and breezes to refresh us in the heats of summer; thereby
mitigating the severity, and the supposed inconvenience of these alternate
extremes. Besides; this vicissitude in the seasons, the gradual changes from
one to the other, are in some respects very agreeable. This is a pleasing
variety. According to my own taste at least, it is much more grateful than any
one constant, uniform, unvaried temperature of the air would be. This variety
is probably much best upon the whole, even for those that complain of it.
Naturalists and learned Physicians have made it appear beyond doubt, that these
vicissitudes in the seasons contribute very much, upon the whole, to the
health, strength and vigor of mankind, and other terrestrial animals; and, at
the same time, to the promoting of vegetation, and the increase of those
fruits, etc. which are needed for their subsistence. Moreover:

BY means of that particular oblique position of the earth's axis, from whence,
in her annual course, this variety in the seasons proceeds, a large proportion
of the earth is rendered habitable, comfortable and fruitful, which would
otherwise be absolutely uninhabitable, barren and desolate. If the sun, to
speak according to the appearance, did not depart from the equinox, and
alternately pay a friendly visit toward the two poles, a much greater part of
the earth about and toward them, would be uninhabitable by excessive cold; and
the course of vegetation would be entirely stopped. At the same time, that part
of the earth under and about the equator, would be rendered equally
uninhabitable and barren, by the sun's constantly beating upon it: And, as some
have computed, at least five sixths of the whole globe Vid. Dr. CHEYNE's Phil.
Prin. of Relig. Chapter V. Sect. 25 and 26. Where there are many curious
observations on the seasons.
would, by this means, have been entirely useless. There would not have been
provision made for so many men, and other animals, by many millions, yea
millions of millions, if God had placed the earth, and given it such a
direction, as some persons in their presumtuous solly would have had him done,
to preserve them from the imaginary inconvenience of the seasons! These
reflections on them are, I think, sufficient, not only to reconcile us both to
summer and winter, but to give us exalted ideas of the infinite wisdom and
goodness of God in these vicissitudes of nature.

2. ONE might here naturally take occasion to speak of storms, tempests,
droughts, pestilence, earthquakes, and some other phenomenon in the natural
world, which some persons may consider as objections against the goodness of
God. But I must only observe in general, that some of the foregoing remarks on
the seasons, are equally applicable to these other appearances. If they render
life less secure and comfortable; yet it must be remembered that God, though
infinite in goodness, is not obliged to put all his creatures into situations
equally desirable; especially sinful creatures. Nay, infinite wisdom and
goodness require the contrary. But some of the things abovementioned, evidently
contribute, in their places, to the perfection of the natural world. Others of
them are adapted to answer the most important moral ends, considering the
nature of man, who needs to have his attention frequently roused to religious
and moral subjects. And if there are any of those things, as I am far from
thinking there are, which are not positively beneficial in either of these
ways; yet they at least proceed from such general laws of nature, as are upon
the whole most wise, good and excellent; and which could not, probably, be
broken in upon, or suspended in their operations, without great detriment,
perhaps destruction to the world.

3. IT may be objected, that there are many poisonous, and other noxious
vegetables and animals. But,

THERE are also many natural means of preservation from, and remedies of, these
supposed evils. And most things that have certain poisonous qualities, being
properly prepared by the art of the physician and chimist, are themselves the
best antidotes and remedies that are known in nature.

AS to those animals that are troublesome and noxious to mankind, they may yet
enjoy pleasure in life themselves: And who told us, that they ought to be
wholly subservient to the happiness of man! Besides; mankind, in the present
state, actually need trials and afflictions, as a means of promoting their
moral good, and future happiness. There is no doubt, but that this is one end
which the infinitely wise and good Creator has, in the production and
preservation of such animals. It seems probable, from some passages of
scripture, that had mankind persevered in their original innocence, as they
would not have needed such afflictions, so neither would they have had them;
the nature of the inferior creatures before the fall, having been different in
some respects from what it has been since. Nor is it an impossible supposition,
whatever a false, minute and spurious philosophy may suggest, that at the time
of the restitution [or renovation] of all things, spoken of by the mouth of all
the prophets since the world began, Acts III.21.
these mischievous and noxious creatures may cease to be such. -- The wolf also
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: And the
calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall
lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down
together: And the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall
play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: For
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the
sea. Isai. XI.6 -- 9.


4. WHAT has just now been said, naturally brings to mind another objection.
How many millions of the inferior creatures on the earth, in the air and water,
seem to live and die in a miserable manner, preying continually on one another;
while all of them are, in some degree, the prey of man, who though so much less
and weaker than many of them, yet out-wits, and so plays the tyrant over them
all? How does it consist with the goodness of God, to make such creatures, and
leave them in such a state!

IT may be answered, that these animals, birds, fish, insects, etc. appear in
general to enjoy no small degree of pleasure in life, while they are preserved
in it, according to their respective natures and capacities. The bountiful
Author of nature feeds them all, and supplies their wants. Leviathan, and all
the watery tribes play, disport themselves, and rejoice for a time in the great
deep, the lakes, ponds and rivers. The birds and fowls of heaven do the like
in the air, the water, or on the earth, as suits them best. The beasts do the
same in the pastures, woods and forests. The smaller animals, reptiles, and all
insects do the like. And men generally take a kind care of domestic animals,
and of all those which they either employ in their service, or design for their
food; liberally feeding and feasting them.

MOST of the untamed animals, etc. die a natural death without fear, and
probably without much pain, when they have run through the courses and stages
assigned to them respectively. And as to those of them that become the prey of
man, or of one another; this is seldom, if ever, till they have enjoyed much
more pleasure in life, than they endure pain in being deprived of it:
Especially when it is considered, that their death is commonly almost
instantaneous; and without any such uneasy reflections on what is past, or
apprehensions respecting futurity, as mankind experience. So that all these
living creatures, whether wild or tame, in all probability enjoy a surplusage
of pleasurable sensations, according to their natures and capacities: And if
so, the Author of their being is good and merciful to them. It should likewise
be considered, that those living creatures, which afford food and sustenance to
man, or to other creatures, at the expense of their own lives, thereby do good
to their devourers; and so, in a sense, add to the common happiness even by
their tragical end.

BUT if there are any of them, which do not enjoy a share of pleasure superior
to their pains in life and death; (an unsupported hypothesis) yet how came you
to know, that there is certainly an end of all, or any of them at death? Who
told you that they do not transmigrate into, or assume other bodies
successively, in which they enjoy life in a more perfect manner than in the
preceding state? Has God plainly revealed any thing to the contrary, in his
word? No. Does reason discern any impossibility, absurdity, or even
improbability in this supposition? Neither of them. Nay; there is some natural
and positive ground of presumption, or a degree of probability, that this is
really the truth. It is certain that every living, sensitive creature, is
endowed with some principle distinct from matter; call it soul, spirit or what
you please, it is of no consequence. All matter, all that is properly and
solely such, is evidently void of animal life and sensation, of all feeling and
perception, in every degree. The living, sensitive, feeling and perceptive
principle, therefore, in all animals, insects, etc. is immaterial, or something
absolutely and entirely distinct in nature from matter. And this may survive
the body, be continued after the dissolution of the present organs of
sensation, and live in another body, if the Author of its being pleases it
should: Though I do not presume to assert positively, that it will. But there is
nothing absurd, unscriptural or irrational in the supposition: Nay; the
transformations, or transmigrations that are actually observed in some living
creatures, render it credible in itself, and, in a degree, probable. But if the
supposition is barely a possible one, it is a sufficient answer to the
objection drawn from the sufferings of brutes and insects, against the express
doctrine of scripture, That the "Lord is good to all," etc. Though, by the way,
if this last, hypothetical solution should be given up as indefensible; yet, as
was intimated before, it can never be proved that any one of these living
creatures endures either more, or as much pain, as it enjoyed pleasure, in life
and death.

5. IT will not be unnatural to proceed from hence to that capital objection,
which is grounded on the many sufferings and pains of mankind in the present
state, too well known to need describing.

TO which I answer, That mankind also enjoy many pleasures; and, as is
generally supposed, many more than are equivalent to the pains which they
endure in this state. If we are subject to diseases, the Author of nature has
also in mercy provided remedies. He feeds and clothes us, and supplies our
natural wants; as to most of us, in a very liberal manner. Most of the pains,
both mental and corporeal, which mankind suffer in this world, are of their own
creating; they are the natural effects of intemperance, and other vices. And it
would be very injurious to object these against that goodness of God, which we
thus abuse to our own hurt. See page 29, Remark 6th of Sermon. I.


AT least some of the sufferings of this life, are judicial and corrective;
brought upon us by the providence of God for our sins, to chastize, and thereby
to reform us, in order to our present and future good. And all such evils, as
we may call them when considered merely in themselves, are actually effects of
the divine goodness, instead of being solid objections against it. See p. 25.
Remark 8th of Sermon. I.


BUT there are some children, who are born, live, and soon die, in pain; before
they have actually done any evil, or committed any fault. Be it so. But do you
certainly know, that what they enjoyed in the womb before their birth, was not
more than equivalent to what they suffered at the time of, or after it, in life
and death? You have no proof of this, however positive you may be. But,
allowing you to be certain, as well as confident, that these infants endure
more than they enjoy, antecedently to their dying; yet are not their souls
immortal? And are they not still in the hands of Him, who has said, Behold, all
souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine
-- The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father? Ezekiel. 18.4, 20.
Is it not then, at least supposable that such infants, never having sinned in
any strict or proper sense, go to an happier state than that, out of which they
were taken? And if so, their momentary pains here, are no solid objection
against the goodness of God. Indeed, if there are any persons who assert, that
besides these pains, they suffer the "wrath and curse" of God, and "the pains
of hell for ever;" it is doubtless impossible to reconcile this, not only with
infinite goodness and mercy, but even with a very small degree thereof. To
suppose that they either properly committed any sin, long before they were
conceived in the womb; or that the sin of Adam and Eve, is or can be so imputed
to them, as to render them justly liable to eternal misery, without any offense
of their own, is one of the grosest of all absurdities. They who are capable of
believing such unscriptural and irrational doctrine, and of thinking justice so
much at variance with goodness, wisdom and mercy, as this supposes, are to be
pitied as persons of a sadly depraved judgment. But if it were allowed that
these "infants of a span long," were justly liable to eternal torments, as some
have asserted; yet upon their own principles, and even according to their own
false idea of divine justice, God may show mercy to them. They do not pretend
to say, that God is obliged to go as far in punishing as he might go, according
to their conceptions of justice. So that these infants, upon any principles
which suppose the immortality of the soul, may be eternal monuments of that
goodness and mercy, against which their untimely death is thought an objection.
And the bare possibility of this, is a sufficient answer to that objection,
unless it could be proved that some of them are certainly devoted to future
torment; -- an opinion equally irrational, unscriptural and antichristian.

6. IT may perhaps be objected, that the scripture doctrine of Christ's
atonement, or sacrifice, is inconsistent with what has been said concerning the
perfection of God's goodness; and particularly with that idea of it which was
given in the preceding discourse, as comprehending justice in it; which latter
is not there supposed to be any attribute of God, distinct from, but one branch
or mode of, his essential goodness. If God be thus perfectly good and merciful
in his nature, why did he not forgive the sins of men without any sacrifice?
without any reconciliation for sin? especially if divine justice is nothing
distinct in nature from divine goodness. What occasion was there for any
atonement, upon these principles? -- Whereas the scriptures constantly suppose
the need of it in order to the pardon of sin.

UPON the principles of the foregoing discourse, infinite goodness itself,
considered in connection with infinite wisdom, requires that order, and the
highest veneration for the majesty of God, his laws and government, should be
preserved amongst all his reasonable creatures. Their own good essentially
depends upon it. And this important end is most effectually attained by the
sacrifice of Christ, "by whom we have received the atonement." We are assured
in the holy scriptures, that God forgives the sins of men through this great
sacrifice intervening, rather than without any, not because he is in his own
nature deficient in goodness, or not perfectly merciful, but because he is
infinitely wise as well as merciful; taking such a method herein, as is in its
nature admirably adapted to "magnify the law, and make it honorable;" i. e. to
beget and preserve in the minds of reasonable creatures, a just sense of God's
authority, the dignity of his laws and government: Which, as was intimated
before, is evidently best even for themselves. In this sense the apostle,
having observed that Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every man,
adds, For it BECAME Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings. Heb. II.9, 10.
It became his wisdom, it became his goodness, it became his mercy, even that
very "grace of God, by which Christ tasted death for every man." There was a
fitness and congruity in it, as the wisest and best method for saving sinful
men, without any kind of reference to that common, but yet strange supposition,
of divine justice being entirely distinct from divine goodness. Besides:

THE scriptures uniformly speak of Christ's mediation, and his dying for
sinners, as the effect or consequence of God's original goodness and mercy.
"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son," John 3.16.
etc. In this was manifested the love of God toward us -- He loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 1 John IV.9, 10.
These representations of Christ's dying, "the just for the unjust," as
consequential to, and the effect of, God's love, mercy and grace, are so far
from supposing any such justice in God as is often spoken of, distinct in
nature from goodness, and to satisfy which, it is said, Christ died; that they
appear to me absolutely irreconcilable therewith. Neither does it seem even
possible to assert, and solidly to maintain, this most important doctrine of
our redemption by the blood of Christ, but upon the supposition of its being
the wisest and best, i. e. the most benevolent and gracious method of
dispensing pardon and life to sinners; in such a sense as wholly and forever to
exclude any such idea of divine justice, as is often given us. -- Though, by the
way, these things are not said by me, but with an high veneration for those
many wise and excellent men, who either have, or seem to have, different
conceptions of this matter. But,

7. How shall we reconcile the supposition of God's leaving the whole heathen
world to unavoidable and eternal misery, with infinite goodness and mercy?

To this it will be sufficient to answer in general, first, That it is by no
means a clear and certain point, either from reason or revelation, that all the
heathen will actually be miserable in the world to come: And, secondly, That if
they shall be so, they will be punished only for their sins; and in due measure
only. And to punish them thus, is not, certainly, inconsistent with the most
perfect goodness.

8. WHAT shall we say to the doctrine of God's having reprobated a great
proportion of mankind; or, from eternity devoted them in his absolute decree
and purpose, to eternal torments, without any respect or regard to any sins of
theirs, as the procuring and meritorious cause of their perdition? and this, at
the same time, to make manifest and glorify his JUSTICE! What can be said to
this? and how shall it be reconciled with the supposition, that God's tender
mercies are over all his works?

I WILL tell you, in a very few words, what I have to say to it at present. And
that is, first, That if any persons really hold such a doctrine, neither any
man on earth, nor angel in heaven, can reconcile it with the goodness of God.
And, secondly, That I have not my self the least inclination to attempt a
reconciliation of these doctrines; being persuaded, that they are just as
contrary as light and darkness, Christ and Belial; -- that one of them is most
true and scriptural, joyful to man, and honorable toGod; and the other most
false and unscriptural, horrible to the last degree, to all men of an
undepraved judgment, and blasphemous against the God of heaven and earth.
Neither is it possible for any man, who really believes what the scriptures
teach concerning the goodness of God, even to think of this other doctrine, but
with great indignation. But,

9. HOW can what the holy scriptures unquestionably teach, respecting the
greatness of the punishment of those who die impenitently under the gospel, be
reconciled with God's goodness and mercy as declared in the same scriptures? To
this it is answered,

1. THAT God certainly exercises great goodness and mercy toward such sinners
in this world; not only in supplying their temporal wants, but in affording
them such means of knowledge and eternal happiness, as nothing but their own
wilful blindness and perverseness can render ineffectual to that end. All are
invited and persuaded, in the most gracious and pathetic terms, to accept of
eternal life, through Him that "gave himself a ransom for all."

2. IT is not inconsistent with the most perfect goodness, especially in
certain cases, to punish wicked men. No earthly sovereign is accounted the less
good or merciful for punishing rebels, traitors and felons even capitally, when
the support of his government, and the common good of his kingdom require it.
Nay, should he neglect to do it in this case, he would be the less good and
merciful; because it would be a sort of cruelty to his other subjects: At best
it would be a great weakness in him. Why then should God, the great and only
Potentate, be thought the less good or merciful for inflicting such punishment
on wicked men, as the support of his government, and the great end thereof,
call for? Goodness, perfect goodness, nay, tender mercy itself requires this:
God would not be perfectly good and merciful, if he did not inflict such
punishment, how terrible soever in its nature and duration, as is requisite to
this end.

3. THE light of nature ascertains neither the kind, the degree, nor the
duration of that punishment, which is necessary to be inflicted on the wicked
in another world, in order to the due support of God's government; or, in other
words, in order to the attaining the good, great and glorious end thereof. Men
may, if they please, presume and be confident, that this or that, and no more,
is necessary in order to the end proposed; and therefore conclude, not
unjustly, if the premises were true, that no more, greater or more durable
pains and penalties, will be inflicted. But after all this confidence, mere
human reason is as inadequate a judge of the matter, as a child of ten years
old is, what course his King ought to take with those that have broken the
laws. The light of nature leaves mankind altogether as much in the dark in one
case, as this child's reason leaves him in the other. Which, by the way, shows
the necessity of an express revelation from heaven, if it were only to give
sinners the assurance of a pardon.

4. THE obvious conclusion from these principles, is, that it becomes us to sit
down contented with what God has actually revealed, respecting this subject.
He, and only He, knows particularly, how great or durable punishments are
necessary to answer the good ends of his universal government; or how it
becomes infinite wisdom and goodness to dispose of sinful creatures. Human
reason knows not what is wisest and best in this case. So that, I see not what
any sober man has to do in it, but to inform himself what the real doctrine of
scripture upon the subject is; and to acquiesce in whatever God has declared to
be his purpose. Whatever that be, we may rest assured that it is at once most
for the glory of God, and for the good of his universal kingdom; such
punishment as it becomes the God and Father of all to inflict. For "shall not
the Judge of all the earth do right!"

HAVING said thus much concerning the future punishment of wicked men, the
duration of which, you know, is diverse times expressed by the words, eternal,
everlasting, for ever and ever, and the like; it is needless to subjoin any
thing particularly about that of the rebel-angels: For the same principles and
general way of reasoning, are equally applicable to both.

THERE is no just and sufficient cause to doubt, either from any appearances in
nature, or from any real doctrine of revelation, but that God is good and
merciful in the highest conceivable sense. But there are positive, conclusive
and demonstrative proofs of his being so. Let me add here, that if this
doctrine of the perfect goodness of God, is not strictly true in the highest
imaginable sense, (though I almost tremble even at making such a supposition,
which I abhor as impious,) there is not sufficient ground for an unreserved
trust and confidence in him. For if he may be supposed to act unreasonably,
cruelly, or contrary to the dictates of goodness in any one case, why not in
others? why not in many? why not in any supposed case? Where then is your
safety? What security has any man on earth, or angel in heaven, that he shall
not, even without reason, without just cause, become the object of God's
insupportable wrath! Will you say, that you are effectually secured by his own
gracious promise? But what firm, unreserved confidence can be placed in his
word and promise, unless he is supposed to be perfectly good and faithful? If
he is not so, he may deceive you; and, instead of exalting you to heaven
hereafter, "thrust you down to hell!" If he deals arbitrarily, capriciously and
cruelly by others, may he not do the same by you, notwithstanding his supposed
word and promise? No doubt: For any being that acts such a part in one case,
may do the like in another. Where then is your "Rock" of peace? On what is your
hope, your confidence grounded, upon the present supposition? -- Alas! on
nothing better than the word and promise of a being, who is capable of acting
unreasonably, arbitrarily and cruelly; or contrary to the dictates of goodness!
-- A miserable support to an immortal soul, that must be either happy or
miserable while it exists, and is absolutely dependent upon Him that made it!
-- It is, therefore, at least for the interest of all, that God should be as
perfectly good and merciful, as he has been represented: Which, though it is no
direct proof, is yet sufficient to show, that no man can in reason be
prejudiced against this doctrine, or have any dislike to it, even upon
supposition that he does not at present see sufficient evidence of it. Though,
how any One can possibly doubt of it, and yet believe the holy scriptures, is
quite unaccountable. For is it not therein declared -- The Lord is good to ALL,
and his tender mercies are over ALL his works? But I proceed,

IV. TO make some application of this subject, by reminding you more
particularly of the great goodness of God to Us, both in temporal and spiritual
respects; and by such inferences and reflections, as may at once tend to the
honor of God, and show what influence the consideration of his goodness, ought
to have upon your hearts and manners.

NOW, if we consider ourselves as MEN, we are a distinguished order of
creatures, and under great obligations to our Creator. However inferior we may
be to many creatures in other parts of the universe; (inferior indeed!) yet
there is no presumption, no vanity in saying, that we are much superior to any
of the other inhabitants of this world. For which pre-eminence of nature and
rank, we are indebted only to Him that made us thus; "of whom, and through whom,
and to whom are all things."

IF we consider ourselves, in the next place, as creatures redeemed from sin
and death by the Son of God in human flesh, we are still more wonderfully
favored and distinguished. God is in Christ reconciling, not a comparatively
small part of mankind to himself, according to the representations of some, but
the "WORLD" itself. For Christ "is the propitiation -- for the sins of the
WHOLE WORLD." And it "pleased the Father -- by him to reconcile ALL things unto
himself, by him, I say, whether things in earth, or things in heaven." --
"Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us," in this respect!

IF we consider ourselves as having been born and brought up in the christian
world, had the advantages of a religious education, and "even from children
known the holy scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto salvation;" we
must acknowledge the particular kindness and goodness of God to us in these
regards. Had we been born in a land of Pagan or Mohammedan darkness, or had we
been born and educated Jews; we might probably have been Pagans, Mahometans or
Jews to this day: Whereas we are now Christians, by profession at least; and if
we are not practically such, the fault is our own.

WE are still farther distinguished and favored of God, by having been born
and bred in a protestant country, and a reformed part of the christian church;
instead of a roman-catholic country, and in the errors, superstitions and
idolatries of the church of Rome. For had the latter been our lot, we should
probably, the most of us, have been enslaved to those delusions, and the papal
tyranny to this day. And those of us, whom God should have given light and
courage enough to cast them off, might have suffered a cruel persecution, and
"for conscience toward God endured grief;" as protestants now do, even in
France itself, from a pretended most polite, humane and refined, but really
barbarous people in some respects. And yet they are by far the least bigoted
to the papacy, of any roman-catholic nation!

IF we consider ourselves as British subjects, and entitled to the liberties
and privileges of such, both civil and sacred; we must acknowledge that
providence has, in this respect, favored us above most other protestants: Very
few of whom, I might perhaps say none, live under so happy and excellent a form
of government as ourselves.

WE are also favored of God, the universal Sovereign, in having a good King,
as well as an excellent constitution of government. Bad Kings may prove a sore
scourge even in a free government, though there is an old paradox, that they "can
do no wrong;" of which our own nation had repeated and dreadful experience,
before the ever-memorable and glorious REVOLUTION. Since that, we have had good
Princes: And his present Majesty is doubtless one of the best-intention'd
Monarchs in the world. We may say, upon good grounds, that "because the Lord
loved us, therefore made he him King over us, to do justice and judgment." This
he has hitherto done; and will doubtless continue to do it, if the Achitophels
and Machiavels are kept from, and possibly even though they should surround, the
throne.

WE must farther acknowledge the goodness of God in lately giving the King a
Son and Heir; and thereby confirming to all his loyal subjects, the agreeable
hopes of the protestant succession being perpetuated in his illustrious house.
-- Heaven preserve the King, the Queen and the royal Infant: The two former, to
be illustrious examples of conjugal affection and happiness; -- of all piety
and virtue, not only to their own subjects, but to other Kings and Queens: And
the latter, to inherit his Father's virtues with his throne, whenever it shall
please Him who "rules in the kingdom of men," to exalt the One above, and
raise the Other to it!

WE are, moreover, to acknowledge the goodness of God in continuing to succeed
the King's arms, in the course of the year past, after having crowned them with
so many illustrious successes and victories for several years before. Two very
signal acquisitions have been made by the British arms, since our last annual
thanksgiving; -- those of MARTINICO and the HAVANNAH. And since these, the
principal place in NEWFOUNDLAND, which the enemy had in such a mysterious
manner possessed themselves of, has been rescued out of their hands. This
important recovery was effected with admirable dispatch and facility, highly to
the honor of those who had the immediate planning, conduct and execution of the
enterprise. And, upon the whole, we have the greatest reason to expect an
honorable, advantageous and lasting peace For I will not -- cannot suppose,
that either folly or pusillanimity, private avarice or treachery, in the
cabinet, will relinquish those signal advantages which wisdom and valor, which
public spirit and loyalty obtained in the field, and on the mighty ocean, through
HIM that has "rode upon the heavens for our help, and in his excellency upon
the skies;" though similar things have been done in former reigns! N. B. Since
the delivery of this discourse, we have had the important advices of the King
of Prussia's, Prince Henry's and Prince Ferdinand's successes; of the Spaniards
retreat out of Portugal, and the signing the PRELIMINARIES for a PEACE betwixt
Great Britian and Portugal on one side, and France and Spain on the other. But
it was though it proper to leave the paragraph above, as it was delivered -- May
the God of peace and love perfect the good work of peace thus begun! --


IF we come to our own country in particular; we have here enjoyed, of late,
almost all the blessings of peace, in a time of war and tumult among the
nations of Europe. We have also been favored with general health. Our
invaluable civil rights and privileges are preserved to us. I do not say, that
they have even been struck at, in any instance or degree -- But if they have,
they are not wrested from us: And may righteous heaven blast the designs, though
not the soul or the body of that man, whoever he be amongst us, that shall have
the hardiness and presumption to attack them!

LET me add, that though we were visited with a pretty severe drought in the
summer past, yet the rains which succeeded, came so seasonably, and in such
competent measure, that there is a supply of the necessaries, and very many of
the comforts of life: So that, to say the least, there is no danger of famine
or distress amongst us for want of them. And we have also been, and still are,
greatly favored in the temperate and moderate weather, continued this year so
much beyond the usual time: Which is, in diverse respects, a great mitigation of
the calamity in the drought beforementioned.

THUS, my brethren, I have briefly reminded you of some of the many instances
of God's goodness to mankind in general, and to ourselves in particular: All
which it becomes us gratefully to acknowledge to the glory of Him, who is "good
to all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works." It now remains, to
draw some practical inferences and instructions from this subject. It affords
many important ones: And, indeed, I shall mention a considerable number, though
but briefly, for fear of being tedious. And,

1. THE consideration of God's goodness, shows the reason and proper ground of
love to God, and complacency in him. To love, or delight in an evil, cruel,
arbitrary and unrighteous being, as such, is impossible to any, except
unreasonable and depraved minds. But such a being as God is represented in
scripture; One so good and merciful to All, must needs be loved by every person
that is not himself unreasonable, corrupt and depraved to a monstrous degree.
For what is it but, I had almost said, infinite folly, perverseness and
wickedness, not to love infinite goodness!

2. WHAT has been said concerning the divine goodness, as comprehending
justice, and the other moral perfections of God in it; shows that he ought to
be loved on account of these also. That is, he is to be loved, considered under
the character, not merely of a benevolent Being, in the common restrained sense
of the word benevolence; but under the character of a most holy, just and
righteous, as well as kind and beneficent Being. God's moral character is to be
taken all together; the several branches of it are to be considered as united
by and in the bond of love, and inseparably connected with infinite wisdom. And
then, God is to be loved as a Being of such a character; a character, in its
own nature infinitely amiable. Nor is there any true, proper and genuine love
to God, but what respects him in the whole of this character. Even wicked men
may and do, often at least, love him as a kind, bountiful and merciful Being,
in a restrained, partial sense of those words, while they hate him considered
as a just, righteous and holy One. But this is not to love God in the sense of
scripture. Good men, and only such, love him as the source and center of all
moral perfection in general.

3. HENCE it is easy to see, not only the reason why, to love God is spoken of
as the first and greatest of all the commandments; but also the ground of that
entire and ardent, I had almost said, that infinite and boundless love to him,
which is required of us. For if God is indeed such a Being as the scriptures
represent him, it is at once manifest that we ought to love him first and last;
and not only sincerely, but "with all our heart and with all our soul, with all
our strength and with all our mind." Even of such a love from all, that Being
is manifestly the proper object, who is himself "good to all, and whose tender
mercies are over all his works." And the more largely God has caused us to
partake of his goodness, whether in temporal or spiritual regards, the stronger
is our obligation to love him thus; and the more inexcusable we are, if we do
not.

4. FROM hence we may clearly see the reason, why, to "love our neighbor as
ourselves," is spoken of by our Savior as the next, the second commandment,
and like unto the first; why love is represented as the "fulfilling of the
law," etc. For if God is thus good, it is evident that, next to loving himself,
he must require his intelligent creatures to love one another; and this as the
sum of all the duties which they mutually owe to each other. No particular duty
of the moral law. I mean, of the second table, can naturally and reasonably
claim such a pre-eminence, such a glorious precedence in the order of offices,
as charity, which does in a sort comprehend them all; even as God's goodness
comprehends his other moral perfections. And love must needs be the supreme,
universal, unchangeable law of such a Being, to all his reasonable creatures;
to angels in heaven, as well as men on earth; and to creatures inferior to men,
if any such there are, capable subjects of moral government; as it is highly
probable there are.

5. FROM hence appears the unreasonableness, and great sin of indulging anger,
revenge, disproportionate resentment, and an implacable spirit; together with
the wisdom and importance of those numerous precepts in the gospel, relative to
meekness, forbearance, forgiving injuries, and the like. The indulgence of any
of those passions, any farther than may reasonably be supposed conducive to
some positively good end, is not merely contrary to the spirit and precepts of
the gospel, but it renders men peculiarly unlike to the infinitely good and
merciful God. Nor is there any thing greater, more glorious and god-like, than
to love them that hate us, and to do good to them that despitefully use us*
Neither is it without a very peculiar emphasis, that He who died for us as
sinners and enemies, enjoins us to do thus, "that we may be the children of our
Father in heaven, who is himself good to the unthankful and to the evil."

6. IT may from hence be inferred, that all God's particular commandments, as
distinguished from those two grand, most fundamental and comprehensive ones
beforementioned, are not only holy and just, but good; actually kind and
beneficial in their nature, design and tendency; adapted to promote the great
end of his universal government, the good of his creatures, and therein his own
glory: For these are inseparably connected* Or, if any choose rather to express
it thus, -- That God's view is, to promote his own glory by doing good, making
the latter the means, and the former the end; I have no objection, except that
it may, perhaps, seem to represent him rather as an ambitious Being, who
desires the praise and homage of his creatures, than an infinitely good One,
who aims at making them happy without any selfish end, incompatible with a
perfect character, and with absolute self-sufficience. -- But I assert nothing
upon this point. However that may be, yet it is certain that none of the
commands of a perfectly good and merciful Being, can be mere arbitrary
injunctions and impositions, without any good end: Much less can they have a
contrary tendency. Of this we may be certain in general, even though we should
not be able particularly to discern the benevolent design and tendency of some
of God's revealed commands; as, for example, some branches of the ceremonial
law. There is no good reason to doubt, but that they were all wisely and kindly
intended. And as to all the precepts of christianity without exception, One
need not scruple to say positively, that the good end and tendency of them is
easily and clearly discernable.

7. WE learn from hence, how liberal, ingenuous and cheerful, as well as how
universal an obedience they who believe in God, ought to yield to his
commandments. Does it become us, my brethren, to obey Him with reluctance, and
grutchingly, who is good to all, and all whose commandments are in their very
nature kind and good, as if we were obeying a tyrant, or cruel task-master, who
cared not what became of us, so that his own selfish ends were but answered? If
God governs us according to the rules of wisdom and benevolence, even as a
father does his children, only in an infinitely more gracious and perfect
manner, should our obedience be gloomy, reluctant, servile and slavish, as if
we only feared a Bastile and the torture! How incongruous were this! Such an
obedience may be suitable enough for some nations to pay to the edicts of their
tyrannical and cruel Monarchs; but, surely, it is altogether unbecoming
christians to their God, their Father in heaven! Your obedience to Him ought to
be, in the highest sense, liberal, cheerful, filial, joyful. It becomes you, in
other words, to be followers of God as dear children; and to walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an offering, and a
sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. V.1, 2.
This is the spirit of genuine christianity; the design, tendency and fruit of
the gospel. Whoever is wholly a stranger to this, does not yet "know the grace
of God in truth," how often soever he may have read or heard the gospel. For
says our Lord, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed: And
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free -- Ye shall be free
indeed. John viii.31, 32, 36.


8. All parents should copy after the goodness of God, our heavenly Father, in
providing for, and governing their children. They are unnatural parents indeed,
who do not love their own offspring: God is good and merciful to all his. But,
as has been observed, God's goodness is not a blind fondness, or mere
instinctive benevolence: It is inseparably connected with reason, and under the
direction of wisdom in all its operations. Under a similar direction should the
love and affections of all parents be. They ought to look forward to
consequences, to consult the real good of their children, and pursue that as
their object; on one hand, by gratifying, as far as may be, all their
reasonable desires, and on the other, by opposing such as are unreasonable,
vicious and hurtful; not indulging them in any wrong way; not sparing reproof,
or even correction, when that is really necessary to answer the benevolent end
proposed. There are probably many more children hurt, and almost ruined, by the
indiscrete kindness, and excessive indulgence, than by the too great rigor and
severity of parents; though examples of the latter may not be wanting -- Whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives And the
following counsel, is that of a very tender father, as well as the wisest of
men and Kings, I mean Solomon: "Chasten thy son while there is hope; and let
not thy soul spare for his crying."

9. FROM what has been said concerning the universal goodness of God, not only
to mankind, but even to the inferior orders of creatures, it appears to be
unreasonable and sinful, and contrary to true goodness, to exercise cruelty
toward the animal creation. Those creatures which are adapted to human use,
whether for labor, food, clothing, or in any other way, we have indeed a right
to use thus; not from the mere light of nature, which gives no such right, but
by the express grant of God; whose are all the fowls of heaven, the fish of
the sea, "every beast of the forest, and the cattle upon a thousand hills."
(This was one, though it is far from being the only end of their creation.) And,
from those animals that are noxious and mischievous to us, we may doubtless
defend ourselves even by destroying them, though they should be of no use to us
afterward. But to kill or torture any of the brute-creation, merely for the
sake of destroying or vexing them; or even to use them with unnecessary rigor
and severity in our service, cannot be justified upon the principles of reason
and benevolence Solomon says, "a righteous man regards the life of his
beast." There have doubtless been many and great immoralities committed by men,
in abusing the creatures of God, even very inferior ones. There is also a
degree of impiety therein. And cruelty to these animals, cannot but be
offensive to Him that made them, their Lord and Proprietor as well as ours; and
whose "tender mercies are over ALL his works."

10. GOD being good and merciful to all men, none, not even the poorest,
meanest and lowest of the human race, have any ground to complain of, or to
murmur against Him and his providence: But, on the contrary, all have reason to
be thankful for their being and preservation; especially when it is considered,
that they will be immortally happy in another world, unless their own
wickedness and perverseness should destroy them.

11. THE greatest and happiest men in this world, though they are under some
peculiar obligations to gratitude, have yet no right, no cause, to despise the
poor and low, or to glory in themselves. Either of these things, would be at
once foolish and impious. He that constituted the members in the natural body,
and assigned them their respective offices as pleased him; He that appointed
the foot to tread in the dust, and to bear the load of the body; He that made
the least comely parts and members, to answer valuable ends, and to participate
in the happiness of the body; while He made the ear to hear, the eye to see,
and the head to direct and govern the whole, has put an honor upon them all in
their respective places: And neither of them can say to another, "I have no
need of you." Thus it is also in the church, and in the greater society of
mankind. For in both respects, we are "members one of another;" and each, such
a member as the infinitely wise and good Author of the whole, pleased to make
him. What ground is there then, for glorying or despising? For "what have thou,
O man, that thou did not receive!" --

12. IT is at once the basest ingratitude, and the greatest folly, not to love
and obey the blessed God; so good, merciful and tender a Father. O ungrateful
and degenerate children of the most High! For you are still his offspring, though
you have forgotten your Father, and "lightly esteemed the rock of your
salvation." In this respect wicked men are not less imprudent, than
dinsigenuous. To disobey the holy, just and good commandments of God, which are
in their very nature adapted to promote your happiness, is to bring mischief on
yourselves. Such a conduct, if continued in, cannot but end in your ruin, even
without the consideration of that future punishment, which God has expressly
threatened as the reward of unrighteousness. There is no substantial happiness,
but in God, in knowing and doing his will. They that are far from him, the
fountain of light, life and joy, -- that refuse to return to him, and to walk
in his righteous ways, must needs perish.

13. WHAT great encouragement does the consideration of God's goodness afford
to sinners, to confess and forsake their sins? to "arise and go to their
Father"? Especially, what encouragement does this afford, when the goodness of
God is considered as it is manifested in the gospel of Christ; who appeared to
"take away the sins of the world," and whose professed design in coming into
it, was to "seek and to save that which was lost?" Can you possibly doubt of a
kind reception, or a gracious pardon from Him, who is not only in general
declared to be good and merciful to all; but who has "so loved the world, as to
give his only begotten Son" to save it! Consider the parables of the prodigal
son, of the lost sheep, and of the lost piece of money, in the gospel: They
will all show you, that it is not the will of your Father, that any of you
should perish; but that he "would have ALL men to be saved." The gospel makes
no exception. It affords an adequate relief to all, and is "the power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes" with all his heart. The greatness
of your past sins, will be no objection against your being accepted in Christ,
if you come unto God by him. God expects no righteousness in or of you, in
order to your being forgiven of Him; but only a truly penitent and humble sense
of your unrighteousness, and an hearty consent to receive "eternal life as his
gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord." -- Ho, every One that thirsts, [then]
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money; come ye -- without money and
without price -- Incline your ear, (says the Lord of life,) and come unto me:
Hear, and your soul shall live. Isai. LV.1, 3. There is an expression in the
learned Mr. CALVIN's commentary upon my text, which seems justly exceptionable,
as conveying an idea contrary to what is most clearly revealed in the holy
scriptures; and setting unwarrantable bounds to the grace, and pardoning mercy
of God. Let the reader judge -- Quamvis ergo peccatorum remissio thesaurus sit
clausus REPROBIS, non tamen Deum impedit ipsorum malitia et pravitas, quo minus
in eos quoque bonitatem effundat Deus; sed quam sine sensu devorant. In English
-- Although, therefore, the remission of sins is a treasure shut up from the
REPROBATE, yet their malice and wickedness does not prevent God's showering
down goodness upon them also; but which they devour without sense or
consideration.

IF by the reprobate, the learned author had here meant only wicked and ungodly
men, considered as such; and if by the remission of sins being a treasure shut
up, or closely locked with respect to them, he had intended no more, than that
it was inaccessible or unattainable by them, while hardened in their sins; this
would have been quite unexceptionable, and perfectly agreeable to scripture.
But the words naturally convey a different idea; viz. That there are many
persons who, by a supposed eternal decree of reprobation, are absolutely
excluded from the benefit of pardon, or the grace of God revealed to the world.
This was the known opinion of that learned man: A sentiment, at once
unsupported by reason or scripture; nay, contrary to both; highly derogatory to
the goodness and grace of God, and of dangerous tendency. Nor is it a little
strange, that such a sentiment should be found in a commentary upon words,
which so strongly express the universal goodness and tender mercies of God, as
those of the text do: Especially considering the words immediately preceding,
-- viz. The Lord is gracious and FULL of compassion, slow to anger, and of
great mercy. And it plainly appears that the learned man had these very words
in his mind, when he wrote -- " Peccatorum remissio thesaurus est clausus
REPROBIS!" -- Pardon, a treasure locked up against millions, in the decree of
absolute reprobation! --


-- But,

14. IF, in reading the holy scriptures, we should find any representations or
expressions relative to the divine conduct, which seem at first view to
militate against the infinite goodness and mercy of God, we should not too
readily admit them in that seemingly harsh sense: I mean, not till we have well
examined them, compared them with other parts of scripture, and find that they
will not bear any other construction without manifest force and violence. There
is nothing so frequently and clearly declared in scripture, as the perfect,
universal goodness and mercy of God. This is a doctrine infinitely precious and
important, and to which we must always adhere, as our sheet-anchor, whatever
becomes of any commonly-received opinions which interfere with it. To let some
obscure expressions which seldom occur, lead in the interpretation of
scripture, as if they were prime, fundamental articles; instead of clear ones
which occur almost in every page of the bible, is the most unnatural and
preposterous thing in the world; a common error, of the most pernicious
consequence. This is more absurd than for the "blind to be leaders of the
blind:" It is like the blind leading those that have their eyes open, and that
see clearly -- But, on the other hand, we ought to be very cautious lest we
reject any doctrine really revealed in scripture, under a false pretense that
it contradicts the goodness of God, with which it is consistent. Our not well
knowing how to reconcile it therewith, is no certain proof in all cases, that
it is irreconcilable. For we must be vain indeed, or allow ourselves to be
very imperfect and short-sighted creatures. However, it is not my intention
here, to make a retreat into total darkness, or to resolve every thing into
mystery, and human ignorance; as if men were incapable judges of goodness,
justice and mercy in any case: Which is the shameful method that many have
taken to get over all difficulties, and to answer all objections against their
unscriptural, absurd and blasphemous doctrines. We may be altogether as certain
that some doctrines fathered upon the scriptures, are contrary to them, and
inconsistent with mercy, goodness and justice, as we can possibly be, that any
others are consonant to them; or, indeed, that there is in nature any such
thing as goodness, justice or mercy.

15. IF, therefore, my brethren, you know of any particular scheme or system of
christianity (so called), two or three of the most distinguishing and leading
principles of which, and the basis on which the whole rests, are plainly and
certainly repugnant to the doctrine of God's universal goodness, and his tender
mercies over all his works; you may be certain that such scheme or system is
false; -- absolutely and wholly false, so far as it has any connection with, or
dependence upon, those leading, fundamental and most distinguishing principles.
Let me add, that if the fautors and asserters of such a supposed system, should
cry it up as peculiarly the doctrine of evangelical grace, and as tending to
give us exalted ideas of the goodness and mercy of God, in contradistinction to
all other systems; it would only make the matter so much the worse: It would be
so much the more impious; the greater abuse of the holy scriptures, and an
insult upon the common sense of mankind. If you know of no such scheme as is
here supposed, then be so kind as to let these remarks pass for nothing. -- But
if you do; yet remember that human nature is frail and fallible; and that men
may have upright hearts, while they have very wrong and pernicious notions in
their heads: So that there is an evident call for mutual candor, forbearance
and charity, betwixt those that differ even widely in opinion; that they may,
if possible, "keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace."

16. LET me, in the next place, caution wicked men against abusing the
scripture-doctrine of God's goodness; (for there is very little danger that any
others will do so.) Do any imagine that they are safe in their evil courses,
because God is good and merciful? That were a vain imagination; since those
courses, in their own nature, tend to misery and ruin, as was intimated before.
But, perhaps, you flatter yourselves, that however you may break God's
commandments, yet He will not punish you in another world, if he is infinitely
good and merciful; but, at the worst, leave you to take the natural consequence
of your evil doings. This would be an equally false and groundless inference;
though even that, would be ruinous and fatal* But God has established a moral
government in the universe, as best adapted to promote his own glory, and the
common felicity of his intelligent creatures. And such a kind of government, in
its very nature, supposes that the obstinately wicked and impenitent under it,
shall be punished by Him, as the Lord and Judge of all: And is it not declared,
that at the great day, the wicked shall "go away into everlasting punishment,
"in the place" prepared for the devil and his angels!" In short, the certainty
of your punishment, if you persevere in breaking God's commandments, may be
clearly inferred from his goodness itself; so far is that from being any sort of
security to you! Again: Do any of you rely upon the divine goodness and mercy,
not in the practice of gross immoralities, but in the practice of your supposed
duties, and moral virtues, while you reject the gospel of Christ, or that
method of salvation which is revealed therein? This is also a groundless
presumption, unless you can plead a sinless innocence and perfection; to which
you will not pretend. What! will you rely on the goodness and mercy of God,
while you despise his truth sufficiently attested, and clearly proved to be
such? -- while you tread under foot his Son from heaven, who came to redeem
you; and resist his Spirit! To do thus, is actually renouncing that very
goodness, and those tender mercies, on which you pretend to rely. Will you rely
on the mercy of God, while you continue in that impenitence and unbelief, which
God himself has declared shall terminate in ruin and perdition? How absurd were
this! It is the greatest presumption and madness for any, to whom the gospel is
preached, to rely on the mercy of God in any other way, course or practice,
than that which God Himself has marked out. To depend upon it in any other way,
is at once absurd and impious; this being, ineffect, "making God a liar;" and
assuming to yourselves a right of prescribing to the Almighty, what channel his
goodness and mercy shall flow in, even contrary to his own declared will and
purpose! -- Know, that the counsel of God shall stand; and stand more immutable
than the foundations of the earth, or the pillars of heaven, with whatever
presumptuous hopes vain men may amuse and deceive themselves! And if he that
despised even Moses's law, died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment
suppose ye! -- But I forbear; remembering that inflicting terrible punishments,
is spoken of in scripture as God's strange work; and therefore, certainly, not
be made the theme of common declamation, as it is by many. There would be a
peculiar impropriety in insisting long upon it in a discourse on the goodness
and tender mercies of God. But yet there seemed to be a necessity of saying
something upon this point, by way of warning to wicked men, who so grossly abuse
that very goodness on which they presume. Let the wicked therefore forsake his
way, and return unto the Lord, that he may have mercy upon him; and to our God,
for he will then abundantly pardon, through Jesus Christ; whom he has set forth
to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God.

17. WHAT solid ground have those that love God, and sincerely do his
commandments, for hope, and entire confidence in him? Is it possible for you,
my brethren, who do thus, to doubt of his love to you? -- What! a sincere
believer in Jesus Christ, and the promises of the gospel, -- a truly good man,
doubt the love and care of Him, who is good to all, and whose tender mercies
are over all his works? -- of Him, who is good even to the evil and unthankful!
This is a kind of paradox: But yet it is not an absolute impossibility. And if
you should, in any measure, distrust the particular kindness and love of God to
you, let the following passages in our Savior's discourses, inspire you with a
firm, and truly filial confidence in Him -- Behold the fowls of the air; for
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns: Yet your heavenly
Father feeds them. Are not ye much better than they? Matthew. Chap. VI.
And gain: Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings? and not one of them is
forgotten before God. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear
not therefore* ye are of more value than many SPARROWS. Luke Chap. XII.


18. THE consideration of God's goodness and mercy, particularly as manifested
in the holy scriptures, in the redemption of the world by Christ, naturally
suggests very pleasing hopes, and a glorious prospect, with reference to the
conclusion, or final result of that most wonderful interposition of grace. It
cannot be denied, that ever since the apostasy of our first parents, there have
been, and still are, some things of a dark and gloomy appearance, when
considered by themselves. -- So much folly, superstition and wickedness there
is, "in this present evil world!" -- But when we consider the declared end of
Christ's manifestation in the flesh, -- to give his life a ransom for all, and
to destroy the works of the devil: When we consider the numerous prophecies
respecting the destruction of sin and death, and the future glory of Christ's
kingdom ON EARTH: When we consider, that he must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet, the last of which is DEATH; and till he has subdued
ALL THINGS unto himself: When we reflect, that according to the apostle Paul,
where sin has abounded, grace does much more abound; and that the same creature
[or creation] which was originally made subject to vanity, is to be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of
God: When we consider the parallel which is instituted and carried on by the
same apostle, betwixt the first and second Adam, in his epistle to the Romans;
and his express assertion in another, that "as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive; but every man in his own order:" 1 Cor. XV.22,
23.
In a word, when we duly consider that there is a certain restitution of ALL
THINGS, spoken of by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began:
When we duly consider these things, I say, light and comfort arise out of
darkness and sorrow. And we may, without the least presumption, conclude in
general that, in the revolution of ages, something far more grand, important
and glorious than any thing which is vulgarly imagined, shall actually be the
result of Christ's coming down from heaven to die on a cross, of his
resurrection from the dead, and of his being crowned with glory and honor, as
Lord both of the dead and of the living. -- The word of God, and his mercy,
endure for ever: Nor will he leave any thing which is truly his own work,
unfinished. -- As the heavens are higher than the earth, says the Lord, so are
my ways higher than your ways; and my thoughts than your thoughts -- My word --
that goes forth out of my mouth -- shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please; and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I
sent it. Isai. LV.9, 11.


To conclude then: Let us all, young men and maidens, old men and children,
love and honor, extol and obey the God and Father of all, whose tender mercies
are over all his works; and who has been so gracious and bountiful to ourselves
in particular. If we sincerely do thus, as becomes the children of the
Highest, we shall, in due time, partake of his goodness in a far more glorious
manner and measure, than we can in the earthly house of this tabernacle. We
shall doubtless also have a far more clear, distinct and perfect knowledge,
than we can possibly have at present, of what is intended in some apparently
grand and sublime, and yet difficult passages in the sacred oracles;
particularly that of John the Divine, with which I close. And EVERY CREATURE
which is in HEAVEN, and on the EARTH, and UNDER THE EARTH, and such as are in
the SEA, and ALL THAT ARE IN THEM, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and
glory, and power be unto Him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. Rev. V.13.
AMEN!

THE END.
PSALM XL.9 -- 11.
IN full Assemblies I have told
Thy Truth and Righteousness at large:
Nor did, Thou know, my Lips withold
From uttering what thou gav'st in Charge:
Nor kept within my Breast confined,
Thy Faithfulness, and saving Grace;
But preached thy Love, for all designed
That all might That, and Truth embrace.
Then let those Mercies I declared
To others, Lord, extend to me:
Thy loving Kindness my Reward,
Thy Truth my safe Protection be!
CORRECTIONS.
Page Line From Read 27 15 bottom worlds 34 7 bot. will take 40 -- margin LUKE
43 -- margin Psalm CXI. 45 3 top than those 48 5 top of reason, 87 11 bottom
being, in effect, 88 2 bot. again

N. B. Some less material errors are omitted.


