A DEFENSE Of the OBSERVATION ON THE Charter and Conduct of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, AGAINTS An anonymous Pamphlet
falsely entitled, A CANDID EXAMINATION Of Dr. MAYHEW's Observations, etc. AND
ALSO AGAINST The LETTER to a Friend annexed thereto, said to contain a SHORT
VINDICATION of said Society. By one of its Members.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the WEST Church in Boston.

Cannot my Taste discern PERVERSE things? JOB. Let the RIGHTEOUS stnite me, it
shall be a Kindness; and let hiM reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil,
which shall not break my Head -- R. DAVID. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by R: and
S. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street; EDES and GILL in Queen Street; and T. and J.
FLEET, in Cornhill. 1763

A DEFENSE, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
Concerning the Manner in which the Author of the Observations, etc. has been
treated by his Opponents; and the Way in which he proposes to treat them, in
this DEFENSE.
THE Indian method of attacking their enemies from dark thickets, where they
lie concealed, and discharge their lead undiscovered, instead of appearing
openly to face them on equal ground, is generally considered by Europeans as
ungenerous, dastardly and dishonorable. The manner in which my episcopal
adversaries have assaulted me, since the publication of my Observations, bears
a considerable resemblance to this Indian way of fighting. There has been one
pop after another at me, in succession, for three or four months; from whom or
whence I was as much at a loss, as the troops near the Monongahela were, when
so many brave Britons fell a sacrifice to invisible savages. Genesis Braddock's
defeat.
But these warriors of the church militant, whose fire I have so long
sustained, and who, while they were too modest to show their heads, have
sufficiently exposed the malevolence of their hearts, differ very much from the
savages in one material point: they are far from being equally good marks-men;
they have not taken a right aim. Most of them indeed, have discharged little
besides mud and dirt at me; from which no execution could be expected: And
accordingly, I find myself at last, not wounded, but only bespattered. Nor am I
under the least apprehension, that any of their filth will stick; much less,
that it will prove mortal, however nauseous, and with how much fury soever it
has been discharged at me.

But, to dismiss metaphor and simile for the present; it seems hardly fair or
honorable, when I prefixed my name to what I published, for so many persons to
write against me, one after another, without doing the like. Let them make the
cafe their own. Unless they supposed, they could give a solid, rational answer
to what I wrote, and at which they appear to have been so much alarmed, it did
not become them to write at all upon this occasion. And if they thought they
had actually done so, our common readers will judge, whether my Observations
were so very contemptible, or their modesty and humility so very great, that
they would, by concealing their names, have declined even so inconsiderable an
honor as that of consuting them. They have, in short, tacitly confessed, by
this conduct, either that they were ashamed of their own performances, or
afraid to be known as the authors of them. And whatever just reasons they might
have for the former, yet methinks they could have none for the latter, in this
country and age of liberty; unless, perhaps, it were, that their libels might
expose them to a legal prosecution, and subject them to pay considerable
damages. But I should not have taken this advantage of them, though they had
prefixed their names to their abuses. I have too much commiseration for them,
to wish them any other pain or trouble than what naturally attends such
degeneracy of mind, such rancor of heart, as they have discovered. I should
accordingly have left them, with pity, to the Nemisis within them, without
seeking any further satisfaction for these repeated outrages; though more gross
in their kind, than any person in this country ever before received from the
most licentious pens.

I shall not demean myself so far as to mention even the titles of most of the
publications, to which I refer; much less, take a particular notice of any
thing contained in them: Especially since the authors did not even pretend to
enter into the merits of the cause, but made it their business, throughout, to
defame and revile me. But there has lately appeared against me a pamphlet,
containing two performances, the one entitled, A candid Examination, the other,
A Letter to a Friend; in both which there is an attempt, not merely to asperse
my character, but to vindicate the conduct of the Society in the way of
argument. This pamphlet has been brandished about as a two-edged sword; and
cried up by the episcopal party, as a weapon, whose sharpness and weight it was
impossible to withstand. And it might, perhaps, be thought by some, that I
treated these performances with too great contempt, if I let them pass entirely
unnoticed; especially considering how many readers there are, with whom mere
finesse, chicanery and confidence have all the force of reason and evidence. It
is indeed a doubt with me, whether they merit such a distinction above the
other performances; not merely because they are, like them nameless; but
because they bear so much resemblance to them in point of personal abuse and
invective. Indeed the author of the former of them, the pretended Candid
Examination, does, in effect, acknowledge himself to be neither a scholar nor a
gentleman; by saying, (p. 1.) that my Observations did not "deserve the notice
of either a gentleman or a scholar; which is there assigned as the true reason,
why they had not before "met with a full reply; and why I have "been suffered
to triumph thus long in my performance -- So that he who now undertakes to give
such "a full reply" to them, and to put an end to my supposed long triumph,
implicitly allows, that neither of those titles belongs to himself: Which, many
who read his Examination, will probably be of opinion, is the most candid part
of it. However, as it does not become me to write in form, on such a subject,
against any person but a scholar and gentleman, I shall at once consult his
reputation and my own so far, as to take it for granted that he is both, and
treat him accordingly; at least as far as is consistent with quoting, and
remarking on diverse passages in his performance, which may, perhaps, maugre all
my intended favor and courtesy to him, prove him to be neither.

In conformity to this professed design, I shall entirely neglect many of his
personal invectives against me, no ways affecting the merits of the cause;
giving my attention chiefly to what concerns the main points in dispute. By
thus passing over much of the desamatary part of his performance, and attending
principally to the argumentative, I shall at once do what is most for his
honor, and greatly shorten my own labor. In conformity to the same declaration,
let me here also take occasion to acknowledge the great obligation which I am
under to him, for the charitable design which he professed, of showing me to
myself; the same friendly office which I attempted to do, I hope not in vain,
for the ingenious gentleman, who was the occasion of my writing the
Observations. Self-knowledge is of the utmost importance. But some there are,
alas! who appear so entirely ignorant of, and so determined not to know
themselves, that it were a vain thing to attempt the teaching them this most
useful lesson. I am glad this gentleman did not take me for one of these. And
since he might think it ungenerous in me, after this, to imagine that he is one
himself, he may be pleased to suppose that I intend him the like favor. It is
my sincere wish, that we may both know ourselves: And if I do not rebuke him
quite so sharply, to this good end, as he has taken it upon him to rebuke me
Candid Examination, p. 69.
; the reader is left to judged, whether this is to be ascribed to the want of
just occasion, or to my greater lenity and moderation.

Let it be farther premised here, that I shall touch but very cursorily on the
general controversy betwixt the church of England and protestant nonconformists
thereto: Which, in my opinion, has already been blended more than was necessary
with this dispute about the Society; though they have really some relation to
each other. The gentleman, against whom I first wrote, was the occasion of my
saying what I did, relative to the former controversy. The two gentlemen, with
whom I am now concerned, have gone still farther into it; and consequently
still farther from what I take to be the chief point of debate, with reference
to the Society's conduct. And when or where is this dispute like to terminate,
if it is not to be ended till we have run through the other controversy; and
settled the matter, which is most agreeable to the plan of the gospel, and
consequently most eligible, modern episcopacy, and the worship and discipline
of the church of England, or the presbyterian, or congregational mode? I am, in
my own mind, indeed, in no doubt as to this; neither do my antagonists appear
to be so in their's. But though it should be allowed, that they have the best
side of this question, (which I am very far from thinking) yet it would not
follow from hence, that the Society have applied their charity and money in
New England according to the true intent of their charter; which was the only
point I proposed to debate; as is evident from the Observations. As to the
other general controversy, which these gentlemen seem desirous to draw on, and
to confound with this; it has been so often and so fully handled by those who
were, as I conceive, much our superiors, (if they will pardon this supposition,
as it respects themselves) that I do not imagine either of us could produce any
thing both new and material upon it. For which reason, as well as because I do
not take it to be the turning point between us, as to the Society'si conduct, I
shall wave going into this wide field for the present. I do not, however,
absolutely preclude myself from the honor of waiting on these gentlemen
hereafter, if they should think it expedient to write particularly and
professedly upon this subject: Though it is strictly true, how genteely soever he
may sneer at it, that I have a real aversion to controversy; the occasions of
which I have heretofore avoided, when my sentiments have been publicly attacked.

LET me further just remind my candid Examiner, that whereas he speaks of my
long triumph, during the five or six months (as I suppose) in which his "full
reply" was preparing; we read of some, whose triumphing is short: The
application of which shall be left to himself, and to our impartial readers.

SECTION I.
Of the supposed Inconsistency charged on the Author of the Observations, in
saying, he designed not to accuse the Society of any wilful, criminal abuse of
their Trust; and yet, as the Examiner asserts, endeavoring to prove them
guilty thereof. THOUGH it appeared evident to me, that the Society had, in some
respects, misapplied their charitable fund; yet I thought it more just and
respeclful to them to impute this to any other cause, than to known, wilful
dishonesty. Wise and good men are liable to errors in opinion, and to various
prejudices, in affairs of such a nature; the right management of which depends
upon some circumstances, which they may not be in a situation to be so well
acquainted with, as many of tfreir inferiors. Was it not therefore much more
candid decent in One, fully convinced that there had been a real misapplication
on the part of the Society, to attribute this to such mistakes and prejudices
as the greatest and best men are not wholly exempted from, than to the want of
integrity, or to a wilful betraying of their trust? Every person, I suppose,
except the candid Examiner, will readily acknowledge this. He is much out of
temper with me, for making this profession of respect for the Society; and yet,
as he says, at other times, charging them, either explicitly or implicitly,
with dishonesty, and endeavoring to prove them guilty of it. At this he
quarrels from p. 3. to p. 9. But my expressions, even as quoted by himself, p.
5. and 6. do not, by any means, amount to such an accusation as he supposes
they do; and it was the less candid in him to endeavor to fix upon me an
inconsistency in this respect, because, as he acknowledges, I had repeatedly
desired that none of my expressions might be understood, as designed to charge
the Society with a criminal abuse or their trust.

My expressions do indeed imply, what I still take to be the truth of the case,
viz. that the Society were over-sedulous to promote the cause of episcopacy and
the church of England in these parts; and too much under the influence of
prejudice against us con-conformists. This I suppose to have been the unhappy
and principal occasion of their expending so much money in New England, in a
manner not warranted by their charter. And who does not know, that even very
wise, honest and good men may have foibles of this kind; so as, in some cases,
to have their conduct unhappily influenced thereby? Or must we suppose that
every person, who is too strongly attached to the interests of a particular
church or religious sect, or too much fet against others, and thereby led into
some instances of misconduct, is therefore a dishonest man, and acts contrary
to his known duty? Is this supposition consistent, I will not say, with
christian charity, but with common candor? What then becomes of my supposed
inconsistency, in which he triumphs? For surely this gentleman and scholar (as
I have agreed to call him) will not deny, but that there may, in many cases, be
real misconduct, and very great, proceeding from suchlike causes, where yet
there is none that is known, wilful and criminal.

ThiS candid gentleman says, p. 6. "Perhaps this consistent reasoner will choose
rather to say, that the Society are misled, and form their plan upon the
misrepresentations of their wicked missionaries. Something like this is
asserted etc. And then he adds, p. 7. "But surely whatever representations
these missionaries have made, the Society must judge whether the complying with
such representations was, or was not, consistent with their charter; so that
notwithstanding his striving to palliate his accusation of the Society, by
casting the odium of a pretended misapplication of their charity on the
missionaries, the slander will still remain where he at first placed it, on the
Society themselves. Now does he not here reason like a scholar indeed? Because
the Society must needs judge, whether their complying with such
representations, however wrong in themselves, was, or was not consistent with
their charter, therefore the supposed slander must needs fall upon them, not on
the missionaries, or other, who may have deceived them! But why so? Is is
expected that the Society should be omniscient, or infallible? Or are they
justly culpable, if they act with integrity, according to the representations
of people in America, which they believe to be just? If I had intimated, that
they must answer at their peril for any involuntary mistakes which they might
fall into, through misrepresentations from hence, might not the Examiner and the
world have justly consuted me? But this candid gentleman himself, it seems,
will have the Society accountable for all impositions put on them by their
missionaries or others here, which may have been the occasion of misleading
them, whatever pains they take to be rightly informed; -- for this substantial
reason, that they must judge, whether the complying with such representations
was, or was not consistent with their charter. Upon which hard condition, this
gentleman had probably rather be even one of those " wicked missionaries" he
speaks of, than a member of the venerable Society; since, according to it, the
latter are to answer for the faults of the former.

THE truth of the matter, with respect to my supposed inconsistency in the
forementioned respect, appears to me to be this: Though my direct charge against
the Society arose no higher than that of a real misapplication of moneys, which
I never once attributed, to known, wilful dishonesty; but repeatedly guarded
against any such construction of my words; yet my Examiner seems to suppose,
that some of the arguments adduced by me, in support of that general charge, if
they prove any thing, prove more than I professedly aimed at by them; viz. That
this misapplication must have been a known and wilful, and therefore highly
criminal one. And this, I have reason to think, is the real opinion of some
others besides the Examiner: And of some, who will not draw the notable
conclusion from hence, that he has done, namely, That therefore there is no
real misapplication in the case! But of this more in the next Section, Let it
suffice for the present, that he had no ground to tax me with inconsistency,
though my proofs had really arisen higher than my charge, as I am far from saying
they do, whatever others may suppose. And if he had had as much, candor as the
title of his performance promises, one would think, he might have acknowledged
this as an example of mine, instead of triumphing, as he does, in an imaginary
self-contradiction in me.

SECTION II.
Of a notable argument of the Examiner, That if the Society have been guilty of
any misapplication of moneys, it must have been wilful; and therefore, that,
according to my concessions, the general charge of a misapplication is
groundless. ThiS argument the Examiner labors, in his labyrinthian manner, from
p. 9. to 18. The sum of it, in few words, is this: That if the Society have
been guilty of any misconduct, it must be either owing to their want of a
competent knowledge of the state of religion in New England, or to their not
understanding the sense and design of their own charter; or, lastly, it must
have been known and wilful. He endeavors at large to prove, it could be owing
to neither of the former causes; and as to the latter, he says, I do not myself
assign this as the true; but rather disown it to have been a known and wilful
misapplication. Therefore, he says, they have not at all misapplied moneys.

THAT I have here given the true sense of this refined, long-labor'd argument,
may appear from the Examiner's own words, where he sums it up: He there says,
he thinks it has "been proved, either that the Society have not acted
inconsistent with their charter, or if they have done so, that it was
knowingly, wilfully and designedly done. He proceeds, speaking of himself: "The
author thinks, as all reasonable men must thinks, that the Society do very well
understand the design and meaning of their charter -- And also that they have a
competent knowledge of the state of religion in the plantations. If these two
things are allowed, the conclusion will unavoidably be -- either that the
Society have wilfully misconducted, or else, that there has been no misconduct
in the case -- That they have wilfully misconducted, the Dr. disallows,
THEREFORE THERE HASD BEEN NO MISCONDUCT AT ALL. -- Here then the argument and
imputation which the Dr. has cast upon the Society, drop of course, p. 17, 18.
Now, not to observe, that he supposes, I cast arguments upon the Society, as
well as imputations; did ever any one meet with a pleasanter, more candid, or
more conclusive piece of reasoning than this? Someshort remarks upon it will be
sufficient.

1. WHAT I directly charged the Society with, and endeavored to prove, was, a
real misapplication of moneys in New England.

2. THE justness and proof of this general charge depend not on the particular
cause or occasion of such supposed misapplication. Whether it were owing to any
mistakes about the religious state of New England, or to a misconstruction of
any clause in the charter, or were known and wilful; or were owing to any other
supposeable cause, if any there be, affects not the justice of the charge in
general.

3. It was not, therefore, incumbent upon me, in the course of my argument,
particularly and minutely to point out the true cause, or causes of this
misapplication: It was sufficient to prove it real; as I did, even to the
conviction of some sensible and candid episcopalians.

4. I AM not, therefore, under obligation, though it were in my power, to
invalidate his supposed clear proofs, that the Society were neither mistaken
about the state of religion here, nor the sense of any part of their charter;
and that a misapplication could not be owing to any thing less innocent than a
wilful betraying their trust. For,

5. IF all this should be conceeded, what conclusion would naturally and justly
follow herefrom, but one which, as I conceive, would be much more to my honor
than to that of the Society, or to the advantage of the Examiner; viz. That I
was too candid in supposing the misconduct of the Society not to be known and
wilful?

6. WHEREAS he says he fays, I "disallow" that it was known and wilful; this is
rather too strongly expressed; -- as if I had labored that point, or at least
laid some stress upon it, in my argument. Neither of which I did; though I
thought, and still think, it was far more decent and charitable to allow, that
though there was a misapplication, yet it might possibly be undesigned, than to
assert, with the candid Examiner, that it must be known, wilful, and highly
criminal.

7. IF I have been too charitable in that concession, as he seems to suppose;
yet, methinks, both he and the venerable Society might "forgive me this wrong;
especially if I should ever be convinced, and make an humble acknowledgment of
my fault therein. And indeed, all that he has said in this argument, has a much
greater tendency to induce me to make an acknowledgment of this sort, than to
convince me that my general charge was not well grounded, or sufficiently
proved.

8. As his argument here manifestly tends much less to confute me, than it does
to fix upon the Society the heinous charge of betraying their important trust,
which my veneration for them would not allow me to bring against them; it may
well be questioned, whether he will ever receive their thanks. He has, to the
utmost of his power, in his great candor, utterly precluded both them and
himself from ever pleading it, byway of apology for these misapplications, that
they proceeded from innocent mistake only, and were not known, wilful and
criminal. Let the discerning and impartial judge, whether he is not in duty
bound humbly to ask their pardon, as having contributed to fix on them a much
higher charge than I ever brought, or designed to bring.

I am the more surprised at this conduct in the Examiner, because he appears to
have been aware of the tendency of his argument, by introducing the objection,
though without answering it. "Some friend of the Dr. says he, "may possibly here
cry out, What would this remarker be at? The Dr. has plainly proved that the
Society have been guilty of great misconduct, have acted quite inconsistent
with the intent and design of their charter; and, from a principle of charity,
is willing to impure it to misinformation, or ignorance; [by the way, I used no
such indecent language at this ( ignorance) concerning the Society] "while this
writer, who affects to be the friend of the Society, is laboring to defeat the
Dr's benevolent purpose, and seems as though he designed to prove their
misconduct to be wilful. However candid the Examiner may be thought, for
introducing this objection himself; yet, I believe, most of his readers will
think him very impolitic therein, unless he could have given an answer to it,
as plausible at least, as the objection itself is obvious and pertinent.

SECTION III.
Of the supposed impeachment of the Lord Chancellor, etc. implied in the
aforesaid imputation on the Society. THE Examiner, in the course of his
argument, designed to prove that the Society's misconduct, if real, is not to
be imputed to mistake, suggests that I grossly reflect on the judgment or
uprightness of certain great, and justly revered personages, who are empowered
to inspect their conduct. How genteely and heartily he speaks of this, will
best appear from his own words -- "Doubtless," says he, "the Lord Chancellor,
the Chief Justices of the King's Bench and Common Pleas, whose peculiar
profession it is, may be supposed to understand the nature of instruments of
this kind [the charter.] And as the Society are obliged to exhibit an annual
account of their proceedings to these very learned and worthy persons, it is
surprising that they should suffer them to proceed above 60 years, without once
acquainting them that their conduct was not agreeable to the letter and spirit
of their charter. That the Society should at last be obliged to a profound
Critic in New England, etc. [p. 16, 17.] "It is not the Society alone, who are
thus unjustly arraigned by these licentious pens, but the integrity and honor
of their inspectors also, the Lord Chancellor, etc. [p. 19.] It may be
incumbent upon me to say a few words with reference to this invidious way of
reasoning.

It is not even pretended, that I dropped the least disrespectful word,
directly, of these great personages; but only the Examiner supposes, that I and
others implicitly accuse them, as wanting either in wisdom or integrity, or
both. This, it is conceived, is both groundless and injurious. For,

However wise and upright they are; yet, whether the Society have, in all
cases, applied their charity according to the true intent of their charter,
depends very essentially, not merely upon an exact and critical knowledge of
law, or the design of the charter, but upon the manner, and various
circumstances of places, persons and things, in which their moneys have been
applied. It is apparently as necessary, in order to a right judgment in the
case, that these should be particularly known, adverted to and considered, as
that the sense and design of the charter should be perfectly understood.
Without this, persons of the most consummate wisdom and integrity, such as
their Lordships are allowed to be, may possibly be ender a mistake with
reference to these applications.

It may be supposed, I humbly conceive, with all due reverence to these right
honorable persons, involved in so much secular business, and at such a
distance from N. England, (even the civil and political state of which has been
so imperfectly known at home, till within a few years) that even they may
possibly have had some conceptions, not exactly conformable to the true state
of religion here; upon which the propriety of the Society's conduct, as was
intimated before, may essientially depend.

Though the Society's accounts, and an abstract of their proceedings are annually
laid before their Lordships; yet it does not particularly appear from them,
what the true state of religion is in these parts. And may it not, without
arraigning the wisdom, integrity and honor of the Lord Chancellor, etc. be
supposed that they put great confidence in the Society? -- especially if it be
considered, that they may never have heard the propriety of their conduct
called in question, respecting the N. England mission? May they not be supposed
to have taken it for granted, that all was well, right, and as it ought to be,
without nicely scrutinizing into the affair? It is, I suppose, no unusual
thing, where there are no prior suspicions or complaints of mismanagement, in
other cases, for persons of the greatest wisdom and justice to suffer abuses to
pass uncenfured, upon a natural presumption, that in such cases, there is no
ground for cenfure. Indeed, if their Lordships had had the Society's conduct
with respect to N. England under their particular consideration; and if it
appeared that they were duly apprized of the most material objections that have
been made against it; and after this, declared their approbation of it, as
conformable to the true intent of their charter; common prudence might then
require any private person to be silent upon the subject; since finding fault
with these applications would, in this case, be implicitly to reflect upon the
judgment of those distinguished personages. But it is, by no mean, sufficient
to silence any considerate man, to reflect that the Society annually lay before
them some brief account of their proceedings, which have hitherto passed
uncenfured. And when all dt'circumstances are duly considered, I apprehend no
candid man, except my very candid Examiner, would build much upon this
argument; much less tax me, for any thing said in the Observations, with
arraigning the "integrity and honor" of the Lord Chancellor, etc. This is only
an argument ad invideum; or of that kind, in which my Examiner, not to say
Inquisitor, seems chiefly to delight.

SECTION IV.
Of the Examiner's exceptions against the Author's construction of the charter;
and he offered in support thereof. ThiS acute logician being apprehensive that,
through the dullness of his readers, what he had hitherto offered would be
unsatisfactory to them, enters upon an examination of my remarks on the
charter; with a design to show, that I had misrepresented its sense. But, by
way of introduction, he gives us a specimen of his candor.

He insinuates, or rather asserts, p. 19, 20. and elsewhere, that I made an
unfair and dishonorable use of what Mr. HOBART wrote upon this subject. This,
he cannot but know, is less ingenuous than what they who read his title page
only, might have reasonably expected from him. I expressly gave mr. HOBART
credit for every Iora I had from him; having quoted him as I remember, in ten
or a dozen places; as well as acknowledged, in a more general way, that his
book had "been of service to me". Which, with any person of as much candor as
the Examiner professes, might have secured me against the dishonorable
imputation of plagiarism, And inless be can produce some clear and substantial
argument, besides a general agreement with Mr. HOBART in sentiment, to prove
this charge; (which he has not attempted, and I challenge him to do) I leave
him to consider, what opinion our impartial readers must entertain of him. --

He also appears much disgusted, because I said, Mr. HOBART had handled this
argument in a manner becoming "a truly christian bishop." He says, I have
"dubbed him bishop," p. 18. And p. 19. he speaks of the " empty honor of a
bishop, which I arbitrarily confer on him, etc. But since I, at most, spoke of
Mr. HOBART only as a christian bishop, in contradistinction from a bishop of
the established church of England; and since, in his opinion, this (...) to be
but an empty honor, methinks he need not have been so much offended at it -- He
also resents it, that I took no notice of Mr. BEACH's reply to Mr. HOBART. One
reason of this was, that I did not think it merited any. And though he calls it a
judicious, masterly and solid answer; it is my serious opinion, that if all the
heads of the Rev. missionaries in America were consolidated into one, it would
not be in the power of that wonderful head to give such an answer to the piece
he speaks of. But these things by the oye.

The Examiner appears in general to dislike what I gave as the sense of the
charter; which, partly to show his disapprobation of that, and partly to vent
his candor at me, he calls Mr. HOBART's sense of it. But still it is not very
easy, at least for me, to tell what he particularly disapproves of, in that
sense of the charter, be it whose it will. But as it is very material to have a
right understanding of the true sense, spirit and design of the charter, in
order to form a right judgment of the Society's conduct, I shall attend to what
he says with reference thereto. And,

First, He taxes me with not adhering, myself, to the rule which I laid down
for interpreting the charter; viz. That "nothing is to be supposed the object,
or any part of the object or this charitable and royal institution, but what
plainly appears to be really so, from the very words of the charter -- The
words of the charter itself must determine and limit the sense of the royal
Grantor, and consequently the legal power conferred, etc. Having quoted these
passages, without directly finding fault with the rule laid dbwn, he says, "We
shall see presently how far the Dr. adheres to his own invariable rule of
interpretation, p. 20. Very well. "He confesses that the British plantations,
or the King's subjects were really the primary, more immediate object of this
institution. The Examiner then demands, with great vivacity, "And pray why not
the sole and entire object of it? There is certainly no other object
particularly expressed in the charter, besides that of the king's subjects. He
has forgot what he asserted but a few lines before, etc. Let it be here
observed,

1. That the Society themselves have all along supposed, they were allowed, and
even obliged by their charter, to use means in order to the conversion of the
American Indians.

2. If so, it must be by virtue of some particular clause, or clauses therein,
or by the very words of the charter. For otherwise, what right have the Society
to apply any part of their fund to this end?

3. The words of the charter clearly show, that this was, in part, the design
of their institution. For though the Indians are not expressly mentioned; yet, as
I hinted in the Observations, those words in the charter, "for the propagation
of the gospel in those parts, manifestly refer to the heathens bordering on the
plantations; and have ever been so understood. The Indians therefore plainly
appear, from the very words of the charter itself, to have been in part the
object of this institution. This the Examiner does in effect allow, by saying,
p. 22. "What is here said is not intended to prove that the Society have not a
power by their charter to propagate the gospel among the heathen, etc. How can
they have such a power by their charter, unless the very words of the charter,
in a fair and obvious construction, grant it to them? This, he knows, is all
that I meant, when I spoke of the words of the charter itself, as what must
determine and limit the sense of the royal Grantor, and consequently the legal
power conferred, etc. What ground had he then, to accuse me of departing from
the invariable rule of interpretation, which I had laid down? But,

4. He attempts to evade the obvious meaning of that clause in the charter,
"for the propagation of the gospel in those parts; in how candid and
scholar-like a manner, the reader shall judge. "Is not the design of that
phrase, says he, " the propagation of the gospel [here he artfully suppresses
the words, in those parts] " fully answered, by preaching it to those of the
king's subjects who seems to be abandoned to atheism and infidelity, and to
those other inferior subjects the slaves? many of whom even in N. England are
yet in a state of heathenism -- Is there a single word about the heathen
bordering on our colonies? Why will he then force upon us a design which the
charter does not mention? p. 21, 22. I answer the design of the phrase
aforesaid, would not be fully answered, in the way that he supposes it would.
though it would be partly answered. If the had wholly neglected the Indians in
these part though a door was opened for christianizing them, It might be justly
said, they had neglected one material part of their charge, according to the
very words, and obvious sense of their charter. For the words, "for propagating
the gospel in those" parts, must, in a fair and natural construction, be
supposed to mean, that it was their business and duty to spread the gospel in
these parts as far as they should have ability and opportunity for it; and, as
was intimated before, they have ever been understood as referring to the
heathen bordering on our colonies. And to deny this, as the Examiner implicitly
does, because Indians are not expressly mentioned; and saying that the design of
the phrase aforesaid, would fully answered, though the charity of the Society
were confined to the king's subjects, would, I suppose, be thought a poor piece
of chicanery in any person but a candid Examiner; and one who was "to show the
Dr. the sophistry of his argument; and that the rule which he lays down for
interpreting the charter, would, if admitted, exclude the Society from this
good work, etc. p. 22. So far from this, that the very words of the charter
manifestly bring the heathen bordering on the British colonies, within the
design of this institution. And where the charge of sophistry ought to lie, is
now submitted to the intelligent reader. Let me just add here,

5. THAT my supposing the christianizing of the Indian nations is comprehended,
or rather principally designed in the aforesaid clause, is by no means using
such a latitude of interpretation, as will equally, or at all authorize the
Society in applying their revenues for the propagation of the church of England
in those places, where the people have already the means of religion in other
protestant communions; and so are in no particular danger of falling into
atheism or infidelity, or the errors of popery. This is what the Examiner seems
to aim at, in the last-mentioned page. But it is unneccessary to add any thing
here, to what was said in the Observations.

Secondly, THE Examiner loudly exclaims, because, in order to confirm that
catholic interpretation which I had put upon the charter, I said, "King WILLIAM
himself was bred up in the calvinistic principles and discipline, quite
opposite in M some respects to the episcopal; and is generally supposed to have
retained a regard for the principles of his education all along; though as King
of England, and head of that church, there was a neccessity of his externally
conforming to its rites and discipline -- This was mentioned by me as one
circumstance, which might contribute to render it probable, that King WILLIAM
did not understand the term orthodox ministers in the charter, in the narrow,
exclusive sense of some episcopalians; as if it comprehended only ministers of
the established church of England. And here my rhetorical, as well as candid
Examiner calls upon his reader to ^^op, and "indulge his astonishment"; adding,
"Was this glorious deliverer then a finished hypocrite? etc. etc. p. 23. I
answer,

1. ALL who know any thing of me and my political opinions, know that I have
the highest veneration for the memory of King WILLIAMS, and that glorious
revolution, which was the occasion of establishing the protestant succession in
the before-illustrious, and now royal house of Hanover. I wish the same could
be truly said of all the highflying episcopalians among us --

2. MY words respecting King WILLIAM do not at all imply, that he was an
hypocrite, much less a finished one, as this gentleman intimates. For,

3. It is very supposeable, that he might retain a great regard for the
principles of his education; and yet upon the whole, all circumstances
confidered, have such an opinion of the church of England, that he could, with
a good conscience, conform to its rites and discipline. I have not sagacity
enough, whatever my Examiner has, to see the least inconsistency between these
things. And if the reader cannot, as it is presumed he cannot, discern any, let
him once again indulge his astonishment, that this candid gentleman should make
such a tragical exclamation at so harmless a supposition, merely to bring an
odium upon me, as if I tacitly accused K. WILLIAM as a finished hypocrite. But,

4. THE gentleman is very confident, in opposition to me, that King'WILLIAM
actually "looked upon the ministry in the church of England as orthodox, in
opposition to those who dissent from the establishment, p. 23. his reason for
this is very curious; and, if we may take his word, "a better evidence could
not be given, etc. Let us then see what this best evidence for the aforesaid
position is. Why, it is "his giving a hundred pounds sterling per annum -- for
supporting a minister of the church of England in Boston, and his bestowing a
valuable library of books on King's chapel in that town. To which is added,
"his royal foundation of a college at Williamsburg -- Now, who can be so dull
as not to perceive, that from these facts or premises this consequence is
logically drawn -- Therefore King WILLIAM looked upon the ministry in the
church of England as orthodox, in opposition to those who dissent from the
establishment? For how was it possible the good King should be so liberal to
those that needed, if it had not been his opinion, that non-conformists to the
established church were unorthodox? And by the same way of reasoning, will it
not also follow, that all the gentlemen who, a few years since, subscribed or
contributed to the rebuilding of the aforesaid King's chapel in Boston, had the
like sentiments of the ministry in the church of England, and looked on her
clergy as orthodox, in opposition to Presbyterians and Congregationalists; though
some who, as I am informed, subscribed for that purpose, have ever been known
non-conformists to that church? And why might not this gentleman as well argue,
that every rich person who gives an alms to a poor churchman, certainly looks
upon him and the church of England as orthodox, in contradistinction to all
non-conformists? According to which rule, it is a question whether there is a
rich gentleman in Boston, but what is a thorough-pac'd churchman in his heart;
and even a great bigot -- What the Examiner adds, p. 25. about orthodoxy,
heterodoxy and herefy, with a view to confine the term orthodox to ministers of
the church of England, may, I believe, be very safely left without any reply;
only referring the reader to what was said upon this point in the Observations,
Sect. II. and IX.

THE Examiner having proceeded thus far with his shrewd objections against what
I offered, relative to the sense and design of the charter; did not like, as it
seems, to reason so closely any longer on the same point. He therefore here
quits the charter, to talk about establishments; concerning which, he says, I
have gone into a mistake. And though he intimates, that I was not positive, and
did not lay much stress upon what I occasionally said about establishments; yet
he has labored this matter for 13 pages together; viz. from p. 26. to p. 39.
inclusive. Some farther notice will hereafter be taken of this huge parenthesis
in the Examiner's argument. But at present I shall pay my attention to what he
says after it, against what I advanced, to show and confirm the true sense of
the charter. Wherefore,

Thirdly, HE seems much disposed to object against the argument which I drew
from the name of the Society; but after reading over, two or three times, what
he says as to this matter, p. 40. I must comfess myself so dull, as not to
apprehend distinctly what be means, or objects against. The scope of what he
says under this head, seems to be, to prove what I never denied, viz. That the
Society's "institution admits of the presevation as well as the extension of
the gospel, etc. But if he intends to apply this, as doubtless he does, to
their supporting episcopal missionaries among us, where God's word and
sacraments are so duly administered; a if the charity of the Society was rightly
beshowed here under the pretense of preserving us from infidelity atheism or
popery; I must beg leave to think h^^^ mistaken; and to say, that we are, and
have all along been, even in much less apparent danger of being abandoned to
these evils, and errors, than the people of England. And if so, whatever
expense the Society have (...), to support and propagate the church of England
here, considered in opposition to presbyterianism, etc. has been a
misapplicatloa; not conformable to their charter, or to their name or title, as
a Society founded for the propagation of the gospel.

Fourthly, HE objects against what I said of the Society's seal, by way of
illustration. He is likewise so candid as to mis-quote my words (...) the seal,
( Ex. p. 41.) in order to make me speak nonsense: But it so happens, that I
have neither inclination, nor the least occasion to take the same liberty with
his words, in diverse places, in order to answer the like end. What I said of
the seal, was in order to show, that it corresponded both to the name of the
Society, and to that catholic sense of the charter, which I had given; but not
to such a narrow, party design, as that of converting protestants of one
denomination, to another. This is (...) true, and directly to the purpose; though
he says, "It is not easy to imagine what this proof was alleged for, since it
either proves too much, or else nothing at all to his purpose. By the way, I
did not bring this for proof, but illustration; the distinction betwixt which,
he either knows, or ought to have known. He goes on, "If it was designed to
prove that the sole business of the Society, was to carry the gospel to the
savages, etc. He knows, I never asserted, much less endeavored to prove, by
this or any other argument, that this was their sole business. -- "But if it
was brought to prove, that the conversion of the natives was one part of the
design of their institution, etc. Neither was it chiefly for this end; but if
he will needs have it intended for the proof of any point, in distinction from
illustration, it was this; that such a catholic sense as I had mentioned, ought
to be put upon the expressions in the charter; and not such an illiberal one as
many suppose; as if the Society were instituted, at least in part, for
propagating the church of England, in opposition to protestants of other
denominations. And however difficult it may be for him, I believe it will be
very easy for others, to conceive how what I said of the seal, tends to confirm
what I said of the charter. And some may, perhaps, perceive also, that what he
has offered upon this head, is mere evasion, not argument.

Fifthly, THE Examiner finds much fault with what I said of the sermons
preached before the Society, in order to illustrate, and thereby to confirm the
true design of their institution. He says, -- "This, like the former instance
produced by him, either justifies the Society, or else is nothing at all to the
purpose, p. 42. Why so? It follows, "For does not the Dr. himself represent the
design sign of their institution to be that of preserving and propagating
christianity among the King's subjects, and extending it also to the heathen?
Certainly; these general expressions comprehend the whole design. But then,
preserving christianity among the King's subjects, must be supposed to refer to
such places and colonies as are pointed out in the charter; viz. those which
greatly need this charitable provision; not those in which a competent
provision was before made for ministers, and where the King's subjects already
enjoyed God's word and sacraments, so as not to be in any apparent danger of
falling into atheism, infidelity or popery. This observation suggests the
proper answer to the question immediately following; "And has not this been the
very practice of the Society from the beginning? I never intimated, that they
had not done much, according to the true intent of their charter, as it has
been represented. But they have also done much beside, or beyond that intent,
by supporting and propagating the church of England, in opposition to other
protestant churches, at a great expense, where their charity was not needed; to
the neglect of those unhappy people pointed out in their charter, as the
proper, and only proper objects of their charitable care.

THE Examiner proceeds: "And what do the anniversary sermons imply, but certain
exhortation to pursue the several objects of their institution? If this is all
they imply, they are directly to my purpose; and do not in the least tend to
justify the Society, as he supposes; since they have pursued certain objects,
which do not appear to have been originally objects of their institution. He
adds, -- "Those which the Dr. has quoted insist chiefly upon one topic, while
other sermons preached upon the same occasion enlarge upon some other branch of
the general design. Let it be here obferved,

1. THAT my citations, (Sect. IV.) were expressly made, as specimens of the
general strain and tenor of those sermons; for which I appealed to those who
are conversant in them. But yet,

2. ThiS candid gentleman has not shown, and is now challenged to show, any one
branch of the general design, which is not obviously contained in those
quotations. That from the excellent bishop BUTLER speaks expressly of keeping up
the profession of christianity "in our factories abroad, and the colonies to
which we are related -- of the slaves, and "taking care for their religious
instruction. And it is added, "The like charity we owe to the natives Now, what
branch of the general design is not fairly and clearly comprehended in these
expressions, in conformity to what was observed immediately after this
citation? viz. " Thus Dr. BUTLER, with his usual penetration and accuracy,
represents the true design of this noble institution, in its whole view,
compass and extent."

3. I also intimated, that some of the sermons speak of more than the charter
does, or warrants; viz. propagating the church of England in oppsition to that
mode, or those modes of protestantism, which are generally professed and
practiced in New England. Of this a specimen was afterward given from Dr.
BEARCROFT's sermon; though in some other of these sermons, such a design and
conduct are at least implicitly condemned: Of which some examples were also
given in the citations from two bishops of St. Afaphs, and from Dr. WADDINGTON.
Was not this a fair way of proceeding? or what would my Examiner have had me
done? Why, he says, -- "If the Dr. had intended to have drawn an argument from
these sermons, in proof of the general design of their institution, he should
have formed an abstract from them ALL, so far at least as they have enlarged
upon different topics; and have given us the collective sense of the whole. But
this indeed would not have served his turn, etc. p. 43. But till he can show
some one branch of the original design, which is not clearly expressed in my
quotations, his objecting in this manner will, perhaps, be thought much less
candid than captious, by intelligent readers: And what turn he may have to
serve by it, all are left to conjecture.

BUT the gentleman may possibly think I do not pay a due attention to his
critical sagacity, unless I take some notice of a specimen of it, in what he
says in this part of the Examination. I said in the Observations, p. 31. "The
preachers upon these occasions seem evidently, however, to have had the heathen
in their minds, rather than professed christians, who only needed assistance in
order to the support of God's worship and ordinances: In which respect the
sermons rather coincide with the ultimate than the more immediate design of the
institution; and so harmonize rather more, perhaps, with the seal and name of
the Society, than with the charter. [Because (as I imagined every intelligent
reader would understand me) the charter dwells chiefly, not upon the ultimate,
but the more immediate design of the institution; i. e. not upon the conversion
of heathens, but the assistance of the King's subjects in the colonies.] The
Examiner having quoted a part of this passage, which relates to the sermons in
general, not particularly to those cited by me, as he has represented it, (though
I will not say, to serve a turn) criticizes upon it thus: "What now are we to
learn from hence, but that the seal and name of the Society, which a little
before he had produced to explain and support his sense of the charter, do
really not harmonize with it at all, but only with the sermons he has quoted?
So all he had been offering before by way of proof, from the name and seal of
the Society, is now given up again, as being (what indeed it is) nothing to the
purpose. This gentleman has a very strange method of proving and disproving, of
asserting and giving up again. Sure he could never expect to arrive at any
solid conclusion by this wanton method of arguing, p. 42, 43. Now, is not this
very smartly and vivaciously said? But,

1. IT was to my purpose, if the name and seal of the Society corresponded to
either part of the general design of the institution, as represented in the
charter: And I observed that they certainly did so more especially to that part
of the design, christianizing the heathens.

2. ThiS I neither gave up nor contradicted, by saying that the sermons
harmonized rather more, perhaps, with the name and seal of the Society, than
with the charter; which chiefly dwells on the primary, and more immediate
object of the institution. For,

3. THEY may all harmonize together, and yet some of them harmonize rather more
exactly than others: A less perfect harmony implies no contradiction or
repugnancy, but a real agreement.

4. UPON what ground then does this candid gentleman say, that in the passage
aforesaid, I represent the seal and name of the Society as not harmonizing at
all with the charter, contrary to what I had just been showing? -- that I gave
this up again? -- proving and disproving, and using a wanton method of arguing?
It would be to his credit if these positions, so alertly thrown out, did not
more clearly discover something else, than either his candor, or his sagacity
and critical skill, whatever he may imagine.

BUT he taxes me with treating the anniversary sermons with "great indecency"
also. This, he says, "will appear to any one who consults my 13th, 14th, and
15th sections, as well as many other passages in my book, p. 43. I own, I spoke
with great contempt of certain passages in one of these sermons, Sect. 13th, as
savouring strongly of bigotry: For which there was sufficient reason. But there
is nothing in the two other sections to which he refers, that can, I think, be
justly construed into a reflection on these sermons. And he may please to
remember, that I spoke of the anniversary sermons in general, in a very
respectful manner, before I began my citations from them. Obs. p. 32. "I have
read many of these excellent sermons, both the very earliest, etc.

LET it be here observed, that the Examiner has thought proper entirely to pass
over one material remark which I made upon these anniversary sermons,
particularly bishop BUTLER's, which takes in the whole design of the
institution. It was to this purpose; That in these sermons good men of all
denominations are called on to help forward the pious work of the Society, as
marked out in the charter; Which exhortation, though of great weight, so long as
the original institution is kept to; yet loses its propriety and force, when
considered as addressed to non-conformists, to persuade them to assist the
Society in supporting and propagating the church of England in these parts, in
opposition to the modes of worship and discipline which generally prevail here.
It will not be amiss here to subjoin one observation of considerable moment,
which did not occur to me when I was writing before; viz. That several of the
members, and original Grantees of the Society, were non-conformists. Such, in
particular, as I suppose, were John Hook, Esquire; sergeant at law, Gray Neville,
Esquire; Mr. Hodges, merchant, and Peter King, afterward Lord Chancellor, and
doubtless then an occasional conformist; author of the learned Inquiry into the
Constitution, Discipline, Unity and Worship of the primitive Church; so
different, in many respects, from that of the church of England. And surely it
cannot be supposed that these, or other non-conformists would have joined in
any design, one branch of which was, to support and propagate the church of
England in the colonies, in opposition to presbyterianism, etc. Which, as is
now pretended by many, was one principal and original object of this
institution.

WHETHER my Examiner has, or has not said any thing of weight, to invalidate
what I offered in order to fix the true sense of the charter, in opposition to
that narrow, uncatholic one, which confines orthodoxy to the church of England,
and which supposes us non-conformists thereto, to be destitute of God's word
and sacraments, so as to seem abandoned to atheism and infidelity, or in
imminent danger of being perverted to popery: This is submitted to the judgment
of the intelligent and impartial: If he has not done this, he has hitherto done
nothing to purpose.

SECTION V.
Of what the Examiner says of the establishment of the Church of England in
these Colonies,

I Now return to what the gentleman says of establishments, from p. 26 to 39
inclusive: So large a proportion of his pamphlet is taken up in an attempt to
prove, that the church of England is, and that our congregational churches are
not, establisted here. Something shall be offered respecting both; and in this
section, concerning the former. Though it was said, en passant, in the
Observations, that the church of England was not established here; yet he knows
that I did not make a point of this. Possibly I was mistaken; though I spoke as I
thought, and was never backward to retract an error, when fully convinced of
if: "Not free from faults, nor yet too vain to mend."

I HAD before read all that the Examiner has produced, of any consequence, to
prove the establishment of the church of England in the colonies. This is
contained in an anonymous letter to a Rev. gentleman in this town, printed in
1745, and signed J. F. I have carefully read said letter since, and been at the
pains to look over the several statutes cited therein; but without being
satisfied, that the ingenious author of it has proved his point. However, I
will not positively deny it, or undertake to prove the contrary. But as I do
not yet see reason to retract my former opinion, it may naturally be expected,
that I should at least assign some of the reasons why I remain unconvinced, by
what is contained in the letter aforesaid. This shall be done with such
diffidence of my own opinion, as might perhaps as well have become the
Examiner, as the great confidence which he has expressed. Mr. BEACH, whose
reply to Mr. HOBART he so highly extols, leaves this as a doubtful point, to be
discussed by gentlemen of the law. But to return,

THE sensible and, I suppose, learned author of the letter aforesaid, before he
speaks particularly of the statutes, says, "The christian religion, as by its
evidence and intrinsic excellency, it recommended itself to the English
government, so it became by law the religion of the English nation; and the
church of England became by law their national church: And when any part of the
English nation spread abroad into colonies, as they continued a part of the
nation, the law obliged them equally to the church of England, and to the
christian religion. I crave leave, with all proper deference to the opinion of
others, particularly of those who have made law their principal study, to
remark here,

1. THAT when the gentleman says, the law obliges the English colonies "equally
to the church of England, and to the christian religion, his meaning
undoubtedly is, that it really obliges them to both; and not more to one than
to the other.

2. ThiS reasoning is partly grounded on the supposition, that the particular
mode or form of christianity, which is established in the mother country, is
not of a more local nature than christianity itself; which, the gentleman very
justly observes, "by its evidence, and intrinsic excellency, recommended itself
to the English government. For if one be more local than the other, would it be
properly said, the law obliges the colonies equally to both?

3. THE whole force of the argument, it is conceived, lies here, that colonies
emigrating from the English nation, continue a part of the nation.

4. IF the reasoning in this passage will hold good, this is a short and easy
way of putting an end forever to the question about the establishment of the
church of England here. For, that the said church is the established religion
of the English nation, of which the colonies thence derived continue a part, no
one in the least doubts. So that if this alone is sufficient to render the
established religion of England, the established religion out of England also,
there is no more to be said. But yet, it seems, the author of said letter did
not choose to rest the cause upon the strength of this argument; for he no
sooner mentions than he leaves it, and has recourse to particular statutes,
from the language of which he endeavors to prove that the church of England is
established, not only in England, etc. but in the colonies themselves. What
occasion was there for this labor, if it be a clear point, that the laws of
England are in their nature binding on all parts of the nation, spread abroad
in colonies, even though they are not particularly expressed or regarded in the
statutes?

5. ACCORDING to this way of reasoning, it will follow, that all the laws of
England, without exception, whether prior or posterior to the establishment of
colonies, are obligatory upon the people in them, as much as if they actually
lived in England: (I mean, unless they should, in some cases, be expressly
exempted from the power of them) For if we are bound by them, merely as they
are the laws of that nation, of which we are a part; this reason will hold as
well with respect to those laws which were subsequent to our emigration, as to
those that were anterior thereto; since we are still equally a part of the
nation. On the other hand,

6. IF this would be an insufficient reason or ground of obligation in one
case; or if any of these laws are not binding upon us merely as they are the
laws of that nation of which we are a part; then this will be an inadequate, or
insufficient reason, considered in itself, in all other cases whatsoever; and
particularly with respect to the established church of England. For if there be
any case in which the laws of England, as such, are not binding on the people
of the colonies, though they continue to be a part of the nation; it is from
hence evident, that something further is necessary to render any of them
binding, besides this, that they are the laws of England.

7. IT will not, I conclude, be asserted, that all the laws of England, without
exception, or of Great Britain, are, as such, binding on the colonies. In order
to their being so, it must, I humbly conceive, plainly appear from the language
of them, or from their very nature, that they were formally designed for all
the King's subjects, as well those in the colonies as those in England. Many of
the laws of England are in their own nature local, so that they cannot possibly
be obeyed out of England. And I am informed by those that are learned in the
laws, and in the customs and usages of the colonies, that it is a clear,
indisputable point, that there are many English statutes, in other cases, which
are not binding on the colonies. So that it seems to be only the common law at
most, and those statutes that are made in affirmation or explanation of it,
that English subjects carry with them when they emigrate into colonies, so as
to be bound by them. And I conclude, it will not be said that the church of
England is eshblished by common law, which had its origin among heathen
nations; and was complete as a system long before the reformation.

8. That this is, in general, the sense of the British parliament; appears at
least probable from hence, That in many statutes the colonies or plantations
are expressly mentioned, in others not; in some of them, some particular
colonies, but not others: in some of them Ireland, but not in others. Does not
this show, that the King and parliament consider the statutes of England as
being of no force in the colonies, unless they are expressly mentioned, or at
least, unless the statutes are conceived in such terms as clearly and
indisputably comprehend them? Acts of parliament designed to bind the
plantations are usually expressed in the following manner -- " Any of the
colonies or plantation in America, under his Majesty's dominion." [6.9 2. C.
13] "Any colonies or plantations of his Majesty, in Asia, Africa or America" --
" Any lands, islands, plantations or territories to his Majesty belonging, or
in his poffession, or which may hereafter belong, or be in poffession of his
Majesty, his heirs and successors, in Asia, Africa or America." [See 12. C. 2.
c. 18. and the acts of Trade in general.] "Good and profitable acts of
parliament made in the realm of Eng, since the reign of K. John, extended not
to Ireland, unless", etc. [4 lost. 351.] "In acts of parliament, Ireland,"
[even though a conquered country] "shall not be bound without express words, though
the nature and reason of the act extends to Ireland." [Skin. 519] -- "They in
jamaica", [call'd a conquered island] "having power to make new Laws, our
general laws may be altered by theirs in particulars" -- [Holt C. J and the
court, in the case of Blan. and Gald.] With how much advantage may all this be
applied to these charter colonies, which have a legislative power, and which
were settled and cultivated to the great benefit of the crown and kingdom, at
the charge of the adventurer?


9. This will farther appear to be the sense of parliament, from an act of the
21st of CEO. II. entitled, An Act for avoiding and putting an end to certain
doubts and questions, relating to the attestation of wills, etc. This act
refers to another in the 29th CHAPTER II relating to the same subject; and contains
these words: "And whereas in some of the British colonies or plantations in
America, the said act of the 29th of K. Chapter II. has been received for law, or
acts of assembly have been made, whereby the attestation and subscription of
witnesses to devices of lands, etc. have been required; therefore, to prevent
and avoid doubts which may arise in the said colonies or plantations -- Be it
enacted, -- That this act, and every clause, matter and thing therein
contained, shall extend to such of the said colonies and plantations, where the
said act is by act of assembly MADE, or by usage RECEIVED as law -- Can there
be a clearer proof than this, that the King and parliament of Britain do not
consider all acts of parliament in general as binding upon the colonies; but
only those of them, which either plainly and expressly extend to the
plantations, or which are afterward, "by act of assembly made, or by usage
received as law?" It may be farther observed, that in foam cases particular
acts of parliament have been made, expressly extending certain clauses of former
statutes to the plantations; either because they were not originally designed
to extend to them, or because that design was not clearly enough expressed in
the statutes themselves. What occasion for this, if it was supposed, or ought
to be taken for granted, that all the statutes in general are binding on the
colonies, merely as they are the laws pf that nation, of which they are a part?
I should be obliged to my candid Examiner, or to the author of the aforesaid
letter (J. F.) if he would fairly reconcile these things with the principle
advanced therein, That the statutes are binding on the colonies; merely because
they "continue a part of the nation." Till this is done, I must beg leave to
consider that position, not only as without support, but as directly contrary
to the express sense of parliament.

10. There is great and manifest reason, why the statutes in general should not
extend, or be supposed to extend to the colonies, unless the colonies are
either expressly mentioned, or clearly and indisputably comprehended in the
terms of them. This, reason is in general founded in the very wide difference
of circumstances, in numberless respects, between the mother country and the
colonies; Which reason, it should be observed, will equally take place with
reference to the statutes that were anterior, and those that were posterior to
the being of the colonies. And there is one very peculiar reason, which shall
be mentioned hereafter, why the statutes relative to the church of England,
should not be supposed to extend to New England.

But the author of the letter, (J. F.) as was intimated before, does not appear
willing to risque much upon the validity of his reasoning in the passage which
occasioned the foregoing remarks. He therefore proceeds to the statutes
themselves; endeavoring to show, from the very terms of them, that they
establish the church of England in the colonies: which would have been an
unnecessary labor, if, according to his other argument, they were in their
nature binding on all the colonies emigrating from, and continuing a part of
the English nation. He refers to, and partly quotes seven statutes in order to
prove his point: I beg leave to make a few cursory remarks upon them.

1. Those of EDWARD VI and Q. ELIZABETH were prior to the being of the
New England colonies. And therefore, though when they were made, they extended to
all the dominions; yet it may well be doubted, whether they ought to be
extended to any countries which did not then actually make a part of the
dominions: I mean, if these statutes are considered by themselves, or
independently of any posterior to them, by which they are extended to such
parts or countries, as did not, at the time of them fall within the dominions.
I am informed that some other ancient statutes, though expressed in similar
terms, so far as regards their locality, are not now supposed to touch the
plantations.

2. Though the statute 14to. CAR. II. commonly called the act of uniformity,
which is the next mentioned, confirms the statutes aforesaid; yet it may well
be doubted, whether it extends them farther than they were originally extended;
I mean, so as to bring any country or countries within the religious
establishment, which were not a part of the English dominions in the time
either of EDwARD VI, or ELIZABETH. It is by no means a clear point, that such a
confirmation of them, actually enlarges their extent, by taking in all that
belonged to the dominions at the time of such confirmation. And if this had
been the real design of the said act, is it not at least highly probable that;
it would have been expressed, or that the plantati-ons which had been made in
the intermediate time between Q. ELIZABETH and CHAPTER II. would have been expressly
included in the establishment now confirmed? Neither of which is the case: But,
on the contrary.

3. This very act plainly limits the establishment, by the very terms or it.
For three several times at least, the locality of the establishment now
confirmed, is expressed so as not only not to include, but to exclude the
colonies. Once it is expressed and desined in these words: -- "within the
kingdom of England, dominion of Wales, and town of Berwick upon Tweed. It is
afterward expressed in the same words, excepting this immaterial difference,
"the realm of England," instead of kingdom, etc. A third time it is expressed
thus, -- "within this realm of England, and the places aforesaid. So that even
Ireland is not included. Now, can it reasonably be supposed, that such terms of
limitation would have been so often used, or even once, in said act, if there
had then been the least thought of the establishment's taking place in the
colonies, whether by virtue of this, or any preceding statutes? Nay, is it not
highly probable, that these limitative clauses were thus repeatedly inserted,
on purpose to preclude all pretensions that the statutes of ED. and ELIZ.
should be so construed as to extend the establishment to the colonies, on
account of any general expressions in them; such as all the dominions of
England, or the like? To me it appears, that this was at least in part the real
design of them; as if it had been said. But although the said statutes are now
confirmed; yet this is to be understood only with regard to England, Wales and
Berwick; Nor are they to be interpreted as touching or affecting the colonies,
or any other of the British dominions, any general expressions in them
notwithstanding.

It being then supposed for the present, though not affirmed, that we have
hitherto found no establishment of the church of England in the colonies; let
it be observed,

4. That the statute of the 5, of Q. ANNE, chapter 5. which is next alleged, makes
no new establishment, nor enlarges the old. It is entitled, "An act for
securing the church of England as by law established" -- By this act, all
future Kings and Queens are to swear at their coronation, to preserve the said
church as already established. How far that establishment actually extended, is
to be learnt from the statutes before in being. Indeed this act says, the King
or Queen shall swear to preserve the church of England "within the kingdoms of
England and Ireland, the dominion of Wales, and town of Berwick upon Tweed, and
the territories thereunto belonging: But, I am told by them, that know much
more of these matters than I can pretend to, that those words, the territories
thereunto belonging, as thus introduced, do not properly include the remote
plantations in America. I suppose that the word territories here, if to be
taken in connection only with the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, immediately
preceding. The design hereof was probably to secure certain territories near
Berwick, (which bad been the subject of frequent dispute, and some times called
debated land) within the English establishment, in opposition to the Scotch and
the kirk. "A Scotchman, who lately wrote a treatise of this country, mentions
that frequently called in our history, the debatable land, because it was under
debate for several reigns, at claimed by both nations, till it became at length
the inheritance of the King of England. He says, it was a tract of forty miles
in length, and fix in breadth, between Berwick and Carlisle, on the frontiers
of both kingdoms, whose inhabitants before the union, etc. Comp. Syst. of Geog.
By E. Bowen, Geog. to his Majesty, Vol. I. p. 204. -- It should be remembered,
that the act in which this word territories is used as aforesaid, was before
the Union, though the same year.
But if they do, which may be considered as doubtful at least, I beg leave to
make a short remark or two, upon that supposition. Though the King were obliged
to swear, even in express terms, to preserve the church of England in the
colonies, as the said Church was already established; yet such an oath would
not make an establishment in the plantations, if there were none before, by
virtue or proceeding statutes. This would leave the establishment just as it
was, of no greater extent. But if it should be said, that upon this supposition
of the colonies being expressly mentioned in the oath, it would be a trifling,
insignificant one, so far as it had respect to the colonies, unless it were
taken for granted that the said church was actually established in them; I
answer, No. For a King of Great Britain may well be supposed to have power to
protect and defend the church of England as by law established, even in those
parts of his dominions where it is not the established religion, if any such
there were. The King would, by exerting his authority to defend his
episcopalian subjects against all oppressions and grievances in the colonies,
and by granting them all legal encouragements, act in conformity to such an
oath; and so as to render it far from an insignificant one, though the church of
England were not formally established in the colonies. This would doubtless be,
preserving the church of England in them, as by law established; i. e. in
England. These things are said, only on supposition that those words, the
territories, etc. necessarily include the colonies: If they do not, there is no
occasion for these remarks: But even the former supposition is, I conceive,
easily reconciled with that of the said church's not being then actually
established in the colonies, or thought to be so.

5. As to the act of Union, which recites at large the preceding act, and makes
it an essential and fundamental part of the Union; the learned Mr. J. F. does
not pretend that it makes the least alteration in the establishment, or
enlarges it. So that if the preceding statutes did not bring the colonies
within the establishment, they remain without or beyond it, notwithstanding
this. The question must therefore be decided, not by this, but those. -- Indeed
my Examiner truly cites Dr. Douglas as asserting in express terms, that, by
this act of union, "the, church of England government in all the English
colonies was forever established. But this, it must be observed, is only the
Dr's comment upon the text: There is no such expression in the act itself

6. It is humbly conceived, there is one very perculiar reason, before alluded
to, why the religious establishment should not be supposed to extend to the N.
England colonies. Almost all the people by whom they were planted, were
Puritans, and either actual non-conformists to the church of England, or very
uneasy under it at home. And it is a fact known to almost every body, I
suppose, except my learned Examiner, that they came hither chiefly on a
religious account: -- that they might enjoy entire liberty of conscience, free
from those restraints and embarrasments, not to say persecutions, which they
suffered there. These things were also well known by the government, at the
time of their emigration; and they were countenanced, at least indulged
thereby, in the prosecution of their design; having repeatedly received letters
patent and charters from the crown, in order to facilitate their enterprise. If
they had imagined, that they should bring the religious establishment here with
them, and still remain under the burden and grievances of it in spite of their
teeth; they would, without doubt, have chosen rather to suffer these
embarrasments at home, in their native and pleasant land, than to have them to
sruggle with in a foreign country, in conjunction with so many other
difficulties attending such an enterprise. Nor is it all improbable, that these
British colonies would not now have had a being, had not those worthy
adventurers taken it for granted, that by flying into a distant country, full
of rocks, woods and barbarians, they should get rid of an establishment which
they accounted much more grievous and insupportable -- I do not say, this
argument is conclusive; since it is possible, that they might be mistaken in
this respect. But it is, I humbly conceive, an argument worthy of some
consideration.

7. ANOTHER probable reason that the church of England is not here established,
is this: Our brethren of that communion, since brought in, were, long after our
present charter, obliged by the laws of this province (allowed by the crown) to
pay taxes toward the support of the settled ministers here, not of their own
denomination. In 1742 they were, as I conceive, with very good reason, by a
perpetual law of this government, exempted therefrom. Whatever they were taxed
for the support of God's public worship, was thenceforward to be paid to the
episcopal ministers, on whose administrations they respectively attended. This
act of exemption may be seen in our Province Law-book, An. Geo. II. dec. sex.
c. 8. Now, can it be supposed, that if the church of England had been
established here, a grievance of this nature would have been so long borne?
Would not the episcopalians, or could they not easily, by proper representions
at home, have got a speedy redress? Nay, is it not highly probable, that the
government here would have been severly reprimanded for such an imposition upon
the members of the church here established, as to oblige them to pay taxes to
our un-orthodox, non-established, schismatical ministers? How justly, and how
highly would this, in all probability, have been resented by the crown? And
yet, who ever heard that it was thus resented; or that the government was
reprimanded, as having taken it upon them to do what they had no legal right to
do? I have been informed, whether rightly or not, that his Excellency then in
the chair, when the aforesaid act of exemption was passed, received the thanks
of the then bishop of London for his service therein; as having contributed his
endeavors to relieve the members of the church of England from an
inconvenience or hardship, not from an illegal oppression, which they had long
labored under; as this most certainly would have been, had the church of
England been the religion established here by act of parliament. This naturally
leads me to mention another reason why I cannot think the church of England
established here, in that exclusive sense intended by the Examiner and
Letterwriter; namely,

8. THAT to me it is evident, that the modes of worship and discipline more
generally professed and practiced in this government, have such a firm and
legal establishment as is inconsistent with such a supposition; I do not mean,
with that of the church or England being in any sense established here, but
that of its being established exclusively of other protestant churches; or so
as to be, by way of distinction and pre-eminence, the established religion of
this country. For if other communions, or christian societies, are also
founded, encouraged and established here by good and lawful authority; it seems
impossible that the church of England can legally claim any such pre-eminence
as is contended for. But the proof of the assumption shall be the business of
the next Section. In the mean time, I shall humbly refer it to the decision of
others, whether enough has not been said under the foregoing observations, to
make it appear at least doubtful, whether the church of England is established
in the colonies by the statutes.

BUT though the said church should not be established here, possibly the
subscription and oaths of the episcopal clergy, taken in England, may bind them
in the colonies, or wherever they are. The Letter-writer, however, by taking
great pains to show, that the church of England is actually established here,
as a medium to prove that the said clergy are obliged by their oaths and
subscriptions even in the colonies, seems to concede, that no such obligation
lies upon them when they are got beyond the limits of the establishment. For if
it continues beyond the establishment, what occasion was there, in order to
show the obligation lying on the episcopal clergy here, to prove that the
establishment actually takes place here? -- But with the question about these
oaths and subscriptions, -- where, and how far they are binding, I am not
particularly concerned; though to determine this point, was the Letter-writer's
chief object. -- How often foever the Book of common prayer, and administration
of the sacraments, etc. have been re-established after a revise, alterations
and amendments, or the said oaths and subscriptions enjoined, and the statutcs
of EDWARD and ELIZ. confirmed; yet, it is humbly conceived, all this is far
from amounting to an establishment of the church of England in the colonies.
And though the learned Letter-writer lays great stress on the act of uniformity;
yet, upon his supposition, I believe he would find it very difficult at least,
to assign even a tolerable reason why England, Wales and Berwick are again and
again expressly mentioned therein, in the manner they are; as if it was with a
formal design to bound and limit the establishment, notwithstanding the general
term dominions used in proceeding statutes, before these colonies had an
existence. N. B. Though it was conceded in the former part of this section, that
English subjects spreading abroad into colonies, carry the common law with
them; yet even this admits of exceptions. One example may suffice. Slavery is
contrary to common law in England; there can be no slave there. But the buying
and selling slaves is a universal, legal and allowed practice in the colonies.
This was declared legal in the case of SMITH ver. BROWN and COOPER; which is
in part as follows. "The plaintiff declared in an Indisstitatus assumpsit, for
20l. for a Negro sold by the plaintiff to the defendant, viz. in Parocha beatx
Maria de Arcubus -- and verdict for the plaintiff; and on motion in arrest of
judgment, HOLT Chapter J. held, That as soon as a Negro comes into England, he
becomes free -- HOLT Chapter J. said, you should have averred in the declaration,
that the sale was in Virginia, and by the laws of that country Negroes are
saleable; for the laws of England do not extend to Virginia -- Therefore he
directed, the plaintiff should amend, and the declaration should be made, That
the defendant was indebted to the plaintiff for a slave sold here in London,
but that the said Negro at the time of sale was in Virginia, and that Negroes
by the laws and statutes of Virginia are saleable as chattels" -- 2d Salk.

IT is certain, none of the American colonies have thought themselves bound by
the common law, in this respect: and the government at home countenances them
in making laws relative to slaves, contrary to common law in England, where
liberty is so carefully guarded. Much more, then, may it be supposed, that the
statutes do not universally bind English suhjects, emigrating into colonies;
particularly those, statutes, by which the church of England is established
And, as has been before hinted, there are some special reasons to think, they
neither are, nor ever were obligatory, or supposed tQ be so, on the people of
New England: -- The principles and views of our Forefathers at the time of
their emigration; the countenance and indulgence shown them by the government,
even in those not very indulgent times: -- the letters patent and charters
repeatedly granted them, with an ample legislative authority, particularly a
power to make laws relative to religion; -- the laws actually made in
consequence hereof from time to time; -- in one of which, express mention is
made of "divine worship in the manner ESTABLISHED by the laws of this province:
-- no declaration or intimation from the government at home, (though these things
were known) that the church of England was established here; -- but on the
contrary, those very laws allowed by the King, whose supremacy in
ecclesiastical affairs is said to take place here: -- and the clear concession
of the Lords Justices, after consulting the Attorney and Solicitor General,
that the national church was not established here, in their letter to the Hon.
Mr, DUMMER, 1925, of which more in the next section.




SECTION VI.
Of what the Examiner says of the non-establishment of any Church or Churches
here, except that of England.

ThiS point he labors from p. 27 to 33. He infers from some addresses of thanks
sent from the ministers of New England to K. JAMES II. "for a toleration of
religion," that our churches had no legal establishment till the act of
toleration took place, if at all. (See p. 27.) Upon which let it be briefly
observed (1.) That arbitrary Kings are often thanked, even for not acting
contrary to law and justice, or for permitting their subjects quietly to enjoy
their lawful rights and privileges. (2.) He has not quoted these addresses of
thanks, which I never saw. Nor does it appear from what he says, but that they
might have respected the indulgencies granted to non-conformists in England,
rather than any granted to the colonies. (3.) How much soever these worthy
ministers might be mistaken in their politics, this does not immediately affect
the merits of the cause. Our New England churches were neither the more nor the
less established for what they did: Nor is any one obliged to abide by their
judgment, though it were certain they supposed these churches were not then
established; as I never asserted they were. (4.) It is sufficient to my
purpose, if they have had a proper establishment since the revolution, and the
charter of WILLIAM and MARY. The present remarks shall therefore relate to that
charter, and to laws subsequent thereto.

BUT my candid Examiner, being perhaps aware that these laws are directly
against his positions, seems desirous of removing them out of his way in the
first place. This he does by representing them as mere nullities, or next to
nullities. He makes a jest of those laws, some of which I referred to, in order
to show that our ministers and churches were by no means destitute of the
support and encouragement of law; -- laws that had "received the royal
sanction. How modestly and judiciously he sneers at this? (p. 26.) "I believe"
says he, "if the Dr. held an estate upon a title so precarious, as that of its
being merely overlooked," [Quere, what overlooked? -- the estate? -- the
title? -- or what?] he would be sollicitous of obtaining a better confirmation
of it." And again, p. 31. "What becomes of his argument for a civil or legal
establishment, founded on certain acts of assembly, not formally set aside, and
therefore supposed to be confirmed by royal sanction? -- So that, it seems, I
must first defend our laws themselves against his bold attacks, before I defend
our churches by them. This is manifestly striking at our laws in general; since
they in general stand upon the very same footing with those relative to
religion; it being a very rare thing, that any of them are approved by the
crown in a more explicit manner than those, to which he refers. I hardly know
whether one may presume so far upon the candor of this gentleman, as to suppose
that he allows the legality and validity of our charter itself. But taking it
for granted that he does so, till he shall think proper to expose himself by
denying it, as he has done by insulting our laws; I would briefly remind him of
two or three things.

1. THAT our laws, being sent home for the King's approbation, if not expressly
disallowed and rejected, under his sign manual and signet, within three years
after, are good to all intents and purposes, according to the charter. "
Provided always" says the charter, "That in case we, our heirs or successors,
shall not within the term of three years after the presenting such orders,
laws, statutes or ordinances, as aforesaid, signify our or their disallowance
of the same, then the said orders, laws, and;c. shall be and continue in full
force and effect, according to the true intent and meaning of the same --

2. EXCEPT in some extraordinary cases, our laws are never allowed or ratified
by the crown, in any other manner than that, which is here positively declared
sufficient to render them of full force and effect. And the Examiner, it is
probable, would be very glad of a good estate, upon a title as precarious as
this (in his own language) of being merely overlooked;" and would be little
"sollicitous of obtaining a better" -- Indeed a better cannot be had, at least
not in the colonies.

3. BESIDES a very general and ample legislative power granted in the charter,
with this single limitation, that our laws shall not be "repugnant or contrary"
to those of England: Besides this general power, I say, the charter expressly
gives a power to make laws relative to religion, in the following words -- "To
dispose of matters and things whereby our subjects, inhabitants of said
province, may be religiously, peaceably and civilly governed -- Here, by the
way, I have done what the Examiner calls upon me to do, with such a
gentleman-like air of triumph. Blaming me with reference to the rule which I
laid down for interpreting the Society's charter, he says; "Let us now apply
this rule to the charter granted to the Massachusetts Bay. Nothing can be
supposed the object, or any part of the object of this constitution, but what
plainly appears to be so, from the very words of their charter, which very
words must determine and limit the sense of the Grantor. It was only for those
purposes that are particularly expressed -- Let the Dr. now read and examine
the present colony charter -- and point out to us the passage or passages,
where in express words a power is granted, etc. p. 32. I answer, the general
legislative power granted, with the single exception aforesaid, even without
that other clause, "whereby our subjects -- may be religiously -- governed,
includes a power to make such a religious establishment as I intended. But this
latter clause being considered in connection therewith, puts the matter beyond
dispute. For it plainly appears from the very words of the charter, that the
legislative body here have a power to make laws and constitutions relative to
religion; not being contrary or repugnant to the laws of England, as ours are
not; since they leave the members of the church of England at full liberty to
worship God according to their consciences; and even support and encourage them
therein, as will hereafter appear.

These things being premised, I proceed to remind the Examiner, and others who
may be as much strangers to our laws as he appears to be, of some acts of
assembly relative to the establishment, not of a provincial church, (which I
never supposed) but of protestant churches of various denominations; or rather,
of any or all denominations that have been, or shall be set up among us; in
conformity to the language and spirit of the charter: -- "And for the greater
ease and encouragement of our loving subjects inhabiting our said province, --
and of such as shall come to inhabit there, We do -- ordain, that forever
hereafter there shall be a liberty of conscience allowed in the worship of God
to all christians (except papists) inhabiting, or which shall inhabit, etc.

In my Observations I particularly reminded the reader of, and partly cited,
the act for the settlement and support of ministers, An. R. GUL. et MA. quart,
the next year after the charter. By this it is ordained, that all towns shall
be provided with able, learned and orthodox ministers; and particular care is
taken for their support, etc. According to which act, compared with what the
charter says of liberty of conscience, to all christians except Papists, I
conceive, protestants of all denominations are considered by the government
here, as orthodox. So that if any particular town in the Province should
Legally choose settle and support a protestant minister of any denomination,
whether episcopalian, presbyterian, congregational, baptist, or lutheran, this
would be looked upon as satisfying the said law, I have diverse reasons for this
supposition. At present one shall suffice, drawn from a paragraph of this same
act; in which it is said, That the respective churches within this province,
shall "at all times hereafter, use, exercise and enjoy all their privileges and
freedoms respecting divine worship, church order and discipline: And shall be
encouraged in the peaceable and regular profession and practice thereof. If any
should think it an inconsistent supposition, that several distinct churches, of
various denominations, and differing very considerably from each other, should,
in my sense, be established in the same province, and respectively protected
and encouraged by the same legislature; the answer is short and easy, viz. That
this is not in any degree more incongruous or inconsistent, than that the two
different churches of England and Scotland, respectively established long
before the Union should continue so after it, and be equally the established
churches of one kingdom, Great Britain; defended and encouraged by the same
king and parliament: Which all know to be fact. And this establisment, or
rather these establishments, are respectively declared in the act of Union,
essential articles and conditions of it -- An hundred churches, all of
different denominations, if there were so many, might all be established in the
same kingdom or colony, as well as one, two or three.


In another act of the 4th and 5th of WM. and MARY, the manner in which
ministers are to be chosen, recognized as such, and supported; with some
reserves as to the town of Boston, is prescribed; and whoever reads said act,
entitled an Act for repealing and altering of some clauses, etc. will see that
it has a special reference to the more usual practice and customs of our
congregational churches from the beginning. See also another act to this
purpose, GULIEL. 7mo. chapter 9.

By an act in the 1st of Q. ANNE, chapter 3d, entitled, An act for the more
effectual providing for the support of ministers, certain methods of evading
the preceding laws, practiced by " irreligious persons, averse and opposite to
the public worship of God are particularly guarded against.

By the foregoing acts it appears, that notwithstanding the general liberty of
conscience allowed here, the government had a special regard to our
congregational method of worship and discipline. This appears still more
evident from an act to which I referred in the preceding Sectionn, for
exempting the professed members of the church of England from paying to the
support of our ministers; An. GEO. II. 16to. chapter 8vo. Part of the preamble of
which, is in these words: "Whereas the professed members of the church of
England have complained that they are unreasonably taxed for the the support of
divine worship in the manner ESTABLISHED by the laws laws of this Province etc.
The legislature here supposed, then, at least, that there was some particular
manner of worship ESTABLISHED here, by way of eminence, or in preference to all
others, particularly to that of the church of England. And what that was, if
any such there were, is sufficiently evident from the laws foregoing, compared
with the most general, known principles and practices of the inhabitants of
this country, from the first settlement of it. It should be farther remembered,
however, that by this very act the members and ministers of the church of
England are countenanced and encouraged: since it makes a legal provision for
their maintaining the public worship of God in their own way. It says expressly,
"The treasurer of such town, etc. shall deliver the taxes collated of every
professed member of the church of England unto the minister of the said church,
with whom he usually and frequently attends the public worship of of God --
which minister shall have power to receive, and if need be, to RECOVER the same
in law, to support him in the place whereunto he is duly designed and sent.

The last act to which I shall refer on this occasion, is one of the 28th of
GEO. II. chapter 3d. entitled, An act for securing and rendering more effectual
grants and donations to pious and charitable uses, and for the better support
and maintenance of MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL, etc. My view herein is more
especially to show two things: First, that there is a real and effectual
establishment of religion made by the laws of this province; and secondly, That
it is, perhaps, the most generous and catholic one that was ever made in any
country; since, though it more especially regards protestant churches of one
denomination, yet it countenances and encourages all others, and puts them in a
legal method to support the public worship of God, according to their
inclinations and consciences respectively. By this it is enacted, "That the
decons of all the several protestant churches, not being episcopal churches,
AND the church wardens of the several episcopal churches, are and shall be
deemed so far bodies corporate, as to take in succession all grants and
donations -- made either to their several churches, the poor of their churches,
or to them and their successors, and sue and defend in all actions touching the
same" -- It is afterward ordained in this act, That whereas the several
congregations in the town of Boston, and some others, are not by law enabled by
vote to raise money for the support of the mini(...) public worship among
them"; the proprietors of pews, deacons or church wardens may, after ta^^ng
certain steps, "cause the several pews in such houses to be valued -- and anew
estimate to be put upon said pews from time to time -- and a tax to be laid
upon each pew -- the money so raised to be applied toward the support of the
ministry etc.

If my Examiner will be pleased to consider these several acts, and the solid
foundation on which they rest in our charter, by virtue of the royal allowance;
he may perhaps be convinced, that our N. England, congregational churches, not
only seem to have a proper, legal establishment, as I cautiously expresed it
before; but have it in reality. And as I would hope he is not past blushing, I
shall just remind him of his own words on this occasion, which may possibly put
him upon it. "Indeed he is so modest, says he, "as only to assert that they
seem to have a legal establishment, but since HE KNEW that this was no
establishment AT ALL, it was perhaps not quite ingenuous to tell his readers,
that it seemed to be one.

But the very candid gentleman lays great strese on a certain letter from their
Excellencies the Lords Justices, in 1725, to the Hon. W. DUMMER, Esquire; at that
time commander in chief of this province, relative to the calling a synod,
which was then talked of and proposed here. In this it is said, among other
things, that "this matter does highly, concern his Majesty's royal prerogative.
It follows, "Their Excellency's referred the consideration of it to Mr. Attorney
and Mr. Solicitor General, who -- reported, That from the charter, and laws of
your colony, they cannot collect that there is any regular establishment of a
NATIONAL OR PROVINCIALCHURCH there, so as to warrant the holding of
convocations or synods of the clergy; but it such synods might be holden, yet
they take it to be clear in point of law, that his Majesty's supremacy in
ecclesiastical affairs, being a branch of his prerogative, does take place in
the plantations, and that synods cannot be held -- without authority from his
Majesty, etc. This, in the Examiner's opinion, is an undeniable consutation of
what I had said in the Observations. On the contrary, I am of opinion that it
is so far from militating, in the least degree, with any thing by me advanced,
that it will serve greatly to confirm it all. Let me make a few remarks. And,

1. I never said, or thought, that there was any national or provincial church
established here; but only a number of particular CHURCHES of different
denominations.

2. Much less did I assert, there was any national or provincial CHURCH
established in such a manner as to warrant the holding of convocations or
synods, Which is what their Excellencies deny, or rather hesitate concerning;
plainly conceeding that there was, nevertheless, some sort of religious
establishment here, by our laws.

3. Though I had asserted both these things, yet I did not say, that Synods might
be held here, "without [special] authority from his Majesty. Which their
Lordships disallow; the calling of these being, according to the British
constitution, one of the jura regalia, or special unalieanable prerogatives of
the Sovereign; whose supremacy in ecclesiastical affairs is said to take place
in all his dominions.

4. Merely this consideration, that convocations and synods cannot be assembled
without express authority from the King, no more proves that there is here no
established provincial CHURCH, than it proves that there is no national ONE in
England: For neither can convocations or synods be held there, without such
authority from his Majesty; as some people know to their sorrow -- All this is
perfectly consistent with whatever I said, relating to the legal footing on
which our churches stand, as distinct christian societies; not as one
collective body, like the church of England.

5. From this letter a very propable argument may be drawn, that the national
church of England is not, and never was supposed to be established here, by the
statutes. For if it had been so, must not their Excellencies, and the Attorney
and Solicitor General have known it? And if they had known it, would they not
have made short work in their letter as to synods, by saying so? Would they
have gone into a particular examination of our charter and laws; and said, that
from these they could not collect that there was any national or provincial
church established here, so as to warrant, etc? Is not this a plain concession,
that they found there was some kind of legal establishment here, though not of
any national or provincial CHURCH, so as to warrant, etc? Is this the language
that might have been expected from those sages in the law, if it had once
entered into their thoughts, that the national church of England was here
established? The Examiner was aware of this objection; and endeavored to
obviate it. I will not expose him so much, as to show particularly in what way.
The reader may see, Can. Ex. p. 38.

6. As on one hand it may be fairly collected from this letter, that the church
of England is not established here, in the Examiner's sense; so, on the other
hand; a good argument may be drawn from it for the validity of those laws, by
which different protestant churches are here established; particulaly
congregational ones, in conformity to the sense intended and explained by me.
For in this letter it is spoken of as a clear point, that the King's
ecclesiastical supremacy, "being a branch of his prerogative, does take place
in the plantations" And are not all the laws aforesaid, allowed and ratified by
the King, who is also head of the church of England? Is not the denial of their
validity, implicitly striking at the King's supremacy in ecclesiastical
affairs? How free do these episcopalians, who scoff at the legal establishment
of religion here, make with his Majesty's royal prerogative? What unbecoming
liberties do they take with the august visible head of their own church; who is
pleased, by his authority, to countenance and support, to confirm and encourage
ours?

From hence it appears, that I have as little occasion as I have inclination,
"to dispute this point with the Lord's justices, and prove that the Attorney
and Solicitor General did not understand the colony charter; which this
penetrating as well as candid and well-bred gentleman suggests, I have at least
much occasion, if not a strong desire to do. Let the reader see how he triumphs
with respect to this matter, p. 31. Let the Examiner also review that page
himself: I am not of such a vindictive a spirit as to desire any severer
revenge on him, than this must be to a person of the least sensibility or
modesty.

I MIGHT perhaps express myself incautiously in the Observations, by saying in
general, without explaining myself, that the church of England was not
established here. My meaning was, that it was not established here by the laws
of England. It has undoubtedly the support and encouragement of our provincial
laws, as other protestant churches have: But I suppose the Examiner, and some
persons of the same turn of mind, will take this concession in great dudgeon;
thinking themselves even degraded and injured, by not being exalted quite so
high above their brethren, as they seem to be for exalting themselves -- But
notwithstanding what has been said, though I really believe, yet I do not
absolutely affirm, that the church of England is not established here by act of
parliament. Be that as it may, yet that it is not established in the manner
intended by them, so as to render all the provincial laws respecting our
churches mere nullities, is very certain.

LET me just remark farther here, That though all I have said relative to
establishments, should be indefensible, yet this would not very materially
affect the main argument of the Observations respecting the Society. For if
God's word, worship and sacraments are actually administered and upheld here, so
that the King's loving subjects are in no particular or imminent danger of
falling into atheism and infidelity, or being perverted to popery; it is plain,
these parts are not the proper object of the Society's care and expense,
according to their charter, whether there is any legal establishment of
religion here or not. And what has been said upon this subject, is in general
applicable to Connecticut and NewHampshire governments; though said with
particular reference to this province THE author would here take occasion to
express hit hearty sorrow, that he understand certain people in some other
colonies have taken great offense, that in his Observations he spoke of their
religious advantages and improvements as much inferior to those of the people
in the three governments above said. He seriously declares that he had not the
least intention to insult, revile and reproach them; but thought of them with
christian concern and affection. Nor was he a little surprised, when he first
heard that this was so highly resented. If he used any reproachful expression,
it was undefined; he is sincerely sorry for it. And if the persons offended are
well advanced in christian charity, he hopes they will forgive him on this
apology.
.

SECTION VII.
Of the Examiner's exceptions against the account given in the Observations, of
the state of religion in New England before and since the incorporation of the
Society. Immediately preceding this part of his labor, the Examiner speaks p.
44, 45, 46, of the Congregationalists using their endeavors to defeat the
pious intention of three episcopal missions in the colony of Rhode Island, in
places where there was then "no settled minister of any denomination. This, I
believe, is at best a mistake. I am informed, that in two at least of the three
places which he mentions, (the other I never heard of before) there were
congregational ministers prior to the missionaries going thithers so that at
present this appears to me to be a groundless, in^^^ous accusation; not to use
his own language, slander. And can this obscure anonymous writer, who produces
no vouchers, expect to be credited in such a case? Though he were not ashamed to
be known, and were a person of good reputation; yet it would hardly be modest
in him to require our assent to such improbable tales, on his bare word; at
least, unless he declared these things, as of his own particular and certain
knowledge. What then is it short of high presumption for a man, who chooses to
keep in the dark, to give out such desamatory stories, in order to bring an
odium upon the people of our profession, with the hopes of being believed? Till
some proof of these stories is produced, the author of them cannot blame us if
we consider them as invented by himself, or at best taken up and published to
the world, without any solid, foundation. And if he should be sharply rebuked
for such a way of proceeding, he would have no just cause of complaint.
I Do not recollect any thing in the Examination, which directly or materially
affects the merits of the cause, but what has been already considered. Whether
he has done any thing hitherto, sufficient to put an end to my supposed long
triumph, or so played the hero, as to lay a good foundation even fpr a short
one himself, our common readers are the properest judges. Has he disproved a
single fact or circumstance, alleged by me? Has he produced any witnesses or
authorities that overthrow, or even militate against those which I brought? Has
he shown that I reason fallariously or inconclusively from any acknowledged
facts? Has he made it appear that I put a wrong construction on the charter?
Has he been able, with all his efforts, to fix the charge of inconsistency upon
me? If not, what has he hitherto done? -- except venting his candor at me; --
frequently triumphing without victory; -- and contributing, by his method of
treating the subject, to fix on the venerable Society a far more heinous charge
than was brought by me; -- that of wilfully betraying their trust.

HE proceeds to find fault with my account of the state of religion in
New England before and since the incorporation of the Society -- "This account,
says he, "in many things can by no means be approved, p. 46. But if it shall be
made to appear, that he no where contradicts my account, without contradicting
himself also, methinks I shall be entitled to a little more candor in this
respect, than I have experienced in others. In the very next paragraph and
words, he does in effect acknowledge the truth of my account in general. "It is
not the author's intention, says he, "to call in question the religigious
character of the first adventurers to New England; he doubts not in the least
but that they were serious well-meaning people, and although laboring under
some mistakes and prejudices, yet many of them persons of great wisdom and
understanding as well as piety. Nor will it be disputed, that they made early
provision for the public worship of God. In all this we seem perfectly agreed.
He proceeds: "But how far their coming hither was occasioned by their
sufferings and persecutions at home, as also what their sentiments were as to
religious matters, may deserve further enquiry. Here there is an hint, though no
direct affection, that these were two of the many things in my account, which
could not be approved. I am willing to attend him in this enquiry. But it
seems, he was so full of candor, that he could not go on to correct my
mistakes, without first giving scope to it in a tragical exclamation and
invective against me, as an impious heretic. The candor of this paragraph, p.
47, 48. shall have some notice taken of it hereafter. I am not so impatient
under his sharp rebukes, but that I can pass them over for the present; and
attend to what he says respecting the occasion of our Forefathers coming into
New England.

He says, p. 48. concerning "those good men," that they "are supposed to have
first come hither for the sake of enjoying a pure religion according to their
consciences -- and just after he adds: "Yet because this state pretense
concerning the design of the first adventurers, as to religious matters, is
artfully and industriously propagated among the common people, who have not
sufficient opportunities of examining this matter, it will be necessary to give
it a more particular consideration. Here the reader will observe, he calls it a
stale pretense, that the first adventurers hither, came on such an account as I
had supposed; so that here he manifestly opposes me. But he immediately
produces a quotation from Dr. DOUGLAS, as if it were on purpose to confirm my
account, and show his own mistake, in calling this a stale pretense. The
Doctor, after speaking of ROBERT BROWN's preaching against the ceremonies and
discipline of the church of England, 1580, and his being "persecuted or baited
and teazed by the bishops courts, says, that "he with some of his disciples
left England, and formed a church at Middleborough -- but, that he at last
recanted, and died in the communion of the church of England. "A congregation
of these Brownists, as the Dr. goes on, "was formed in Yarmouth, 1602; being
harrassed by the established church of England, with their pastor they
transported themselves to Leyden in Holland; here they became more moderate
under the direction of their pastor Mr. ROBINSON; and from Brownists changed
their denomination to that of Independents. Being of unsteady temper, they
resolved to remove from among strangers after ten years residence, to some
remote country in some wilderness, where, without molestation, they might
worship God in their own devotional way. These then were confessedly the first
adventurers who became settlers in New England. And whoever knows any thing of
Dr. DOUGLAS's religious sentiments, Quere, Upon what grounds, and with what
view does this candid gentleman elsewhere speak of Dr. Douglas at my "favorite
author? Might he not with far better reason, and more truth, have called bp.
Tillotson, bp. Butler, or the late bishop of London Dr. Sherlock, my favorite
author? But this, perhaps, would not so well have answered his generous and
candid design with respect to me?
will make considerable allowance for his calling the aforesaid R. BROWN "a
hotheaded young enthusiaitical clergyman; and those whom he speaks of as his
disciples, persons of unsteady temper," etc. They were doubtless in general
very pious, good men. The Dr. himself allows, that they were "more moderate"
before they came hither; and that their motive in coming hither was, in his
peculiar turn of phrase, that they might worship God in their own devotional
way, without molestation. "Thus," to use the Examiner's own words on this
occasion, "the first effectual settlement in New England was clearly made on a
religious account, p. 49. This was at Plymouth, in 1620. And it really seems
very candid in him thus to confirm my account of the matter, in direct
contradiction to himself, -- that this was a stale pretense; though he had in
effect acknowledged the truth of it before.

THE Examiner goes on: "But as to the first settlers of the colony of the
Massachusetts Bay, understood as posterior to, and distinct from that of
Plymouth, they plainly acted as other men usually do upon like occasions, from
hopes of increasing their estates, and providing an ample inheritance for their
children -- And "as it was now pretty generally known, that the Plymouth
adventurers had set up a way of worship different from the public establishment
of the nation, it began to be suspected and reported, that this new company had
a purpose of the same nature, as soon as they should arrive in America. This
came to the ears of governor WINTHROP and his associates, while they lay
wind-bound at Yarmouth, and gave them great uneasiness, as well it might, to
lie under the odium of this slander, and occasioned their writing the following
letter for their own exculpation before they put to sea -- Part of the letter
follows p. 50, 51. in which they speak very civily and respectfully of the
church of England as their mother, etc. etc.

ALL this is manifestly introduced in opposition to the account given by me, of
the first setlers in New England, and their motive in coming hither. This
appears from the use the Examiner makes of it. For after producing Mr. PRINCE's
testimony, that these pious people were professed members of the church of
England, till they came into America; he goes on thus: "From the foregoing
letter and testimony it is evident, that whatever the case was as to other
places, and with regard to other adventurers, the first settlers of the
Massachusetts Bay at least, those pious good men, who left the fair cities,
villages, and delightful fields of Britain, for the then inhospitable shores
and deserts of America, did not do it upon any disgust they had taken at the
established religion of their country; but from quite other motives -- p. 51,
52. Let the reader also be pleased to see how the Examiner triumphs upon this
occasion, through the next page. But let me unravel this piece of sophistry; --
at least, what would deserve no other name, if it were not found in a candid
Examination. And,

1. I OBSERVE, that G. WINTHROP and his associates, whom he calls "the first
settlers of the Massachusetts Bay," came over in the year 1630. at least ten
years after the first settlers in Plymouth colony, who had by that time made a
considerable establishment.

2. THAT, according to his own account from Dr. DOUGLAS, these first Plymouth
adventurers were persecuted, baited, teazed and harrassed in the bishops
courts; and did indisputably come hither for conscience sake. In the Examiner's
own words, "Thus the first effective settlement in New England was clearly made
on a religious account. And he had before spoken of the first adventurers to
New England as persons of a good religious character, "many of them persons of
great wisdom and understanding as well as piety p. 47. If he spoke sincerely,
and with propriety, he must have meant these Plymouth adventurers, by whom, he
acknowledges, the first effective settlement was made in New England.

3. FROM hence it appears, that he acknowledges my account to be just; though
he would seem to contradict it by the use of an equivocal term, the
Massachusetts Bay. He knows that this now comprehends the old Plymouth Colony,
which was formerly distinct from it, and first settled. He also knows, that
New England, or This Country, comprehends both, and much more. So that when I
spoke of the first settlers of New England, or of this country, as persecuted
non-conformists, who came hither on a religious account, I said no more than
was literally true, even according to the authority cited by himself. And
although I had any where said, as I did not, that the first settlers of the
Massachusetts Bay came over on such an occasion, might not a gentleman of
candor have understood me as speaking of the Massachusetts Bay, as it now
includes Plymouth Colony, not as it was formerly distinguished from it? Did I
assert, or intimate, that the first settlers of the Massachusetts, in
distinction from Plymouth, came on such an account? No. What ground or occasion
was there then for the Examiner's alert demand, p. 52. speaking of G. WINTHROP
and the other signers of the letter aforesaid? -- "After such an explicit
declaration as this, written and signed with their own hands, how can the Dr.
pretend, that these men were aggrieved at home, that they came hither chiefly
on account of their sufferings for nonconformity, that they fled hither as to
an assylum from episcopal persecution? -- If I had actually said so, it would
not have been so remote from truth as he imagines. But at present it is
sufficient to deny, that I gave such an account of these men, who were not the
first settlers of New England, even according to his own. Though he was either
not sufficiently cautious of contradicting himself, or of imposing on his
readers, by the use of an equivocal term afterward.

4. To me there appears a little finesse and double-dealing in what this candid
gentleman says of the religious character of our forefathers, though I do not
positively accuse him as to this. I will lay some of the grounds of my
suspicion before the reader, in a few words. He speaks very respectfully of the
"first adventurers" to New England, their wisdom, piety, etc. p. 46, 47. These
were the Plymouth Settlers; who had been harrassed for nonconformity in
England, before they went to Holland. But afterward he speaks in such a
manner, as can hardly be reconciled with the supposition that he really meant
them; but rather only G. WINTHROP and his associates, who, he supposes, were
churchmen. For when he mentions the suspicions in England, that these latter
had a design to set up a way of worship here, as the Plymotheans had done,
different from the public establishment of the nation, he says, "this gave them
great uneasiness, as well it might, to lie under the odium of this slander; to
excu^pate themselves as to which, he says, they wrote the aforesaid letter.
Quere, Would he have expressed himself in this manner, if he had really
supposed the Plymouth settlers, notwithstanding their avowed separation from
the church of England, very pious and good men; "many of them persons of great
wisdom, etc. Again, -- "The first settlers of the Massachusetts Bay [here
plainly meaning G. WINTHROP and associates, etc.] "at least, those pious good
men, who left the fair cities, etc. -- did not do it from any disgust they had
taken at the established religion of their country. -- Is this, or is it not a
hint, that those others who came hither before, professedly on this account,
are not to be reckoned among the pious good men? -- Again, speaking of G.
WINTHROP, etc. whom he supposes I had represented as non-conformists,
antecedently to their coming hither, he says, -- "Let the Dr. consider what
recompense he can make to the memory of these men, for abusing them with the
opprobrious charge of sectarism and hypocrisy. Does it not plainly appear from
hence, that to have said these persons were non-conformists, and came hither
for conscience sake, would, in his opinion, have been to abuse them, and to
bring an opprobrious charge against them as sectaries and hypocrites? Quere
then, what opinion must he have of the Plymotheans, who certainly left England
on account of their, dislike to the established church; however respectfully he
may seem to speak of them? Quere also, what opinion must he consequently
entertain of all us non-conformists to said church, which he supposes to be
established here?

UPON the whole, the intelligent reader will see, with how much propriety I
might retort upon him his own words; "This gentleman has a very strange method
of proving and disproving, of asserting and giving up again. Sure he could
never expect to arrive at any solid conclusion, by this wanton method of
reasoning.

SECTION VIII.
That the Examiner has much mistaken the religious principles, character and
views of the first Settlers of the MassachusettsBay, as distinguished from
Plymouth colony. IN the proceeding Section I vindicated my account of the first
settlers of New England, and showed how this candid gentleman, rather than not
contradict me, contradicts himfelf: So that the many things which, as he said,
could by no means be approved in my account, really come to nothing, by his own
concessions. I had, in the Observations, said nothing of the first settlers of
the Massachusetts, in distinction from Plymouth. But this gentleman having
thought proper to speak particularly of them, it may not be unacceptable to the
reader, if I correct his mistakes relative to them, by giving a brief account
of this settlement, and the principles and motives of the settlers. This
account shall be partly taken from Dr. C. MATHER's Magnalia Chapter Amer. or
Ecclesiastical history of New England; and partly from more ancient, and the
most authentic records.

AND that this settlement was projected and made on a religious account, as
well as that of Plymouth, is as clear and indisputable as any one branch of
history. "There were more than a few attempts of the English, says Dr. MATHER,
to people and improve the parts of New England which were to the northward of
New-Plymouth; but the designs of those attempts being aimed no higher than the
advancement of some worldly interests, a constant series of disasters has
confounded them, until there was a plantation erected upon the nobler designs
of christianity. And that plantation -- continues to this day. There have been
very fine settlements in the north-east regions: But what is become of them? I
have heard that one of our ministers once preaching to a congregation there,
urged them to approve themselves a religious people from this consideration,
that otherwise they would contradict the main end of planting this wilderness:
Whereupon a well-known person, then in the assembly, cried out, Sir, you are
mistaken; you think you are preaching to the people at the [Massachusetts] Bay;
OUR main end was to CATCH FISH." Magnalia, p. 15.
The reader will naturally compare this with the Examiner's account of the
first settlers of said Bay, who, he says, "plainly acted as other men usually
do upon like occasions, from the hopes of increasing their estates, etc. p. 49.

THE Dr. in the same chapter, speaking of Sir RICHARD SALTONSTALL and others
being associated with Sir HENRY ROSWELL, etc. who had made a purchase of the
Plymouth company, of that part of New England which lies between Merrimack and
Charles's (alias Charlestown) river, says: "These persons being associated with
the former, and having bought of them all their interest in New England
aforesaid, now consulted about settling a plantation in that country, whither
such as were then called non-conformists might, with the grace and leave of the
King, make a peaceable secession, and enjoy the liberty and exercise of their
own persuasions" Page 16.
-- "The persecuted servants of God, under the English hierarchy, had been in a
sea of ice mingled with fire -- But the ice was now broken, by the American
offers of a retreat for the pure worship of the LORD JESUS in a wilderness" --
"The God of heaven served as it were a summons upon the spirits of his people
in the English nation; stiring up the spirits of thousands which never saw the
faces of each other, with a most unanimous inclination to leave all the
pleasant accommodations of their native country, and go over a terrible ocean,
into a more terrible defart, for the pure enjoyment of all his ordinances."
page 17.
In the general considerations for making this plantation, which were then
drawn up, this is the first, "It will be a service unto the church, to carry
the gospel into those parts of the world, and raise a bulwark against the
kingdom of Antichrist." Vid. Mag. p. 17.
--

ALL this, it must be observed, relates particularly and expressly to the
Massachusetts Bay, in distinction from Plymouth colony. And King WILLIAM, in
our Province charter, enjoining on the grantees a religious conversation, and
taking care to christianize the Indians, adds, "which our royal grandfather --
in his said Letters Patents declared was his royal intention, and the
adventurers free profession to be the principal end of the said plantation.

LET it be observed here, that there was a small settlement made at Salem in
1629, nine years after that at Plymouth, and the year before G. WINTHROP and
associates came over. Here a church was founded the same year, under the care
of the worthy Meff. hiGGINSON and SKELETON, after consultation with their
brethren of Plymouth; with whom there seems to have been an entire agreement as
to ecclesiastic affairs. They drew up a church covenant, in a very general,
catholic, and pious strain, now to be seen, Magnal. p. 18, 19. And it is
particularly recorded, that " some of the passengers, who came over with our
first Salemites, observing that our ministers did not use the book of
common prayer in their administrations; that they administered the baptism and
the supper of our Lord, without any inscriptural ceremonies -- they began to
raise a deal of trouble hereupon." But these persons received such an answer,
that they soon "returned into England, with very furious threatenings against
the church thus established." Vid. Magn. p. 19.


AFTER the arrival of governor WINTHROP, etc. in July 1630, it is particularly
recorded, that "they were so mindful of their errand into the wilderness, that
still one of the firsst works was, to gather a church into the covenant and
order of the gospel." Magn. p. 22.
Accordingly churches were soon founded in the following places and order, on
the model of those at Salem and Plymouth; viz. at Charlestown, Dorcherster,
Boston, Roxbury, Lynn, Watertown. Id. p. 23.

Now, if Governor WINTHROP and associates were such good churchmen when they
left England, as the Examiner supposes; if they had taken no disgust at, nor
suffered any grievances from, the church established there, is it not strange
that we hear of no essays toward setting up the church of England worship and
discipline here; nor of any disputes relative thereto; but find them unanimous
in forming churches upon a quite different model? I will engage to give a much
clearer account of the letter, on which he builds so much, than he can possibly
give of this harmony and coalition, upon his own hypothesis. This in general.

Of the principal personages who came over at this time, it is certain that
they were warm friends to the church order here set up, in distinction from
that of England. It is said of the Lady ARABELLA JOHNSON, who was one of them,
that she "left an earthly paradise in the family of an earldom, to encounter
the sorrows of a wildeness, for the entertainments of a pure worship in the
house of God." Mag. p. 21.
-- Governor WINTHROP himself was a member and warm friend, a great ornament
and support of the first church in Boston. Id. B. II. c. 4.
And it is said in Dr. MATHER's life of this truly great and excellent man,
that "when the noble design of carrying a colony of chosen people into an
American wilderness, was by some eminent persons undertaken, this eminent
person was, by the consent of all, chosen for the MOSES who must be the leader
-- Wherefore having sold a fair estate of fix or seven hundred a year, he
transported himself with the effects of it into New England -- where he spent
it upon a famous plantation, founded and formed for the seat of the most
reformed christianity: And continued there comsticting with temptations of all
sorts" -- Mag. P. II. c. 4.
The very worthy T. DUDLEY, Esquire; who came over with him in quality of his
Lieut. Governor; who was chosen Governor in chief on Mr. WINTHROP's death, and
who was also one of the signers of the letter aforesaid, was one of the
Puritans, and a nonconfomist before he left England, even when he was a young
man: "The spirit of real christianity in him, now also disposed him unto sober
nonconformity; and from this time -- he became a judicious dissenter from the
unscriptural ceremonies retained in the church of England." -- "The Earl of
Lincoln found, that he could be no more without Mr. DUDLEY, than PHARAOH
without his JOSEPH, and prevailed with him to resume his former employment,
until the storm of persecution upon the non-conformists caused many men of
great worth to transport themselves into New England. Mr. DUDLEY was not the
least of the worthy men that bore a part in this transportation, in hopes that
in an American wilderness, they might peaceably attend and enjoy the pure
worship of the Lord Jesus Christ." Mag. B. II. c. 5.


IN this same gentleman's own printed letter to the Countess of Lincoln,
written from Boston the same year, I think, that he came hither, there are
clear intimations, what was the principal view and aim of the adventurers.
"After my brief manner," says he, "I say this, that if any come hither to plant
for worldly ends, that can live well at home, he commits an error, of which he
will soon repent him -- If any godly men, out of religious ends, will come
over, to help us in the good work we are about; I think they cannot dispose of
themselves, nor of their estates more to God's glory, and the furtherance of
their own reckoning.

IN a word, the people who came over to New England in 1630, were, I believe,
to a man, those who were called Puritans; some of them actual non-conformists
to the church of England, though many had not proceeded so far as to separate
themselves from her communion; but all of whom in general, were much
dissatisfied with many things in said church; and had suffered, at least
reproach for it.

ThiS is evident, I think, beyond doubt, from what has already been observed.
And "it was for a matter of twelve years together, says Dr. MATHER, [i.e. after
1630.] "that persons of all ranks, well affected unto church-reformation, kept
sometimes dropping, and sometimes flocking into New England. -- The persecutors
of those Puritans, as they were called, who were now retiring into that cold
country from the heat of their persecution, did all that was possible to hinder
as many as was possible from enjoyment of that retirement -- that this people
should not be let go. Among those -- that were so stopped -- were OLIVER
CROMWELL, Mr. HAMBDEN, and Sir A. HASELRIG. Nevertheless, this is not the only
instance of persecuting churchmens wanting the spirit of prophecy Mag. p. 23
[Alluding to the great part which these famous men bore in what was soon after
done in England.]

To those which preceed, let me add the joint testimony of the Rev. Messieurs
JOHN ALLIN of DEDHAM, and THOMAS SHEPHERD of Cambridge, New England. These were
persons of great note in their day, both of them learned men, among the very
early Mr. Shepherd came over in 1634, When Mr. Allin came, I am not so certain.
settlers in the Massacbusetts-Bay; and both of them grown men before the
famous embarkation of 1630. So that they must have known, not only their own
motives in coming hither, but those of the other adventurers in general, This
testimony is contained in a certain preface, signed by them jointly, dated
New England, Nov. 28. 1645. One principal design of which preface was to
justify the great resort into America, against some complaint of their friends,
the Puritans and non-conformists in England, as if they had deserted them and
the good cause of reformation there, In answer, among other things, they say:
"Let us entreat all the godly wise to consider and look back upon season of
this great enterprise, undertaken by us -- and we think, though we were silent,
they may easily satisfy themselves, whether this was of God or men; a sinful
neglect of the cause of Christ, or a manifest attestation to the truth, by open
profession against corruptions of worship in use, and for the necessity of
reformation of the church; and that confirmed by no small degree of sufferings
for the same. For was it not a time when human worship and inventions were
grown to such an intolerable height, that the conscience of God's saints and
servants -- could no longer bear them? Was not the power of the tyrannical
prelates so great, that like a strong current, carried all down stream before
it?" -- "And what would men have us do in such a case? Must we study some
distinctions to solve our consciences in complying with so monifold corruptions
in God's worship? of should we live without God's ordinance" -- "It is true we
might have suffered, if we had sought it; we might easily have found the way to
have filled the prisons; and some had their share therein. But whether we were
called thereunto, when a wide door was set open of liberty otherwise; and our
witness to the truth, through the malignant policy of those times, could not be
open before the world, but rather smothered up in close prisons, or some such
ways, together with ourselves we leave to be considered. We cannot see, but the
rule of Christ to his apostles and saints, and the practice of God's saints in
all ages, may allow us this liberty as well as others, to fly into the
wilderness from the face of the DRAGON" -- "We should be an object of
tenderness to that state and people, by whose laws and unkind usages we were
driven out into a wilderness"

THE Examiner having thought proper to use late very inquisitive and studious
Mr. PRINCE's testimony on this occasion, I conclude be wiil not object against
my making some addition to it, out of the same Book; which I consider as an
authentic account of the persons by whom, and the motives on which, this colony
was peopled. After speaking largely of the Puritans and their sufferings, he
says: "Of these English Puritans were the greater part of the settlers of the
Masachusetts colony. They had been chiefly born and brought up in the national
church, and had hitherto lived in communion with her -- Though with multitudes of
others, laboring under grievous impositions, conslicting with many
difficulties, and looking earnesly for better times; till the high-flying
bishops both increased the ceremonies, and grew so rigorous in imposing them,
as to allow no worship in the church without them: Yea, so severely prosecute
those who could not in conscience use them, as to let them live no longer in
their native land in quiet. Finding therefore the impositions growing, losing
all farther hopes of reformation and indulgence there; and New England opening
her arms to embrace them; they judged they now ought to improve the offer, and
rather choose a hideous wilderness; that here, being free from all restraint,
they might set up churches, in their worship, matter, form and discipline,
entirely after the, New Testament model; enjoy these great and christian
liberties without disturbance, and transmit them, as what they accounted their
dearest legacy, to their perpetual succesors." N. E. Chron. Vol. I. p. 239.


To these let me subjoin one more testimony: It shall be from the venerable
Society themselves, in their historical Account, An. 1706. p. 10. "It must be
acknowledged, that it was the unhappiness of New England and the adjoining
parts, to be first planted and inhabited by persons who were generally
disaffected to the church of England, and had many of them taken REFUGE or
retirement in those parts, on account of their suffering for NONCONFORMITY at
home.

IT should be remembered that all these testimonies, except the last, (and it
were easy to fill volumes; with others to the same purpose) relate particularly
and direstly to the settlers of the Massachusetts Bay, as distinct from
Plymouth colony; and they speak for themselves.

BUT let me make a short remark or two, relative to the letter of Governor
WINTHROP, etc. on which the Examiner says so much stress. Upon what authority
the Examiner says, this letter was directed to the bishops and clergy, and
people of the church of England. I am quite at a loss. In the Edition before
me, Boston 1696, the direction is, To the rest of their Brethren in and of the
church of England. And whom they chiefly intended by their brethren, etc. there
can be little room for doubt: Certainly not the high-flying persecutions of the
Puritans.
And,

1. He speaks of this letter as written on purpose to exculpate themselves from
the slanderous report of their intending to set up a form of worship, different
from the national establishment, as those of Plymouth had done before. But,

2. IF this was their principal design, it is very strange they did not do so.
There is not a syllable in the letter, that implies they had no such purpose.
They speak, indeed, very respectfully of the church of England, calling her
their mother; desire the prayers of their brethren in and of her; and say, they
did not dream of perfection in this world, etc. In this they discover their
great charity and moderation: But all this falls far short of a declaration,
that they were not disgusted with many things in the national church, and that
they had no intention to set up a different way of worship; as it is known they
unanimously did, immediately on their arrival here.

3. IN this very letter, I mean a part of it which the Examiner did not think
proper to quote, as not being for his purpose, there is positive and clear
intimation of their having some peculiar opinions and principles in religious
matters. "If any there be, say they, "who through want of clear intelligence of
our course, or tenderness of affection toward us, cannot conceive so well of
OUR WAY as we could desire, we would entreat such not to despise us, nor to
desert us in their prayers and affections, etc. Those words, OUR WAY, plainly
refer to their principles and practices as Puritans, which had rendered them
obnoxious, and for which they had been sufferers.

4. CAN the Examiner himself possibly imagine that this letter is of any weight
in the scale, against so many clear testimonies as have been produced, relating
to the sentiments, sufferings and motives of these renowned adventurers, and to
the manner of worship and discipline which they immediately and unanimously
fell into, on their arrival here; in conformity to the churches before founded
at Plymouth and Salem? The utmost that can be made of this letter, appears to
me to be this; The good men were deeply affected with the thoughts of leaving
their native country, and going into an American wilderness: They recollected,
that they had been mostly born and bred in the church of England, in which they
supposed there were great numbers of excellent men, between whom and themselves
the difference was but small, though they had received such ill usage from the
governing part: They were desirous to take their farewell upon as friendly and
good terms as possibly they could, with a safe conference: They therefore seem
to bury and forget all the reproach and hardships they had undergone as
Puritans: They wish well to the church of England; honor her as their mother,
and desire the prayers of all good people in her communion, notwithstanding
their own way was thought so ill of by many. This, as was intimated before, is
a glorious example of true greatness of mind, of generosity and catholicism, of
christian meekness and charity; -- such as is rarely to be found. More than
this cannot be fairly made of it, considering what is certainly known of these
persons, and how they conducted on their arrival in America: And less than this
I do not desire should be made of it. Nor will it even admit of the least
rational doubt, but that they had, at the very time of their writing the
letter, a formal design to set up purer and more scriptural churches in the new
world, than that which they left established in the old; at least purer in
their own apprehensions.

Let me therefore make one more remark here; it is this, That if I had spoken
in the Observations, of the principles, motives and sufferings of the
Massachusett-adventurers, as distinguished from the Plymothcan; yet it would
have been conformable to strict historical truth, though my Examiner calls all
this stale pretense. I will not insult the man who appears so unacquainted with
the matters he wrote of, unless it be doing so, just to remind him of his own
words: his calm reflections on this occasion, if he is a person of any candor
or ingenuity, will give him sufficient uneasiness. -- "The first settlers of
the Massachusetts Bay at least, those pious good men, who left the fair cities,
etc. did not do it from any disgust they had taken at the established religion
of their country; but from quite other motives -- "Read, my dear countrymen,
read the words of our pious forefathers in the above letter, and compare them
with this author's licentious harrangue -- "Let the Dr. consider what
recompense he can make to the memory of these men, for abusing them with the
opprobrious charge of sectarism and hyprocrify -- i. e. Because I am supposed
to have spoken of them as taking refuge in America for conscience sake, and
coming hither as to an assylum from the perfections of the church of England:
This, in his candid opinion, is to abuse them as hypocrites as well as
sectaries; and to bring an opprobious charge against them -- As to the
Examiner's recriminations with respect to the non-conformists having persecuted
in their turn, even in New England; I am sensible he has too much occasion for
this. He is also sensible, and ought to have had the candor to acknowledge it,
than I declared expressly in the Observations, that I would not undertake their
defense in this respect. So that he might have fav'd himself a great deal of
labor. p 54 and onwards; since he is not disputing here with me, or any other
person so far as I can tell. I am mistaken, however, if he would not be glad to
see them become perfections again, at least of one man --


SECTION IX.
Containing some short Remarks on various unconnected matters in the
Examination, from p. 57 to 69. FIRST, He speaks highly of "tests"; and
insinuates that my manner of writing on this occasion, has a tendency to stir
up a spirit of "persecution" against the church, which, he says, is "already
established here"; he also says, "tests are already ordained, and in many cases
required, as they are in England -- He accuses me of "persuading people to
unite in excluding those of the church of England, not only from all posts of
honor and emolument, but even from the common rights and privileges of natural
born subjects; a scheme so notoriously factious and unjust, Sec. etc. p. 57, 58.

Let me here briefly remark,

1. It does not yet appear that the church of England is already established
here.

2. Every one knew, without his information, that certain officers who bear the
King's commission in the colonies, must qualify, by communicating in the church
of England. And by the manner of his speaking of tests, it may naturally be
presumed that he is much troubled, that this is not generally, or rather
universally required; -- that our counselors, representatives, judges,
justices, sheriffs, militia-officers, etc. are not all obliged to qualify in
the same way; and that schisinatics may be admitted to these places of public
trust.

3. That I aimed at penswading people to unite in excluding those of the church
of England, not only from all posts of honor and emolument, but even from the
common rights and privileges of natural born subjects, is absolutely false. I
did not excite them to unite in excluding them even from posts of honor and
emolument; which would have been a very toolish and fruitless, not to say
sactious scheme; especially while the Governor, who has the sole appointment of
military officers, the nomination of civil, and a negative upon the choice of
counselors here, must be a conformist -- Much less did I excite people to
unite in excluding episcopalians from the common rights and privileges of
natural born subjects. But I am free to own, that I expressed my apprehensions
of the government and all offices here, coming wholly into the hands of
churchmen, which many seem desirous of. I am equally willing to own, though I did
not say so before, that I think it would be little short of infatuation for the
people here, on any occasion to favor those with their votes, who are bigots
to the said church; who contemn and despise all non-conformists thereto, who
desire to deprive them of their ancient privileges, to trample and crush them
under their feet. -- This would be to put a sword into the hands of their
enemies. These sentiments I avow; and this is the most, and even more than can
be strictly made of that passage in the Observations, at which some
episcopalians have been so much enraged.

4. As to perfection; I have ever had the utmost abhorrence of it in every
shape, as my mean writings, from first to last, clearly testify. And I solemly
declare, I had much rather suffer it my sels, than promote it against others.
The Observations themselves strongly express my sentiments as to this matter.

Secondly, The Examiner makes a slourish about episcopacy and the liturgy, p.
60, 61, 62, 63. But as he has offered nothing of the least consequence upon
these heads, I let what he says pass without any particular remarks. Though if he
had talked more to the purpose than he has, I should have declined entering
upon so extensive an argument at present, for the reasons assigned in my
Introduction. He, and those of his own stamp, may, if they please, attribute
this either to my suspicion of the grounds of our nonconformity, or to my fear
of his great learning and abilities in this controversy. -- I can, however,
hardly forbear taking a little time just to smile at the authorities which he
produces on this occasion; particularly the last. He tells us p. 63. that Dr.
DURELL received the compliments of three or four reformed ministers in France,
on his sermon in praise of the liturgy. These he has produced with great
formality in French and English, on opposite columns. That which crowns all, as
being the most a la mode and sublime, the very apex, culmen and quintescence of
French compliment, is expressed thus -- "If you stood in need of an
approbation, after that of your bishops CHAPLAIN, I would willingly add MINE to
the same Whoever would see the principles of our non conformity, and the
validity of our ordinations (...) vindicated may have that satisfaction
particularly from Mr. (...) Plea for the Non conformists. Mr. J. PIERCE's
Vindication of Dissenders, the Answer to Mr. WhiTE's Letters, and Dr. CHAUNCY's
(of Boston) sermon at the Dudleianlecture, 1762, entitled, The Validity of
Presbyterian ordination asserted and maintained. The reader will in these find
something much more solid and satisfactory, than in the scraps which the
Examiner has cited from Calvin and Bezo, or even in those French Compliments,
on which he lays so great a stress.
!

Thirdly, In p. 64, 65 and 66. the Examiner very formally sums up what he calls
"the argument on both sides." All that needs be said of this at present, is,
that he seems perfectly satissied with himself, and to think he had done
wonders --

-- "Reviewing what he writ,

"Blesses his stars, and wonders at his wit."

The wonder of his readers may, however, probably be much more excited at
something else, on this occasion.

Fourthly, He expresses his hope, in the last mentioned page, that the Society
will continue their millions here; and his considence, however that may be,
that God will "direct to sufficient means for the preservation of hiS CHURCH.
As to the latter of which, I heartily concur with him; and would accordingly,
if he will excuse such a piece of vanity and presumption in me, take it upon me
to officiate as his clerk, by saying AMEN! Only observing, it is my humble
opinion, that the church of God would be much better preserved, and more
effectually propagated, if the Society, in their wisdom, should think proper to
send their missionaries into other parts.

Fifthly, He next speaks of my "indecent and abusive treatment of them" [the
Society.] This charge I deny: It was neither indecent nor abusive in me to
endeavor to show by clear arguments, that the Society had in part misapplied
their charity; unless I had also charged them with known, wilful misconduct, as
I did not. This is such a liberty as is agreeable to the laws and customs of
Great Britain; and, which is much more, to the spirit and precepts of religion.
And the reader is left to judge, whether my Examiner has not injured the
Society far more than I have done, by laboring, to prove, that if they have
misconducted, they have wilfully betrayed their trust. Let him therefore, to
use his own words, "consider what reparation he ought in conscience to make,
etc. p. 44.

Sixthly, He blames me, p. 67. for not rather Writing an account of the success
of another religious Society, than objecting against the conduct of this. To
which I shall only answer, that I was at my liberty; and thought there was more
occasion for the latter than the former; this occasion being given by Mr.
APTHORP's officious and indiscrete zeal.

Seventhly, He commends Mr. WHEELOCK's scheme, p. 68. I am glad he can approve
of any thing done toward the conversion or the heathens, by those who,
according to his principles, are unorthodox, sectaries and hypocrites. This is
what I hardly expected.

Eighthly, In the same and the next page he justifies all the virulence and
abuse that have been so plentifully bestowed on me on this occasion; saying
that I have "no right to complain," etc. To which I shall only answer, that he
who can thus deliberately justify such outrages, adopts, and makes them his
own; and thereby shows, if possible, a more rancorous spirit than that which
dictated them at first.

Lastly, He speaks of me, p. 69, as one of those who ought to be "rebuked
sharply." And no one, surely, who reads any part of his virulent pamphlet, can
in the least doubt, but that he thought himself a very proper person to
undertake that office: But whether he is or not, other persons may reasonably
doubt, since he is ashamed of his name.

SECTION X.
Of some ingenuous and candid methods taken by the Examiner, in order to render
the Author of the Observations odious; and of what was apparently his farther
view therein,

IT is no new practice for those who write upon controverted matters, to see
the persons against whom they write, in the most disadvantageous point of
light; and to take such methods in order thereto, as every christian, gentleman
and scholar ought to have in contempt and abhorrence. If my candid Examiner
excells in any thing, I think it is in such arts as these: And, by what I can
learn, this is the general opinion of the most unprejudiced among us. I shall
not pretend to enumerate all the particulars which he has said with the
aforesaid design; but some of them only, as they occur to my mind.

And,

First, He has represented me as an enemy to the government under which I live,
by speaking of me as an enemy to all kings. It is with this view, undoubtedly,
that speaking of king WILLIAM, he says, he was a prince for whom I " pretend a
respecty, at least as much as I am capable of paying to any crowned head, p.
23. And immediately after, to prove my implacable hatred of all kings, he
quotes one of my sermons, in which I said, "The greatest part of mankind now
are, and almost always have been, oppressed by wicked tyrants, called civil
rulers, kings and emperors; oppressed by God's scourges, that call themselves
his mini sters for good -- A fact which hardly any person conversant in
history, will pretend to deny. But why did he not go a little farther, and
represent me as an enemy to all civil government in general; since, in the
passage he quoted, I use the general terms civil rulers? But though it is my
opinion, that the "greatest part" of mankind are thus abused by kings, or other
rulers, methinks a logician would not infer from hence, that I think they all
are; and consequently, that all kings and civil rulers are tyrants -- It is
with the same candid design, that he says, I call kings "sceptered tyrants" p.
70. as if I had applied those epithets to all kings indiscriminately, as
characteristic of them. Whereas it is evident from the passage to which he
refers, that I used them only concerning some particular arbitrary and
persecuting kings. This he must have known; and he might have known also, that
in many of my printed discourses, I speak of good kings with the highest
reverence; particularly of king WILLIAM, and all the princes of the HANOVERIAN
succession: And he is, perhaps, disgusted that I have praised these princes so
much, instead of extolling those of the STEWART family. For he discovers his
dislike to what I have occasionally said about the latter.

Secondly, He has ransacked my sermons, published at different times, for
fifteen or sixteen years past, and which he somewhere, I think, smartly says,
are sufficiently voluminous; picking out expressions, scraps of sentences, and
words, which he thinks harsh and exceptionable. This he has generally done
without the lead regard to the scope and connection of the passages from whence
he has culled them, and though many of them had no relation to the point in hand.
A mote particular notice will be taken of what he says upon this head: At
present I only observe in general, the ingenuity of this gentleman,in taking
such a method to render me odious; and then pleading these detached words and
expressions, which he has raked together with so much malicious diligence, as a
justification of all the ribaldry and personal abuses that have been vented
against me on this occasion. And what is the evident tendency of what he has
offered upon this head, but to excite every person, especially episcopalians,
(many of whom needed no stimulus) to treat me with all the rudeness and
scurrility they are capable of? -- I aver, that if one were to take this same
liberty with the writings even of Dr. Tillorson, and the most eminent divines
of the church of England; -- nay, with the writings of St. Paul, and other
apostles; -- yea, with the discourses of our blessed Savior himself, who was
so "meek and lowly in heart", it would be easy to find detached expressions in
them on different occasions, which would at first view have the appearance of
great hardiness and severity; such as might seem not easily reconciled with the
gentle spirit and the precepts of the gospel, though perfectly agreeable thereto
in reality, when the occasion and circumstances are duly attended to -- In
hunting thus after exceptionable words and expressions, from sermon to sermon,
how much less resemblance does this candid gentleman bear to the be, than to
some less cleanly insects, which delight more in what is unsavory, than in
honey or the honey comb? -- Mean as my discourses are, he might have found in
them many things salutary to the soul, and particularly adapted to rectify such
a disposition as he discovers.

I would indeed rather apologize for, than undertake fully to justify, some
particular expressions which I have used. Much wiser and better men than I am,
have some times spoken unadvisedly with their lips. But I think I have no
occasion even to apologize for most of the expressions, against which he
excepts. I shall go over those which he has so industriously raked together,
from p. 70. to 76. inclusive; making some short remarks on them, that the
impartial reader may judge between us -- "Sceptered tyrants." -- This was not
said of kings in general, as he maliciously insinuates; but of bad kings only.
"The greatest part of mankind now are, and always have been, oppressed by
wicked tyrants, called civil rulers, kings, etc. This is agreeable to strict
historical truth; let him, if he can, prove the contrary. "An enormous
hierarchy, ascending by various gradations from the dirt to the skies". -- Let
the reader consider a poor, half-starv'd curate in England, with only L.10 or
12, sterling. per ann. and then rise in his imagination along the scale of
rectors, prebendaries, deans, commissaries, archdeacons, etc. till he comes to
bishops and archbishops, who have 8, 10 or 12,000l. sterling. a year, with place
and rank next to the royal familys, and power in proportion: Let him then
consider, whether such an hierarchy as this, does not pretty near to the
aforesaid description; and whether it is not very different from any which we
find in the new testament, whatever regard it may claim, considered as
authorized by the laws of EngLandi. "An hierarchy resemblihg that of the Romish
church, where one great prelate presides", etc. Any person who will turn to my
Obs. p. 79. may see that this is not directly asserted concerning the English
hierarchy; but if it had been, it would have been strictly true. And he that
denies any resemblance between, these hierarchies, either knows nothing of the
matter, or cares not what he denies. "One of our kings was wheedled and duped
to his destruction, by the furious episcopal zealots of that day" -- Strictly
just, and true. "The persecuting antichristian spirit of many prelates before
the revolution". -- This is expressed with great tenderness and moderation, and
needs not the least apology. "Bishops and their underlings". -- And who will
deny, that bishops have usually many underlings? Tho's this was not used by me
as a term of contempt and reproach respecting the persons of all those who are
in office subordinate to bishops, in the church of England; but with reference
to the known principles of non-conformists, who suppose and prove that,
according to the new testament, an elder or presbyter is not an officer
inferior to a bishop, but the same. "The mitred, lordly successors of the
fisherman of Galilee" -- That bishops wear mitres, sit in the house of Lords as
Peers, are called of men Lords; and, that they call themselves successors of
the apostles, who were some of them fishermen of Galilee, will not be denied.
What then does my Censor find fault with in this? If he says, that the
expression taken all together, has the air of reproach and sarcasm; I need not
deny it. But then he should not have represented it, as if applied by me to all
bishops in general; for it is used in the very place from whence he took it, (
Obs. p. 155.) only concerning those imperious, tyrannical ones, who cruelly
harassed our forefathers -- "When we reflect what our forefathers suffered
from the mitred, lordly successors, etc. For this I shall make no, apology. "
Before the revolution, episcopal persecution was seconded by royal power; which
condescended to be subservient to the views of domineering prelates" --
Strictly just, without the least need or apology. "Their unholy zeal and
oppressions were countenanced by sceptered tyrants" -- Strictly just again. He
says, I have characterized the church or England, as "a cruel persecuting
church"; but he is forced immediately to acknowledge, that I expressly confine
this description of her, to the times "before the revolution": Which he
heartily attributes to my fearing "the censure of civil authority". This, I
deny; let him prove it. This character of said church, as restrained to those
times, needs not the least apology. Nay, it is but too apparent, that her being
such a church no longer, is much more owing to the ju^stice and mildness of the
civil government, than to the disposition at many of her sons, and even of her
clergy. Though I doubt not, but that the bishops are now generally persons of
moderation; lovers of civil and christian liberty, as well as of learning; and
encouragers of the latter even among non-conformists: In which respects I
highly honor them.

He comes next to my sermon relative to the 30th of Jan. preached 1750. In the
preface to which, he says, I "speak of bishops and the clergy in general, under
the title of imperious bishops and reverend jockies. This, he must give me
leave to tell him; h an absolute, right down -- falsehood. He must have known
it to be so, if he read the passage to which he refers, instead of taking his
account from vague report. This will appear to be a falsehood, when the passage
itself is produced. After speaking of ecclesiastical tyranny, as the most
cruel, intolerable and impious of any", I go on thus -- "From small beginnings
it exalts itself above all that is called God and that is worshipped: [herein
particularly referring to the tyranny of the church of Rome] "People have no
security against being unmercifully priestridden, but by keeping all imperious
bishops, and other clergymen who love to lord it over God's heritage, from
getting their foot into the stirrup at all: [i. e. from getting too much power]
"Let them be once fairly mounted, and their beasts the laity may prance and
flounce about to no purpose: And they will at length be so jaded and hacked by
these reverend jockies, that they will not even have spirits enough to complain
that their backs are galled, or, like Balaam's ass, to rebuke the madness of
the prophet. Now who sees not that, in this passage, I speak only of some
bishops under the character of imperious; as I do, only of some other
clergymen, who love to lord it over God's heritage? -- and that it is only such
bishops, and such other clergymen, whom I call reverend jockies? Is there the
least foundation for saying, that I call them all so? This expression may
indeed be rather too ludicrous; the hypocrisy and wickedness of such men, and
the mischiefs they do, being perhaps thing of too serious a nature to be made a
jest of. This expression, however, was not used in a sermon: Nor do I see any
occasion to apologize for it though I will not dispute tastes with those, who
have less of the risible in their constitution than myself, or who may think it
improperly indulged itpon such an occasion; as I do not -- But he says that, in
the sermon aforesaid, "they [i. e. bishops and the clegy in general, the
immediate antecedents] are styled reverend and right reverend drones, who
preach preach but once a year" etc. This is another absolute falsehood. So far
was I from styling them so in general, that I did not expressly call any of them
so; as any one may see, by turning to the sermon, p. 21. The expression in
entirely hypothetical; and introduced only to illustrate the argument I was
upon, about kings -- " Suppose farther, that a number of reverend and right
reverend drones, who worked not, etc. And even this hypothetical similitude,
brought in for illustration, is introduced with the following, precaution --
"It is no matter how far it is from any thing which has in fact happened in the
world" -- But what if I had expressly described some bishops and other
clergymen, as reverend and right neverend drones, who work not, but only eat
the honey; would this have been justly exceptionable? Are there not many such,
at least in Popish countries? This needs no apology -- To proceed -- "He [K. C.
I.] supported that more than scend arch bp. Laud, and the clergy of his stamp,
in all their church tyranny and hellish cruelty" -- This is the first
expression produced by him, which is not jusstisiable; but this I concede only
With reference to those two words, more than -- I confess this was rather too
hyperbolical. I would therefore correct the expression in such a manner as
will, I hbpe, make it almost, if not quite unexceptionable, thus -- "That scend
incarnate arch bp. Laud, etc. leaving out the words more than -- "There seems
to have been an impious bargain struck up betwixt the scepter and the surplice,
for enslaving both the bodies and souls of men," etc. -- Though there is an edge
some on these expressions; yet it was not without sufficient reason; nor is
there any occasiOn to apologize for it -- "Some contend, and foam, and curse
their brethren, for the sake of the athenasian trinity, till it is evident they
do not love and fear the one living and true God," etc. These expressions, and
those which follow, Ex. p. 74. will appear to be very little, if at all
exceptionable, when it is considered that they were used expressly concerning
some hypocritical zealots for a party, in a sermon on the deceitfulness of the
heart. Why should my candid Examiner thus take the part of hypocrites, or think
them too harshly dealt with? Some may perhaps suspect, not wholly without
grounds, that what chiefly disgusted him in this paragraph of the sermon
aforesaid, was a sentence or two immediately preceding those which he has
cited; -- and left out by him, for a reason that shall be nameless. The
foregoing words are -- "There are none, perhaps, who have more reason to be
suspicious of themselves, than your hot religious zealots, the great sticklers
for what they call orthodoxy; whether justly or unjustly, It now matters not.
You will sometimes see men wrangling in such an unchristian manner, about the
form of godliness, as to make it but too evident, that they deny the power
thereof. You will find some who pride themselves in being of what they call THE
TRUE CHURCH, showing, by their whole conversation, that they are of the
synagogue of Satan. Some contend and foam, etc. This is the connection: I
would, however, hope that my Examiner is not one of the persons here described,
notwithstanding he thinks I have treated them with too much harshness and
severity. But hypocrisy is so much the object of my aversion, and hypocrites
are so severely handled by our Savior and his apoles, that I do not think I
have occasion to apologize for what I say of them, to this gentleman, or any
sincere christian. Does he think it belongs only to his own important, though
unknown self, to rebuke sharply?

I cannot but admire the candor and modesty of this Examiner, who, after
searching many sermons for the several expressions aforesaid; after entirely
misrepresenting the sense of most of them, and then jumbling them all together,
says, "It will be doubtless disagreeable to the reader to be any longer
entertained with expressions and observations, so utterly unbecoming a minister
of Jesus CHRIST -- How dared the man to mention that ever sacred and venerable
name thus, after treating me in this heathenish manner! -- If I need an apology
for any expressions in the sermon on the 30th of January, besides that which
relates to arch bp. Laud; I have one at hand. There was great provocation to
use severe expressions about that time, and before. Some of the episcopal
clergy here, used, on the same occasion, to assert the divine, hereditary and
indefeasable right of kings, in direct, manifest opposition to the principles
of the revolution; almost deifying archbishop LAUD as well as CHARLES I;
calumniating non-conformists as schismatics, fanatics, persons of republican,
rebellious principles; and imitating, as far as they were capable, the manner
and style of the keenest, severest sermons ever published in England on the
same occasion. This is well known; and may not this be considered by the
candid, as some apology for me, if not a full vindication? Let me add, that it
is supposed by many, that the episcopal clergy have since preached in a more
moderate strain upon the said occasion: Which some, I know, attribute in part
to the publication of my sermon. If there is any ground for this, I am humbly
of opinion that it has done some good; and that they ought to think themselves
obliged to me for the share I have had in keeping them from exposing themselves
till this time, in the way that some of them used to do before --

LET me here briefly take notice of a supposed inconsistency charged upon me,
Ex. p. 76. The gentleman says, Mr. Apthorp had observed, "that the religious
state of the country is manifestly improved as to its speculatived doctrines,
notwithstanding the immoralities which we lament and wish to reform. He
immediately adds, "After spending several pages ( viz. from 83 to 92.) to
confute this position, the Dr. concludes as in the opposite column -- Now, in
said column I am truly cited as conceeding that christianity, speculatively
considered, may be better understood in this age, than in that of our Fathers:
But still the inconsistency charged upon me, is an absolute, apparent
falsehood. For if the reader will be pleased to turn to the pages which the
Examiner refers to in the Observations, he will find that I never once denied
"this position," viz. "That the religious state of the country is manifestly
improved as to its speculative doctrines; much less, spent nine pages "to
confute this position" as he has the presence to assert. Nor did Mr. Apthorp's
assertions relate only to speculative doctrines: He spoke of the savage and
gloomy appearance with which superstition terribly arrayed religion in the days
of our fathers; and of the hypocrisy and persecution in respect of which, as he
supposed, we have been reformed by means of the Society and their missionaries.
These were the positions that I confuted in the pages aforesaid; without once
denying, that better speculative opinions in some respects now prevail, than
formerly did. Nor have I the least reason to think that the palpable falsehood
of this representation, as to an inconsistency, was undesigned; -- except only
the title of the pamphlet which contains it. There is indeed a remarkable
"contrast" betwixt the truth and this representation; and, in his own words on
this occasion, it is "left to speak for itself."

SECTION XI.
More of the Examiner's candor; particularly in representing his antagonist as
an impious heretic or deist; and accusing him of denying certain doctrines,
which he is known to maintain. IT is a stale art of bigots and party-men, to
represent those who appear in opposion to their designs, as deists, or heretics
at best; as denying the essential, fundamental doctrines of christianity, etc.
in order to destroy their influence, and to inflame the unenlightened zeal of
the multitude against them. Whether this candid gentleman has, or has not made
use of this art, in a manner hardly to be parallelled, shall be submitted to
the judgment of the reader, when I have produced the proofs of it under his own
hand. And here I must look back as far as the 47th page of his libel, where,
speaking of our fathers, he says: "Could the Dr. have mentioned these good
fathers without blushing, if he had reflected how widely he has departed from
the faith which these good men professed, and that as to the most essential
doctrines of christianity? Or must we take his appeals and harraugues of this
kind to be mere grimace, or rather a design calculated ad captum vulgi, to
raise a serment in the minds of people who cannot help retaining, and that very
justly, a value for the memory of their progenitors? Whatever their notions of
liberty, or purity of religion amounted to, they certainly had no great opinion
of the learned Socinus; they entertained those orthodox opinions, at least
concerning the divinity of the Son of God, which the Dr. has treated in so
bold, as well as ludicrous a manner; and had he lived in their days, he must
either have enlarged his, creedy or felt the effects of their HOMEST
RESENTMENT. But though he has no right to take shelter under the merit of those
good men -- since he is departed from that purity of faith, whatever it was,
which they professed, as far as darkness is from light: Yet, etc. As this
seemed to be one of the most labored passages in his libel, I was willing he
should have the credit of it, by quoting it thus at large. As to myself, I am
at a loss whether it most merits contempt or indignation, ridicule or grave
censure. There may therefore, perhaps, be a mixture of them all in the
following remarks upon it.

1. I HAVE never been backward to own, that my religious sentiments are, in
some respects, different from those of the generality of our forefathers. Much
less did I ever swear to, subscribe, or profess to believe all their opinions;
so that, in this respect at least, the episcopalian clergy cannot justly accuse
me of hypocrisy. Much less did I ever think of taking shelter under the merit
of those good men; never having imagined that I stood in need of any other
merits besides those of my Redeemer. But,

2. THE Examiner in this passage, so full of christian candor and benevolence,
has represented my religious sentiments as much more different from those of
our good fathers, than they really are. Of this I am certainly a better judge
than he can possibly be; since I best know, what my own sentiments are -- "How
widely he has departed from the faith which these good men professed -- " " --
as far as darkness is from light -- " "and that as to the most essential
doctrines of christianty -- " What more could he have said, if I had been a
professed roman-catholic? I had almost said,a mohammedan. Does this man, or do
many others well consider what they say, when they so freely charge others with
denying the essential doctrines of the gospel? Who told them that the doctrines
which they often speak thus of, even supposing them true, are essential? Is not
this equivalent to saying, that the deniers of them are no christians, though
they profess a sincere regard to Jesus Christ as the Savior of the world, and
to the holy scriptures as a revelation from God? Do they consider, that this
judging and setting at naught their brethren, is expressly prohibited by our
common Lord? Do they consider, that there are hard speeches against men, as
well as against God, that must hereafter be accounted for? I wish some people
who may mean better, perhaps, than my Examiner does, would more seriously
consider the consequences of talking at this rate, than they seem to do. WHAT
our pious forefathers considered as the most essential branches of
christianity, may doubtless be learnt in part from the first church covenant
used in the Massachusetts Bay colony; viz. at Salem, before the year 1630; and
I think, afterward in other churches. This is preserved in Dr. Mather's
history of New England, B. I. chapter 4. Of which the Dr. says, "By this instrument
was the covenant of grace explained, received and recognized by the first
church in this colony, and applied unto the evangelical designs of a church
state," etc. Now, if I were a friend to subscriptions, I declare I could, with
the utmost freedom, both with heart and hand, subscribe this covenant; and even
go farther toward what is usually called orthodoxy among us. Let the reader
then, who believes me sincere in this protestation (as those that know me best
will) judge whether I am justly accused of departing from the most essential
doctrine of the gospel, which our said fathers held, as far as darkness is from
light"! -- Happy had it probably been for New England, if no narrower, or more
divisive church covenants had ever been seen among us --
But,

3. THERE are some more particular insinuations and assertions here, and in
other parts of this defamatory pamphlet, in order to show how widely I differ
from our good forefathers. It is intimated that I am a Socinian: "Whatever
their notions of liberty -- amounted to, they certainly had no great opinion of
the learned Socinus. Here this Censor alludes to a passage in one of my sermons
on Christian Sobriety, p. 57. in which I speak of Socinus under that charater,
learned. Will this candid man then allow none to be even learned, unless they
are Athenasians? It were somewhat hard to deny them all, the reputation of
learning in this world: Is it not enough for charitable and meek christians
solemnly to declare, that they shall without doubt perish everlasting? But the
candor of my Examiner is here the more observable because in the very passage
where I speak of Socinus as a learned man, I introduce him on purpose to
intimate my dislike of his most distinguishing opinions; as I did expressly,
without giving the least intimation that I approved anyone of them, as I never
did. What if the reader should here a little "indulge his astonishment:" at the
candor and modesty of this man! To use his own language, could he write thus
"without blushing?" -- Truly, by the spirit that runs through his pamphlet, I
almost believe he could; though it is probable, there are not many other persons
in the world, who have got fo far beyond that childish infirmity.

HE goes on -- "They entertained those orthodox opinions, at least concerning
the divinity of the Son of God, which the Dr. has treated in so bold as well as
ludicrous a manner" -- That I ever denied, or treated in a bold or ludicrous
manner, the divinity of the Son of God, as revealed in scripture, I absolutely
deny. My soul loves and adores him. Of his great salvarion I have a good hope
through grace; more prized by me than many, than all worlds: And I have made it
my serious endeavor to preach his unsearchable riches according to the
scriptures of truth, without pretending to be wise above what is written. I
have indeed expressed my disbelief, and even contempt of certain metaphysical
and scolastic, unscriptural and ridiculous definitions or explications of the
trinity, which some men have given. This is all that he can make of those
places in my sermons, to which he has had the assurance to reter the reader,
without quoting a syllable of them. He hoped, no doubt, that this word would be
taken, on account of the formality of a marginal reference. But in some of
these very passages, the true scriptural account of Christ's divinity is
asserted and proved -- But this is the practice of some men. With them,
rejecting mere human inventions and refinements respecting the doctrines of
scripture, is the same thing with denying scripture-doctrines themselves. And
accordingly they scruple not boldly and plumply to tax others therewith, in
general terms; and to treat them as heretics; enemies to the most essential
doctrines of the gospel, etc. Let such men remember, that that glorious Person
for whose honor they either are, or would be thought to be concerned, has said,
"Judge not, that ye be not judged."

BUT this is not the only specimen which this writer has given of his candor
toward me, with respect to doctrinal points. In his flaming apostrophe to the
ministers of Boston, (who, as he was informed, had thanked me for the
Observations) he accuses me of "attempts to undermine the fundamental
principles of their faith -- " "those essential doctrines" -- "the doctrines of
grace" -- "destroying the fundamental principles of their faith" -- and
"undermining the dignity and divinity of the Son of God" -- All these railing
accusations are in page 77. In the next, I am said to "deny and ridicule the
doctrine of justification by faith" -- to "discard the notion of original sin"
-- and to "brand the notion of imputed righteousness with the reproach of
nonsense" -- And he insults the said reverend gentlemen, as not having "the
courage to rise up in defense of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the truth of his
gospel," in opposition to me. These heavy charges are in page 78. Concerning
all which, as they respect myself, I protest before God and the world, that
they are absolute falsehoods. Nor has he produced a single sentence from any of
my writings, to support any one of them; which, he knew, was not in his power.
He has indeed had the confidence to refer in the margin, to some of my sermons,
to render his groundless accusations the more plausible; hoping his word would
be taken. But whoever will be at the pains to turn to these passages, will find
the whole amount of them to be this -- that I explode certain wrong and
unscriptural explanations of those doctrines; some of them tending to
licentiousness; while I not only allow, but assert and prove the doctrines, in
a sober, scriptural sense. What an iniquitous artifice is this, to bring such
general charges without quotations; and without making any distinction betwixt
the doctrines of scripture in general, and unscriptural refinements upon them?
I appeal to God and the world -- nay, to the conscience of this virulent
accuser himself, if it is not such an one as we read of in one of St. Paul's
epistles -- I TIM. 4. 2.


BUT he goes still further; intimating his suspicions that I am a deist, p. 79.
-- "The Dr's reflection upon the Song of Solomon is sufficient to show how easy
it is for him to discard the sacred canon of scripture itself: Or perhaps,"
etc. But he dared not to cite that reflection, as he calls it. The most that
can be fairly and logically inferred from it, is, that I supposed there was
near as much reason for admitting the Wisdom as the Song of Solomon into the
cannon; -- a very harmless supposition, even though it should be a mistake; and
which does not imply the latter to bo admitted without reason. -- He had before
intimated, p. 76, that there was ground to "suspect that I deceive myself, when
I profess a regard for -- divine revelation" -- Behold his candor! He also
makes a great outery, because I somewhere said, that certain passages of
scripture seemed "at first view" to countenance the doctrine of
annihilation."This," says he, "will be greedily catched at by those who have
lived in such a manner, as to have no better hope in their death" -- "This and
several other passages -- certainly have a threatening aspect upon the religion
of Jesus Christ." Now if I had any reason to think him sincere in all this, I
should think myself bound as a christian to give him a particular answer. At
present I shall only observe, that if he had had enough of the charitable
spirit of that religion, for which he expresses so great a concern; or if he
had but duly meditated upon the eternity of those torments, which he supposes
struck at by me, before he began to write; he would probably have spared some
of his railing accusations, and palpable falsehoods; and made that candor which
he professes, a little more conspicuous to his readers -- But to return to his
47th and 48th pages, to illustrate the spirit of which, I have made the last
preceding remarks; I observe,

4. THAT he there intimates his suspicions, that whatever esteem and veneration
I professed for our good fathers, is "mere grimace, or rather a design
calculated ad captum vulgi, to raise a ferment in the minds of the people,"
etc. But where is the candor of this? May I not consistently have an high
regard for their memory, though I do not in every respect embrace their opinions?
I am certain I have; and it is in the nature of things impossible for him to
know the contrary. Nay, does not he himself profess a great esteem of them,
notwithstanding the wide difference betwixt them and him? -- much wider,
without doubt, than betwixt them and me. I should not fear to lay myself under
bonds in a considerable sum, that this man, so full of evil surmisings and
perverse disputings, would be known to disagree more with them, much more upon
the whole, than I do, if he were not so very modest as to conceal his name --
But who can blame a man for this precaution, if he writes in such a manner as
to expose himself to universal contempt, or indignation, if he were known? --

5. I AM much mistaken if this candid man, this enemy to religious persecution,
did not desire something farther than merely to render me odious, by one stroke
in the aforesaid passage. For immediately after representing me as a Socinian,
and one who had ridiculed the "deity of the Son of God," he says, that had I
lived in the days of our pious fathers, I "must either have enlarged my creed,
or felt the effects of their honest resentment." Let the reader compare this
with what he elsewhere says of my principles, particularly in his fiery address
to the ministers of Boston; and then judge; whether it would fully satisfy this
meek christian, to have me universsally abhorred --

6. WITH how great advantage might I retort upon him a suspicion, that whatever
he has said in honor of our fathers "is mere grimace," -- "a design calculated
add captum valgi, to raise a ferment in the minds of the people, etc.? For let
the circumstances be considered: I had written against the conduct of the
Society, expressed my dislike of the church, and my hopes that it would not
prevail here. It also plainly appears, particularly by the furious apostrophe
aforesaid, that he was apprehensive what I wrote, either had, or was likely to
have some influence, in keeping people steady to their old congregational
principles. Now, to take the Examiner in his own way, may it not be suspected
that all his pretensions of respect to the memory of our fathers, are "mere
grimace, -- ad captum vulgi;" and ad captum of our magistrates and ministers
also, as well as of the common people? May it not be suspected, that with the
like pious and ecclesiastical design, he endeavors to raise a universal
ferment and clamor against me, as a Socinian or deist; a man who has departed
as far from our fathers pure faith, "as darkness is from light," etc. etc? What
more likely method than this, to keep people from paying any regard to what I
said, or might say, respecting the church? And how much might it contribute to
conciliate their assections to her, as their dear mother, to find one of her
sons speaking so respectfully of their progenitors? What could have a more
promising tendency to make them return into her bosom, than to sow the seeds of
greater divisions and animosities among us, particularly among our ministers,
than any that before subsisted? What a glorious harvest might the church expert
to reap, could they be engaged in a public quarrel? Did we never hear of such
ingenuous arts as these? Is Divide et impera, a new maxim either in church or
state? Are there none of those, whose business it is to " catch men," the most
successful fishers of them, when they fish in troubled waters?

I APPEAL to the discerning and impartial reader, whether the Examiner's way of
treating his subject, or rather of reviling me, as an enemy to the most
essential doctrine of the gospel, professed by our fathers; -- his professing
such a regard for them himself; -- reproaching the Boston ministers for showing
their approbation of my Observations, while they had not the courage, as he
says, "to rise up in defense of the Lord Jesus Christ and the truth of his
gospel," against me, etc. Whether all this, I say, does not sufficiently
discover the spirit of this man, and his designs, to be really such as I
suspect them. IF the reverend ministers of Boston are supposed by any to have
treated me with too much candor and charity; all I shall say at present upon
that head, is, that it is in my power very fully to convince the world, that
this is a groundless suspicion -- But I well know what some people desire; and
do not think it expedient to gratify them -- "Later anguis in herb" -- My
Examiner had douhtless a design to alarm the honored and beloved people of my
pastoral charge, and to prejudice them against me. But they well know the
falsehood, and perceive the malice of his accusations: And from all that I know
of them, or have, perceived on this occasion, his libel is likely to have an
effect, in this respect, directly contrary to that which he hoped it would
produce.


THE Examiner's suggestions near the close of his libel, that what I have
written upon this occasion, will be attended with unfavourable "impressions,
where it is the interest of the province to stand in a favorable light," are
of a similar nature; mere bug-bears, to frighten children, or those that know
no more; and to be despised by all other persons -- I am indeed heartily sorry,
that my writings first and last, on different subjects and occasions, have been
so little adabted to do honor to my native country. All I can say, is, that I
have ever had her interest and reputation, her laws and liberties, her civil
and religious rights, near my heart. This sufficiently appears even from my
mean writings; and I sincerely congratulate, and rejoice with those of my
countrymen, whom God has endowed with abilities to accomplish those ends by
their writings, which I have aimed at; however unsuccessfully, yet with equal
sincerity and ardor.

I SHALL not imitate my Examiner, by an oftenratious recapitulation of what has
been done in this Defense: Nor shall I sing any paeans, after the manner of
Roman conquerors; especially as my victory, if real, is so inconsiderable as
not at all to deserve the honor of a triumph! I have certainly overcome neither
a BRENNUS nor ANTIOCHUS, neither an HANNIBAL nor a MYTHRIDATES -- The whole is,
with great deference, submitted to the judgment of the intelligent and
unprejudiced reader. I can heartily join with the Examiner in the collect with
which he concludes, "though in the words of the liturgy:" And shall take leave of
him, by exhorting him, at once with proper resentment and hearty good will,
seriously to reflect on the very unchristian manner in which he has treated me;
-- the many grossly false representations in his pamphlet; -- and, as he expects
to appear before the awful tribunal of Jesus Christ, to give me public and
christian satisfaction for these abuses.

P. S. IT should have been observed, p. 24. That whereas the Examiner says,
there is no express mention of Indians, but only of the king's subjects in the
Society's charter; the Indians bordering on our colonies Were actually
considered, called, and treated with as subjects, before as well as since the
said charter was granted. Though if this had not been the case, yet they clearly
come within the express design of the institution, by virtue of these words,
"for propagating the gospel in those parts;" as was shown before.

THERE is a passage in the historical account of the Society, 1706. p. 10, 11.
which appears to me very material in the question about the establishments. I
will first produce it, and then make some short remarks upon it. After speaking
of New England as first planted and inhabited by people, many of whom had taken
refuge there "on account of their suffering for nonconformity at home," the
Society go on thus: "So that they fell there generally into independent
congregations: till about the year 1679, when upon questioning the charter of
that country, the Lord bishop of London, upon an address from several of the
inhabitants of Boston, did prevail with his Majesty, [Charles II.] that a
church should be ALLOWED in that town, for the exercise of religion according
to the church of England --

1. THE time here referred to, 1679. was posterior to all the statutes alleged
for the establishment of the church of England here, except those of the 5th of
Q. Anne, chapter 5 and 8.

2. It appears from hence, that even the bishop of London and the Society did
not suppose the said church established here, at the time aforesaid. For had
this been supposed, what occasion was there for his Lordship to intercede with
his Majesty to allow a church in Boston, for the exercise of religion, etc?

3. By this manner of expression, it seems that it was thought even in those
times, a stretch of prerogative for the King to allow, etc. though he was
prevailed with to do it. It seems as if this allowance was hardly confident
with the charter and laws of this country; so that recourse was had to a
dispensing power in the crown, often claimed and exercise in those times, with
reference to corporations, etc.

4. ThiS conjecture is rendered the more probable, because it is particularly
remarked in the passage before cited, that it was "upon questioning the
charter" of this country, that the said allowance was solicited and obtained.

5. IF the church of England was not here established at that time; but was
then introduced and tolerated, in consequence of the King's exercising a power
at least du^ious, and, in effect, annulling our charter and laws; it is plain
that the establishment of said church here, depends and rests solely on the two
statutes aforesaid, A. 5. chapter 5 and 8. How precarious and slender a foundation
this is, needs not be repeated.

NOThiNG here said, is to be understood as if I liked those ancient laws of
these colonies, which bore hard on the members of the church of England: It is
my opinion, that they were unjustifiable; and I am sincerely glad that they are
no longer in force. All those which we now have, relating to religion, are in
fact the King's laws, who is head of the church of England; -- as truly and
properly his, perhaps, as those laws by which the church of England itself is
eslablish'd in England.

SECTION XII.
REMARKS on a rambling, abusive LETTER annexed to the UN-CANDID Examination
aforesaid, and erroncously called A SHORT VINDICATION of the Society. By one of
its Members. The author had prepared a more particular reply to this Letter.
But on farther consideration of the Letter itself, and hearing the opinion of
others concerning it, he thought there was do need of a beetle upon this
occusion. He therefore contracted what he had written; and the rather, because
the preceding Defense was so large and particular, as, if he is not mistaken,
to render any reply to this loose, declamatory performance in a manner
unnecessary.
THOUGH the author of this letter styles himself a Member of the Society; yet as
he chooses, not without good reason, to conceal his name, no one is bound to
believe him. However, to me this is a matter of indifference; I shall not
therefore dispute that point with him. his letter is not the better in itself,
though written by a Member of the Society, nor the worse, if written by some
other person. It bears the marks of age, with its usual infirmities, whoever
was the author of it.

I cannot but observe, in the first place, That there is not a single
authority, citation or voucher produced through the whole; though this was
apparently necessary in order to confute me, who had produced so many; and to
vindicate the Society. It consists chiefly of loose declamation, and vague
assertions, which rest solely on the credit of this Somebody, Nobody can tell
who. And if the great difficulty which he "labored under in writing," is a
sufficient apology for his neglect in this respect, it might have equally
excused him in not writing at all -- This, to be sure,is a pleasant way of
writing answers and vindications. Why did he not, as he might with equal
propriety, sum all up in one single positive assertion, That my Observations
were unjust, and that the Society had certainly done right? This would have
been as convincing as all that he has written; and would also have saved both
precious time, and paper.

The politeness of this writer (or shall rather say, his candor?) is
sufficiently discovered in his first paragraph (p. 81.) He says, with an air of
assurance, that my observations and reflections are "either merely personal, or
ludicrous, and often trifling, and few of them relating to the merits or the
cause; which is a practice quite unbecoming a just writer, either in the
critical or moral sense of that character. A very decent and modest beginning,
without doubt. He proceeds in the same page: "There is one grand imposition
upon his readers, which runs through the whole, and which is, as it were, the
burden of his song, in which there is not the least truth -- Very civil and
modest again. Unless he can make good this high charge, the reader will
consider what opinion I have a right to entertain, not only of his breeding,
but of his veracity and morals. The pretended imposition is this. -- "That the
chief view and endeavor of the Society has been to convert presbyterians and
congregationalists to the church, to the neglect of Negroes and Indians, and
the heathenish colonies, as he calls them. He immediately adds, "If ever their
missionaries had done this -- Done what, good Sir? You was speaking of the
chief view and endeavor of the Society, not of what their missionaries have,
or have not done -- But I will consider the writer's age -- After passing some
harsh and coarse censures upon the "dissenters from the beginning," as
promoters of "faction," etc. which, he says, "issued in right down rebellion,
he adds, "It is true, every goad churchman must rejoice, when any of our
wondering brethren -- return to the unity of the church -- But as the Society
was not incorporated for that purpose, nor was it ever their principal aim, I
believe very few instances, if any, can be produced, of any missionaries
beginning with any dissenter, with a view of reclaiming him to the church. I
have been long knowing to the affairs of the Society, and know of no such
instances, p. 82. This is his proof of the grand imposition aforesaid. Upon
which I observe,

THAT he has not shown that I even inadvertently expressed myself, as if this
was the " chief view and endeavor of the Society." I very explicitly said the
direct contrary; with a formal design to guard against any such construction,
and to do justice and honor to the Society. For the 6th section of the
Observation begins thus: "That the Society have chiefly sent their missionaries
into those British plantations where they were much needed, according to the
true design of their institution; and that they have hereby served the interest
of religion in them, is by no means to be denied: It were very criminal to deny
them the praise that is justly due to them in this respect. But, that they have
deviated from their original plan -- in some other respects; and thereby left
undone much of the good which they might probably have effected, etc. Let the
Vindicator compare this with his heavy charge against me, as to the grand
imposition which, he says, runs through my whole performance, so as to be the
burden of my song. And when he has made this comparison, taking it for granted
at present, that he is an aged member of the Society, I will only request him
to lay his hand upon his heart, and seriously consider, whether such a
groundless accusation is a branch of that righteousness, which adds a luster
and glory to the "hoary head." But

THOUGH this aged Member "knows of no such instances as he speaks of; yet, that
the Society have actually had it partly in their view to convert presbyterians,
etc. is evident beyond dispute, even from one of their standing Instructions to
their missionaries. It runs thus: "That they frequently visit their respective
parishioners; those of our own communion, to keep them steady in the profession
and practice of religion, as taught in the church of England; those that oppose
us, or dissent from us, to convince and reclaim them with a spirit of meekness
and gentleness. Now, is it not strange that this gentleman, who has been so
"long knowing to the affairs of the Society as to have known Dr. Bray, the
Father of it, very well, (p.82.) should remember nothing of this Instrution,
published so long ago as the year 1706, and still continued! -- Or was this his
meaning, That though he knew of this Instruction, yet he did not know of any
missionary who had been faithful to his trust, by acting in conformity to it?

BUT that some of the missionaries have not been so negligent in this respect,
as he supposes, is well known to many among us. It were easy to give numerous
instances of their zeal and activity in edifying the church of England, by
bringing in presbyterians, etc. At present one example shall suffice. It is the
famous case of Mr. Commissary PRICE, who some time ago resided at Hopkinton,
about 30 miles from Boston. Having a farm or two there, he used his endeavors
to bring over the congregationalists to the church, from their Reverend Pastor,
Mr. SAMUEL BARRETT, an aged gentleman now living. The said Mr. PRICE drew up a
petition to the Society for a missionary, in behalf of some Episcopalians in
said town, to which he got as many names subscribed as possible. In this
petition great encomiums are bestowed on the Revd, Draught's-man; and the
Society are earnestly solicited to fix him as a missionary at Hopkinton.

THERE have been few more flagrant instances of ecclesiastical juggling, than
this of the Commissary. It was laid open by the Revd. Mr. BARRETT aforesaid, in
a letter to Sir HENRY NEWMAN, whom, by mistake, he then supposed Secretary to
the Society. This letter is written in a very plain, sensifible and candid
manner: It recites the aforesaid petition at large, and contains remarks upon
it. And as it may serve not only to convince this Vindicator, but to throw
light upon and confirm what was said in the Observations, concerning the
methods used to propagate the church or England among us; I shall give it to
the reader at large in the margin; only premising, that I had it from Mr.
BARRETT himself, in his own handwriting, with express leave to publish it as
his. The Rev. Mr. Barrett's letter to Sir H. Newman, then supposed by him to be
Secretary to the Society. Boston, March 15, 1738. SIR,
I Understand that a petition has lately been sent to the Honorable Society
for propagating the gospel, subscribed by fundry of the inhabitants of
Hopkinton and others requesting the said Honorable Society to send them an
Episcopal Minister, and assist them in his support and maintenance. And by your
known character as a zealous friend to truth, peace and righteousness, and your
relation to said Honorable Society, I have been induced to give you the
trouble of this letter; hoping it will not be too late to set that matter in a
true light, and thereby to hinder the excellent charity of pious persons being
unhappily misapplied upon this occasion.

The petition to which I refer, is as follows, taken from the original
draught under the Rev. Mr. Commissary Price's own hand writing.

"May it please the Honorable Board,

We the Subscribers are members of the Church of England, many of us by
education, and others by conviction, and by an impartial inquiry after truth:
But such is our misfortune, to be settled in a part of this province, where we
are destitute of the invaluable blessings of the public worship of God,
agreeable to our principles, and the practice of the true Church of England;
many of us having newly entered upon our farms, and consequently not able to
support a minister our selves, and at too great a distance from any episcopal
church, to receive the benefit of the public ordinances; thirty miles being
the nearest. So that were it not for the kind assistance of the Rev. Mr,
Commissary Price, who once a month visits, and performs divine service among us
we should be utterly deprived of all regular and public worship, and ourselves
and families in danger if falling into the deplorable ignorance of the native
Indians. In these our miserable circumstances to whom should we apply, (next to
God) but to that pious and charitable Society which has undertaken to relieve
the distressed, and by whose generous endeavors we daily see christianity
thrive and flourish among us? We humbly hope the necessitous condition of
noinconsiderable number, as we and our families are in the town of Hopkinton,
and the places adjacent, will move your compassion toward us, and powerfully
plead for a share of that bounty, which our brethren of the same communion in
other parts enjoy, and are happy in. And we shall not fail to expressour
gratitude, and endeavor to deservere it, by contributing to the utmost of our
ability toward the support and comfort of any minister that the Society shall
see meet to send among us; which, we engage, shall not be less than sixty
pounds per annum of this currency; and will enlarge the sum in proportion to
the increase of our estates, But if we may presume further to speak our
desires, we should be doubly thankful if we could in any degree be under the
care of the Rev. Gentleman before mentioned, to whose uniwearied labors we owe
our increase, and hopeful situation. There is a good farm consisting of upwards
of fifty acres, with an house and barn and stock of cattle upon it,
appropriated to the use of an episcopal minister for ever: Which, after a few
years, by the care of an incumbent, and the assistance we shall be willing to
afford him in inproving it, will be a comfortable support to him. But at
present we are as great objects of the Society's compassion as any of our
brethren of the episcopal church in New England; and we promise ourselves as
happy success from it, and shall as thankfully receive any tokens of it."

Upon which I would make the following remarks.

In the first place: Whereas the subscribers declare themselves members of the
Church of England, by education or conviction, and an impartial enquiry after
truth; it is certain that, before the petition was sent, the Rev. Mr. Price
knew perfectly well that several of the subscribers never pretended to be
churchmen; nor did he ever examine them concerning their principles in this
respect, as they have since declared. One of them has told me, that Mr. Price
urged him to sign it, saying it would do him no hurt. Another assured me that
he was unready about his signing; who applied himself to Mr. Price, who told
him, his turning would not oblige him to pay toward the maintenance of the
church of England. It Is known that some who were drawn into the subscription,
are professed presbyterians. It can be proved that one of these, being asked
how he who had been bred up in the presbyterian way, could conform to the
church, answered, that he was not a churchman; but that Mr. Price obliged him
to go to church or leave his place; and said further, that he intended to leave
Mr. Price's farm as soon as he could provide for himself; and then, he hoped,
he should enjoy his own principles. Another of the subscribers assured me, that
he was still of the presbyterian principles; but that Mr. Price, his landlord
obliged him to go to church. And, that all the subscribers were not members of
the Church of England, by education or conviction, appears by a declaration
(the original of which I have in my own hands) signed as follows --

"We the subscribers, being among the number of fundry of the inhabitants of
Hopkinton, and others, who have petitioned the honorable Society for
propagating the gospel, to send them an episcopal minister; think ourselves
obliged to declare to the world, that although we are represented in said
petition as members of the Church of England ( which we were ignorant of at the
time of our signing) yet we never pretended to be members of the Church of
England, or inclined to it, but were urged to sign and petition, by the
promoters of it; being told by them, that our signing was only in, order to
their having a minister who were churchmen, and that our signing would not make
us churchmen; but that they must have such a number of signers, or they could
not have a minister sent among them.

Samuel Peck, Alexander Kelley, Joseph Whitherby, Peter Barns."

In the next place, the honorable Society will be imposed upon by Mr.
Commissary's petition, if they think that the subscribers are generally the
owners of farms, and masters of families, in or near Hopkinton, Of all the
subscribers that are churchmen, by education or otherwise, I challenge him to
produce more than three who have entered upon their own farms: The rest are
tenants, and many of them tenants at will; and who will succeed them is
uncertain. Some of the subscribers are not heads of families, but single
persons not at their own disposal; being not all of age to act for themselves.
Nor can it be said with truth, that all the subscribers are settled in a part
of the province, where they are destitute of the worship of God according to
the practice of the church of England, and thirty miles distant from it, at
Hopkinton and the places adjacent; as seems plainly to be insinuated. For, to
make up a number of subscribers sufficient to obtain a minister from the
Society, Mr. Price and the other promoters of this matter, have not only
persuaded fundry persons inconsiderately to sign the petition, without knowing
the contents of it, and to declare themselves members of the church of England,
when they are not so; but likewise among the number of those whose families are
distressed, have brought in landlords as well as tenants: -- landlords who have
their dwellings in or near Boston, where they may have their choice of
episcopal ministers. Nor can I forbear taking notice of the artful manner in
which Mr. Commissary has drawn his petition; he forbearing to give the least
hint, that there has been, for this fourteen years, a congregational church
settled in Hopkinton, which holds falt the profession of the same faith that is
contained in the doctrinal articles of the church of England, and which have
expressed their charity, by publicly declaring their readiness to embrace the
sober, religious members of the church of England, who desire and seek
communion with them; and in which some of the members of Mr. Price's own church
have been admitted to communion, in the ordinance of baptism and the Lord's
supper. But, instead of the least intimation of this, Mr. Commissary has
draughted the petition so as to insinuate to the honorable Society, that the
petitioners were settled upon a new tract of land, bordering upon the natives,
where they might be serviceable to propagate the gospel among them: What else
can be the meaning of those words in the petition? -- That without the kind
assistance of the Rev. Mr. Commissary Price, who once a month visits and
performs divine service among us, we should be in danger of falling into the
deplorable ignorance of the native Indians. As to Mr. Commissary's
uncharitableness toward the churches of our Lord Jesus Christ in this land,
which he has manifested in comparing their state with that of the native
Indians, I leave him to his own reflections upon it: But I must profess so much
charity for the sober members of the church of England, that I cannot at present
believe he will have many of his own communion to join with him in it.

I shall omit several remarks upon other exceptionable matters in said
Commissary's petition; and shall leave it to you and others, who may be
acquainted with this affair, to make what reflections you think proper upon the
conduct of this Rev. Gentleman and others, who have been taking this method to
express their zeal for the church of England. But who can think that such
methods to introduce the church of England among us, will be likely to
conciliate the respect that her friends wish to see paid her by dissenters? --
Can such management, to promote uniformity in rituals and circumstantials, be
thought serviceable to promote religion in general? -- Has it not rather a
direct tendency to widen the distance between christian brethren, and so
obstruct the exercise of that brotherly kindness and charity, without which we
cannot adorn the doctrine of God our Savior?

Thus, honored Sir, I have written to you upon this occasion, without the lead
design to give offense to any members of the episcopal church; but from a real
desire to have peace with truth and ho!iness established and promoted among
christians; not doubting but you will take all in good part. I leave it with
you to make that use of this letter, which you think will tend most to answer
this great and noble end; wishing you may be long continued a useful instrument
in the hands of our Savior, for promoting vital christianity in the world.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, Samuel Barrett, Pastor of the church of Christ
in Hopkinton.




It will not be amiss to subjoin to the preceding letter, the deposition
followirg, viz.

"We the subscribers being among the number of some of the inhabitant, of
Hopkinton, and others, who have petitioned the Hon. Society for propagating the
gospel, to send them an episcopal minister, and to assist them in his
maintenance; Now whereas it is set forth in said petition, That the signers of
it have engaged to give sixty pounds per annum of this currency to any minister
that the Society should see meet to send among them, we do declare that we
never read the contents of said petition, nor did we ever understand that there
was any obligation on the signers to pay the said sum, or any other sum,
toward the maintenance of the minister applied for to the Society.

Alex. Kelley Simpsun Jones Mark John Vickley his Peter Barnes Thomas Edsar.

Middlesex scil. Hopkinton, June 15, 1741.
The within named Alexander Kelley, etc. all personally appeared, and, after
due caution, made oath to the truth of the above written, before me

John Jones, Just. Pacis".



This is a specimen of that mystery of churchism, which has long worked in N.
England; other examples of it having been before given in the Observations. The
aforesaid letter was actually communicated by Sir H. Newman to the then bp. of
London (I suppose Dr. Gibson, author of the famous Codex) That it was thus
communicated by him, appears from his letter to Dr. Colman soon after; -- an
extract of which I had from Mr Barrett, as follows -- "I received yours of the
17th of March, 1738 9 enclosing one from Mr. Barrett of the 15th of the same
month; both which I sent to the bp of London, and had his Lordship's answer May
17 1739 -- Dr Gibson having been, as is said, a relation of Mr. Commissary
Price he might possibly decline laying this matter before the Society; even
though Mr. Barrett took the pre\caution, as he told me, to have his name, place
of abode, and charter certified by a Notary Public. But whether the Society
were let into this affair or not, the Rev. Commissary obtained his end, by
being soon after fixed as a missionary in Hopkinton; where he continued till,
as is said, he was invited to England by the prospect of greater secular
advantages than he had here -- Now, it being the business of a Commissary to be
at once an example and a check to the inferior clergy, and to keep them in some
order; it must be supposed that he is commonly a person of at lead as much
discretion, piety and integrity as any of them. What managements then, may it
be naturally supposed, have they not been chargeable with, in order to build up
the church herer, when even their Commissary would steal and impress men for
the service of the church, in the manner before represented? We may, on this
occasion, invert those words of the poet,

"Quid domini facient, audent cum talia sures"!

What will not inferiors do, when their superiors are not ashamed of such
dishonorable practices! --




IT appears then, that some persons know that the missionaries have not been
quite so negligent of their Instrucsions, as this aged member, and perhaps
missionary of the Society, supposes. But whether that the Rev. Commissary's
conduct, as represented below, was agreeable to the latter part of the
Instruction aforesaid, may indeed be doubted: Which directs the missionaries,
in frequently visiting those that dissent from the church, "to convince and
reclaim them with the spirit of meekness and gen tleness.

It is in my power, upon a proper occasion to give other examples of their
fidelity in this respect; and, perhaps, not much less to their honor, and the
credit of the Society or the church, than the aforesaid conduct of the Rev.
Commissary: This may satisfy for the present. But if I rightly understand the
Vindicator, he has, by a concession in the passage above cited, gone far
toward giving up the point in controversy. He there allows, that "the Society
was not incorporated for that purpose; viz. reconciling their wandering,
factions, schisinatical brethren ( dissenters) to the church of England. For if
they were not incorporated for that purpose, does it not follow, that so far as
they have used their endeavors, and expended their money in order to
accomplish this end, they have actually deviated from the design of their
instrution? And whether this has not been a great object, both with the Society
and their missionaries, is humbly submitted, upon the evidence that has been
produced here, and in the Observations.

It may not be amiss, in the next place, to take some notice of what he says of
Dr. BRAY's testimony, before produced by me; viz. That in Connecticut and the
Massachusetts, there was no occasion "at all" for missionaries to propagate
christianity. The Vindicator says, "I agree to his report at that time -- He
afterward intimates, that circumstances were so altered, that there has been,
and is great occasion for missionaries since. Let him inform us what this
alteration is -- " There was then", says he, "(except at Boston) but here and
there a member of the church of England scattered about these provinces -- But
does it at all follow, that when there came to be such numbers of conscientious
members of the church of England -- that the Society had by their charter no
right and business to assist in providing for them, -- etc? p. 83. Now
according to this reasoning, though there was no occasion at all for missionaries
here, while the people were all in a manner non-conformists; yet when churchmen
became considerably numerous here, missionaries were much needed to
christianize them, or "to propagate christianity" among them (Which, as before
observed, is Dr. Bray's expression.) But why it should be so, I cannot easily
see, unless people do in some sort cease to be christians when they become
churchmen; which I am very unwilling to suppose -- As to what is said
immediately after, about the propriety of the Society's providing ministers for
these conscientious people, who may dislike our way of worship; I need now add
nothing upon this head, to what was said in the Observations, Sect. X.
entitled, The plea of conscience, etc. p. 75.

his next labor is to show, from p. 83 to 86. what the increase of the church
of England in these parts is owing to. In which he is partly right and partly
wrong. But as in all this he has not directly contradicted any thing said by
me, and as this does not immediately touch the merits of the cause, I shall let
his mistakes upon this head pass uncorrected. Only I must observe, that as I
never undertook to show what were all, or even the principal occasions of the
growth of the churcn of England here, he has passed a very injurious and
ungentleman-like reflection upon me, with reference to this matter -- "Now,"
says he, "these are all known facts: Is not Dr. Mayhew then very dis ingenuous
to conceal them? -- etc. p. 86. If I had undertaken to assign all the causes,
etc. he might have had some color for this base insinuation. But the reader is
left to judge, who is the most disingenuous, I, for not mentioning what did not
particularly affect the argument, (which he calls concealing it) or he for
doing so, and then representing me as disingenuous, only because I was not
impertinent; as I should also now be, if 1 gave a more particular answer to
this part of his performance.

As to what he says in the same page; that "great advantages" have been derived
from the prevalence of the church of England here, I shall only beg leave to
refer the reader to what was said in the, Observations, Sect. XI and XII. in
answer to Mr. APTHORP upon this head -- In the same page he gives another
specimen of his politeness and breeding -- "If it was not for now and then such
abusive and uncharitable scribblings of a few zealots, we should soon coalesce,
etc. Those who are not under very great prejudices, will, I believe, hardly
agree with this gentleman, on what side there have been the most abusive and
uncharitable scribblings, in our disputes with the episcopalians, and
particularly in the present controversy. And whether this aged member of the
Society, who speaks of the non-conformists from the beginning, as factious,
rebellious sectaries, and gravely taxes others, with uncharitable scribblings,
has himself written in such a manner as to give others a good example, so that
we may learn decency, good manners or charity from his Vindication, is
submitted to the judgment of his readers.

In some following pages he declaims about the excellency of episcopacy, the
liturgy and church of England; about liberty of conscience, etc. and endeavors
to be, in his old age, what some may perhaps think was hardly in his power,
even in youth; -- to be very witty. All this I pass over, as being -- what it
is.

After having got almost through his letter, in the manner before represented, he
comes a little closer to the point in hand, p. 90. "But," says he, "the Dr.
insists that Massachusetts and Connecticut come not within the Society's limits
by the charter: [I did not say so absolutely, but excepted such parts even of
these colonies, in which there might be either no protestant ministers, or
ministers but very meanly provided for.] "I answer, this cannot be maintained,
since they are not excepted by the charter, unless it can be proved that the
congregations of the church, for which the Society provides in those colonies,
would not in the sense and words of the charter, want, or be destitute of the
administration of God's word and sacraments, if the Society did not assist
them: But this he does not, nor can he prove. Surely he cannot pretend that K.
WM. who introduced the toleration of dissenters, would leave his loving
Subjects of the church UNTOLERATED, and under the necessity of receiving God's
word and sacraments contrary to their consciences, or of having none -- It must
therefore be his meaning to provide that his loving subjects of the church
might enjoy God's word and sacraments in these colonies, etc.

This passage having more of the form and air of an argument than any other in
the letter, shall be impartially, though briefly examined.

And,

1. Here is a plain concession, that these colonies do not come within the
limits of the Society's charter, if it can be proved that the episcopalians in
them would not be destitute of the administration of God's word and sacraments,
in the sense of the charter, although they were not provided for by the Society.
On which supposition it will clearly follow, that whatever has been expended
for them, has been misapplied, i.e. applied in a way not warranted by the
charter.

2. That clause [ in the sense and words of the charter] by which the
Vindicator would some way qualify or restrain the general expression in the
charter, want, or be destitute of the administration of God's word and
sacraments, will not answer his end, unless he can prove that the royal Grantor
used this latter expression in some peculiar, appropriate sense, not known and
allowed by protestants in general, of different denominations: Or, in other
words, -- that he meant thereby, the administration of God's word and
sacraments, according to the particular usage of the church of England, not
only in opposition to that of the church of Rome, but of Scotland, Holland,
Geneva, and other protestant churches in general. If he understood it in any
less appropriate sense, or in the sense common among protestants, the
Vindicator can deduce no conclusion herefrom, that will be to his advantage.

3. That the charter uses the aforesaid expression in any such peculiar and
appropriate sense, does not appear. Or, to use his own words, "This he does
not, nor can he prove. On the contrary it appears from the charter, that this
expression was used in the common, known and general sense of protestants.
Because the evils proposed to be remedied or guarded against, by having
orthodox ministers provided, are not presbyterianism, congregationalism,
lutheranism, or any particular form of protestantism, though different from to
the church of England; but atheism, infidelity, and the gross errors of popery.
What was wanted and proposed, was, ministers to instruct people "in the
principles of true religion in general, considered only in opposition to such
fatal errors as these; or "in the christian religion", as it is afterward
expressed. All which clearly shows, that the aforesaid expression was used in a
catholic sense, not in that narrow, limited one, which the Vindicator contends
for.

4. What he alleges in support of this sense, will not endure any test at all,
much less a rigorous and severe one. For what though King William, who tolerated
his loving nonconforming subjects, cannot be supposed to have left his
subjects of the church of England untolerated; how does it appear from hence,
that he used the expression aforesaid in such a sense as to imply, that other
protestants, besides those of the church of England, do not enjoy the
administration of God's word and sacraments? It is this only, that can serve
his turn, or be to his purpose. The toleration has really nothing to do in the
present controversy, any farther than this, that it ought to be supposed, or
taken for granted. Or if it has any thing farther to do therewith, it may be
improved with advantage in favor of the catholic sense aforesaid, in opposition
to the Vindicator's. For if all protestants in general were tolerated, and so
far countenanced by the government, there is plainly less ground for him thus
td restrict the sense of that expression, than there would be, if all besides
episcopalians were untolerated.

5. What then can be a more manifest inconsequence, than this, that because
non-conformists are tolerated, therefore it was King WILLIAM's "meaning to
provide, that his loving subject of the church might enjoy God's word and
sacraments in these colonies, etc.? -- That is, to make provision by the
charter, for supporting that, particular form of worship, in places where God's
public worship was already provided for by other means, and in a different
form, though as truly protestant.

6. Whereas the Vindicator seems to lay a mighty stress upon this dilemma, or
alternative, that the episcopalians among us, unless the Society provided for
them, would be "under the necessity of receiving God's word and sacraments
contrary to their conferences, or of having none, as he accurately expresses
it; I answer, That though this, if true, may be justly considered as a great
infelicity, yet it will never prove, that this particular provision was
designed for them. Nay, for any thing that appears at present, the King's
loving presbyterian or congregational subjects, living in another colony, where
they labored under a similar inconvenience, might near as plausibly argue,
That the good K. WILLIAM, who was no bigot, and had a paternal regard for all
his protestant subjects, though not of the church of England, undoubtedly
designed that person? in their unhappy situation should be relieved and
assisted by this charity; left they should be under a necessity, either of
communicating with the church of England contrary to their consciences, or else
not enjoy God's word and sacraments at all -- [But let me just add here, That
it is notorious, the Society have long supppoted missions in New England, in
places where the episcopalians were not in fact reduced to such a dilemma;
being sufficiently numerous and wealthy to support their own ministers.]

WHETHER these remarks do, or do not sufficiently show the invalidity of the
Vindicator's reasoning, is submitted to the intelligent reader. To give my
sense of this dispute in a few words -- Whoever would fairly vindicate the
Society's conduct, must, I humbly conceive, not only prove that the mode of
worship and discipline generally practiced in New England, is less pure and
scriptural than that of the church of England, in a comparative view; (which, I
am fully persuaded, never has nor can be done) but that it is so wholly corrupt
and unscriptural, that we cannot be said to enjoy "the administration of God's
word and sacraments," in a christian and protestant sense: So that the people
here would, without the Society's care, be in very imminent, peculiar danger of
falling into atheism or infidelity, or being perverted to popery. Unless this
is a true representation of our religious, or rather irreligious state, all
that has been hitherto said to justify their conduct, must pass for nothing.
Some of my antagonists, I think all, have given broad hints that they consider
us in this disadvantageous point of light. It this be their real meaning, let
them speak out boldly; and assign their reasons. I do not believe they will
presume to do so, or rest the cause here. If they do, I promise, that if God
spares my life and health, they shall have either my answer or my confession;
and if the latter, I will also immediately become a proselyte to the church of
England, and endeavor, by my future zeal in her behalf, according to my mean
abilities, to make some amends for whatever I have said in times past, either
against her, or against the conduct of the venerable Society. For I was never a
temporizer in religious matters; but have always freely spoken, professed,
preached, published, what I though it agreeable to the word and will of God,
whatever misapprehensions I may have been under in any respect.

I pass over what the Virdictator says about the Society's never having
neglected the Southern colonies, or the Indians in any degree, as his
Ipse-dixits; -- not only without any proof, but contrary to direct proofs
produced in the Observations; and which therefore merit no particular reply.
his general charges as to my abusing the people of the church of England, and
having no charity for them; his intimations about herefy; and his suggestion
that I am against toleration; all these things. I pass over also, as mere
groundless calumnies, sit only to be despised. As I repeatedly said in the
Observations, I now again declare, that I esteem and highly honor many
episcopalians; -- all of them who are persons of virtue, moderation and candor;
and am destrous to live in friendship and good neighborhood with them,
notwithstanding differences in opinion, if they will condescend to let me.

But there is something in this self-sufficient, rude Censor's last paragraph,
which must not escape without a brief animadversion. He says, he cannot but
imagine, that the "candid and serious, even among the dissenters themselves,
must be sensible that Dr. Mayhew has most unjustly charged the Society, and
that his own friends can scarcely be able to withold a (...) for him, at his
indecent as well as injurious treatment ot that venerable body -- and also at
his mean and unworthy personal (...) against the modest and very deserving
gentleman, who has been the innocent occasion of provoking his riotous pen."

1. I may presume to know the opinion of those whom he calls dissenters, than
this unpolished dogmatizer, whether a member of the Society or not. Nor have I
the least reason to think, that there is a single man of them, who has read the
Observations, but what thinks I fully and dearly proved what I undertook to
show, (if not more) and therefore did the Society no injustice.

2. I can upon good grounds assure him, that this is also the opinion of some
"candid and serious" persons even of the church of England: Who are, perhaps,
as much disposed to "blush" tor the Society, as any of my friends are to blush
for me, with relation to this matter.

3. I am sincerely sorry that, by speaking of what he calls "mean and unworthy
personal invectives against the " modest and very deserving gentleman, who has
been the innocent occasion of provoking my riotous pen; he should at once give
me reason to complain of his own soul language, and revive the remembrance of
that gentleman's inconcinnate performance; which, for the credit of the author
and the cause, he ought to have wished might remain in oblivion. his pamphlet
was an insult upon the memory of our fathers; and upon the ministers, religion
and churches of New England. Neither his modesty, nor his great merits, either
as a scholar, gentleman or fair reasoner, appeared in that performance: his
uncommon self-sufficiency, his unfairness in mangling the charter, his contempt
of other people, and even of grammar, were much more conspicuous. In short, he
handled his argument in such a manner, as naturally to excite both ridicule and
resentment; nor were all the advantages taken against him, that might justly
haebcen taken. I am much deceived, (not to say misinformed; if either his
equals here, or superiors elsewhere, have been "able to withold a blush for
him. And, by his long silence, there is room to entertain such an opinion of
his modesty, as to suppose that he blushes for himself. -- These things are not
said by way of insult upon that ill-advised gentleman, to whom I sincerely wish
well, but in my own necessary defense. So that both he and his friends have far
less reason to blame me than the Vindicator; who, by his indiscretion, his rude
cenfures upon one hand, and his unseasonable compliments on the other, has put
upon thus calling back to remembrance what would otherwise have been fit only
to be forgotten. --

The CONCLUSION.
THE apprehensions that were expressed toward the later end of my
Observations, that the Indians might probably give us disturbance, were, alas!
very soon after, and too sadly proved to be just -- How many of our posts and
garrisons taken in a short time! -- What an extensive frontier broken up --
What numbers of people, of soldiers, husbandmen, women and children massacred,
in manner corresponding to the character of those, whose "tender mercies are
cruelty!" -- Had all practicable methods been formerly taken, to conciliate the
friendship of the savage nations; to civilize and christianize them, and to
counteract the intrigues of the French: Particularly had the venerable Society
used their best endeavors to this end, and left us in New England to do as
well as we could without their charity, it is highly probable that these great
evils would not have come upon us. May it not be reasonably hoped, that
whenever a door shall be opened by a peace, for a friendly intercourse with
these nations, some methods will be vigorously pursued, in order to fix and
retain them in the British interest? How much the sending sensible and discrete
missionaries among them, might probably contribute to that end, is very obvious.

IT may be hoped that the Society and the right reverend Fathers of the church,
will hereafter be both more zealous and more successful in the prosecution of
this important design, than they appear to have been in times past: And the
rather, because, as it is credibly reported, they of late employed all their
weight and influence to crush in its embrio a Society then forming in America,
for the same purpose; -- partly through misrepresentations from episcopalians
here, and partly because they apprehended that our being countenanced in
propagating the gospel, would be a prejudice to the church, It after this, they
should themselves neglect to christianize the American heathen, some persons
who have less veneration for them than I have, may possibly think they a little
too much resemble those spiritual guides of old, of whom it was said by the
chief Shepherd and Bishop of souls, That they shut up the kingdom of heaven
against men; neither going in themselves, nor suffering them that were
entering, to go in. There is ground to think that some ill-minded episcopalians
in America, represented to their correspondents in London, that the Society
proposed here, was to be set up in opposition to the venerable Society at home,
and to the church of England; -- that it was a party-affair, and that no
episcopalians could be admitted as members. If such representations were made,
as there is good reason to believe, I presume to say, they were absolutely
false -- I never heard of more than one episcopalian who desired to be a
member, and that Gentleman was actually received accordingly.


I am well informed, without inquiry, that the Rev. Mr. CANER of King's Chapel
in Boston, ushered into the world (at least by correcting the press) the two
abusive pieces ( fralrum dulce par) on which I have been remarking. Some might
probably think it a compliment to him, to suppose him the real Father of either
of them: I am little sollicitous as to this. But if that gentleman thinks me in
the wrong, it would, in my opinion, be much more to his honor to write in, his
own name, and to appear openly in the cause, than to be underhand concerned in
midwising into the world such illegitimate, incestuous children, begot by
DECREPIT MALICE upon ZEAL for the church -- suppose me to be really such a man
as I am represented in these pieces; -- suppose me a person void of principle,
an heretic, Socinian, Deist, Atheist -- any thing -- What is all this to the
merits of the cause, whether the Society have, or have not, in some respects,
misapplied their money? -- The most superficial reader of these performances,
especially of the former of them, cannot but see, that it was the author's
principal aim to blacken my character; And the candor of the methods used to
this end, (numerous misrepresentations, and even gross falsehoods) is equally
conspicuous. If some of the more rigid sort of Calvinists among ourselves, are
secretly pleased at seeing me visified as an heretic, not only while, but
because I appear in their defense (according to my poor abilities) against the
reproaches of episcopalians; I am not much surprised at this, considering what
I have experienced in times past. But I have no disposition, at lead not upon
this occasion, to repeat grievances, No treatment which 1 have, or may receive
frcm persons of a narrow, contracted way of thinking, shall discourage me from
standing up to the utmost of may power, in vindication of our religious
liberties, and our congregational church order; which, in my humble opinion is
more scriptural and liable to fewer inconveniences, than any other now in the
world; though there are others for which I have a great veneration --


IF any of the episcopalians should still choose to go on as they have begun,
and long proceeded, to insult and slander me in anonymous libels, instead of
keeping to the point; I have no reason to be against this, except for their own
sake; being well persuaded, that attacks of this kind can neither hurt me in
the end, nor serve their cause; -- that it can neither be any credit to
themselves, to the Society, nor to the church of England -- But whatever
opinion any of them may please to entertain of me, or whatever asfronts and
outrages they may offer to me, I am not of such a vindictive temper, but that I
sincerely wish them well, and pray for their eternal felicity -- Nor can I make
an end, without lamenting the unhappy condition of us mortals in this respect,
That even some of those, who perhaps intend equally well, and who would
therefore have the most cordial esteem and affection for one another, if they
knew each others hearts; are yet, through difference of education, early and
unperceived prejudices, and the imperfection of human knowledge in general,
often led into such different conceptions of things here on earth, that it
seems hardly possible they should meet together in the same heaven. Whatever
any of those may do, differ from me in sentiment; I will endeavor, by God's
grace, to cultivate in myself such a temper of mind; -- particularly such
good will and charity even toward my most inveterate enemies, that if I should
never have the happiness to meet them there, (which God forbid) the fault will
not be mine.

N. B. Whatever argument In this Defense is grounded on the supposed civil
establishment of religion here, or the King's ecclesiastical supremacy, is to
be considered only as argumentum ad hominem.

THE END.

CORRECTIONS.

PAGE 5. 1. 8 top, r. Nemesis. P. 8. 1. 2. bottom, r. they may sneer. P. 17. 1.
3 top, r. as this. P 49. 1. 8 top, r. at all. P. 52. Margin, r. Indebitatus. P.
64. 1. 3 bottom, r. indictive spirit. P. 108 top, 1. 11. r. HONEST.

Some in material errors in the spelling and pointing are left unnoticed.


