An Account of the Fire at Harvard-College, in Cambridge; with the Loss
sustained thereby.
CAMBRIDGE, JAN. 25. 1764.

LAST night HARVARD COLLEGE, suffered the most ruinous loss it ever met with
since its foundation. In the middle of a very tempestuous night, a severe cold
storm of snow attended with high wind, we were awaked by the alarm of fire.
Harvard-Hall, the only one of our ancient buildings which still remained, * and
the repository of our most valuable treasures, the public LIBRARY and
Philosophical APPARATUS, was seen in flames. As it was a time of vacation, in
which the students were all dispersed, not a single person was left in any of
the Colleges, except two or three in that part of Massachusetts most distant
from Harvard, where the fire could not be perceived till the whole surrounding
air began to be illuminated by it: When it was discovered from the town, it had
risen to a degree of violence that defied all opposition. It is conjectured to
have begun in a beam under the hearth in the library, where a fire had been
kept for the use of the General Court, now residing and sitting here, by reason
of the Smallpox at Boston: from thence it burst out into the Library. The
books easily submitted to the fury of the flame, which with a rapid and
irresistible progress made its way into the Apparatus-Chamber, and spread through
the whole building. In a very short time, this venerable Monument of the Piety
of our Ancestors was turned into an heap of ruins. The other Colleges,
Stoughton-Hall and Massachusetts-Hall, were in the utmost hazard of sharing the
same fate. The wind driving the flaming cinders directly upon their roofs, they
blazed out several times in different places; nor could they have been saved by
all the help the Town could afford, had it not been for the assistance of the
Gentlemen of the General Court, among whom his Excellency the Governor was very
active (...) -- All the Fathers, Greek and Latin, in their best editions. -- A
great number of tracts in defense of revealed religion, wrote by the most
masterly hands, in the last and present century. -- Sermons of the most
celebrated English divines, both of the established national church and
protestant dissenters: -- Tracts upon all the branches of polemic divinity: --
The donation of the venerable Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign
parts, consisting of a great many volumes of tracts against Popery, published
in the Reigns of Charles II. and James II. the Boylean lectures, and other the
most esteemed English sermons: -- A valuable collection of modern theological
treatises, presented by the Right Rev. Dr. Sherlock, late Lord Bishop of
London, the Rev. Dr. Hales, F. R. S. and Dr. Wilson of London: -- A vast number
of philological tracts, containing the rudiments of almost all languages,
ancient and modern: -- The Hebrew, Greek and Roman antiquities. -- The Greek
and Roman Classics, presented by the late excellent and catholic-spirited
Bishop Berkeley; most of them the best editions: -- A large Collection of
History and biographical tracts, ancient and modern. -- Dissertations on
various Political subjects -- The Transactions of the Royal Society, Academy of
Sciences in France, Acta Eruditorum, Miscellanea curiosa, the works of Boil
and Newton, with a great variety of other mathematical and philosophical
treatises. -- A collection of the most approved Medical Authors, chiefly
presented by Mr. James, of the island of Jamaica; to which Dr. Mead and other
Gentlemen made very considerable additions: Also Anatomical cuts and two
complete Skeletons of different sexes. This collection would have been very
serviceable to a Professor of Physic and Anatomy, when the revenues of the
College should have been sufficient to subsist a gentleman in this character.
-- A (...)

Under the head of Mechanics, there were machines for experiments of falling
bodies, of the center of gravity, and of centrifugal forces; -- the several
mechanical powers, balances of different sorts, levers, pullies, axes in
peritrochio, wedges, compound engines; with curious models of each in brass.

In Hydrostatics, very nice balances, jars and bottles of various sizes fitted
with brass caps, vessels for proving the grand hydrostatic Paradox, siphons,
glass models of pumps, hydrostatic balance, etc.

In Pneumatics, there was a number of different tubes for the Torricellian
experiment, a large double-barrell'd Air-pump, with a great variety of
receivers of different sizes and shapes; syringes, exhausting and condensing;
Barometer, Thermometer; -- with many other articles.

In Optics, there were several sorts of mirrors, concave, unequal, cylindric;
Lenses of different foci; instruments for proving the fundamental law of
refraction; Prisms, with the whole apparatus for the Newtonian theory of light
and colors; the camera obscura, etc.

And a variety of instruments for miscellaneous purposes.

THE following articles were afterward sent us by Mr. Thomas Hollis, Nephew to
that generous Gentleman, viz. an Orrery, an armillary Sphere, and a box of
Microscopes; all of exquisite workmanship.

For Astronomy, we had before been supplied with Telescopes of different
lengths; one of 24 feet; and a brass Quadrant of 2 feet radius, carrying a
Telescope of a greater length; which formerly belonged to the celebrated Dr.
Halley. We had also the most useful instruments for Dialling; -- and for
Surveying, a brass semicircle, with plain (...) and magnetic needle. Also* a
curious Te- (...)


