OBSERVATIONS ON THE CHARTER and CONDUCT OF THE SOCIETY For the Propagation of
the Gospel in Foreign Parts; DESIGNED TO SHOW Their NONCONFORMITY to each
other.

REMARKS on the MISTAKES of EAST APTHORP, M.A. Missionary at CAMBRIDGE, in
Quoting, and Representing the Sense of said Charter, etc.

AS ALSO Various incidental Reflections relative to the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and
the State of Religion in NORTH AMERICA, particularly in NEW ENGLAND.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the West-Church in BOSTON.

-- Brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our LIBERTY
which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into BONDAGE: To whom
we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour; that the truth of the GOSPEL
might CONTINUE WITH YOU.

Ap. PAUL to the Galatians. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL
DRAPER, in Newbury-Street, EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, and THOMAS and JOHN
FLEET at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill. M, DCC, LXIII.

TO ALL the sincere Lovers of Truth, Righteousness and undefiled Religion, (of
whatsoever Denomination amongst Christians) into whose Hands the following
OBSERVATIONS may fall, whether in NEW ENGLAND or elsewhere, they are, with due
Respect and Humility, INSCRIBED by

THE AUTHOR.

The Introduction.
THERE are some men who write, and others who read controversy, merely from a
wrangling disposition; without any regard to truth, right, or the importance of
the matters contested. That this is a turn of mind unbecoming a Christian, and
even a man, needs not be said. Others have an utter dislike to all disputes
relative to the subject of religion, because they are Skeptics; thinking there
is nothing of this kind worth disputing about. Only thus far they are fully
persuaded, that it is a pity the world should be disturbed by such trifling
debates, in the peaceable pursuit of pleasure, or of solid gain; very gravely
condemning all disputants as quarrelsome people that would set the world in a
flame, and making no small merit of their own indifference to all religion in
general. A third sort are those good men, who sincerely love and practice
religion themselves; but yet are such great lovers of peace, of such a timid
make, and so apprehensive of the bad effects of contention, that they think it
best never to enter into debates on religion, or any thing relative to it, on
any occasion; and condemn those who do so, as at best imprudent, ill-advised
persons.

BUT surely, there may be just and sufficient cause for disputing, if religion
itself is of any great importance. We are enjoined to contend earnestly for the
faith: Nor are even the means, modes and circumstantials of religion, wholly
unworthy in all cases to be the subject of controversy. The epistles of the
apostle PAUL, who would not have the Gentiles troubled about circumcision, or
other Jewish rites; and exhorted them to stand fast in their LIBERTY, instead
of submitting to any yoke of BONDAGE, sufficiently evince this. And if the
good, peaceable gentlemen who were mentioned above, are left to exercise their
own liberty and discretion, either to read or not read disputes; one would
think, they should allow others the like liberty and discretion as to writing:
No one will compel them to read, contrary to their inclination --

THE author of the following pages supposes the subject of them to be of real
importance, not only to the general interest of religion in AMERICA, but
particularly in NEW ENGLAND. In which respect he is very far from being
singular in his opinion. Indeed, none besides those who think that our
Forefathers separated from the Church of ENGLAND without just grounds; and that
the differences subsisting betwixt the people of that communion and ours, are
quite immaterial, can suppose this a needless controversy. The prosperity, if
not the very being of our NEW ENGLAND Churches, is essentially concerned in it;
as may appear in the sequel.

AN evident occasion was lately given for some person or other amongst us to
write upon it, by a Gentleman on the other side of the question, who has
attempted, as he though it proper to express himself, "to determine it once for
all, by authentic vouchers." The author of the ensuing pages pretends to no
such great matters; and would have been sincerely glad, if some person of
greater abilities and more leisure, would have saved him this trouble. But some
of his friends, perhaps partial in his favor, expressed a desire that he would
take so fair an opportunity to communicate some of his thoughts to the public,
on the point in question. In a word, his aversion to controversy has, on this
occasion, given way to his regard to truth and justice, backed in this manner.

THOUGH he really believes the constitution, worship and discipline of the Church
of ENGLAND much less agreeable to the word of GOD than our own; yet he has an
high veneration for many persons of that communion, as persons of great
learning and wisdom, candor and piety. He therefore requests that nothing which
here follows, may be considered as a general reflection upon the people of that
persuasion. He is also sensible that the SOCIETY, etc. area very respectable
BODY, and to be treated with all the regard that is consistent with truth and
justice. But he cannot think, an implicit faith is to be placed in any BODY of
uninspired men, however great or good; or that there is any indecency in
examining into some of the Conduct of the said SOCIETY, and comparing it with
their CHARTER; that so, if there is any real inconsistency betwixt them, it may
appear. This he takes to be the undoubted right of every BRITISH subject, as
well as his own. But though he proposes to lay some of his sentiments on this
subject before the world, in simplicity and with freedom; yet he declares, it
is by no means his intention to charge that venerable BODY with any wilful,
known misconduct, or improper application of moneys: And therefore he requests
the candor of his readers, that no advantage may be taken of any incautious
expression that may escape him in the pursuit of his argument, even though it
should at first view have the appearance of such an accusation; for it is not
designed as such.

IF his observations are futile in themselves, or if there is any indecency in
the manner of his proposing them, as he hopes there is not, the dishonor will
be to himself: And he even wishes others to judge with the fame freedom and
impartiality that he intends to write.

THE reverend Mr. NOAH HOBART of Fairfield, in a book entitled A second address
to the members of the EPISCOPAL SEPARATION IN NEW ENGLAND, Published 1751.
entered into this argument concerning the SOCIETY's conduct; which he handled
in a manner becoming both a truly Christian Bishop and a Patriot; and deserves
the thanks of his country, as well as the high esteem of his flock. His book
has been of service to me; and wherever I make use of it in the following
sheets, proper acknowledgments are made. In short, Mr. HOBART wrote so solidly
and judiciously upon this subject, that it would hardly have been needful to
say any thing farther upon it at this time, except in conformity to that maxim,
That every thing newly published on a controverted point, must be answered; --
unless it is either convincing and satisfactory to the knowing, or so mean and
trifling, that even the ignorant are in no danger of being imposed upon
thereby. Probably there are not many, who know any thing of the matter, that
think the former the true character of Mr. APTHORP's Considerations, etc. And
if I supposed they deserved the latter, I should think my time ill employed in
endeavoring to prevent their having that effect. They seem to me to hold such
a medium betwixt evidence to the wise, and glaring absurdity to the foolish, as
to render some strictures upon them very expedient.

THIS Gentleman's discretion is, at least in one respect, very conspicuous;
perhaps in many. Having taken the defense of the SOCIETY upon himself in
quality of an advocate, the validity of his plea is then humbly submitted to
his venerable CLIENTS in quality of JUDGES. His Considerations are inscribed to
the SOCIETY, "in appeal to their JUDGMENT and DECISION." And can it be supposed
that so ingenious an advocate as Mr. APTHORP will lose a cause, wherein he is
so happy as to have the same honorable and venerable personages both for
CLIENTS and JUDGES? -- especially if he has them for his WITNESSES too; as will
appear in due time and place to be his peculiar felicity. I should, however,
have followed him to the SAME TRIBUNAL to which he has appealed, had I not
feared it might be thought a piece of rudeness, or kind of insult, to inscribe
to so venerable a BODY those Observations, the professed design of which is, to
show that they have, in some respects, counter-acted and defeated the truly
noble ends of their INSTITUTION, however contrary to their intention.

SECTION I. The QUESTION stated.
THE author of the following pages desires to have what he disputes about,
relative to the charter, SOCIETY and their missionaries, clearly understood in
the first place. He apprehends there is no ground for controversy as to
religious liberty, or the natural and legal right which protestants of all
denominations have, in any part of his Majesty's dominions, to worship God in
their own way respectively, without molestation.

NOR is the question, whether any person or persons in Great Britain have a
right, considered in their private capacity, if they think it expedient, to
encourage and propagate episcopacy in America, by transmitting money to build
churches here, to support missions and schools, or the like. Whatever our
sentiments may be about the church of England, we are not so vain as to assume
a right of dictating to them the manner in which they shall, or shall not
bestow their charity; or in any sort to control them herein. This is said with
reference to people in England, considered in their private capacity, as was
intimated before.

AGAIN: The question is not, whether that very respectable Body corporate, the
Society for the Propagation of the gospel in foreign parts, are to judge for
themselves in what particular places, and under what circumstances their
charity is to be employed, conformable to the true design of their charter.
They must, in the nature of the thing, judge for themselves in this respect, if
they act with integrity, according to the nature of the trust reposed in them;
which is not disputed. Though as this is a matter of public concernment, in
which the civil as well as religious interest of the King's subjects in America
is nearly concerned; other people have a right to give their opinion about the
manner in which that charitable fund is employed; whether agreeably to the
intent of the charter or not; and even publicly to remonstrate against any
misapplications of it, whether through misinformation, or any other
supposeable means, in order to a reformation of such abuses, if real. Moreover;

THERE is no dispute, but that the venerable Society have a right to plant
churches, to support missions and schools, etc. in many of the British American
colonies; or whether this is in conformity to the intent of their charter. No
one that has ever read it, can possibly make a doubt of this; or imagine that
the Society's care and charity ought to be confined to the heathen slaves in,
or the savages bordering on the plantations.

BUT then it is supposed by many persons, that there are some of these American
colonies, whose religious state is such, as renders them improper objects of
this charity; and consequently, that whatever has been done by the Society in
supporting episcopal missions in them, is a misapplication of that part of
their fund, which has been employed in this way; to the neglect, prejudice and
injury of other colonies, the Negroes and Indians, who were unquestionably
proper objects of their charity.

THIS therefore, is the main question now proposed for a free and candid
discussion; Whether the planting episcopal churches, supporting missions and
schools, etc. in certain parts of America, particularly in New England, in the
manner, and under the circumstances in which this has been, and still is done
by the Society, is conformable to the true design of their institution,
according to their charter; or a deviation therefrom, and consequently a
misapplication of their fund?

THIS is a question of no small importance: And it can be determined only by
comparing the manner and circumstances in which the Society have planted
churches, supported missions, etc. in these parts, with their charter itself.
And all who are capable of understanding the charter, which is very plain, and
who are apprized of the facts and circumstances aforesaid, may be deemed
competent judges of the merits of this cause.

THAT part of the charter which explains the design of the institution, will be
produced in the next section. In the mean time it may be observed, that the
ingenious Mr. Apthorp has proposed a certain question for discussion, or rather
to be "determined once for all," which was probably never thought of before;
and is indeed hardly intelligible. It is this, Whether the Society -- conform
to the design of their incorporation, by maintaining episcopal churches in the
settled towns and villages of North America: or whether they have not
misapplied a fund originally limimited to the conversion of the heathens.
Considerations on the Institution and Conduct of the Society, etc. p. 1.
This he speaks of as a very interesting question to "the Missionaries and
their congregations." Possibly it may be so. But what does the gentleman mean
by the settled towns and villages of North America? Is this designed in
opposition to unsettled, or uninhabited towns and villages here? I know of none
such: But if there were any, who ever supposed that it was expected the Society
should maintain episcopal churches in such, but not in the inhabited towns and
villages? It were hard indeed, to confine the pious labors of the missionaries
to places without inhabitants! -- Especially while there are so many settled
towns and villages in North America, Indian as well as English, where they
might be useful. But by the disjunction which he makes, it seems as if by
settled towns, etc. he meant places inhabited by English subjects and professed
Christians; for the Society's employing their charitable fund in order to the
conversion of the heathens, is the other part of the disjunction; and so stands
in direct opposition to maintaining episcopal churches in the settled towns and
villages here. But if this is what he means by settled towns, etc. the question
seems at best very vague and indeterminate: For some of these towns and
villages have all along had ministers of other protestant communions in them;
others have not. And it was proper, one would think, that the gentleman should
have let us know which of these he intended. If he meant the latter only; and
intended that the society rightly applied their fund in maintaining episcopal
churches in them, as well as in the conversion of the heathen, it is allowed;
there is no controversy as to this. But if he meant the former also; and that
the Society rightly apply their fund in maintaining episcopal churches in
places where other protestant churches were before settled, and the
administration of God's word and ordinances provided for, then indeed he
opposes us. But, on any supposition, his disjunction is extremely lame and
imperfect. And how interesting soever his question may be to the Missionaries
and their congregations; yet, as he has stated it, the established ministers
and churches of New England will not probably think themselves much concerned
in it. For if the question is determined only in the same loose, vague manner
in which it is proposed, it can do little good nor hurt to any cause, even though
it should be thus determined once for all.

SECTION II. Part of the Charter, with observations upon it, showing the true
design of the Society's institution.
THE first thing requisite in order to a right determination of the question,
Whether the Society have deviated from the design of their institution or not,
is to show what that design was. And to this end an appeal must be made to
their charter, granted by King WILLIAM III. in the 13th of his reign, Anno
1701. The preamble of which clearly expresses that design, if considered all
together. The whole preamble is therefore here subjoined, without the omission
or addition of a single word; only such clauses as are especially necessary to
a right understanding of its design, are printed in a different character.

WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of GOD etc.

I. WHEREAS we are credibly informed, that in many of our plantations, colonies
and factories beyond seas, belonging to our kingdom of England, the provision
for ministers is very mean; and many others of our said plantations, colonies
and factories, are wholly destitute and unprovided of a maintenance for
ministers, and the public worship of God; and for lack of support and
maintenance for such, many of our loving subjects do want the administration of
God's word and sacraments, and seem to be abandoned to atheism and infidelity;
and also for want of learned and orthodox ministers to instruct our said loving
subjects in the principles of TRUE RELIGION, diverse Romish priests and jesuits
are the more encouraged to pervert and draw over our said loving subjects to
Popish superstition and idolatry.

II. AND whereas we think it our duty, as much as in us lies, to promote the
glory of God, by the instruction of our pleople in the CHRISTIAN RELIGION; and
that it will be highly conducive for accomplishing those ends, that a
sufficient maintenance be provided for an orthodox clergy to live amongst them,
and that such other provision be made, as may be necessary for the propagation
of the GOSPEL in those parts.

III. AND whereas we have been well assured, that if we would be graciously
pleased to erect and settle a corporation for the receiving managing and
disposing of the charity of our loving subjects, diverse persons would be
induced to extend charity to the uses and purposes aforesaid.

IV. KNOW ye therefore, that we have, for the considerations aforesaid, and for
the better and more orderly carrying on of the said charitable purposes, etc.

THE following observations are submitted to the candid reader's judgment.

1. NOTHING is to be supposed the object, or any part of the object of this
charitable and royal institution, but what plainly appears to be really so,
from the very words of the charter. Even though it were certain that those
persons to whom it was granted, had, at the very time, some farther views and
ends in obtaining it, besides those which are expressed, or plainly implied;
yet the words of the charter itself must determine and limit the sense of the
royal Grantor, and consequently the legal power conferred on the noble and
reverend Grantees, the Society. It was only for those purposes that are
particularly expressed, not any private or secret ones, which they might
possibly have had in their own minds, that they were incorporated.

2. IT appears that the British plantations, etc. were really the primary, more
immediate object of this institution: or the King's subjects. In which term,
subjects, may be comprehended the slaves in the plantations, who are the most
inferior subjects. But it also appears that the grand, ultimate design of the
institution was, the propagation of the GOSPEL in those parts; which
necessarily includes the design of christianising the Indians bordering on the
colonies, as a principal part of the general design.

3. THIS charitable foundation was not intended for all the plantations,
colonies and factories indiscriminately; but for such of them only as really
stood in great need of relief and help in this way, and whose religious state
corresponded to the description in the charter. This distinction betwixt the
colonies, etc. is clearly supposed in the charter itself, by the manner of
expression used; particularly those words, "Whereas -- many of our
plantations;" and -- " many others of our said plantations." Had it been said,
the rest of them, or all others, it would have materially altered the case. And
it is at least probable that some such expression would have been used, had it
not been taken for granted, that some of these plantations were in a quite
different state with reference to religion.

THIS charity must needs have been intentionally limited to those plantations,
etc. which were or should be, in the state represented in the charter; in such
sort, that the Society had no warrant to extend it to any others, if others
there were, whose religious state was materially and essentially different.

4. EVEN amongst those plantations, etc. which were truly the objects of this
charity, there is some difference; for they are differently described; and come
under two distinct heads in the charter, viz.

First, THOSE in which the "provision for ministers is very mean:" which are
passed over with this cursory mention, as not being the plantations whose
relief was principally intended. [And this, by the way, naturally implies that
some of the plantations, etc. were at that time supplied with such ministers as
are designed in the charter, "learned and orthodox" ones: For there is no
complaint against these ministers themselves, but only against the meanness of
their support.]

Secondly, SUCH plantations as are " wholly destitute, and unprovided," etc.
And these being the places more especially regarded in the charter, their
deplorable and pitiable state is enlarged upon: They are represented as wholly
destitute of the " public worship of God;" -- "wanting the administration of
God's word and sacraments;" -- "seeming to be abandoned to atheism and
infidelity" -- and in danger of being perverted to " Popish superstition and
idolatry." Sad state indeed! but one degree better than that of pagan
barbarity. And who that reads this first paragraph of the charter, can possibly
doubt, but that the relief of these places was principally designed, not only
in distinction from those plantations where a tolerable provision was already
made for ministers, and the support of God's public worship, but also in
distinction from those where the provision was "very mean?"

5. IT is evident that, by "ministers," or as they are afterward called,
"learned and orthodox ministers," and "an orthodox clergy," were not intended
ministers of any one denomination amongst protestants, exclusively of others.
For this it may suffice at present to assign only three reasons: There will be
occasion to resume the consideration of this point hereafter, when many others
will be given. First, Orthodox ministers, in the charter, stand in direct
opposition to Romish priests and jesuits: For it is said, that for want of the
former, the latter were the more encouraged to pervert the King's subjects.
Secondly, It is not said, that for want of such ministers to instruct the
people in the peculiar doctrines, discipline and worship of the church of
England, or any other particular protestant church, the Romish priests were
thus encouraged; but for want of such to instruct them in the "principles of
true religion" in general; or, as it is afterward expressed, in "the christian
religion." There is not the most remote hint in the charter, at any
controversies subsisting amongst protestants; but only at those which subsisted
betwixt them and Roman-catholics. The evils proposed to be remedied, or guarded
against by this institution, are those of atheism, infidelity and popery; not
the errors, whether real or supposed, of any protestants out of the communion
of the church of England. It could not even be known from the charter, that
there were any dissentions amongst protestants; so general, generous and
catholic is the language of it; and so far is it from countenancing any
party-design. Thirdly, King William himself was bred up in the Calvinistic
principles and discipline, quite opposite in some respects to the episcopal;
and is generally supposed to have retained a regard for the principles of his
education all along; though as King of England, and Head of that church, there
was a necessity of his externally conforming to its rites and discipline. Can
it be reasonably supposed then, that in this charter, by orthodox ministers, he
intended those of the English church in distinction from those of all other
churches in the world; and consequently to brand all the rest as heterodox! For
this will necessarily be the consequence; orthodoxy being always and only
opposed to heterodoxy or heresy. To suppose that that noble-spirited Prince had
any such intention, is quite unnatural: And to say that the Grantees understood
the term orthodox in this narrow, exclusive sense, is to reflect upon their
understandings as well as their catholicism.

FROM the foregoing observations it appears, that, none of those plantations,
etc. if any such there were, in which a tolerable provision was made for
ministers, though not of the church of England, to administer "God's word and
sacraments," and to instruct the people in the "principles of true religion,"
or "the christian religion" -- and so, to guard them against "atheism and
infidelity" on one hand, and "Popish superstition and idolatry" on the other,
were in any sort the intended objects of this charity. And therefore,

THAT if the society have applied any part of their fund to support and
encourage the peculiarities of episcopacy in any such places, they have applied
it in a manner not warranted by their charter. And

THIS abuse is so much the greater, if at the same time they have either
neglected to support God's public worship in those, plantations, etc. which
were exactly in the poor and destitute condition represented in the charter; or
to propagate the gospel amongst the heathen bordering on the colonies. This, if
real, is a double abuse; withholding their charity from those for whom it was
originally designed, and bestowing it upon those whom the charter, by natural
and necessary consequence, excludes from it -- The truth of these supposed
facts will be considered hereafter: In the mean time it will not be amiss to
take some notice of Mr. Apthorp's mistakes as to the charter, and the design of
this institution.

SECTION III. Of Mr. Apthorp's manner of quoting and representing the Charter.
THIS gentleman having intimated his intention to determine the question " once
for all, by authentic vouchers;" ( Consid. p. 7.) says (p. 8.) The proposed
vindication is designed to convince the candid. To confute the obstinate, and
silence the malicious, is not in the power of reason. From a person who sets
out in this modest manner, we have doubtless a right to expect very direct,
plain authorities, and great candor, as well as the utmost clearness and
strength of reason: For should he fail in these respects, even those who are
neither uncandid nor malicious, may possibly remain unconvinced. But in the
next page, just after a very heroic threatening (in some lines from VIRGIL) what
a severe and deserved revenge he would take on some unknown person who, it
seems, had provoked him in a news-paper; we find him taking a method to
accomplish his grand design of vindicating the Society, so as to convince all
but the uncandid and malicious, which does not seem the best adapted to this
end: And that is, mis-quoting the charter. He there undertakes to give the
words of the charter, which, he says, "thus expresses the design of their" [the
Society's] "institution;" and then goes on with the usual sign or mark of a
quotation. Nor, indeed, do I accuse the gentleman of inserting, as from the
charter, any words that are not in it. But whoever compares his quotation (p.
9.) with the charter itself, or only with the preamble as it is quoted verbatim
in the preceding section, will find the following particulars true: -- That he
has taken the liberty to transpose some clauses, and wholly to leave out
others, without giving the least notice of it to his reader in the usual way,
by a blank or --; and also that he has thus omitted clauses which are very
material, in order to ascertain the true sense of the charter. For he has
entirely dropped the following clause -- "and seem to be adandoned to atheism
and infidelity" -- and these also -- "diverse Romish priests and jesuits are the
more encouraged to pervert and draw over our loving subjects to popish
superstition and idolatry;" misplacing the intermediate clause concerning
"learned and orthodox ministers." And yet the pointing all along in this 9th
page, is as it ought to be, if the charter had been quoted verbatim, without
any omissions or transpositions.

NOW, can even the most candid think, this gentleman dealt ingenuously by his
readers, in thus mangling and castrating the charter? Or can it be supposed
that he thought the clauses thus suppressed, were of no use in ascertaining the
sense? The importance of them is quite obvious in this respect; they show the
very sad and deplorable condition of those places, which were in an especial
manner the objects of this charitable institution; -- that they were not merely
destitute of episcopalian ministers, but ministers of any other denomination
among protestants; so as to be in a manner abandoned to atheism and infidelity,
or in great danger of being perverted to popery. Considered in their proper
connection, and in this view, any common man may easily see the importance of
the clauses. But it would have ruined his design, if it had plainly appeared
from his own quotation, as it does from the charter itself, that the
institution was not intended for the support of an episcopal clergy, where a
competent provision was already made for a clergy of the congregational or
presbyterian persuasion; but where there was no competent provision made for
any ministers of any denomination amongst protestants, capable of instructing
the people in "the principles of true religion," and so, by God's blessing,
guarding them against the fatal errors of atheism, infidelity and popery. There
was therefore evidently an end to be served, such as it was, by thus mangling
and mutilating the charter; whether he had any such design in it or not. For it
would answer his purpose much best, to have the true, and very forlorn
condition of those plantations, etc. kept out of sight as much as possible,
which the royal Founder of the Society had in his mind, and which those omitted
clauses so clearly and strongly express; that so people might be the easier
induced to believe, that any of the plantations where there was no episcopal
clergy, were actually the objects of this charity, even though they had ever so
many ministers of any other denomination, competently supported. And, that this
was his intention, there is hardly any room even for the candid to doubt, when
his own words just after this extraordinary quotation, are considered. For
there he deduces this as one of his "certain conclusions" from that view of the
charter which he had given; viz. That the primary intention of the Society was,
-- to provide a maintenance for an orthodox clergy; which (as the charter was
obtained by the members of the Church of England) must -- mean a clergy of
their own church. Consid. p. 10, 11.
It might indeed be naturally expected that the Society, being at least chiefly
episcopalians, whenever they sent missionaries abroad, would send those of
their own communion. But it will not from hence follow, that they were to send
and support such, in any or all of the colonies indifferently, where a
competent provision was already, or should be made, for protestant ministers of
another communion. This latter is what the defense of the society requires; and
it is a sophism, perhaps undesigned, which runs through the Considerations. But
of this more hereafter. -- If Mr. Apthorp did not perceive those clauses which
he has suppressed in so singular a manner, to be of any importance, I blush for
him as a reputed Scholar: But if knowing them to be so, he omitted them in
order to impose upon his unwary readers, and the better to disguise the true
design of that excellent institution, I am quite in pain for him as a
Christian; -- especially as One who is by office, I would hope by example also,
an instructor of others in christian simplicity and godly sincerity.

BUT whatever might be his design therein, which is left to his own
reflections, he has not left out enough of the charter to answer his purpose.
Those remaining clauses -- "provision for ministers is very mean" -- " wholly
destitute and unprovided of a maintenance for ministers, and the public
worship of God" -- "ministers to instruct our loving subjects in the principles
of true religion; -- " want the administration of God's word and sacraments;"
-- which are all descriptive of the pitiable state of the places whose relief
was designed by this charitable foundation, are sufficient to invalidate his
defense of the Society, without the assistance of the clauses suppressed in
such a manner. For if it can be shown that the Society maintain many missions
and schools in those plantations, etc. to which no part of this description is
applicable, but quite the reverse is true; the gentleman must certainly
consider at least once again, and reason a little more closely, before he will
convince the candid and judicious, that the Society have not misapplied their
fund. The charter warrants them to maintain no missions or schools in the
colonies, but in such places as answer to the descriptions in the charter; in
order to make converts to the church of England from christians of other
denominations. The charter knows of no distinction amongst christians, except
that of protestants and papists: Its grand object, a truly glorious one, is, to
promote christianity, considered in opposition to atheism, infidelity and
popery; not episcopacy and the liturgy of the church of England, in opposition
to presbyterianism, etc. Though if the profession of christianity is upheld, or
if the gospel is propagated at all, it is readily acknowledged that this must
be done in some particular way, mode or form. And when episcopalians do any
thing to these ends, it is to be expected that they will do it in that way,
mode or form, which themselves most approve. Neither is this the thing objected
against in the present argument; but, the Society's turning their arms, as it
were, against other protestants; and expending a great proportion of their
moneys in supporting a party.

SECTION IV. Of some other Things tending to explain and confirm the Sense of
the Charter, and the design of the Institution aforesaid.
I. THE name itself by which this respectable corporation is distinguished and
known, is agreeable to the spirit of the charter as before explained: The
Society for the propagation of the GOSPEL, etc. From this name or title any one
would naturally conclude, that if heathens and barbarians were not the more
immediate objects of the charitable institution, but only the more remote; yet
it had for its object people in very deplorable circumstances at best; such as
were in a manner destitute of God's word and sacraments, or the means of grace.
It would never enter into any one's heart to conceive, that any part of its
design was, the building up any one protestant church on the ruins of others.
Thus the name of the Society, and the charter well agree. But according to some
things which Mr. Apthorp and others have advanced, not to say at present,
according to some proceedings of the Society, it ought rather to have been
called, The Society for propagating the church of England, in those parts where
the administration of God's word and sacraments is provided for, after the
congregational and presbyterian modes.

2. THE common seal of the Society, which often serves as a frontispiece to the
charter, is agreeable both to the charter and name of the Society. The device
is, a sun in the upper part of a circle, shining gloriously on the world; a
natural and noble emblem of the sun of righteousness; of Him that said, "I am
the light of the world." Within the circle to the right, is a ship under full
sail; on the prow of which stands a clergyman with a book in his hand, (I
suppose intended for the Bible) which he extends to a company of naked savages
on the left, who are eagerly thronging to the shore, to meet and receive the
blessing. Just over them is a scroll with these words, Transiens adjuva nos;
alluding to Acts xvi. 9. "Come over -- and help us:" the words of the man of
Macedonia, whom St. Paul saw in a vision; from whence he inferred that the Lord
called him "to preach the gospel" to the heathen there. And in the outward
circle or circumference of the seal, is the aforesaid title or name of the
Society. This is a fine device for the seal of such a society, according to its
name and charter.

3. THE sermons preached annually before the Society, in the general strain and
tenor of them, correspond very exactly to the noble design of the institution,
as before represented. The grand topic insisted on in them, is promoting THE
GOSPEL; the undoubted doctrines and duties of the Christian religion. The
preachers on these occasions seem evidently, however, to have had the heathen
in their minds, rather than professed Christians who only needed assistance in
order to the support of God's worship and ordinances: In which respect the
sermons rather coincide with the ultimate than the more immediate design of the
institution; and so harmonize rather more perhaps with the seal and name of the
society, than with the charter. This is not said with the least design to
reflect on the preachers of them, as if they had forgotten the design of the
institution, which is indeed kept in view in those sermons; though, as was
intimated before, the ultimate design of the institution is much more enlarged
on, than the primary or more direct. And the grand argument insisted on, to
induce good people of all denominations to assist the Society with their
charity, is, the common cause of christianity; partly for supporting the public
worship of God in those British colonies, where it could not be tolerably
supported without such assistance; but chiefly for the sake of the poor heathen
slaves and savages in, or bordering on the English plantations: An argument
which has been handled with the greatest propriety and pathos in these sermons;
and has doubtless drawn some thousands of pounds from protestant dissenters in
England.

I HAVE read many of these excellent sermons, both the very earliest, and those
preached from time to time since; and have many of them now by me: So that it
were easy to fill volumes with quotations to exemplify and prove what is here
asserted concerning the general strain of them. But I am not willing needlessly
to load and swell the present publication, by quotations to prove what, it is
taken for granted, no person who knows any thing of the matter, and either has
or deserves the least reputation, will presume to deny. But by way of specimen,
for the sake of those who may not have read any of these sermons, some extracts
shall be subjoined from the late bishop BUTLER's sermon before the Society,
1739: A great ornament of the episcopal order, and of the church of England;
the clearness of whose head, the precision of whose language, and the goodness
of whose heart, are so conspicuous in all his writings.

NO one has a right to be called a christian, says, he, who does not do
somewhat in his station, toward the discharge of this trust; [meaning the
gospel, which he considers as a trust] who does not, for instance, assist in
keeping up the profession of CHRISTIANITY where he lives. And it is an
obligation but little more remote, to assist in doing it in our factories
abroad, and in the colonies to which we are related --

OF these our colonies, the SLAVES ought to be considered as inferior members,
and therefore to be treated as members of them; and not merely as cattle or
goods, the property of their masters. Nor can the highest property, possible to
be acquired in these servants, cancel the obligation to take care of their
religious instruction. Despicable as they may appear in our eyes, they are the
creatures of God, and of the race of mankind, for whom Christ died: and it is
inexcusable to keep them in ignorance of the end, for which they were made; and
the means, whereby they may become partakers of the general redemption, etc. --

THE like charity we owe to the NATIVES; owe to them in a much stricter sense
than we are apt to consider, were it only from neighborhood, and our having
gotten possessions in their country. For incidental circumstances of this kind
appropriate all the general obligations of charity to particular persons; and
make such and such instances of it, the duty of one man rather than another. We
are most strictly bound to consider these poor unformed creatures, etc. --

AND it may be some encouragement to cheerful perseverance in these endeavors,
to observe, not only that they are our duty, but also that they seem the means
of carrying on a great scheme of providence, which shall certainly be
accomplished. For the everlasting GOSPEL shall be preached to every nation: And
the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ.

AFTER discoursing for two or three pages, concerning the good effects that
might be reasonably expected from these pious endeavors to propagate
christianity, he goes on thus -- The design before us being then unquestionably
good, it were much to be wished that serious men of all denominations would
join in it. And let me add, that the foregoing view of things affords distinct
reasons why they should. For, first, by so doing, they assist in a work of the
most useful importance, that of spreading over the world the SCRIPTURE ITSELF,
as a DIVINE REVELATION: and it cannot be spread under this character, for a
continuance, in any country, unless CHRISTIAN CHURCHES be supported there; but
will always, more or less, so long as such churches subsist; and therefore
their subsistence ought to be provided for. In the next place, they [ viz.
serious men of all denominations] should remember, that if CHRISTIANITY is to
be propagated at all, which they acknowledge it should, it must be in some
particular form of profession. And though they think ours liable to objections,
etc. -- Upon the whole therefore, these persons would do well to consider, how
far they can with reason satisfy themselves in neglecting what is certainly
right, on account of what is doubtful, whether it be wrong -- Edit. p. 14 --
22. See also p. 24, 25,


THUS Dr. BUTLER, with his usual penetration and accuracy, represents the true
design of this noble institution, in its whole view, compass and extent. And
how cogent is his reasoning, to induce serious men of all denominations in
England to join in, and contribute toward carrying it into execution, upon the
true original plan? But let me just ask by the way, what force there would be
in this excellent reasoning, to induce protestant dissenters in England to
assist the Society, upon supposition it was a known fact, that the Society
deviated very essentially from this noble plan, by applying a large proportion
of their fund in supporting a party in America, and undermining the
congregational and presbyterian churches here? Could it be reasonably supposed,
that those of the same religious principles in England, would assist the
Society in any designs or endeavors against their brethren in New England? or
in promoting episcopacy here, in opposition to the churches of their own
denomination? Or could any preacher on those occasions, who knew this to be
fact, with integrity and uprightness make use of arguments of this catholic
strain, in order to get money out of the pockets of English dissenters? I am
fully persuaded that the great and good Bishop BUTLER would have detested such
an artifice, and even the whole scheme of planting and supporting episcopal
churches in diverse places in America, had he been apprised of the true state of
religion in them. -- The foregoing extracts from his sermon, as was intimated
before, are given only as a specimen of what is the usual strain of the sermons
preached on the same occasion. Though I am not insensible, that some of them,
especially within the last twenty years, have expressions in them of a much
less catholic strain, and quite aliene from the spirit of the charter; an
example or two of which may perhaps be given hereafter. But then, it is to be
observed, on the other hand,

4. THAT in some of these anniversary sermons, all narrow, party designs are
condemned and disclaimed in very strong terms; and a zeal for catholic
christianity recommended in opposition to every thing of this kind. Thus
particularly Dr. BEVERIDGE, Bishop of St. Asaph, in his sermon before the
Society, 1706, after commending the zeal of the primitive Christians, says, But
then we must take care, that our zeal be as theirs was, according to knowledge
-- Not for any private opinion, party or faction, not for either side of a
doubtful disputation, or for unwritten traditions, wherein men are apt to spend
all their zeal, so as to have little or none left for that which is the proper
object of it. But as it is said of Phineas, in his great commendation, that he
was zealous FOR HIS GOD; Number. xxv. 13. So must WE be. 1 Edit. p. 8.
Another Bishop of St. Asaph, as quoted by Mr. HOBART, Second Address, p. 131.
(which of them I am not certain) expresses his indignation against the church
of Rome, on account of the party designs and views with which they send
missionaries about the world, in the following terms. THEIR missions do not
seem to be managed with an apostolical simplicity. THEY settle themselves in
nations which are Christian already, and have been so from the beginning. And,
under the pretense of converting the infidels that are among them, their chief
business seems to be to apply themselves with all their arts to pervert the
Christians themselves from their ancient faith; and to draw them over to a
subjection to the Pope: The want of which subjection is what they think the
greatest error they find among them, and which they zealously endeavor to
eradicate, while the Infidels are very sparingly, (if ever) applied to by them.
Mr. HOBART makes a a pertinent remark to the present purpose, on Dr.
WADDINGTON's sermon before the Society, which the author has not by him. Dr.
WADDINGTON, says he, -- supposes that some would object, that not christianity
itself, but the faith and practice of ONE COMMUNITY ONLY of Christians, would
be propagated, and in replying to it he says, no such PARTICULAR DESIGN is
mentioned in our charter. Second Address, p. 143.


NOW it is to be observed, that these anniversary sermons are almost always
preached by members, and printed and dispersed by order of the Society: A
principal design of them being, to show what a noble and generous work they are
engaged in; that so-people of all denominations amongst protestants may be
encouraged to bear a part with them in it, by their donations, legacies etc.
How great therefore must be the surprise of good people on the other side of
the water, if they should find, that notwithstanding these generous professions
of the Society from time to time, and their disclaiming all narrow, party
designs, they had actually been many years prosecuting such a design themselves
in America; a scheme not sufficiently unlike to that which they condemn so
justly in another famous society, that De propaganda Fide; and that they had
employed a great part of their collections, revenues, etc. in carrying it into
execution! That what is here mentioned only by way of supposition, is not so
remote from certain fact, as many may think it even from the lowest
probability, will be shown in the following sections -- [The Society have,
however, all along professed a particular regard for the church of England;
such an one as all persons who are sincere, must be supposed to have for their
own communion: And nothing which has been said before, is to be undestood as a
denial of this.]

SECTION V. Some general Account of the State of Religion in New England,
before and since the incorporation of the Society.
HAVING in the preceding sections taken a view of the charter, and represented
it in its true light, in opposition to Mr. Apthorp's misquotation and
misrepresentation of it; and also confirmed that sense which has been given as
the true, by the name and common seal of the Society, as also by the
anniversary sermons preached before, and dispersed by them, to get
subscriptions, etc. It will now be proper to come to some facts relative to the
conduct of the Society in planting churches, and supporting missions in
America. And as the principal objection lies against their conduct as to
New England, it will be necessary, in order to set the objection in a fair and
true light, in the first place to make some remarks on the state of religion
here, before the Society sent any missionaries into these parts, and since.
This is proposed in the present section. And,

1. IT is well known, that the first settlers of New England were such as came
hither chiefly on account of their sufferings for nonconformity to the church
of England. They fled hither as to an assylum from episcopal persecution,
seconded by royal power; which often condescended to be subservient to the
views of domineering prelates, before the glorious revolution. That this was
the occasion of their flight hither, appears even from the Society's own
publications. Thus in the Account of the foundation, proceedings and success of
the Society, published Anno 1706, it is said, (p. 10.) It must be acknowledged,
that it was the unhappiness of New England and the adjoining parts, to be first
planted and inhabited by persons who were generally disaffected to the church
by law established in England; and had many of them taken refuge or retirement
in those parts, on account of their suffering for nonconformity here at home.
This fact must indeed be confessed; and that it was their unhappiness to suffer
thus, ought to be confessed also. But, that it was the unhappiness of
New England to be first planted and inhabited by these conscientious
non-conformists to the established church of England, is not so clear a point:
Neither is it to be wondered at, if they were disaffected to such a cruel,
persecuting church as that was before the revolution.

2. IT is no less certain that these refugees were very far from being persons
of a loose, irreligious character. Had they been void of conscience toward God,
they would not have suffered so much for nonconformity, and fled their dear
native country, for the sake of serving him without fear in a wilderness. If
they had been persons void of religious principle, they would in all
probability have lived and died in the communion of that church, for dissenting
from which they suffered so much. -- That they were a sober, virtuous and
religious set of people in general, is certain: Though, that they were perfect,
or free from all human errors and frailties, is not pretended.

3. IT is well known that they very early made provision for the public worship
of God, and founded a seminary of learning, which has been increasing and
flourishing to the present time. The zeal which they showed both for learning
and religion, from the first, was indeed very uncommon; and greatly to their
honor. The public worship of God, and the administration of his word and
sacraments, have all along been provided for in New England: I mean, in the
Province of Massachusetts Bay and in Connecticut; which two may contain perhaps
about eight parts in ten of the inhabitants of New England. In the other two
small governments, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
there has, to be sure, been much less care taken for the support of a public
worship. But in the Massachusetts and Connecticut the public profession of
religion has all along been very regularly upheld, nearly after the same mode
of profession. The doctrines almost universally professed in both, are and ever
have been, very agreeable to the doctrinal articles of the church of England.
Their external polity, and form of worship, are indeed known to be different;
the churches of the Massachusetts Bay, the principal New England government,
being generally of the congregational persuasion, which the episcopalians
affect to reproach under the name of independency; and those in Connecticut, of
the presbyterian; or at least approaching nearer to the established church of
Scotland.

4. IT is farther to be observed, that in these two principal governments of
New England there has been, not only provision, but legal provision made for
the support of a learned and orthodox ministry, and of schools; and that,
before the Society for propagating the gospel had a being. Particularly in the
Massachusetts, there was a law enacted in the 4th of WILLIAM and MARY, for
those purposes; which having been nine years before the Society obtained their
charter, it will be needless to look any farther back for a civil establishment
of religion here, upon this occasion. Some extracts from the law aforesaid may
be seen in the margin The act is entitled, An act for the SETTLEMENT and
SUPPORT of MINISTERS and SCHOOLMASTERS. It begins thus, Be it ordained by the
governor, council, and representatives convened in general court or assembly,
and by the authority of the same, That the inhabitants of each town within this
province shall take due care from time to time, to be provided of an ABLE,
LEARNED, ORTHODOX minister or ministers, of good conversation, to dispense the
word of God: which ministers shall be SUITABLY encouraged, and SUFFICIENTLY
supported and maintained by the inhabitants of such towns -- It is provided in
the same paragraph, that all contracts which had been or should be made by
towns, relative to their ministers or schoolmasters, and their maintenance,
should be made good, etc. And where there is no contract respecting the support
and maintenance of the ministry, or when the same happens to be expired, and
the inhabitants of such towns shall neglect to make suitable provision therein,
then the court of quarter Sessions is empowered and directed "to order a
competent allowance to such minister;" and the manner in which the assessment
shall be made, etc. is pointed out.

In the next paragraph it is ordained, that if any town shall be destitute of a
minister "qualified as aforesaid," -- "six months" -- the said court of
quarter sessions, after taking certain steps to induce the inhabitants to
conform to the law in respect of the settlement of a minister, shall, if this
proves ineffectual, themselves take effectual care to procure and settle a
minister qualified as aforesaid, and order the charge thereof, and of such
ministers MAINTENANCE to be levied on the inhabitants of such town.

It is afterward enacted, that every town having fifty householders or upwards,
shall be constantly provided of a Schoolmaster to teach children to read and
write. But towns that have "one hundred families," are obliged to be provided
with "Grammar schools." etc. And suitable penalties are ordained in case of
neglect.


.

5. DIVERSE acts, relating to the settlement and support of the gospel ministry
here, having received the royal sanction, our churches seem to have a proper
legal establishment. And it ought to be particularly remembered, that the act
aforesaid was passed about nine years before the Society's charter was granted.
Can it then be supposed that this province, where such provision was made for
the settlement, support and maintenance of an "able, learned, orthodox.
ministry," was either one of those plantations. intended in the Society's
charter, where the provision for ministers was "very mean;" or one of those
which were " wholly destitute and unprovided of a maintenance for ministers;"
so that the King's subjects "seemed to be abandoned to atheism and infidelity;"
or were, for want of learned and orthodox ministers to instruct them "in the
principles of true religion," in imminent danger of being perverted to "popish
superstition and idolatry! Certainly the charter cannot in reason be supposed
to have had the least reference to this province, or any other British
plantation, where a similar provision was or should be made for the
administration of God's word and ordinances.

6. CHURCHES and schools have from time to time been founded, and are
continually multiplying in New England, in conformity both to the pious
inclinations of the inhabitants, and to the legal provision made for those
purposes. A competent number of young men have also been educated from time to
time in the Colleges of Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut, for the supply of
both. And our ordinations are carried on in a regular, orderly and scriptural
way; at least according to our own conceptions: And we have doubtless as good a
right to judge for ourselves as to that matter, as the Society have to judge
for us.

7. THE people of New England, particularly in those two principal governments
of it, are all in general professed Christians. There is no such monster as an
Atheist known amongst us; hardly any such person as a Deist. And as to the
superstitions and idolatries of the church of Rome, there neither is, nor has
been the least danger of their gaining ground in New England. The
Congregationalists and Presbyterians are known to hold them at least in as
great abhorrence as the Episcopalians do. And since the revolution, hardly a
Roman-catholic, except some few transient persons, has been seen in
New England, till after removing the French from Nova Scotia, and dispersing
them in the colonies. These are a plain, simple, ignorant people, who have now
no Romish priests or Jesuits amongst them; and by whom we are surely in no
danger of being perverted from the protestant faith. How much better then, in
all these respects, is the state of religion amongst us, than it is even in
England, under the immediate eye and documents of the venerable bishops? Where,
notwithstanding all their pious endeavors, there are so many Roman-catholics,
Infidels and Skeptics, if not right down Atheists! It may be added, that the
common people in New England, by means of our schools, and the instructions of
our "able, learned, orthodox ministers", are, and have all along been,
philosophers and divines in comparison of the common people in England, of the
communion of the church there established. This is commonly said by those who
have had an opportunity personally to inform themselves: And a rationale might
be given of the fact, even without any reflection on the church aforesaid.

8. AS to practical religion, though we have no cause for boasting, yet, to say
the least, we have no cause for blushing on a comparison of our morals with
those of the people in England, in the communion of that church: And many vices
that are common there, are almost, if not quite unknown here. So that if we
appeal to fact and experience, there is much less danger of irreligion in
principle or practice, and of Romish superstition and idolatry prevailing in
New England, amongst the Presbyterians and Congregationalists, for want of
learned, orthodox and pious ministers "to instruct them in the principles of
true religion," than there is of their prevailing in England: Though in the
Abstracts annexed to the bishop of Clogher's sermon before the Society, 1714,
(p. 53.) there is indeed an intimation that the Episcopalians in America are in
imminent danger of falling into those errors, for want of bishops to reside
amongst them. And should any be sent hither, to prevent these evils amongst the
people of that communion, it is to be hoped they will have better success in so
pious an undertaking, than the bishops have hitherto had in England --

9. FROM the foregoing faithful, though brief representation of religion in
New England, from the time that the first settlers of it were persecuted out of
England by the established church, to the present, (I speak particularly of the
two principal governments of New England) it appears that there neither is nor
has been any occasion for the Society to support missions and schools here; and
that they had not even a warrant for doing so, by their charter. New England
(the two small governments of New Hampshire and Rhode Island excepted) does by
no means answer to the description of those plantations, etc. in the charter,
for supporting "God's public worship" in which, a charitable provision is
thereby made.

IF it should be said, (which is the most plausible thing that can be said)
that in some parts even of the Massachusetts and Connecsicut, the provision
made for the maintenance of ministers has been "very mean," and that therefore
they come within the true design of the charter; several things may be observed
in answer hereto. First, good ministers of JESUS CHRIST, who have the interest
of religion at heart, do not aspire after worldly riches, pomp and grandeur.
Secondly, the provision for ministers here, though not to be compared with the
rich benefices in England, has not yet been so "very mean," but that a
competent number of learned and orthodox ministers have been found to supply
our churches. Thirdly, the government here, which took the support of ministers
into consideration before the Society was founded, must in reason be supposed
more capable of judging, what a competent provision for them is, in this
country, than the venerable Society. But, fourthly, if notwithstanding this
legal provision, a number of them in some of our poor, small, or frontier
towns, have been "very meanly" provided for; (which is not denied) and this is
alleged as bringing such places within the true intent of the charter; I will
allow the pertinence and validity of the argument, upon either of the two
following suppositions. First, that the charitable Society have remitted
something from time to time to our poor, though learned, orthodox and pious
ministers, settled in such places, for their help and encouragement; which
would have been quite agreeable to the spirit of the charter, and the catholic
principles of the royal Grantor, however aliene it might possibly have been
from the principles and views of the episcopal Grantees. Or secondly, if it
appears that the Society have actually established their own missions in such
poor, little or exposed places only, instead of doing it in our richest and
most populous towns, where the best provision was before made for ministers.
But if neither of these things can be made to appear, it will be in vain, and
indeed a piece of hypocrisy, to allege the "very mean" support of ministers
here, as an argument for the Society's applying a great part of their revenue
for the maintenance of God's public worship in New England.

That there was very little, or rather no occasion for Missionaries in
New England, Mr. HOBART has very pertinently produced the testimony of the
pious and judicious Dr. BRAY, who, before the Society's incorporation, was the
bishop of London's commissary in Maryland. This worthy divine took great pains
to inform himself of the state of religion in the colonies, and their various
exigencies; of which he published an Account, and delivered it as the result of
his inquiries, that from New York northward, he found very little need of
missionaries for the propagation of christianity; and in the colonies of
Connecticut and the Massachusetts NONE AT ALL. Vid. Second Address, etc. p. 126.


THIS testimony of Dr. BRAY ought to have the more weight, not only because he
was such a leading man with reference to the charitable institution aforesaid,
as to have been honored with name of "the Father of the Society"; but because
of the great respect with which I find the Society speaking of him, of his
conduct in, and his account of the Affairs of America, in the following words
-- The Lord bishop of London -- did afterward send over the Rev. Dr. THOMAS
BRAY, as his commissary to Maryland; who being assisted -- did settle and
support several new ministers in that province, and did fix and furnish some
parochial libraries, and did other public services, of which he has himself
given a TRUE and modest account Account of the Society, p. 14.
.

IT is submitted to the judgment of the impartial reader, whether the aforesaid
testimony of Dr. BRAY, so inquisitive, observing and active a man, is not more
than a balance to the testimony which Mr. Apthorp produces from the Dean,
afterward bp. BERKLEY's sermon before the Society; -- "that the likeliest Step
toward converting the heathen, would be to begin with the English. The
missionaries do good service in bringing them to a serious sense of religion,"
etc Considerations, p. 19.
. The excellent Dr. BERKLEY lived a recluse, studious life the greatest part of
the time he was in N. England; and that in the small government of
Rhode Island, where there was indeed then but little of the face of religion,
-- except perhaps among our good friends the Quakers -- Besides; he does not
speak particularly of N. England, or any part thereof, but of the colonies in
general; thinking that the missionaries in them do good service in bringing the
English to a serious sense of religion. Which is doubtless true as to some of
the colonies: Though the people of the Massachusetts and Connecticut had at least
as serious a sense of religion, long before there was a single missionary in
them, as they have had since. And Dr. BRAY is express, that in these two
colonies, there was no occasion AT ALL for missionaries to propagate
christianity: And the Society say, he gave a TRUE account of things in America.
So that if they send missionaries into these colonies, it cannot be so much to
propagate christianity, as to propagate something distinct from it, viz. the
peculiarities of the church of England.

SECTION VI. Observations on the Conduct of the Society in supporting Episcopal
Missions and Schools in New England, particularly in the Massachusetts Bay and
Connecticut.
THAT the Society have chiefly sent their missionaries into those British
plantations where they were much needed, according to the true design of their
institution; and that they have hereby served the interest of religion in them,
is by no means denied: It were very criminal to deny them the praise that is
justly due to them in this respect. But, that they have deviated from their
original plan according to the charter, in some other respects; and thereby
left undone much of the good which they might probably have effected, with the
ordinary blessing of God, may perhaps be equally evident from this and the
following sections. Most of the following facts are very notorious, even from
the anniversary sermons, abstracts, and other publications of the Society; so
that they will not be denied.

1. FOR several years, I think about eight or nine, after the Society was
founded, they sent no missionary into N. England. Which may naturally be looked
on as one argument, that it was not originally considered among those
plantations which were supposed to stand in need of their charity There was no
church of E. in N. E. till about the year 1678 or 1679, in the reign of the
unhappy, infatuated Roman-catholic K. James II. and the administration of the
Roman-catholic Governor Sir Edmond Andros, in this Province. It was at this
time that the Ld. bp. of London, upon an address of several of the inhabitants
of Boston did prevail with his Majesty [aforesaid] that a church should be
allowed in that town, for the exercise of religion according to the church of
E. [ Account of the Society, p. 11.] If I mistake not, there was no missionary
from the Society in N. E. till about the year 1710. It is not material: In the
year 1718 there were only three of them in all N. E. viz, one at Rhode Island,
another at Marblehead, and a third at Newbury; according to the abstract for
that year, p. 44.
.

2. THEY have from time to time, since they began to send missionaries into
these parts, been adding to their number, supporting episcopal schools, etc.

IT is also to be observed, that a very large proportion of their missionaries
have fallen to the share of N. England; in the two principal governments of
which, Dr. BRAY, the Father of the Society, thought there was no occasion for
any at all. The gradual increase of the missionaries, catechists, etc. in N.
England, appears from the abstracts to have been as follows, viz. In 1718 -- 3.
1727 -- 10. 1730 -- 14. 1739 -- 22. 1745 -- 24. 1761 about 30.
I have seen no later abstract.

HOW large a proportion of missionaries, etc. this is for N. England, compared
with the other colonies, especially when a due regard is had to their religious
state respectively, may appear by the single cast of the eye on the table
following. In the last mentioned year, 1761, according to the abstract, their
numbers in the southern colonies, where they were so much needed, were, In
New York 10. New Jersey 10. Pennsylvania 9. N. Carolina 5. S. Carolina 5.
Georgia 1. Bahama Islands 1. Barbados 2.


IT does not appear from the abstracts, that the Society have any missionaries
at all in the other W. India Islands, where, as is commonly reported, there is
hardly any show of public worship kept up, of any kind; and where there are so
many thousands of Negro slaves in total ignorance of christianity. The true
cause of this neglect may be seen hereafter.

3. IT is notorious that the missionaries, instead of being sent to the
frontier and other poor Towns in N. England, where the provision and
accommodations for ministers were the meanest, have generally been station'd in
the oldest, most populous and richest towns, where the best provision was
before made for ministers; where the public worship of God was constantly and
regularly upheld, and his word and sacraments duly administered according to the
congregational and presbyterian modes. This will be evident to all that are in
any measure acquainted with this country, from the bare mention of some of the
places where the Society support missions and schools; viz. Boston, Cambridge,
Salem, Marblehead, Newbury, Portsmouth in New Hampshire, Braintree, Situate,
Bristow, Portsmouth in Rhode Island, N. London, Stratford, Fairfield,
Middletown, etc. I have also understood that there is a church of England in N.
Haven, the seat of the College in Connecticut; though I do not find by the
abstracts, that there is yet any missionary fixed there. It is not denied,
however, that there arc a few missions established in N. England, particularly
in Rhode Island government, where they might be needed.

4. It needs not to be proved, but only remembered, that these missions, etc.
have not been supported, but at a large annual expense of the Society. The
amount of the salaries here, exclusive of books to be distributed, etc. for the
year 1761, was about L. 1270 sterling, according to the abstract. The other
expenses of the Society for N. England being added hereto, might probably make
up the sum of L.1500 sterling. communibus annis, for many years past: Though I
pretend not to be very exact in this calculation.

5. TO those who are well acquainted with N. England, and the manner and
circumstances in which episcopal churches have been gathered and founded here,
it appears that the Society have manifested a sufficient forwardness to
encourage and increase small disaffected parties in our towns, upon an
application to them; -- in those towns, I mean, where a regular, legal and due
provision was already made for the support of God's public worship. Some of
these little parties, or rather factions, it is well known here, have taken
their rise from no fixed principle of a conscientious dissent from our manner
of worship, but from mere levity, petulance or avarice; -- from some trifling,
groundless disgust at the stated minister; or a dissatisfaction about pews and
rates; or at their being under, or likely to come under censure for their
immoral practices. I do not affirm positively, that either of these has always
been the case, without exception: But, that it often has been, is as well known
amongst us, as a thing of that nature can be known. These people being thus
affronted and angry without cause, presently declare for the church, without
really knowing any thing of the state of the controversy; and apply to some
missionary or missionaries, to recommend them to the charity of the Society.
And diverse of the missionaries have been much injured, (which there is no
reason to suppose) if they have not been very busy in intrigues in order to
foment these divisions and parties, for the good of the church; yea, been at
the bottom of them. In which they perhaps thought, they conformed to the true
design of that standing direction of the Society to their missionaries; viz.
That they frequently visit -- those that oppose them, or dissent from them, to
convince and reclaim them -- They add indeed, with a spirit of meekness and
gentleness; which seems not to have been so much remembered in all cases, as
the other branch of the direction.

BUT from whatever cause these little discontented parties have generally taken
their origin, in towns where there were learned and orthodox ministers duly
supported; thus much is certain, that they have not only been recommended to
the Society from time to time, but been encouraged thereby, and had
missionaries sent to them. The number of these humble supplicants in a town,
have sometimes not exceeded eight, ten or twelve heads of families; and this in
towns consisting of two or three hundred families. It is commonly, and I
believe truly said, that there are scarce so many as ten families in the town
of Cambridge, which usually attend the service of the church lately set up
therein, but about half a quarter of a mile from the College, and from the
meeting house there. What is this but setting up altar against altar? And some
there are, who think the principal end, and true spirit of that mission was not
ill explained by an episcopalian, who, as is reported, expressed himself thus
on the occasion -- I don't care for them; we have now got a church in the very
munns A cant term well understood among us.
of 'em. It is a known fact, that in some other churches, which, according to
the abstracts, have been represented as growing, flourishing, and increasing in
reputation for near half a century, the number of stated worshippers at this
day very little, if any thing, exceeds ten or twelve families. These small
parties thus encouraged and supported by the Society in different parts of
New England at a great expense, have in short all the appearance of entering
wedges; or rather of little lodgments made in carrying on the crusade, or
spiritual siege of our churches, with the hope that they will one day submit to
an episcopal sovereign. And it will appear at least probable in the sequel,
that this has long been the formal design of the Society; and that it is the
true plan, and grand mystery of their operations in New England.

6. IT is well known to us in New England, that after supporting and
encouraging these little parties, till in some places they have, by one means
or other, become considerable both for number and riches, and well able to
support their own ministers; the Society have still continued to pay these out
of their charitable fund. The only reason why I do not come to particulars
here, is, left it should seem too invidious. This conduct of the Society, for
some years proved no inconsiderable means of increasing the church-party: I
mean, till a law of this province was made, obliging the episcopalians, to pay
ministerial rates in common with other people; the money levied on them,
however, to go to the support of their own clergy. This law seemed to give some
check to the progress of episcopacy, and a zeal for the liturgy, in
New England. And if there had been no such act, or the episcopalians had been
exempted from all ministerial taxes, as the Quakers are, almost all who loved
their money better than any thing else, might in the course of a few years have
declared themselves for, and adorned the communion of the church -- But this is
not designed as a general reflection on the people of that communion here; some
of whom are doubtless persons of principle, and sincere piety.

SECTION VII. The manner in which episcopal churches have often sprung up in
New England, illustrated and exemplified in a letter of the late Rev. Dr.
COLMAN of Boston to Dean, afterward Bishop KENNET; with part of the Deans
answer. The letters from which these extracts are made, are contained at large
in the life of Dr. Colman, by the Reverend E. Turell, A. M. pastor of Medford,
p. 122 -- 132.

IT may perhaps be less invidious to exemplify some things in the foregoing
section, relative to the episcopal churches and missions in New England, by
some extracts from a letter of Dr. COLMAN to Dr. KENNET, then Dean of
Peterborough, than by giving any more recent instances, however notorious. It
was in 1712, that the letter from which the following extracts are made, was
written by the former to the latter of those worthy Divines.

Rev. Sir, Boston, Nov. 1712.
I AM altogether a stranger to you, and must needs be unknown; for my name is
much too little to have been heard of by persons of your dignity in the
established church. But meeting with your excellent sermon preached before the
honorable and most reverend Society -- I cannot forbear asking your leave to
write you my thoughts upon an admirable passage I find therein, p. 22.

NEITHER our own people in those parts, nor their African slaves, nor their
Indian neighbors have ought to accuse us of. At least we have given no just
offense to the Gentiles there, nor to the church of God. We trust we have not
sinned against the brethren, and have walked honestly toward them that are
without. We give our money, our attendance, our correspondence, our several
sorts of care, pains and trouble: Forgive us this wrong: If we have done any
other, God do so to us, and more also.

SIR, there is such an air of sincerity in these words, that I cannot but have
a perfect esteem of the good, and truly noble spirit breathed in them. I doubt
not but you fully believe as you speak, and are accepted by God in your pious
desires of serving the interests of religion in these remote parts of the
earth. I greatly honor the intentions of your most honorable Society, their
abundant labors and expense.

A MORE noble charity never was projected than your sending the gospel among
the heathen here, and into heathenish places, where the settlements have been
made void of the form of religion. The harvest of this nature is too plentious
through Virginia, Maryland, the Jersies, our Eastern country also, and the
Narragansett, and some places about Rhode Island, which have been too long
neglected, and suffered to run wild into sectaries, and prejudicies against any
ministry of the word at all.

THIS vast and waste space, desolate and perishing, cries aloud to you for your
charitable care: And verily the fund which the Society has contributed and
gathered is but too little yet by far, for these necessitous places; while at
the same time many of your missions into our parts, are unto places where the
gospel is received and preached, and churches gathered in very good order and
manner. -- I cannot but let you know my thoughts, that the reverend and
honorable Society have been once and again misled, and even imposed on by
mis-informations, and private designs and interests, of persons and parties
here, to misspend (and so necessarily pervert) great portions of their noble
charity, to such ends and in such manner as do not at all answer the
propagation of the gospel among us, but which do really break in upon and
hinder the spreading and success of it. To evince which, I will fairly put the
case, and offer an instance or two.

YOU must give me leave, Sir, to suppose a town and towns here, wherein
religion is settled, ministers legally fixed, the word of God faithfully
preached, and the sacraments of Christ administered; and yet there happen a
discontented person or two in the place; or some difference about the placing a
new house for public worship, or about paying their little rate to the
ministry, or the like: Immediately they are advised, or in their own mind they
propose to themselves, Let us send over to the Lord bishop of London, or to the
honorable Society for propagating the gospel, for a minister of the church of
England! He will bring a salary of L. 50 sterling -- Now suppose, Sir, they
actually send and obtain, I demand, whether it be not a real injury and abuse
of the Society and their charity; their declared end, and the proper use of so
great a gift as fifty pound per annum is? -- Yet are there several such
notorious instances in our New-English provinces. One was lately in the town of
Braintree, within ten miles of Boston, which application to you the Rev. Mr.
Miles of Boston refused to countenance; and was free to say, that were the
circumstances of the place known, my Lord of London and the Society would never
approve of it: For it is a notorious matter of fact, that setting aside two
families in that party at Braintree, the rest neither know why they sought the
church worship there, nor could be any credit to it. Their number was so very
minute, and their character so very mean, that when a minister was sent to
them, he was ashamed of his errand, and diverted to some other place of service.

THIS last year a difference happened in the town of Newbury about placing
their meeting house: The matter was brought before our general court, who
determined it according to the free vote and act of the precinct, whereby they
had obliged themselves to each other. Whereupon a number of them declare
themselves for the church of England; many of them, I will suppose, persons of
sobriety and virtue, only in a pet, and to save their rate to their aged and
worthy minister, Mr. Belcher; utterly ignorant of the church they declare for,
nor offended in the least with the form of worship or dicipline which they turn
from; -- being till now among the most narrow and rigid dissenters. --

IN short, Sir, there is a sordid motive which will find you beggars enough for
your charity in our country-towns! if you will free them from rates to any
ministry, and maintain it for them -- You will best judge, Sir, if there be no
offense to the church of God, in the steps taken by too many, here and there.
--


THE worthy Dean wrote a very obliging answer to the foregoing. His letter is
dated Sept. 15. 1713: In which are the following passages.

Rev. Sir,
THOUGH I seem negligent in my due acknowledgment of yours of Nov. 1712, yet
among private friends I have often expressed my satisfaction in the sense,
style and temper of it; and I now heartily accept such a correspondence, and
wish the continuance of it, for the sake of our common cause of charity to
souls, and zeal to our Christian religion.

I was under a great temptation of communicating your letter to a general
meeting of our Society; that I might have their instructions for an answer to
the particulars contained in it. -- But then I thought my self restrained by
some prudent intimations of your own; and I was very unwilling to draw you into
any controversy or envy, that two often attend us for speaking PLAIN TRUTHS:
For SUCH indeed I believe are the kind informations you give me relating to the
places you mention -- It is possible we are not so intent upon our business, as
if it were for filthy lucre -- We are less exact in our correspondence and
accounts, than if the dear liberty and property of this world depended on it --
However, our general aim is, to pursue our general commission of planting
christianity according to the church of England, in those parts of our English
plantations, where there is no settled ministry: or, etc. --


AFTER speaking of the difficulties which the Society were under, in respect of
their distance from America, the disagreement of accounts from hence, and
expressing some hope that the time would come, when the English in America
should be all of one heart, and one way of discipline and worship, with several
other particulars, the Dean concludes his letter in the friendly and catholic
manner following --

Our exchanging, Sir, the good offices of common charity and a public spirit,
will help much, under GOD's blessing, to enlarge our understandings and our
affections also to each other; and so to meet nearer upon earth, and
inseperably in heaven. Let these be our mutual prayers and endeavors. I am,
dear Sir, your affectionate Friend and Brother,

WHITE KENNET.


NOW, the manner in which episcopal churches have been founded in the
Massachusetts and Connecticut, has all along in general borne but too near a
resemblance to that represented in Dr. COLMAN's letter aforesaid: And the
worthy Dean was so just as to express his entire belief of what the Dr. said
relating to the places which he mentioned; supposing these representations to
be some of those plain truths, which too often draw people into controversy and
envy. He also speaks of it as the primary design of the Society's institution,
to plant episcopal churches in those parts of our English plantations, where
there is no settled ministry; though not exclusively of those, where there are
good numbers who cannot in conscience conform to the ways of worship different
from the established church of England. The invalidity of which plea of
conscience, as it relates to the present controversy, will be shown hereafter.

SECTION VIII. That the aforesaid Conduct of the Society is not agreeable to
the Letter or Spirit of their Charter.
SUPPOSING the truth of the principal facts represented in the foregoing
sections; particularly as to the state of religion in New England, the number
of missionaries, etc. maintained here by the Society, and the places in which
they are supported; which I consider as the principal facts, even in
distinction from the dishonorable manner in which episcopal parties have often
arose, been encouraged and increased here; (which is considered only as an
incidental circumstance, not a principal fact, upon which the argument finally
turns) Supposing the truth of those facts, I say, almost any unprejudiced
person may easily see, that such a conduct in the Society is not conformable to
their charter in any one material circumstance, but essentially repugnant
thereto. The contrast, or the opposition betwixt the charter and such a
conduct, may be made to appear in a very few words.

1. IT is allowed on all hands, that one material end of this institution,
according to the charter, was, propagating the gospel among the heathen
bordering on the British plantations. But no one will pretend to say, that the
missionaries in New England are employed directly in that good work.

2. ANOTHER end was, the maintaining a public worship in those colonies, where
the people, though called Christians, were wholly destitute and unprovided, --
where they wanted the administration of God's word and sacraments, and seemed
to be abandoned to atheism and infidelity, etc. But, that this neither is, nor
ever was, the true state of New England, at least not of the Massachusetts and
Connecticut, is sufficiently apparent.

3. ANOTHER end of the institution, which is indeed the first mentioned in the
charter, was, the benefit and assistance of those plantations, in which, though
there were such ministers as are designed in the charter, yet there was not a
tolerable or competent provision made for their subsistence; or, in the words
of the charter, in which the provision made for them was "very mean." Whereas
it is a known fact, that in most of those places in New England where the
society support missions, there was a legal and competent provision before made
for the support of an "able, learned, orthodox ministry."

4. THESE three are the only ends of the institution expressly mentioned in, or
that can fairly be inferred from the charter of the Society. And consequently,
if they have annually expended a large sum here in New England, not conformably
to either of them, this must needs be a misapplication. Whatever they have
expended, more or less, to accomplish ends different from these, or such as are
not directly subservient to them, has been laid out in a manner not warranted
by the charter; and therefore perverted and alienated from the true, important
ends of their institution. Let the knowing and impartial judge, whether this
conclusion is fairly drawn or not, supposing the truth of the facts aforesaid;
which are indeed too notorious to admit of a denial.

SECTION IX. Of Objections against the Reasoning in the preceding Sections;
and particularly as to a learned and orthodox Ministry.
IF the facts aforesaid are allowed, no solid objection, it is conceived, can
be brought against the general conclusion as to the perversion or
misapplication of the Society's charity; though a person who sets himself to
invent evasions, may possibly think of a number of weak ones. And the ingenious
Mr. Apthorp has been so lucky as to hit upon several such in his
Considerations, designed to vindicate the Society against that charge, which
has often been brought against their conduct in respect of New England. One of
these evasions has already been hinted at: But it may be proper to speak of it
a little more distinctly, though briefly, here -- It is said, the ministers
spoken of in the charter, are spoken of under the designation of "learned and
orthodox."

NOW, as to learning; though the ministers educated in our young, but growing
Colleges in New England, may not vie with this gentleman, who brought with him
the advantageous reputation of a considerable Scholar from one of the ancient
and renowned British Universities, in which, it is said, he reaped some
laurels; -- a reputation which he doubtless merited; yet, as the truly knowing
and learned, are generally candid also, it is hoped that he will not absolutely
deny that qualification to our clergy, in the degree necessary to render them
useful and sufficient ministers, provided they are not defective in the other
material point, orthodoxy. And, to do the gentleman justice, he seems wholly to
wave the former, and to deny our clergy nothing but orthodoxy; in which, other
people generally suppose, they are not deficient. After mentioning it as the
primary design of the institution aforesaid, to provide a maintenance for an
orthodox clergy; he subjoins, which (as the charter was obtained by the members
of the church of England) must, in all reasonable construction, mean a clergy
of their own church. Consid. p. 11.
So that, there being no such ministers amongst Us, in the sense of the
charter, it was incumbent upon the Society to supply Boston, Cambridge, etc.
etc. with orthodox missionaries: in doing which, they conform to the original
and charitable design of their institution. This is the obvious intent of what
the gentleman says upon this head; though, for certain prudential reasons, he did
not choose, in a more explicit manner, to monopolize all the orthodoxy in
New England to himself, the other missionaries, and the people of the church of
England; stigmatizing all our ministers and churches as heretical or
unorthodox. This is indeed the unavoidable consequence of his appropriating and
confining the terms orthodox ministers, to those of the episcopal communion.
But, to have reproached us thus in plain words, might have been a bolder stroke
than the times would well bear as yet; and so, rather prejudiced than served
the cause in which he engaged. This might perhaps have contributed to frustrate
the modest hopes which he expressed of great accessions to the episcopal party
at Cambridge, in his letter to the Society soon after his mission there, dated
Aug. 30. 1760. some time before the church was fit for divine service. For it
is said in the abstract printed in 1761, that Mr. Apthorp had written, that the
building of the church was in such forwardness, that he hoped it would be fit
for divine service in November; and particular care had been taken to make the
structure useful and durable, as well as decently elegant; and, in case of
future accessions to the congregation, it might be easily enlarged; and he had
the satisfaction to add, that it already promised to be one of the best
supported, and most flourishing churches in America. Abstract, 1761. p. 44, 45.
It would doubtless be a great pity that the gentleman's wishes and
expectations should prove abortive, if there is no orthodox minister in
Cambridge besides himself, though there are three of our congregational churches,
as well as the College, in that town.

BUT the following considerations, some of which were before hinted at, (p. 21)
will be sufficient to show that our ministers are not destitute of orthodoxy,
although they are not conformists to the church of England; and that the
gentleman is a little too selfish, in endeavoring to engross the whole of that
precious commodity to himself and his party. Though if orthodoxy has the property
which an eminent divine of the church of England Bp. HARE, Difficulties and
Discouragements, etc.
sarcastically ascribes to it, -- that of "covering a multitude of sins," I
will not deny, but yet do not affirm, that they have rather more occasion for
it than those whom they would strip of it, leaving them nothing better than
charity to supply its place --

ORTHODOXY, in the commonly-received sense of the word amongst protestants at
least, notwithstanding its general etemology, relates particularly to doctrinal
points, or articles of faith, as distinguished from opinions about the best
modes of ecclesiastic polity, external order, rites and ceremonies. To these
latter it has no reference in its most common use. And it can hardly be
supposed, that a gentleman so well skilled in Christian philology as Mr.
Apthorp, will dispute this point.

FROM whence it follows, that ministers or churches differing widely in opinion
about an hierarchy, discipline, and modes of worship, may yet be equally
orthodox; agreeing nearly in the same common faith respecting GOD, JESUS
CHRIST, his offices and redemption.

IT is also a known fact, that the ministers and churches in New England, with
a very few exceptions, if any, agree in doctrinal points, and therefore in
respect of orthodoxy, with the church of England, according to her articles
relative to these points.

IT is moreover known, or at least generally supposed amongst us, that our
New England ministers, a very few excepted, adhere much more closely in their
preaching, both to the letter and spirit of those doctrinal articles, than most
of the episcopal clergy themselves, whether here or in England. And if this be
fact, as I am fully persuaded it is, the former are really more orthodox than
the latter, even according to the articles of their own church. Besides:

BY the same rule that this gentleman and some others deny our ministers the
title of orthodox, limiting it to the "clergy of their own church;" they must
deny it to the ministers of the established church of Scotland, and of all
other churches, except perhaps that of Rome. For none of them fully agree with
the church of England, except in doctrinal points, as we also do; which, it
seems, is not sufficient to denominate them orthodox. According to which
pretense, there will be no orthodox ministers in the world, except of the
church of England: And is not this very modest and candid!

DIVERSE of our laws relative to ministers, and in which they are designed as
orthodox, having had the allowance of the King, the head of the English church,
this seems to be a royal acknowledgment of their orthodoxy. And is it not
somewhat presumptuous for any of the members of that body to contradict their
head!

NOTWITHSTANDING those ministers and churches in England, with which ours in
New England very nearly agree in doctrine, discipline and worship, have often
been accused by the episcopalians as schismatical, on account of their dissent
from the church there established; yet they have not often been reproached as
heterodox, heretical or un-orthodox in that respect. So far from it, that I do
not think there can be a single episcopal divine of reputation produced, or
other approved writer on that side within a century past, who has taxed them in
a body as heretics, or denied them to be orthodox, on account of their
nonconformity. Mr. Apthorp seems to have forgotten that the episcopal divines
in England, even in their highest flights, have generally distinguished betwixt
heterodoxy and schism; while he, it seems, is for confounding them together,
and will not allow us to be orthodox even in New England, unless we will become
conformists to a church that is not established here.

IT has before been observed, how unnatural it is to suppose that King WILLIAM
designed to limit the terms "orthodox ministers" in the charter, to those of
the church of England; and thereby to brand the ministers of all other
protestant churches as heterodox; which were to suppose that catholic-spirited
Prince as great a bigot as any of his royal predecessors.

BESIDES: The whole air and complexion of the charter are catholic in the
highest degree: There is no hint or allusion therein as to any differences
amongst protestants. The grand end proposed therein, is propagating the gospel,
the principles of true religion, and the Christian religion, in opposition to
atheism, infidelity and popery: And orthodox ministers stand there in direct
opposition to popish priests and jesuits; as before observed. It is therefore
contrary to all the rules of good criticism, as well as to catholic
christianity, to appropriate and confine these terms to the ministers of the
church of England, and thereby to hereticate the ministers of all other
protestant churches. Nothing can be less conformable to the language, and whole
spirit of the charter.

IF this argument of Mr. Apthorp were of any force, it is not easy to see why
the Society might not send missionaries into Scotland to convert the kirk to
episcopacy, by virtue of their charter, as well as into New England, to convert
us; excepting only that Scotland is not a "plantation, colony or factory beyond
seas;" and, in that respect, certainly not within the design of the charter.

THIS point may be now dismissed with reminding the reader of the reply of Mr.
HOBART to some of his antagonists, relative thereto. "If," said he, they think
that none but the clergy of the church of England are in a legal sense orthodox
ministers, Dr. MACSPARRAN can inform them how that matter was determined by the
King in council, in the case between him and Mr. TORREY. Second Address, p. 143.
Some of the more bigoted sort of episcopalians amongst us, scruple not to say
boldly and plumply, that we have no gospel ministers at all; no sacraments, or
gospel ordinances, nor any christian churches; for this goodly reason, that our
ministers have not had episcopal ordination after the mode of the church of
England. Where they learn this silly cant, it is not worth while to enquire I
am not willing to impute such pitiful conceits to the ingenious Mr. Apthorp;
especially since his anonimous friend in the piece dated at Cambridge the 25th
March last, and published in the New England Chronicle, speaks of him as no
bigot, but a catholic-spirited gentleman; -- as one who is so far from thinking
every punctilio in the modes of worship established in the church of England,
jure divino, that he makes no scruple to confess even to those who secede from
her, that he is of opinion no particular mode of worship can be precisely
ascertained from any thing re-revealed in the new testament, and that therefore
mutual forbearance ought to he exercised in this respect. -- as one publicly
averring he desired not to make one proselyte from the congregational CHURCH;
-- and keeping up a friendly interchange of visits with its PASTOR -- There
seems, however, to be some difficulty in reconciling this declaration, that he
desires not to make one proselyte from the congregational church, with the
hopes expressed in his letter to the Society, of future accessions to his own
congregation; so that there might be occasion for enlarging the church, etc.
(see before, p. 69.) But perhaps it was from the College only, not from the
congregational church at Cambridge, that he flattered himself with such large
accessions to the small episcopal party there. In which respect the gentleman
is supposed to have been not a little disappointed --

There is a chronological mistake in the margin of p. 52. which the author
takes this first opportunity to correct, after the discovery -- It was not in
the reign of James II. and administration of Sir E. Andros, that the Bishop of
London prevailed with the King to allow an episcopal church in Boston; but in
the reign of Charles II. when Mr. S. Bradstreet was Governor here, An. 1679.




SECTION X. The Plea of Conscience, as it relates to the present Question,
considered.
BY way of answer to the objection so often made against the Society's conduct
in supporting missions in those colonies, where the people have the means of
religion already, in other protestant communions; Mr. Apthorp says, This is not
universally true: or wherever it happily is true; this brings us back to the
claim of liberty of conscience. The means of religion are NO MEANS to him whose
conscience cannot use, or does not approve them: no more than Popery or
Mahometanism afford the means of religion to a good Protestant, who happens to
reside in Popish or Mohammedan countries. Consid. p. 14.
Something of this sort has been said in diverse of the anniversary sermons
before the Society: And Mr. Apthorp might perhaps take the hint from that
excellent Prelate who now so worthily presides over the church of England, [I
hope he meant in subordination to the King] AND THE SOCIETY ITSELF; ( Cons. p.
19.) This great Prelate, a distinguished member of the Society, is one of the
two witnesses whom Mr. Apthorp summons to bear "testimony" in favor of the
Society, after producing that of Bishop BERKLEY, another member of the Society,
in this cause. Speaking of whom conjunctly, he says, he confidently rests his
proof on the unexceptionable testimony of two most candid and truly Christian
Prelates, etc. (p. 18.) The testimony of the worthy Bishop BERKLEY has already
been taken notice of. The other of these witnesses is quoted by Mr. Apthorp as
having given an answer similar to his own, to the objection aforesaid, in the
following words -- An objection to the conduct of the Society, is that they
have sent missionaries to some places in which there were already Christian
assemblies established and supported. But in the lest exceptionable of these
assemblies, there are several things, which the consciences of many (we
apprehend, with great reason) cannot acquiesce in; who were not therefore to be
left destitute of public worship; especially as our charter was granted in
express terms, for the maintenance of an orthodox clergy in those parts.
Consid. p. 21
So that, it seems, one material point which his GRACE is called to bear
testimony to, is, that the consciences of many people in these parts, cannot
acquiesce in several things found even in the least exceptionable of our
Christian assemblies, etc. Let me make a few remarks upon the foregoing passage
in the Considerations, thus supported by the testimony of this great Prelate.
And,

1. MR. Apthorp plainly allows that the people in some of the colonies have the
means of religion already, without the Society's charity, in other protestant
communions; by saying that this is not universally true; or wherever it happily
is true, etc.

2. IF this is happily true in any of the American colonies, I conclude he will
allow it to be so in this province and in Connecticut, which have much the
fairest pretensions to such a preeminence; and to the proceedings of the
Society in which, the objection principally relates. It is therefore conceived,
that it may be naturally taken as a concession of Mr. Apthorp, that in these
principal parts of New England, where so many episcopal missions have been
supported by the Society, the inhabitants had the means of religion already, in
other protestant communions.

3. THEREFORE, according to the reasoning in the preceding sections, which
needs not to be here repeated, these are not such colonies as were the proper
objects of that charity: For their state in respect of religion, is essentially
different from that of the places described in the charter; and for which a
charitable provision was made thereby. So that the money expended here by the
Society as aforesaid, is not employed in conformity to the true intent of the
charter: For who can, with the least appearance of reason, say, that the
charter makes provision for those plantations, in which the people enjoyed the
means of religion already, in ANY protestant communion? -- those in which a
sufficient number of protestant ministers of ANY denomination were competently
provided for, and God's public worship was constantly upheld?

4. As to the plea of conscience, that there are some persons amongst us, who
cannot use the means of religion, which they have in our protestant communions;
and that to such persons these are NO MEANS, any more than Popery or
Mahometanism, etc: If these very conscientious people were as entirely
protestant in their sentiments, as our communions are in their nature, it might
perhaps in part remove the difficulty. What there is in the least exceptionable
of our truly Christian and protestant assemblies, which should give offense to
the consciences of sincere, good protestants, neither Mr. Apthorp nor his GRACE
has particularly declared: Whether it be the preaching, so strictly agreeable
in general to the doctrinal articles of the church of England; or the devout
prayers, not read to GOD, but dictated by the heart, as in the truly primitive
and apostolic churches; or the administration of the sacraments in the molt
simple and scriptural manner, without any of those additions which the wisdom
or the clergy afterward invented; or whether it be any thing else, we are left
to conjecture; and so cannot particularly answer this objection against our
protestant communions, as Mr. Apthorp, or Christian assemblies, as his GRACE is
pleased to call them. It seems they both decline giving these the name of
churches: But for what reason, it is not easy to say. It is to be hoped, they
can form some idea of a truly christian and protestant church, without a King
or Queen at its head; without numerous acts of parliament to model its
constitution, and establish its ceremonials; without printed forms of devotion;
and without an hierarchy resembling that of the Romish church, in which one
great Prelate presides over the whole, with all the inferior religious orders,
the lowest of which are as it were trodden in the dirt; -- an hierarchy which,
in a word, may be compared to JACOB's ladder, "Its foot on earth, its top above
the skies."

IF there are any persons amongst us, who have no conceptions of a truly
Christian church, but in connection with such things as these, it is not indeed
strange that the means of public religion which they might have in our
protestant communions, should be NO MEANS to them; or that their consciences
should not fully acquiesce in them; not even so readily as they might in
Popery. Indeed I have myself heard some episcopalians amongst us, who were
reckoned very good churchmen, say, that they should much prefer the communion
of the church of Rome to ours; and would sooner go to mass than come to our
assembles, if there were here any Romish, and no English churches. This I
declare, of my own certain knowledge, and could mention names; and I have
diverse times heard credible persons speak of some conscientious episcopalians
amongst us, as expressing themselves after the same manner: Though, to do them
justice, I do not suppose that these sentiments generally prevail amongst them.
Some of them may possibly, without going these lengths, have conscientious
scruples about the means of religion in our protestant communions: But to say,
that because there are some things or circumstances attending them, which they
cannot entirely acquiesce in, or approve of, therefore they are absolutely NO
MEANS at all to them, is at best a very extraordinary position. However,

5. IT is readily granted, that great allowances ought to be made for weak and
scrupulous, tender, and even erroneous consciences; and for the prejudices of
education, in matters merely of a religious nature. And this plea of conscience
ought to be allowed valid thus far, viz. That these conscientious people among
us, should not be compelled to join in our protestant communion; but left
entirely at liberty to worship GOD according to the episcopal mode, even though
we may think it considerably less protestant and scriptural than our own.
Indeed there are not a few of them, whom we should be far from desiring to see
coming to our communion, unless they were much more conscientious in some other
respects, than they appear to be -- The government here neither pretends nor
desires to deprive them of their religious liberty: Though, by the way, had the
government in England allowed our Forefathers the like liberty of conscience,
they would have had no occasion to take refuge in New England, from their
sufferings for nonconformity. BUT,

6. HOW good a plea soever this of conscience may be for liberty, in opposition
to all restraint or constraint in matters purely religious; yet it seems far
from a solid one as used by his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Mr.
Apthorp, in order to justify the Society in the application of so much of their
money, or even any part of it, for the support and increase of the episcopal
party among us. The reason is obvious from what has been said before: Their
whole fund and revenue are otherwise appropriated by their charter itself; viz.
to the propagating the gospel among the heathen, and to the maintenance of
God's public worship in those plantations, in which no competent provision was
before made for ministers; and in which the people, for want of the means of
religion in any protestant cammunion, seemed abandoned to atheism and
infidelity, or in imminent danger of being perverted to popery. To alienate
their revenue from these important ends, under a pretense of gratifying some
scrupulous consciences, in places where a legal and competent provision was
before made for the maintenance of ministers, and a public, protestant
religion; is a manifest abuse and perversion of that charity, even upon
supposition that these conscientious people among us were much to be pitied,
and really the objects of charity. If any persons in England, in their private
capacity, should think it a deed of charity to advance money for supporting
episcopal churches here, for the sake of those comparatively few conscientious
people, to whom the means of religion which are to be had in our protestant
communions, are NO MEANS at all, any more than Popery or Mahometanism; they
have an undoubted right to do it. But the case of the Society is essentially
different in this respect, from that of private persons: They have not the same
right to dispose of their money, that a private man has to dispose of his
property; the former being particularly appropriated to certain uses and ends,
from which it may not be alienated to any others, even though good in themselves.

THAT argument which Mr. Apthorp quotes from the great Prelate aforesaid; --
that "the charter was granted in express terms, for the maintenance of an
orthodox clergy" in the colonies; cannot be thought one of his GRACE's
"invincible reasons" which Mr. Apthorp speaks of, till it is proved that no
clergymen besides those of the church of England, can properly be called
orthodox ministers, even though they adhere to the doctrinal articles of that
church more closely than her own clergy. But enough of this before. And the
intelligent reader is now left to judge, whether Mr. Apthorp had reason to
usher in his two witnesses, as he does in the following words -- To take leave
of this popular objection with so full a confutation, that it will be
disingenuous ever to advance it again; the writer confidently rests his proof
on the unexceptionable testimony, etc. Consideration p. 18.
That he does this confidently, no one will deny; but that these testimonies
are so entirely unexceptionable in this cause, as to be a just ground for such
confidence, is far less apparent; -- especially considered as testimonies or
the party accused. But yet it is not easy to see, why he might not call in the
Society as witnesses in their own cause, with as much propriety at least, as he
had before submitted his defense of them to their own judgment and decision.
One of the witnesses, however, bishop BERKLEY, says nothing directly to the
main point, as to the missions in those colonies wherein protestant churches
were before settled: The other, his GRACE of Canterbury, does; but yet perhaps
not so convincingly, as to render it quite disingenuous ever to advance this
objection again.

SECTION XI. Of the great Good which Mr. Apthorp supposes the Society have done
by their Missionaries, in bettering the general State of Religion among us.
UPON this head the ingenious gentleman expresses himself thus. That the state
of religion among ourselves is now so much superior to what it was, when the
missions were first appointed, is, under God, so greatly the work of the
Society, that to give this reason for their withholding their protection from
our churches, is to make the success and benefit of their design, an argument
against it Considerations, p. 17.
.

1. WHO ever gave this reason for their withholding their protection from the
episcopal churches here, that the state of religion among ourselves is now so
much superior to what it was, etc? They must be strange objectors indeed, who
could object after this manner; which is the plain import of Mr. Apthorp's
words. And one may be confident, without presumption, that no person among us
ever objected against the Society's conduct, or their missionaries, that the
state of religion among us is much superior to what it was formerly; though many
have objected the direct contrary.

2. AS to the important fact which Mr. Apthorp supposes, viz. that the state of
religion here is much superior to what it formerly was; many persons who were
men of observation before either Mr. Apthorp or I was born; who have always
lived, and still are living in the country, will by no means agree with him. In
their opinion, the general state of religion in this country, is not so good as
it was "when the missions were first appointed in it;" though I will not myself
assert any thing positively upon this head. But,

3. THOUGH this fact were certainly true; yet it is by no means a clear point,
that this reformation is so greatly the work of the Society or their
missionaries, as he is pleased, in his great civility to them, to take for
granted. I might engage to bring twenty persons who think the religious state
of the country worse than it was, and who attribute this in a great measure to
the same cause to which he ascribes the reformation of it, for one that he can
produce to support his double hypothesis. But supposing the reformation real;
yet there is no reason to think that this is greatly the work of the Society,
if at all.

4. SUPPOSING the truth of both these facts; yet this will not justify the
Society in a misapplication of moneys entrusted with them; and neglecting those
places which were the direct, proper objects of their charity, according to the
charter. To plead the good done in such a case as this, however undisputed;
though it may be considered as some apology for, yet it cannot be considered as a
proper vindication of, those who did it; especially if it has occasioned the
neglect of a much greater good to the heathens, or to those colouies wherein no
tolerable provision was made for the administration of God's word and
sacraments. This plea is as invalid, as if, when a particular person is accused
of misapplying the money put into his hands expressly for the use of A,
perishing with hunger and cold; it should be alleged in his vindication, that
he had laid it out for the benefit of B; and fed and clothed him more
elegantly than he was clothed and fed before. How would this excuse him in
leaving A, the intended and proper object of the charity, to perish for want of
those things that are needful for the body? The application is easy, and cannot
be mistaken.

SECTION XII. Some farther reflections on the same Point, occasioned by the
Considerations.
BUT Mr. Apthorp descends to some particulars, in which he supposes the state
of religion among us is greatly improved by the charitable care of the Society.
"Every one," says he, who knows the history of this country must acknowledge,
that the religious state of it is manifestly improved: notwithstanding the
IMMORALITIES and defects which we lament, and wish to reform in the present
MANNERS and principles. Religion no longer wears among us that savage and
gloomy appearance, with which superstition had terribly arrayed her: its
speculative doctrines are freed from those senseless horrors with which
fanaticism had perverted them: Hypocrisy has worn off, in proportion as men
have seen the beauty of holiness: and above all, that exterminating monster
persecution, is itself exterminated both from the temper and practice of the
age. Much indeed remains to be done in MANNERS and PIETY, etc Considerations,
p. 17.
. How greatly are we indebted to the Society!

BUT yet here seems to be a concession, that the boasted reformation in the
state of religion among us, very little, if at all consists in the improvement
of our morals, manners, and piety. It is not pretended by Mr. Apthorp, that
there has been any considerable reformation in these respects, since the
missions were first appointed here, which is greatly the work of the Society.

But

HE says, Religion no longer wears among us that savage and gloomy appearance,
etc. And, not to dispute with this ingenious gentleman about small matters, it
shall be allowed, (if that is what he means) that the faces of people in
general are less grave and solemn than they were a century ago, or even since
the institution of the Society: And this improvement, it may also be conceded,
is greatly the work of the Society, by the instrumentality of those good
gentlemen the missionaries, who commonly appear with a pretty gray, debonair
and jovial countenance. But it is not quite clear from hence, that the state of
religion is now much superior to what it was before. If diverse of our
Forefathers had somewhat too long faces, and a too set, formal air; yet they
might be very pious, virtuous and worthy men. And though I would by no means deny
the venerable Society or their missionaries any praise which may justly belong
to them for contributing to the mirth, gaiety and cheerfulness of our
countenances; yet methinks the gentleman went a little two far in using the
expression SAVAGE and gloomy appearance; partly (unless I mistake his meaning)
to express his dislike to the faces of our good Fathers, some of whose pictures
he may probably have seen. And it may perhaps be worthy of his consideration,
whether this dislike might not in part be owing to the unskilfulness of the
painters of those days. But be that as it may, it might still be worthy of his
consideration, whether, since the missionaries came among us, many people are
not run into an extreme quite opposite to gloominess and preciseness, and even
to that gravity and sobriety which become the Christian character; putting on a
light, thoughtless air and behavior. He will not deny but that people may
riot, laugh and frolic, curse, swear and game too much, as well as wear too
grave and formal a countenance. Those are much worse, and more dangerous
extremes than this. And many persons that were men before either of us was
born, can attest that such excesses are, beyond all comparison, more frequent
since the church of England prevailed here, than they were before; and have
increased in some proportion to its flourishing. But, what the true cause
hereof is, supposing the fact, is another point: And, for my own part, I will
not affirm that this is greatly the work of the Society.

BUT the gentleman intimates, that the state of religion is much improved among
us, in respect of its speculative doctrines, how little soever it may be in
respect of manners and piety -- Its speculative doctrines, says he, are freed
from those senseless horrors with which fanaticism had perverted them. Let it
be here observed,

1. THAT Mr. Apthorp seems not only too harsh, but a little impolitic in giving
such an account of our Forefathers. He had just before spoken of religion among
them, as having been terribly arrayed by superstition. And here they are
represented as a parcel of wretched Fanatics, who had perverted the speculative
doctrines of religion with senseless horrors. Mr. Apthorp in his
Considerations, (p. 23.) expresses great indignation at the author of a
supposed insult on the memory of a deceased missionary; which was yet, perhaps,
no insult. But whose memory does this same gentleman now insult in so
licentious a manner? In effect, the memory of all the pious Fathers of
New England, so justly venerable and dear to their posterity, whose faith is in
substance the same with their's to this day. So that he does, in a sort, insult
the living and the dead at the same time; and not a few particular persons
only, but the people of a country in general. This, to be sure, does not seem
the likeliest way to make proselytes to the church --

2. THIS outrage is the more to be wondered at, because the gentleman does, by
natural implication, insult the Fathers and Founders of his own church at the
same time. For it is a known fact, that the speculative doctrines almost
universally received and professed in New England from first to last, are in
effect the same with those of the church of England according to her articles.
I suppose, with others, that the gentleman had here a more particular view to
the Calvinistic doctrines of original sin, justification by faith alone,
election and reprobation. In this sentiment I am confirmed by a passage in a
sermon of Mr. Apthorp, published a year or two since; wherein he expresses
himself with so much contempt and horror of those, who draw portraits of the
DEITY from the sanguinary passions of the worst men -- representing the
all-merciful Father as the tyrant of the universe, reprobating his creatures,
pre-determining their crimes, and predestinating their eternal misery: of
persons who falsely charge on Christianity opinions subversive of all moral
obligation, leading weak minds into enthusiasm and licentiousness -- of persons
by whom a just attention to the cause of virtue is reproached as derogating
from the glories of HIM, who has sanctified us with His blood; and the
justification of sinners -- is proposed in such a manner, as to render virtue
useless and even a crime: -- these horrors, etc. The Constitution of a
Christian Church, etc. p. 8. Preached at the Consecration of the new Church in
Cambridge.
I believe hardly any one who reads this passage, will doubt but that the
Calvinistic doctrines aforesaid, are those to which Mr. Apthorp refers in his
Considerations, as the speculative doctrines of our superstitious, fanatical
Forefathers; the effects of which are supposed to have been, the making them
savage and gloomy, and filling them with senseless horrors. I would not be over
confident; but yet take this to have been his true meaning. And, what the
church of England professes in her articles respecting those doctrines, the
reader may be pleased to see in the margin, where the substance of several
articles is quoted: ARTICLE IX. Of original or Birth-Sin. Original sin stands
not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly talk) but it is the
fault and corruption of the nature of every man -- and therefore in every
person that is born into this world, it deserves God's wrath and damnation --

ARTICLE XI. Of the Justification of Man. We are accounted righteous before
God, only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not
for our works or deservings --

ARTICLE XIII. Of Works before Justification. Works done before the grace of
Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God -- yea,
rather for that they are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be
done, we doubt not but that they have the nature of sin.

ARTICLE XVII. Of Predestination and Election. Predestination to life is the
everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were
laid) he has constantly decreed by his counsel, secret to us, to deliver from
curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, to
bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor. -- As
the godly consideration of predestination, and our election in Christ, is full
of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons: -- So for curious
and carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before
their eyes the sentence of God's predestination, is a most dangerous downfall,
whereby the Devil does thrust them either into desparation, or into
wretchlesness of most unclean living, no less perilous than desparation.


Whereby one may be the better able to judge of Mr. Apthorp's sincerity and
consistency in subscribing those articles as part of his faith; though it is
indeed possible that he has altered his opinion since, as a very honest man
might do. But,

3. TO speak sincerely, I own it is my private opinion, that it has been too
common a thing for people in New England to express themselves in a manner
justly exceptionable upon these points, however agreeably both to the letter
and spirit of the articles aforesaid: But yet, I believe, not more
exceptionably than many eminent divines of the Church of England did in the
last century.

4. IT is probably true, that for half a century past, many ministers and
others in New England have discoursed more cautiously upon those points than
the greater part did before; and some perhaps have run into an opposite
extreme: Which may be owing to the prevalence of the church of England amongst
us; many of whose ministers, if not the most, have long preached in a strain
almost diametrically opposite to the articles aforesaid. But upon supposition
that we are really indebted to the Society or their missionaries in any degree,
for freeing the speculative doctrines of religion amongst us, from what Mr.
Apthorp calls senseless horrors; (which will not be generally allowed) yet we
may well think it ungenerous and inconsistent in this gentleman, to revile our
Forefathers as a company of superstitious, senseless Fanatics, for adhering so
closely as they did to the doctrinal articles of the church of England.

MR. Apthorp adds, as another particular of our reformation, which is greatly
the work of the Society, that hypocrisy has worn off in proportion as men have
seen the beauty of holiness. As to which it may be observed, that we have not
more clearly seen the beauty of holiness since the prevalence of the church of
England amongst us, than it was discerned before, except perhaps by way of
contrast. He does not pretend to say, that the state of religion has been
improved here, since the missions, in respect of morals, manners or piety. So
that the holiness which he speaks of, seems to be something distinct from
these; and what sort of holiness that is, I will not pretend to conjecture. But
whereas he supposes that hypocrisy has worn off in proportion to the glorious
discovery of it in the church of England; I must observe, that the most
detestable hypocrisy in the sight of God and wise men, is that which is shown
in a zeal for rites and ceremonies, for external modes and forms; especially
uninstituted ones, the inventions of men, while the zealots are comparatively
negligent of the weightier matters of the law and gospel. Of which kind of
hypocrisy there has unquestionably been much more amongst us, since the Society
was instituted than before. But, to what this is to be ascribed, is another
question: I will not say, it is greatly the work of the Society.

Mr. Apthorp subjoins: And above all, that exterminating monster persecution,
is itself exterminated both from the temper and practice of the present age.
This he mentions as another instance in which the state of religion is
manifestly improved among us, by means of the Society and the episcopal
missions. And any one, ignorant of the country, would from hence naturally
conclude, that there had been here acts of uniformity in worship, rigorously
put in execution, till the establishment of episcopal churches in these parts:
For otherwise this is not so pertinently said, as might be expected from so
ingenious a gentleman. But this is a mistake at best: No such acts ever took
place here, so far as I have learnt. But if there were, in the early days of
the country, some instances of unjustifiable severity toward the Quakers, etc.
they were used much less under the notion of these people being dissenters from
our mode of worship, than of their being disturbers of the peace, and of our
religious assemblies; in which respects they were indeed very disorderly,
abusive, and highly culpable. Some learned and good men in England, who had not
a thorough understanding of the case, have, for this reason, passed much too
harsh a judgment on the conduct of our Forefathers; though I will not undertake
to vindicate all their conduct relative to this point. But supposing them to
have been justly chargeable with some instances of persecution; from whom? --
from what church did they learn this practice? Episcopalians, certainly, should
lay their hands upon their mouths --

MOREOVER: How blameable soever our Forefathers might have been in this
respect; yet how does it appear that our reformation therein, is greatly the
work of the Society? Nothing of that kind had been known amongst us for many
years before the Society had any missionaries among us, or was itself in being.
Nor is it a little odd that this gentleman should insinuate, that the posterity
of those who so cruelly persecuted our Fathers out of England into America,
should follow us hither to teach us charity and moderation, and to exterminate
the exterminating monster persecution from among us! Is he in jest or in
earnest? -- Wherever we learnt Christian forbearance and charity toward those
that differ from us, he may be assured we did not learn it of the church of
England; from which our beloved and honored brethren in England, even at this
day, do not in all respects find the kindest usage; being subjected to diverse
temporal inconveniences on account of their nonconformity. And notwithstanding
the gentleman says, persecution is exterminated both from the temper and
practice of the present age; I have myself heard some of the episcopalians
amongst us speak with much regret, and even indignation, of the act of
toleration, by which that of uniformity was in part repealed. Nay, it is
credibly reported, that some of the warm episcopalians here, have said, they
hoped for the time when they might shoot dissenters as freely as they might
shoot pigeons. Not a few of them discover a like spirit. Let the reader then
judge, whether the exterminating monster is entirely exterminated; and if so,
how greatly this is the work of the Society and their missionaries.

IT does not appear, upon the whole, that we are at all indebted to the Society
for the improvement of the state of religion amongst us, in any of the
instances which this gentleman mentions: It is probably in some respects,
particularly as to our morals, worse than if there had never been an episcopal
church in these parts. But upon supposition that what Mr. Apthorp says as to
this matter, was true in fact; still it must be remembered, that this is no
justification of the Society in alienating their fund and revenues from their
direct, proper ends expressed in the charter.

SECTION XIII. Farther Reflections relative to the views and Conduct of the
Society, the State of Religion in New England, and the prevalence of Episcopacy
here; with Remarks on some expressions in Dr. Bearcroft's sermon before the
Society, 1744.
DR. BEARCROFT, who has many years been Secretary to the Society, near the
beginning of his sermon before it, speaking of the design of the institution,
expresses himself in a very rhetorical style about the great charity of
bringing back their brethren in America to good manners and a christian life.
And had he spoken only of professed episcopalians, or of people in such an
heathenish state as those in some of the colonies, no one would have doubted
the charitableness of such a design. But to me it is evident that he
comprehends us Congregationalists and Presbyterians in New England, in the
terms brethren in America. Taking this for granted, it may be observed, that
how much soever we may be obliged to him for his catholicism in acknowledging
us for his brethren, notwithstanding our apostasy from episcopacy; yet we are
not much obliged to him for the insinuation, that we are sadly departed from
good manners and a christian life; so that the design of the Society to bring
us back thereto, is produced as an argument of their prodigious charity. And if
by thus bringing us back, he really intended any thing more than converting us
to episcopacy; the Society have hitherto failed very much in their charitable
design. For though their missionaries have, first and last, made a considerable
number of proselytes from our churches, many of whom needed to be bettered in
their morals; yet it may be questioned whether any of them have thereby been
brought back to good manners and a christian life: Possibly there may have been
some, though I never knew an example of it. But the examples of the contrary
are numerous: I mean, of persons whose morals, though not unexceptionable
before, were apparently much worse after their being thus episcopally
converted. It is a known fact among us, that these proselytes often become
exceeding loose, profligate, vain and censorious; seemingly placing no small
part of their religion in railing at their unconverted, i. e. congregational
and presbyterian neighbors, whose lives are christian, excepting this one
capital fault, that they go to MEETING every Lord's Day!

THE Doctor a little afterward seems to be quite in a rapture, when he says,
The word of God mightily grows and prevails in New England according to the
liturgy of the church of England. Brave indeed! What good news was this from a
far country? -- that the word of God should mightily prevail here according to
the liturgy; which he seems to consider as the standard, or the touchstone by
which the word of God was to be tried. I suppose he had lately been reading
some of the pompous, hyperbolical accounts of the missionaries concerning the
success of their pious labors. Of many of which accounts from time to time, as
to the number of their converts, baptisms, communicants, etc. I have at present
only time to say, that no person who knows any thing particularly about
America, can read them without astonishment; though the direct proof of a
negative in such cases, however false the accounts may be, is no easy matter --
Could the Doctor have truly said, that pure religion mightily prevailed in
New England according to the holy scriptures, and that the converts to the
church were generally pious, virtuous and good men, it might have been a
triumph altogether as becoming a Christian divine, as that the word of God
prevailed according to the liturgy. Or if he had said that the word, inventions
and commandments of men, mightily prevailed in New England according to the
liturgy, he might perhaps have come nearer the truth. But with some gentlemen,
it seems, the liturgy! the liturgy! is all and all. If that is embraced, from
whatever petulant, frivolous humor, or dishonorable motive, O! then to be sure
the word of God mightily grows and prevails; and every unstable son of REUBEN,
every tho'tless, giddy changeling or outcast, is, without more ado,
represented as brought back to good manners and a christian life. These
proselytes are, perhaps, spoken of in the accounts transmitted to the Society,
as persons of very good characters, of much consideration; and commended for
their penetration. I lately met with a very remarkable account of the sagacity
of some of them in one of the abstracts, and the prodigious improvement which
they had made in a short time under the documents of a missionary: It was to
this purpose; -- They had discovered that there were in the liturgy no remains
of popery and the mass book, as they had formerly supposed! -- Nor are there a
few episcopalians, who seem to have much the same opinion of that composition,
that the old Ephesians had of their famous, adored image, which, they were so
confident, fell down immediately from Jupiter; and of their church, that those
zealots had of their goddess, when they bauled by the space of two hours
together, Great is Diana of the Ephesians!

THE Doctor says afterward; The powers there in being, [i.e. in New-England]
to do them justice, had taken care for God's public worship, and erecting
schools for the education of their youth -- What occasion was there then for
the Society to maintain missions and schools here at a great expense, to the
neglect of the heathen, and of those colonies in which no such pious care was
taken by the government; which, according to their charter, were the direct,
proper objects of their charity? Is not this at best very mysterious? O, no!
the Doctor explains himself in the next words -- but not in the true orthodox
principles of the church of England. -- Sad indeed! And therefore we
Congregationalists and Presbyterians in New England, being in so much worse a
state than the others, were proportionably so much the more proper objects of
the Society's charity; to the end that the word of God might mightily grow and
prevail here according to the liturgy; whether the heathen, and those that were
but one degree better, had the word and gospel of God preached to them at all
or not -- Here the Doctor explains at least the sentiments of his own soul,
probably the views of the Society also. But can the unprejudiced even among the
episcopalians, think it a matter of equal importance to convert US to
episcopacy, and some confessedly unnecessary ceremonies, however decent, as to
propagate the knowledge of the only true God and Jesus Christ among the
heathen, or in heathenish places, where there is hardly any appearance of
religion? It were doubtless better that WE should be destitute of those
super-eminent, super-abundant, and, if I may be allowed the expression,
super-scriptural means of grace and salvation, which are to be had in the
communion of the church of England, than that any of those for whom Christ
died, should perish for want of God's own word and sacraments, or be perverted
to Popish superstition and idolatry.

IT would doubtless rejoice the Doctor's heart, if the powers here in being, in
instead of contenting themselves with taking care for God's public worship
according to his own word only, should be convinced of their error and neglect
in this respect; and for the future take care for it according to the liturgy;
Which may be about as much of an improvement upon the Bible, as some of the
Society's conduct is upon their original plan according to their charter. Yea,
I believe it would not a little refresh the good gentleman, only to hear that
the powers in being in New England, (if such a thing should ever be) on some
public occasion went in a body to church; though it were only from the same
principle that the great Syrian Captain and Courtier formerly attended his
royal master to the house of RIMMON, when he went to bow and worship there. 2
Kings Chapter VI.
The Doctor might probably consider this as an indication, that they were
gradually coming off from their stifness and preciseness; possibly conclude,
that in their hearts they condemned their Forefathers separation from the
church of England; and intended to lead the rising generation into an opinion,
that the differences betwixt that communion and ours are quite inconsiderable.
How might this exalt his hopes into a plerophory? And what a sure presage would
it be, that the glorious era was nigh at hand, when the word of GOD should
still more mightily grow and prevail in New England according to the liturgy!
--

SECTION XIV. That the Society have long had a formal design to root out
Presbyterianism, etc. and to establishing both Episcopacy and Bishops in the
colonies: In pursuance of which favorite project, they have in a great measure
neglected the important ends of their institution.
IT is hardly possible to account for the Society's conduct, without supposing
them to have had such a design; and this being once supposed, it will serve to
explain, and show the consistency thereof; not indeed with the charter, but
with itself. And as to the truth of the fact, that they have long had this
design; such evidence shall now be produced, as may in this case be deemed the
best, their own.

IN the Account of the Society, published 1706, which has been mentioned
before, after speaking of the "independent congregations" in New England, they
say: Several other ways of division and separation did so much obtain in other
of our colonies and plantations, that this made it more necessary to think of
providing for a regular and orthodox ministry to be sent and settled amongst
them; to remove those prejudices under which the people generally labored, and
to promote, as much as possible, an AGREEMENT in faith and worship -- Account,
etc. p. 11.
This can mean nothing more or less than uniformity, or a general conformity to
the doctrine, discipline and worship of the church of England: Which seems to
have been what some had in view, even before the institution of the Society;
though there is nothing in the charter which countenances the propagation of the
church of England, in opposition to other protestant churches; as before
observed.

IN the same Account they say, They have been careful of recommending the
discipline of the church of England, as far as the constitution of those
countries will possibly admit. The want of a Bishop or suffragan in those parts
was often complained of -- And this matter has been carried as far as the
difficulties in it would hitherto allow, and is under such farther solicitation
and advances, that we hope shortly to see a happy success of it. In the mean
time, all young students in those parts, who desire episcopal ordination, are
invited into England; and their expenses in coming and returning are to be
defrayed by the Society. P. 74.


IN the Abstract printed 1711, they say, It having been frequently represented
to the Society, that there is great want of a Bishop to govern those
missionaries, whom the Society has or shall, from time to time, send over to
New England, -- as well as the rest of the clergy in those and the adjacent
colonies; and to ordain others, and to confirm the children of the clergy and
laity; this matter has been most seriously considered of, and is yet depending
before the Society, and in the mean time, and till they can bring it to bear,
they are looking out for the best and most commodious place, -- to fix the Sea
for the said Bishop. -- Abstract 1711. p. 27. 28.


DR. KENNET, a member of the Society, part of whose letter to Dr. COLMAN was
quoted before, says in another paragraph, It is our being misinformed and
misguided in some ways, that increases our desires of having Bishops settled in
those foreign parts committed to our care -- I hope your churches would not be
jealous of it, etc.

IN the Abstract printed 1715, the Society say, After all, upon the renewed
instances from the governors of provinces, ministers, vestries, and private
persons in the plantations, for settling ecclesiastical Superiors there,
without whom the church must rather decrease than increase; and from a full
conviction of the expediency thereof, Bishops being never more wanted there
than now; the Society's endeavors have been employed, not without expense this
year, in paving the way for such, by all proper applications, and due
preparations: Not to mention what has been formerly done in this matter, P. 52.
etc. -- And by way of preparation for a Suffragan, or Bishop, in one of the
Sees upon the continent of America; the Society having thought fit to purchase
a seat for his residence some while since at 600 l. sterling expense, p. 54.
etc. There are several pages of this Abstract filled with this affair of
Bishops in America. Later Abstracts and other records might easily be produced,
in order to show what a favorite object this has been with the Society. And
one standing instruction of the Society to their missionaries, is in these
remarkable words, viz. X. That they frequently visit their respective
parishioners; those of our own communion, to keep them steady in the profession
and practice of religion, as taught in the church of England; and those that
oppose us, or dissent from us, to CONVINCE and RECLAIM them, etc. This clearly
shows what they are after. It will also be observed here, that WE are
considered as PARISHIONERS of the missionaries, no less than professed
episcopalians: And we are often spoken of AS SUCH by them in their letters to
the Society, as appears by the Abstracts. How assuming is this! --

THE affair of Bishops has lately been, and probably now is in agitation in
England. And we see the Society spare neither endeavors, applications, nor
expense, in order to effect their grand design of episcopizing (if I may use
the term) all New England, as well as the other colonies. And it is supposed by
many, that a certain superb edifice in a neighboring town, was even from the
foundation designed for the Palace of one of the humble successors of the
apostles.

BUT however that matter may be, the following things are evident:

1. THAT the Society have long had a formal design to dissolve and root out all
our New England churches; or, in other words, to reduce them all to the
episcopal form; or, in the words of their own Account, before cited, to
promote, as much as possible an agreement [uniformity] in faith and worship --

2. THIS fully and clearly accounts for their being so ready to encourage small
episcopal parties all over New England, by sending them missionaries, etc.
although the people had the means of religion already, in other protestant
communions. For these handfuls of people, scattered here and there, it is
supposed, or at least hoped, will in time, by some means or other, become
considerable for numbers; and at length eat out, or absorb all our churches.

BUT supposing them finally to carry this favorite point, at a vast expense,
as I hope in God they never will; yet one would think it impossible even for
themselves to imagine, that the interest of religion in the colonies would be a
quarter part so much served hereby, as if they had employed this money in those
ways which are plainly pointed out in the charter, and from which they have
alienated it. Is the effecting an exact uniformity among us in discipline,
modes of worship, ceremonies, etc. an object worthy of any attention or
expense, in comparison with that of maintaining a public worship in places
destitute thereof, or the conversion of the heathen! Can wise men, free from
bigotry and the spirit of party, possibly think it is, though they are themselves
episcopalians in sentiment?

SECTION XV. That by supporting little Episcopal Parties in New England, and
endeavoring to convert Presbyterians, etc. to the Church of England, contrary
to the whole spirit of the Charter, the Society have actually defrauded the
People who were the proper Objects of their Charity.
IF the Society's fund, together with the annual collections, legacies, etc.
had been more than adequate to the real exigencies of those people, who were
indisputably the proper objects of that charitable institution; and they had
applied only the surplusage for the support and encouragement of the episcopal
party in New England, in opposition to presbyterians, etc. their conduct would
have been much less exceptionable than it is: Since, upon this supposition,
others would not have been injured by such an application. Though even in this
case, it might well be questioned whether their conduct would have been
entirely justifiable; because their charter warrants neither their receiving
nor expending any money for supporting any one party whatsoever amongst
protestants, in opposition to another; but only for the common cause of
Christianity, in opposition to atheism, infidelity and popery. But the Society
have by no means thus abounded in money. They have been making great complaints
for half a century past, how streightened they were for money; how much their
annual expenses exceeded their certain annual income. Dr. HUTTON, bishop of
Bangor, in his sermon before the Society 1745, (p. 24.) says, they have borne
an expense frequently more than five times equal to their certain annual
income. These representations have been very pathetically made from time to
time, in order to induce good people of all denominations to assist them in so
pious a work, as that of supporting the public worship of God in those colonies
which must otherwise be destitute of it, and propapating the gospel among the
poor Negroes and Indians. This shall at any time be proved at large by
quotations from the sermons, and other publications of the Society, if any
person of reputation denies it, as I am confident no one will presume to do.
And yet, while these loud, and almost tragical complaints have been making, the
Society have been expending large sums every year in New England, quite beyond
the design of their institution, to support and increase the episcopal party as
such; greatly to the neglect of the Southern colonies upon the continent, the
Indians bordering upon us, the West India islands, and the many thousands of
Negro slaves in them; all of which and whom were the direct proper objects of
their charity; and whose names were made use of most pathetically to excite
compassion in, and draw money from well disposed people of every denomination!
It needs no proof, that by how much more was done by the Society for the
support of the episcopal party here; by so much less must unavoidably have been
done for the heathen, or for the colonies in a state but little better than
that of heathenism. And if the Society cannot, in this respect, be said to have
"robbed other churches," to ease and gratify the episcopalians here; yet they
may be said to have robbed the heathen, the slaves, and heathenish colonies
aforesaid; who had an exclusive right, according to the charter, to the benefit
of that very money which has been sunk in the episcopal gulf here, where the
people actually "had the means of religion in other protestant communions." He
that can consider these facts, and such a flagrant abuse of a noble
institution, without admiration, has doubtless that qualification which the
poet speaks of, as the most essential foundation of happiness -- Nil admirari
prope res est una, Numici,
Solaque quae prossit facere and servare beatum.


EVEN upon supposition that the Society has such an extraordinary
"discretionary power" as Mr. Apthorp speaks of; (which will hereafter be
considered) so that they cannot be justly charged with violating their charter,
by expending their money for the support of an episcopal party in New England,
to the prejudice of other colonies, etc. or if they have a legal right to act
thus; yet in how extraordinary and unaccountable a manner do they use that
supposed right and power? Can any wise and candid man, who allows the main
facts and circumstances as before represented, possibly think the interests of
CHRIST's kingdom so much served in this way, as they might have been by a
different conduct in the Society? If they are not, this is certainly a
misapplication both of their charity and their power, in some degree. For
whatever powers or moneys the Society are entrusted with, they were to be
employed in such a manner as should most effectually answer the ends expressly
mentioned in their charter. And they have all along professed to apply their
fund and revenues in such a manner as should be likely to do the most good, and
best to serve the general interest of religion in the colonies, and adjacent
countries. That they have not done so, but alienated their revenues from a
truly noble to a comparatively mean, narrow, party design, is as certain as any
thing of this nature can be: Though I would by no means be understood as charging
so respectable a BODY with any wilful, criminal abuse of power, or
misapplication of moneys.

SECTION XVI. Of the good that might probably have been done, had the Moneys
which have been misapplied in supporting the Episcopal Party in New England,
been applied according to the true and noble Design of the Institution.
IT is no inconsiderable sum that the Society have sunk in the episcopal gulf
here in New England, quite beyond, and therefore contrary to, the design of
their institution; there being no medium, as has before been observed, betwixt
a right application of their fund, conformable to their charter, and a
perversion of it. According to the Abstract 1730, L. 705 sterling was expended
on the missions, etc. in New England. In 1739, the sum was L. 1030 sterling.
And in 1761, the latest Abstract which I have been able to procure, it was L.
1270. These disbursements, it must be remembered, are exclusive of books to be
distributed, and other incidental charges. So that, according to a moderate
calculation, there may have been about L.1200 sterling expended by the Society
for N. England, one year with another, for 32 years past; amounting to 38,400
And about L.200 per Annum for 20 years preceding 1730, amounting to 4,000
Total Er. excepted, 42,400 sterling.

BUT then a deduction is to be made on account of that part of this sum which
may have been expended conformably to the design of the charter, in supporting
the public worship in some places in N. England, particularly Rhode Island
government, where the Society's charity was needed. If we deduct L.7400, there
has been about 35,000 sterling, misapplied in N. England, according to the
reasoning in the proceeding sections. I shall take the liberty to go upon this
supposition, though I do not pretend to be very exact as to the quantum; I
believe it is not less than that. The benefit of this sum then, other persons,
the Negro slaves, Indians and heathenish colonies, have been deprived of; though
the money was as it were collected in their name, or with a profession of
employing it in their service.

NOW let it be considered, how much good might probably have been done to the
souls of these people, the direct, proper objects of this charity, had the
aforesaid sum of 35,000 sterling. been duly applied in maintaining and propagating
christianity among them, instead of being laid out to support and increase the
episcopal party in those towns of N. England, in which people had the means of
religion already, in other protestant communions. Forty or fifty missions
might, with this sum, have been comfortably maintained among the heathen, and
in heathenish places, every year, for more than thirty years past; and a
considerable number for several years antecedent thereto. It is well known that
in some of the Southern colonies, there are large districts of 10, 20, 30, and
40 miles extent, and I think more, wherein there is no public worship of any
kind regularly kept up, for want of ministers; in which colonies there are also
many Roman-catholics and slaves. And their state, to this day, answers very
exactly to the description in the charter, of those places which are therein
marked out as the objects of this charitable institution. The same in general
is applicable to some of our West India islands, all which so much abound with
Negro slaves.

LET us suppose then, that about one half the aforesaid sum had been employed
in supporting missions and schools in those colonies, and the other half among
the Indians bordering upon us. How much good might probably have been done, by
keeping up some form of religion, and giving a check at least to infidelity,
vice and barbarity in the former; and by propagating the knowledge of true
religion amongst the latter? In what degree it might have pleased almighty God
to succeed these missions, it is indeed impossible for man particularly to say.
But such an application of the money would unquestionably have been right and
proper, according to the charter: And the design had at least been charitable,
noble and laudable, whatever the success had been. Nor is there any reason to
doubt in general, but that some, yea, great good would have been done, if all
the misapplied money had been discretely expended in these ways. The general
state of religion in those colonies would, in all probability, have been much
better at this day than it is. Many persons might have been restrained from
open vice and impiety; not a few brought to a serious sense and practice of
religion; a great number of the Negro slaves in, and the Indians near the
colonies, brought to some hopeful knowledge of God and his truth had as many
pious, and duly qualified missionaries been sent to one and the other, for
thirty or forty years past, as might have been tolerably subsisted on the
aforesaid sum, which has been very little, if any thing better than thrown
away; yea, which many think really worse than thrown away, all circumstances
considered. Nor am I either ashamed or afraid to own myself of this latter
opinion; being persuaded that there is less real religion now in those parts of
N. England where it has been expended, than there would have been, had it been
sunk in the ocean instead of the episcopal gulf here: Though it is not to be
supposed that any episcopalians can be of this opinion; neither is any stress
laid upon it in the present argument. But even allowing that some good has been
done by converting a number of presbyterians, etc. to the church of England;
yet what sober and candid person can possibly imagine, that the common cause of
christianity has been a tenth part so much served hereby, as might have been
reasonably expected from a different application of this money, in ways
directly and indisputably agreeable to the intent of the charter? What the
venerable Society may think of these things, I cannot pretend to say: But I
know, many wise and good men think they have reason to bless God, that they are
not themselves to give an account to him for such managements; and that the
blood of so many as have probably perished thereby, will not be required at
THEIR hands.

SECTION XVII. Farther Reflections on the Society's neglecting the Southern
Colonies and the Indians; and a particular Instance of the latter, with Respect
to the Iroquois, or Five (alias Six) Nations.
THOUGH I will not affirm it for truth, yet I have been very credibly informed,
that the people in some of the Southern colonies, and particularly in those
parts of N. Carolina which were entirely destitute of ministers, have made
earnest and repeated applications to the Society for missionaries to be sent to
them; sometimes without any answer at all, for years together; and at last
without success. And some solid, sensible and serious persons from that
country, with whom I conversed in Boston several years ago, I think gave me the
same account: But whether they did or not, I know they made such a
representation of their sad state for want of ministers, and expressed so
serious a desire of having the public worship of God introduced among them,
that at this very moment it is not in my power to refrain from tears in
reflecting on it -- What they told me, at least confirms in some measure the
report aforesaid, concerning the ineffectual solicitations from thence to the
Society; who perhaps had it not in their power to comply therewith, by reason
of the large expense which they were at in the noble design of supporting and
increasing little episcopal parties, or factions, here and there in N. England.
And according to the Abstract, 1761, the Society had only five missionaries in
the whole country of N. Carolina, while they had about thirty in N. England;
chiefly in the most populous towns of it, where a due and legal provision was
made for the support of ministers, and the public worship of God!

AS to the Indians; no one can doubt but that there have been, and still are,
some great, discouragements in attempting to christianize them. But, according
to diverse appearances, the Society have had this work less at heart than that
of propagating the peculiarities of episcopacy and the liturgy in N. England,
in opposition to presbyterianism and congregationalism. The neglect of the
Natives in America, has long been complained of, and the accusation in some
sort allowed to be just by themselves, in times past. This will appear in part
from Bp. WILLIAMS's sermon before the Society, 1705. But whilst we find fault
with others, says he, we must not forget our own. It has been the continual
matter of reproach to us, that this application to the Natives has been
neglected on our part. Where are the numbers you have converted to the
Christian faith? Where the fruits of your religion? when you have under your
care those vast dominions which are called the English empire; and from whence
you draw so much of your emoluments to enrich and pleasure yourselves at home.
This is an objection that has its weight, and perhaps is incapable of a just
and sufficient answer. Recriminations are but a kind of confession of guilt:
And the best way to answer, is, to mend what is amiss in ourselves -- 1 Edit.
p. 32.
.

IT is unnecessary to confirm and justify this complaint by an appeal to any of
the later sermons before the Society; which would be no difficult matter. Some
essays they have indeed made from time to time, toward the conversion of the
Savages: but they seem to have been very faint and feeble; and with a sparing
hand as to money, when compared with the goodness and importance of the work,
or the difficulties to be expected in it; with the zeal of our French
neighbors to christianize, or rather popize the Indians, and even with their
own zeal and expenses in order to episcopize the Congregationalists and
Presbyterians of N. England. I am not ignorant however, that they and their
missionaries have frequently given the world sufficiently pompous accounts of
their efforts in order to the conversion of the Indians; not to say, spoken
somewhat hyperbolically of the real and great difficulties attending this work.
Though I doubt not but that the Society kept to the accounts given them by their
missionaries; who seem to have been less indefatigable, and sooner discouraged
in their labors among the Indians than among Us. And though the following remark
of Dr. DOUGLASS, a very attentive and capable observer of what passed in the
colonies, is not literally true of all the missionaries in America, yet it
deserves notice here: The missionaries from the Society, says he, do not in the
least attempt the conversion of the Indians, because it requires travel, labor
and hardship. Summary Historical and Political, etc. Vol. II. p. 118.


IT is certain from authentic records, even from several publications of the
Society, that the Five, alias Six nations, a respectable and warlike people on
the Frontiers of N. York and Pennsylvania, and long the terror of all the other
Indians from Florida to the n. west of Canada, have not only been our good
friends and allies all along, but for more than half a century past, very
favorably disposed toward Christianity; at least toward entertaining
missionaries among them, which was a very important point gained. Their chiefs
have even petitioned for them repeatedly; of which the Society was duly
advertised by the Governor of N. York, as appears from the Abstracts, etc. Nor
have they been wholly neglected by the Society; than which, it is apprehended,
little more can be said, notwithstanding all that Mr. Apthorp has written
concerning their "unwearied zeal in this attempt Consid., p 15, 16.
". In speaking of this matter, Mr. Apthorp has referred to Dr. BARCLAY, now a
missionary in the city of N. York; who was for a time a missionary to these
Indians. It will not therefore be improper to observe a few things relative to
that worthy gentleman's mission to the Iroquois, or Six Nations aforesaid, as a
specimen of the Society's zeal for the conversion of the Indians The following
facts relative to Mr. now Dr. Barclay's Indian mission, are taken from the
Historical Memoirs relating to the Housatonnuk Indians, and the excellent Mr.
Sergeant, a Missionary to the latter from another Society: By the Rev. S.
Hopkins, A. M. a gentleman of undoubted veracity, Page 66, etc.
.

IN the year 1738 Mr. SERGEANT, the then very worthy missionary to a tribe of
Indians on our western frontiers, employed by the Boston-commissioners of the
Society for the propagation of the gospel in N. England, and the parts adjacent
in America, incorporated Anno 1661; a (Society which pursues the true end of
its institution) wrote the following letter to the Hon. and Rev. commissioners
his employers, relative to Mr. BARCLAY and his mission. -- "I had just now a
letter," says he, from Mr. BARCLAY, a young gentleman of Albany, lately arrived
from London with a mission from the Society for the propagation of the Gospel
in foreign parts, to the Mohawks N. B. The Mohawks are a principal Tribe of the
Iroquois, or Six Nations.
West of Albany; who tells me he has but a scanty allowance, (i.e. from the
Society) and could obtain NO salary for an interpreter, or schoolmaster: and
that he has thoughts of applying to the commissioners at Boston for assistance;
but would have my advice first. I cannot tell what stock the corporation has;
but I suppose it is scanty, by the allowances they afford their missionaries.
However, I could heartily recommend Mr. BARCLAY to the notice and favor of the
commissioners. He is a worthy gentleman, and well deserves encouragement in his
undertaking, etc.

THE Rev. Mr. HOPKINS, after quoting this letter in his Memoirs, says: That the
reader may be sensible what a prospect there was of Mr. BARCLAY's being
eminently serviceable among the Mohawks, if he had been duly encouraged; I
shall (asking Mr. BARCLAY's pardon) show by transcribing some passages
contained in his letter to Mr. SERGEANT. The following are from a letter wrote
before he went for orders, and dated in his school at Fort-Hunter, June 11,
1736. The quotations stand thus in the Memoirs aforesaid.

I am heartily glad to hear of your success; I pray God more abundantly to
bless and succeed your labors: and may you enjoy abundant satisfaction in the
discharge of your function here, and a glorious reward hereafter. I bless God I
have no reason to despair of success in my mission. They daily become more and
more desirous of instruction; and would, in all probability, make great
progress both in the knowledge and practice of Christianity, were proper
methods taken to instruct them. But I labor under great disadvantage for want
of an interpreter; so that I cannot tell what progress they may make in
knowledge, nor can I proceed regularly in my instructions; and I must despair
of obtaining a perfect knowledge of their language, without the assistance of
an interpreter, which could I but enjoy for the space of two or three years, I
doubt not but that I should be master of it; and should take greater pleasure
and satisfaction in the discharge of my duty. Nevertheless I have the comfort
of seeing a very great and daily reformation of manners among them, which is
indeed the end of all our endeavors -- I am almost amazed at the progress the
youth make in reading and writing their own language. All the young men from 20
to 30 years, constantly attend school when at home, and will leave a frolic
rather than miss. Sundry of them write as good a hand as myself ( which was
very fair and good) -- As to the encouragement I have, for aught I see yet, I
must expect my reward in another world. I have now been here almost a year and
half, but have never received a farthing from any body. The Assembly voted me
thirty pounds for two years; but by reason of -- I am not like to get it till a
Governor comes over; and have no great hope of farther encouragement from them.
[N. B. This relates to the government of N. York.]

As for the Society, they have allowed me thirty pounds for one year: What
further encouragement they will give me, I know not. In the mean time I am at
great charges. My board is six shillings a week, which is not above half my
necessary expense.

MORE than two years after Mr. BARCLAY had taken Orders, he wrote thus in
another letter dated at Albany Aug. 21, 1740. I am satisfied I should have much
greater success, if I had a schoolmaster and interpreter. I had the
satisfaction last Lord's day to preach to a number of the Six Nations, who came
to this town to treat with the Governor, who also was present; and has taken a
great deal of pains to countenance my design. My Mohawk congregation behaved so
well, that all the auditory were exceedingly delighted. I assure you I have the
cause at heart, and am well persuaded of your zeal. --

FROM the foregoing representation it is evident, that a wide door was opened
for the gospel to enter among those heathen tribes; The fields were white unto
the harvest, had but laborers been sent, and duly encouraged to the noble
work. These tribes would probably have been in general professed Christians
before this day, had the business been duly forwarded and encouraged. Which
might perhaps, by reason of the great fame of the Iroquois, have had a very
extensive and happy influence on many other nations. But, alas! the Society,
though so desirous of christianizing the natives, could not afford salaries to a
schoolmaster and interpreter, of perhaps about L.20 or L.30 sterling each; nor
to Mr. BARCLAY himself, who was so zealous in this good cause, half a proper
support! Why not? The reason was apparently this; that they supported so many
missionaries here in N. England at a great expense, for the encouragement of
the episcopal party, and in order to convert us to the liturgy. If so great a
proportion of their revenue had not been thus unprofitably sunk in places where
God's word and sacraments were duly administered, how easy would it have been
for them to support 5, 6, or more missionaries, and as many interpreters and
schoolmasters among the Iroquois? Mr. Apthorp speaking of the "promising
appearance" there was among the Iroquois about this time, says, -- From the
latest authorities -- we find this mission either much dwindled, or greatly
interrupted. Consid. p. 16.
-- No wonder, when the mission itself was so starved. The Indians doubtless,
perceived how remiss the English were in the cause, so that they could hardly
think them in earnest; and the French jesuits, or other emissaries, no question
made their advantage of this negligence. Can it be expected that missions will
succeed, which are conducted after such a manner? -- This specimen may perhaps
serve to explain and confirm what Mr. Apthorp says, where he introduces the
affair the Mohawks; -- Indian conversions are undertaken by our Society
incidentally, and as it were ex abundanti p. 15.
. They have indeed been undertaken -- as it were; but the words ex abundanti,
methinks, sound but odly here. And to reconcile what he immediately subjoins,
with plain facts, even with relation to this very mission which he so much
glories in, is impossible -- "Yet," says he, have they omitted no opportunity
of promoting this pious work, as far as they found it practicable. N. B. There
have lately been two missionaries sent to the Six Nations from the Boston, at
the expense of the other London Society, and the Society in Scotland for
propagating Christian knowledge. And the accounts received from them, as to the
temper and disposition in which they find the Indians, are very encouraging,
notwithstanding all the pretenses, that it is a vain thing to attempt the
christianizing of Savages. If there had been as much zeal for converting them
to Christ, as there has been for converting Us to episcopacy, the real
obstacles in the way of it would have doubtless appeared less formidable than
they have been represented.


SECTION XVIII. Of the important political ends that might have been answered,
had the Society taken due care to send proper Missionaries to the Indians; and
the pernicious Consequences of their Neglect.
THE author of these observations is sensible that worldly politics, and
temporal things were not the direct objects of this institution; but the
promotion of true religion, and the eternal happiness of men. However, these
things often stand in a close connection, and are in a measure interwoven with
each other. And the Society's prosecuting that important part of their plan,
the conversion of the heathen bordering on our American colonies, would at the
same time have answered very valuable ends of a political nature. This, one
would think, was an additional obligation lying upon them to do so, instead of
neglecting it for the sake of converting us to the liturgy, in the manner they
have done. That such ends would, in all probability, have been answered
thereby; and that this neglect has been attended with very fatal consequences
in a civil consideration of things, may appear from the following remarks.

IT is known that the Indian nations lie on the back of our settlements, from
N. Scotia Northward, round to the West and S. West as far as Georgia and
Florida. And had early and due care been taken by the Society to send as many
missionaries among them, as could have been subsisted on the money so
unprofitably sunk in N. England; it would have had a direct and manifest
tendency to attach them to the British interest. Had this L.35,000 sterling. or
the greater part of it, been employed in maintaining a number of sensible,
discrete ministers among the Indians, and enabling them to make them small
presents from time to time, in order to gain their esteem and good will, it
might probably have been the means, not only of giving them at least some
favorable impressions of Christianity in general, but of the protestant
religion; and so making the greater part of them our fast friends.

And there was the more occasion for taking this course, in order to
counter-act the designs of the French, till of late our dangerous enemies and
rivals on this continent. They, if not from a principle of piety, yet of sound
policy, have all along made a point of sending jesuits, priests and other
emissaries to all the Indian tribes that would admit them. It is evident that
the Society were not ignorant of these circumstances; which were well known the
British court, even before the charter was granted; and in all probability,
were one reason of its being granted. It may be added, that the Society did,
from the first, profess to have a regard to them. The following extracts from
the Account of the Society, will serve at once to throw light upon this affair,
and to render their neglect the more unaccountable. They say, Nor has the
Society been unmindful of using their utmost endeavors for propagating the
gospel among the heathen Indians and slaves in and near our plantations. They
received with great satisfaction a letter from the Lords commissioners of trade
and plantations, directed to the Ld. arch. bp. of Canterbury, signifying, That
the earl of Bellamont had several times represented to them the great want of
some ministers of the church of England, to instruct the Five Nations of
Indians on the frontiers of N. York, and prevent their being practiced upon by
French priests and jesuists. -- At the same time the Lords commissioners
imparted to his Grace, and to the Lord bp. of London, some farther advice upon
the subject -- in particular this remarkable extract of what was said by One in
the name of the rest of the Sachems -- to the commissioners for the Indian
affairs in Albany, June 28, 1700 -- Says he, We are now come to trade; and not
to speak of religion. Only thus much I must say, all the while I was here,
before I went to Canada, I never heard any thing talked of religion, or the
least mention made of converting us to the Christian faith. And we shall be
glad to hear, if at last you are so piously inclined to take pains to instruct
your Indians in the Christian religion. I will not say but that it may induce
some to return to their native country. I wish it had been done sooner, that
you had had ministers to instruct your Indians in the Christian faith, etc.
`This representation,' the Society add, was laid before the Queen in council;
from whence his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury reported this order.

At the Court at St. James's, etc.

Upon reading this day at the Board a representation -- setting forth, among
other things, that as to the Five Nations bordering on New York, lest the
intrigues of the French in Canada, and the influence of their priests, who
frequent and converse, and sometimes inhabit with those Indians, should debauch
them from her Majesty's allegiance, their Lordships are humbly of opinion --
that two protestant ministers be appointed, etc. The Society add, Upon
communicating this order to the Society, it was immediately agreed, that it
should be referred to a committee, etc. Account, etc. p. 38 -- 41. printed 1706.


THE chief design of this quotation, is to show how early and fully the Society
were apprised of the intrigues of the French with the Indians on this
continent, and the importance of counter-acting their designs, in a political
as well as religious consideration of things. These things they have known all
along, from the very foundation of the Society. And yet, that they have done
hardly any thing toward the conversion of the Indians; and either could not or
would not allow even an interpreter or Schoolmaster to Mr. BARCLAY, is equally
certain: Their object, to all appearance, having been rather the extirpation of
presbyterianism and congregationism from the colonies, than the planting of
Christanity among the Indians; whereby they might at once have been
instrumental of saving many souls, and doing an important service to
Great Britain.

HAD the Society applied the money which they have sunk in New England, (in a
way quite unauthorized by their charter) to the support of missions among the
Indians, it is quite probable, as was intimated before, that the greater part
of those bordering on our colonies might long since have received very
favorable impressions of the Christian, protestant religion, and been amicable
to us. We should of course have had a much larger share of the profitable trade
with them, which has been almost engrossed by the French. And, as many of them
might have been in a degree civilized at the same time, and brought into the
English way of living; they would of course have taken off a greater quantity
of British manufactures, and other commodities, to the national advantage. The
lives of great numbers of British subjects in the plantations, destroyed by the
Savages from time to time, would have been saved. The colonies which have been
kept in terror, and stunted in their growth, their frontiers having often been
quite cut off, or broken up, would have been in a much more flourishing
condition than they are at present. And most of these Indians, instead of being
at the command of the French, to cut our throats and scalp us, whenever they
thought proper; might have been ready to act for us against them, on any just
occasion.

THESE are some of the important political ends that might probably have been
answered, had the Society thought proper to send missionaries among the
Indians, (whose conversion they have all along declared to be a principal, though
not a primary object with them) instead of sinking so much money in the
episcopal gulf in New England. And when we also consider how duly they have
been advertised of the French intrigues from time to time, and of the
importance of counter-acting them; it is not easy to say, whether their piety
or their patriotism is the most conspicuous, with relation to this part of
their conduct. And, whether their affection for, and strong attachment to the
peculiarities of a party, are not at least as conspicuous as either of them,
the reader who is not afraid to think, is left to judge from the whole series
of facts and circumstances.

SECTION XIX. Of the discretionary Power of the Society, and Mr. Apthorp's
Reasoning thereon.
THE ingenious Mr. Apthorp, to whom I must now again pay my devoirs, urges the
large discretionary power of the Society, in order to vindicate their conduct.
The passage to which I refer, seems to have something so very curious in it,
that I cannot but quote it at large for the entertainment of the reader.

"IT is observable," says he, that a large discretionary power is left to the
Society, to regulate their institution, and even occasionally to make
ALTERATIONS in it, in such a manner as to render it most beneficial to
religion, whether in our colonies, or among the bordering nations. For this
purpose, they and their successors for ever are empowered to make any laws or
constitutions that shall seem reasonable, profitable or requisite for the good
estate and government of the Society, and the effectual promoting its
charitable design. Thus, with an evidence beyond exception, it appears that
their conduct in placing churches AMONG US, is in all respects CONFORMABLE to
their institution -- Consid. p. 12.


1. IT is to be observed, that Mr. Apthorp here refers to that part of the
charter which relates to bylaws; but in quoting which (p. 10.) he has
transposed some clauses and omitted others, without giving notice of it to his
readers in the usual way. However, since in his own way of quoting it, there
does not seem to be any very material alteration in the sense; it will not be
worth while to compare the quotation and charter together, merely for the sake
of showing some of his harmless errors. But had a reputed Scholar quoted any
disputed passage in LIVY, TACITUS or CICERO, in the manner in which this
gentleman quoted another part of the charter, before taken notice of; it would
have been no easy matter for him ever to regain his reputation in the learned
world. Whether misquoting the charter in this controversy, is not an offense of
a much higher nature, is submitted to the judgment of the impartial reader.

2. IT seems a pretty extraordinary position, that any incorporated Society
should have power by their charter, to make alterations in their institution.
If this Society has any such, Mr. Apthorp was doubtless right in speaking of it
as a large discretionary power! For is not a power to make alterations in their
institution, equivalent to a power to alter their institution itself; -- to
depart in a great measure from the original plan according to the charter, and
to pursue ends different from those which are expressed therein? And what
corporation ever had so large a discretionary power as this?

3. BY laying claim to such an extraordinary power for the Society, and making
use of this as an argument to justify their conduct, Mr. Apthorp seems to allow
that they stand in need or it for that purpose. The gentleman surely would not
have had recourse to such a supposed wonderful power vested in the Society, if
their conduct could be reconciled with the most plain, obvious sense of the
charter.

4. THIS is, in effect, though not expressly, a concession that the Society have
actually made alterations in their institution: and have really been pursuing
designs not expressly authorized by the charter. That this is fact, I am far
from denying. But the gentleman well knows, that the questions de facto and de
jure, are very different: And if he can clear up that of right, as plainly as I
flatter myself I have and shall do that of fact, our debate will be half
finished. But still it must be remembered, that though the Society had
confessedly a power to make alterations in their institution, by neglecting
some ends thereof particularly mentioned in the charter, and pursuing others
not mentioned; yet unless they are supposed infallible and impeccable, these
alterations may be for the worse. That the alterations which they have made,
are for the better, will not follow, as he seems to suppose, from their having
had a legal power to make them. Allowing the power, if by altering they mend
their institution, they are doubtless to be praised in that respect: But
whatever power they may have, if they pejorate their institution, and pursue
comparatively mean and low ends, instead of the noble ones expressed in the
charter, Mr. Apthorp will not deny but that this is an error of judgment at
best, and a real abuse of their power. Whoever would fully vindicate the
Society, must prove, not only that they are actually invested with such a
power, but that they have used it discretely and wisely; so as most effectually
to answer the general and excellent end of their institution: To allege power
only in their vindication, is not giving reasonable satisfaction to those who
may except against their conduct: Because even a legal power may be abused, or
a discretionary power misapplied. But,

5. THE charter contains no expression equivalent or similar to this, of a
power left to the Society to make alterations in their institution. The
strongest expressions used therein, relative to the power given them, are these
-- The said Society shall and may consult, determine, constitute, ordain and
make any constitutions, laws, ordinances and statutes whatsoever; as also
execute leases for years, as aforesaid, which to them, or the major part of
them then present, shall seem reasonable, profitable or requisite, for,
touching or concerning the good estate, rule, order and government of the said
corporation, and the more effectual promoting the said charitable designs. Now
is there any thing here, that is in the least similar to a power of making
alterations in their institution? -- or a right to apply their fund in any
manner whatever, not expressed in their charter? So far from it, that,

6. THE Society are, by this very part of the charter which, it is pretended,
gives them such an extraordinary power, limited and confined to those ends or
objects, which had before been expressly mentioned as the ends of the
institution. For the power here granted them to make constitutions, laws, etc.
is, in express terms, in order to "the more effectual promoting the said
charitable designs." And what, in the name of charity, are they? Is any one of
them, the supporting and increasing little episcopal parties and factions in
those colonies, where due and legal provision was before made for the public
worship of God; and where the people "had the means of religion already, in
other protestant communions?" -- and this to the manifest prejudice of those
colonies in which no such provision was made for the administration of God's
word and ordinances; -- of the Negro slaves and Savages! I ask again, whether
this is one of the said charitable designs? If it is, then the Society have
unquestionably a right to make constitutions, laws, etc. in order to the more
effectual promoting it: But if not, what can be less pertinent and
satisfactory, than to allege the large discretionary power given them, to
justify their conduct in this respect? And how did this inventive gentleman
come to talk of a power to make alterations in their institution? What that
institution is, and all the ends of it, have been sufficiently explained
before: And whatever they are, the Society are here confined, limited and tied
down to them, as much as if they had again been enumerated in the very words of
the preamble; to which the reader is referred. The Society must indeed, in the
nature of the thing, if they act with simplicity and integrity in this
important affair', act as to them shall seem most reasonable, profitable, etc.
in order to accomplish the said designs; as other persons entrusted with a
discretionary power in order to accomplish certain ends, must also act. But
their institution itself is fixed, immutably fixed by the charter; so that they
have not the least power to make alterations in it; but only to prosecute, in
the most effectual manner, the declared ends of it. And if any incorporated
charitable Society whatsoever, under the pretext of a discretionary power,
neglect the declared ends of their institution; and pursue others, to which
their charter is a stranger, they cannot but be considered as acting contrary
to the trust reposed in them: But whether wilfully, or through misapprehension,
is another question; respecting which people may have different opinions. But,

7. HAS not the ingenious Mr. Apthorp a very singular way of reasoning here? He
certainly makes use of a kind of logic, which very few of the un-orthodox N.
England ministers learnt at our little, young Colleges. For, having endeavored
to establish this extraordinary discretionary power of the Society to make
alterations in their institution, as if all depended upon it; the triumphant
conclusion at length comes out in the following words: THUS, with an evidence
beyond exception, it appears, that their conduct in placing churches AMONG US,
is in all respects CONFORMABLE TO THEIR INSTITUTION -- i. e. because he had
made it so evident, that they had power to make ALTERATIONS in their
institution; therefore they have made NONE, nor in the least deviated from it;
but their conduct is in all respects CONFORMABLE thereto! And this, it is said,
appears from the premises, with an evidence beyond exception -- But if their
conduct is thus conformable to their institution, why did Mr. Apthorp attempt
to justify it, by asserting their power to alter their institution? As his
argument now stands, the premises and the conclusion unluckily frown on, and
militate against each other. I have tried several ways to reconcile them; but
to no purpose. I have endeavored to suppose, that this position about the
large discretionary power of the Society, was bro't in only as Mr. Apthorp
says, Indian conversions are undertaken by the Society, viz. incidentally, and
as it were ex- abundanti Consideration, p. 15.
. But still, either the conclusion knocks down the premises, or the premises
the conclusion. I have also endeavored to suppose the ingenious gentleman's
meaning was, that the Society's conduct, was conformable to their institution,
after they had made alterations in it, by virtue of their "large discretionary
power"; not as it was originally: But neither, can I make this bear, in several
respects. The war still continues between the former and latter branch of the
argument: So that they must be left to fight it out betwixt them.

SECTION XX. Remarks on Mr. Apthorp's curious Application of those Words, Is it
not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? etc. to the present
Controversy.
IMMEDIATELY after the passage last quoted, Mr. Apthorp, that he might oblige
us with some of his rhetoric together with his invincible arguments, subjoins
-- And to any one who cries out on imaginary abuses or misapplications, the
Society may reply, like the good Householder whose stewards they are, Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? is thine eye evil, because I am
good?

LET it here be observed,

1. THAT whatever the Society might justly reply to those who cry out on
imaginary abuses or misapplications; the same reply would not be valid or
pertinent to those who cry out on real ones.

2. THE Society are hero very justly styled stewards. And they were entrusted
with the care of a charitable fund, not only by God, as he seems to intend, but
by men; by the King, who granted their charter, and by all who have contributed
to the charitable designs expressed therein.

3. A LEARNED clergyman, like him, doubtless knows, it is "required in stewards
that a man be found faithful." Stewards are not allowed to use the goods or
money with which they are entrusted, but for those ends and purposes for which
they are committed to them. If they knowingly apply them to any others, however
good in themselves, they are unfaithful in their trust. For example, if a
steward is entrusted with money by his lord, to give to particular poor persons
by name, or to the poor of such a parish; and he neglects these, to relieve
other persons, though equally necessitous he misapplies the money, and abuses his
trust; Much more so, if instead of bestowing it on any of the poor, he employs
it in building and decorating an house for himself, and in adorning his wife,
misses or children.

4. THAT the Society have applied a great part of the money entrusted with
them, to other, and to say the least, much less noble purposes than those for
which it was committed to them, has, if I mistake not, been sufficiently proved.

5. IN the very same sentence that Mr. Apthorp calls the Society stewards, he
does, in effect, suppose them to be, not stewards, but lords or proprietors.
For he supposes them to have an absolute, uncontrollable right to apply their
charitable fund to whatever good uses they please. This he evidently does, by
putting that reply of the good Householder, the Proprietor and Lord of all, into
their mouths, to stop the mouths of those who cry out on abuses and
misapplications -- Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? is
thine eye evil, because I am good? This answer could with no propriety be
adopted by a steward, when accused or suspected of abusing his trust, and
alienating the money committed to him from the particular designs of it. The
language is suitable only to a proprietor, at absolute liberty to dispose of his
own goods as he pleases, without being obliged to give an account of his
conduct; as the Society expressly are, by their charter -- The said Society
shall yearly, and every year, give an account in writing, etc. And is it not a
little singular, that this argumentative and rhetorical gentleman should thus,
in the same breath, make the Society both stewards and sovereign proprietors of
the charitable fund in their hands? -- characters absolutely incompatible with
each other in the same persons, and with relation to the same thing; as he
applies them to the Society, to convince the candid, and all but "the
obstinate" and "malicious"; which, he says, is not in the power of reason.

6. THOUGH the members of the Society are themselves large contributers to this
fund, it makes no material alteration in the case. Whatever they subscribe or
contribute, ceases to be their own, their private property, as soon, as it is
put into this common stock. It is then no longer their own, to use as they
please, or to alienate from the particular charitable ends mentioned in their
charter. This were sacrilege in a much more proper sense than that, in which
the episcopal clergy have termed some other alienations sacrilege. And
supposing such an unjust thing to be designedly done, which I am not willing,
to think, the words of the apostle to ANANIAS, who kept back part of the price,
etc. would be very applicable to this case -- Why has Satan filled thine heart
to lie to the holy. Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? -- Thou have not lied unto men [only]
but unto God. -- Let me just add here, that if the eye of any one is evil
toward the Society, possibly some better reason may be given for it than this,
that they are good; which were, in diverse respects, the worst that could be
assigned --: at least, it may not be, because they are too good to the colonies
which most need their charity; or to the Negroes and Savages, who are the
proper objects or it. If the other London Society, or Scotch Society acted
thus; -- neglecting the heathens, and heathenish places, to support and
increase little presbyterian parties where due provision was made for the
worship of God in the episcopal way; episcopalians would hardly be satisfied
with this answer, that they might do what they would with their own. They would
be censured as bigots, influenced by the spirit of party, and perverting their
fund.


SECTION XXI. Of the Plea, That the episcopal Missions in the Colonies, to
rectify the State of Religion in them, are a necessary Means of christianizing
the Savages.
THIS is often mentioned in the Abstracts; and has not seldom served as a theme
for popular declamation in the anniversary sermons. Mr. Apthorp has quoted, or
at least pretended to quote, several of those sermons to this purpose. I have
compared but one of these quotations with the text itself; that from the bp. of
St. David's sermon; ( Consid. p. 15.) In which short quotation of but eight
lines, there are three or four deviations from the usual way of quoting. Some
of his own words are inserted as the words of the sermon; clauses are left out,
and parts of sentences at the distance of 13 pages in quarto are tacked
together, and pointed as they ought to have been, if they had been contiguous
in the sermon; though the pages from whence they are taken, are indeed referred
to in the margin. How he has used some other authors from whom he quotes; and
even that great Prelate who "presides over the church of England, and the
Society itself," I have not thought it worth while to examine. He has not
indeed misrepresented the sense of the bp. of St. David's sermon; and perhaps
not that of other bps, etc. as to this point. For I know it is a usual thing
for the preachers before the Society to talk in the same strain, about
remedying in the first place, the ill state of religion in our colonies
themselves: without which care, it is said, the conversion of the neighboring
Savages can hardly be effected; and the like.

LET it be here observed,

1. THAT all this kind of reasoning supposes, that one principal object of the
Society, is, the conversion of the Savages; and so does not well harmonize with
what Mr. Apthorp says elsewhere, however true in point of fact -- Indian
conversions are undertaken by our Society incidentally, and as it were ex
abundanti.

2. THIS reasoning seems very just, when applied to most of the British
colonies, and the missions in them; viz. all those, the religious, or rather
irreligious state of which, answers to the representations in the charter; --
those colonies in which no tolerable provision was before made for ministers;
-- in which the people seemed abandoned to atheism and infidelity, or in danger
of being perverted to popery, for want of the administration of God's word and
sacraments. Sending missionaries to such places as these, is doubtless one
proper means of propagating Christianity among the heathen. But,

3. NOTHING can well be less to the purpose than this kind of reasoning, when
applied to the far greater part of N. England, where the public worship of God
was so regularly upheld, and the people had the means of religion already, in
other protestant communions. Such expressions as those, of remedying the ill
state of religion in the colonies, and the like; when applied to the
Massachusetts and Connecticut, can naturally import nothing more than reducing
us to an outward uniformity of profession, or converting us to episcopacy and
the liturgy. But supposing this to be done, it is not easy to see how it would
contribute much to the conversion of the Indians. Nay, if we consider what has
been done hitherto to this end, by episcopalians and presbyterians, etc.
respectively; there is great reason to think that our conversion to the church
of England would rather retard than promote the conversion of the Savages. And
it is intimated even in some of the anniversary sermons before the Society,
that the people of New England had provoked them to jealousy in this respect;
though hitherto, to very little purpose. Thus particularly bishop BURNET says,
Let those who have a true zeal for the honor of our church, contribute to raise
her glory, which hitherto has been too little advanced this way, while those
who divide from us in NEW ENGLAND, seem to have provoked us to jealousy on this
account. Sermon before the Soc. p. 27.
Similar concessions to our honor, might be produced from other anniversary
sermons.

4. As the conversion of the heathen was from the first one professed aim of
our Forefathers in settling in New England; so almost all the royal charters,
grants, letters patent, and acts of government in England, relative to this
country, have made mention of, and encouraged, yea, enjoined upon us the
prosecution of this pious design; not considered as episcopalians, but as known
dissenters from the English church. To which purpose is the following passage
in the charter of this province, granted in the 12th of WILLIAM and MARY; the
year before the Society's carter -- To dispose of matters and things whereby
our subjects, inhabitants of our said province, may be religiously, peaceably
and civily governed, protected and defended; so as their good life, and orderly
conversation may win the Indians, natives of the country, to the knowledge and
obedience of the only true God and Savior of mankind, and the Christian faith;
which his royal Majesty our royal Grandfather K. CHARLES the first, in his said
letters patent, declared was his royal intention, and the adventurers free
profession to be the principal end of the said plantation. And for the better
maintaining and securing liberty of conscience, etc.

5. CAN it be reasonably supposed that King WILLIAM, in the Society's charter
granted the year after this, had the least thoughts of impowering them to
employ a great part of their fund in converting Us to episcopacy, and
uniformity in worship, either as one end of their institution, or as requisite
means of converting the Indians; -- a pious work all along recommended to, and
enjoined upon the inhabitants of New England themselves! The royal charters,
letters patent, grants, etc. suppose the settlers and inhabitants of this
country, though not episcopalians, to have been a religious people, who were
disposed and qualified to serve the interests of religion, by christianizing
the Indians. But it seems Mr. Apthorp, not to say, the Society, think that,
instead of confining their pious care to the heathenish colonies, or applying
themselves directly to the Indians, they are to employ a great part of their
fund in converting US to the liturgy, as a necessary means of converting the
Savages. Is this such a method of justifying the New England missions, as must
needs "convince the candid?" -- confute all but the "obstinate," and silence
all but the "malicious!"

6. UPON supposition that our conversion to episcopacy had really some remote
tendency toward the conversion of the Indians to the faith of Christ; (which
is utterly denied) yet it may well be doubted, whether this would justify the
Society in applying so great a part of their fund for the support and increase
of the episcopal party here, in a country whose religious state no ways answers
to the descriptions in the charter; to the neglect of other colonies, and the
heathen themselves, the direct, proper objects of their charity. Colonies whose
religious state is like that of the Massachusetts and Connecticut, are
implicitly excluded from any share in this charity, by the representations
given in the charter, of those for which it was designed, so widely different
therefrom. And to bring in these New England missions and missionaries thus
indirectly, or edge-ways, as a pretended means of converting the Savages, when
they cannot be justified directly, by the express, obvious design of the
charter; is no better than an evasion; and one that naturally brings to mind
those words of the CHIEF SHEPHERD, so often misapplied by episcopalians -- He
that enters not by the door, into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber. -- Though I do not mean to call the
Society's missionaries among us, by those opprobrious names; or to give them
any personal affront. But,

7. IF it should be said, that any means which have even a remote tendency to
the conversion of the Indians, may be used by the Society to that end, by
virtue of their "large discretionary power;" and if it is upon this footing
that the missions here are justified, let us consider how far the same way of
reasoning might carry them, and where it would end. They think our conversion
to episcopacy a means of converting the Indians. They are therefore, in
pursuance of the maxim aforesaid, right in maintaining missions here at a great
annual expense, with the hopes of thrusting in the sickle, and reaping a mighty
Indian harvest a century or two hence, when it is ripened by means of the
benign influences of episcopacy upon New England. Neither I, indeed, nor
probably the reader, can see how this supposed means tends to the proposed end.
It seems a round-about, awkward way of going to work: But no matter; the
Society judge it proper, and that is sufficient. Let us then proceed one step
farther. If the church of Scotland, for which WE have generally a great
veneration, was but first episcopized; this might possibly have some remote
tendency to induce us to conform to the church of England; and therefore a
tendency, according to the present supposition, though more remote, to convert
the Indians. NOW, if it should appear thus to the Society, they may, according
to the maxim aforesaid, send missionaries to convert the kirk, in order to the
conversion of New England; and this in order to convert the Savages on our
frontiers. With the same pious design, they might also send missionaries into
Holland, Geneva, the Swiss Cantons, etc. For though the charter says nothing of
Scotland, Holland, Geneva, Switzerland, or even of New England, but implicitly
excludes them all from the charitable care of the Society; yet the Society, it
is said, have a large discretionary power, -- even occasionally to make
alterations in their institution, in such a manner as to render it most
beneficial to religion, whether in our colonies, or among the bordering
nations. -- Who then can doubt the right of the Society to maintain missions in
all the protestant countries of Europe, to promote the peculiarities of the
church of England, in order to the establishing of episcopacy and uniformity
among us; and to remedy the ill state of religion here, without which, the
conversion of the neighboring Savages can hardly be effected! -- NOW, where
Mr. Apthorp's method of reasoning, joined with such an imagination, may end, it
is not easy to say; except perhaps in the Society's appointing proper persons
to look out for some Geese of the breed of GONSALES, to carry missionaries to
the moon, in order to convert the good man there to the church, in order to his
coming as an apostle to convert us; and all this as a means of converting the
Iroquois, etc. And indeed, considering how scriptural our religion is at
present; and how unlikely we are to better ourselves by so great a change,
either on temporal or spiritual accounts; it may be hoped that we shall not be
generally episcopized in a long time, unless that officious planet, at least by
some secret and powerful influence, should have a considerable hand in the
apostolical work of our conversion.

IF this is too ludicrous for the grave reader, I ask his pardon. To be
serious, is it not a surprising thing, that the Society should expend large
sums annually for half a century together, in order to establish episcopacy
among us, under the poor, thin pretext of its being a necessary means of
converting the Indians? -- and at the same time neglect, in so great a degree,
both the Indians themselves, and those heathenish colonies, which are the
proper, direct objects of their institution! Can any supposed discretionary
power, however large, possibly justify a conduct so aliene from the obvious
sense, letter, and whole spirit of their charter?

SECTION XXII. Remarks on a curious Argument of Mr. Apthorp, in favor of the
Church of England.
IT was by no means my design, in this publication, to enter into the
controversy betwixt the church of England and us. But as Mr. Apthorp has
thought fit to produce an argument in favor of the former, in the margin of the
22d and 23d pages of the Considerations, I cannot but take a cursory notice of
it. It is a good presumption, says he, that the church of England is a
reasonable Christian communion, and free from all extremes in its constitution;
that all the various religious persuasions, at home and abroad, concur in
holding it next in esteem to their own. Considering the force of prejudice,
what in every one's judgment holds the second place, may be supposed to deserve
the first. The ingenious gentleman adds, that for this observation, as far as
be can recollect, he is indebted to a fine writer, Dr. JOHN BROWN -- Be that as
it may, I can give a guess from whence it came originally; viz. from another
learned Divine of the church of England; I mean Dr. SWIFT. For in his
Dedication of of that curious theological production, entitled A TALE OF A TUB,
are these words; -- It is a maxim, that those, to whom every body allows the
second place, have an undoubted title to the first. This he applies, in the way
of compliment, to Lord SUMMERS.

BUT as to the observation itself, as applied in a compliment to THE CHURCH;
where did either of these gentlemen get his intelligence, that ALL the various
religious persuasions, at home and abroad, concur in holding the church of
England NEXT in esteem to their own? Have they explicitly declared so? Have the
churches of Scotland, Holland, Geneva, the protestant Swiss Cantons? have the
Lutheran and Greek churches, etc, etc. by any solemn public act, proclaimed
claimed the church of England second best? Or has Mr. Apthorp the faculty of
discerning the sentiments of all other churches, without their declaring them?
Till this fact is well established, the argument which he deduces from it may
well be called a presumption; but, that it is a good one, as he says, is not so
evident. -- There is indeed one church, a very ancient and extensive one,
which, it may naturally be concluded, for a reason that shall be nameless,
considers the communion of the church of England as the next best to her own.
But it may well be doubted, whether one half the protestant churches in the
world concur with her, in holding the church of England in such high esteem.
And though this unsupported supposition were a certain fact; yet it would be no
proper evidence that the church of England is a reasonable Christian communion,
and free from all extremes in its constitution, with those who plainly see many
unreasonable, unchristian, and unscriptural extremes in her constitution,
worship and discipline: Which almost any man, tolerably free from the
prejudices of education, may easily see; and which have, in effect, been
acknowledged and lamented by many of the wisest and best men of that communion;
who would have been glad of a farther reformation with respect to those
extremes. The judicious, episcopalian Authors of the Free and candid
Disquisitions relating to the church of England, say, The reformation of OUR
CHURCH was never brought to that perfection which the first undertakers and
promoters of it intended; and which many of the worthiest of their successors
have desired and pleaded for since. Third Edit. Dublin, 1750. p. 246. They
afterward produce the testimony of great numbers of the most eminent bishops,
and other learned men of the church of England, both clergy and laity, to
support the assertion aforesaid. And they have themselves mentioned almost
innumerable things, which they own to be very exceptionable in their own
church. -- They also acknowledge, p. 344. that the learned Mr. Pierce's
VINDICATION of the Dissenters was never answered, although somebody or other has
attempted it -- And if they had added, that it never will, nor can be answered,
they had not gone too far. Indeed, these Disquisitions themselves contain one
of the fullest and most unanswerable Vindications of our dissent from the
church of England, that have appeared; though undesigned.


THE gentleman, by introducing this good presumption, as he calls it, though
without foundation, in favor of the church of England, shows at least that he
had not forgotten the great and important design of the Society's missions in
these parts, viz. propagating the peculiarities of episcopacy, and reconciling
us to the church of England. Hic labor, hoc opus est. What success the Society
and missionaries may have in this favorite project, which engrosses so much of
the attention, and absorbs so much of the revenues of the former, while it is
almost the sole business of the latter; God only knows. But I have good reason
to think that, in general, I speak the sense of far the greater, wiser and
better part of the people in New England in the following paragraph --

WHEN we consider the real constitution of the church of England; and how
aliene her mode of worship is from the simplicity of the gospel, and the
apostolic times: When we consider her enormous hierarchy, ascending by various
gradations from the dirt to the skies: When we consider the visible effects of
that church's prevailing among us to the degree that it has: When we reflect on
what our Forefathers suffered from the mitred, lordly SUCCESSORS of the
fishermen of Galilee, for nonconformity to a non-instituted mode of worship;
which occasioned their flight into this western world: When we consider that,
to be delivered from their unholy zeal and oppressions, countenanced by
sceptered tyrants, they threw themselves as it were into the arms of Savages
and Barbarians: When we reflect, that one principal motive to their exchanging
the fair cities, villages, and delightful fields of Britain for the then
inhospitable shores and deserts of America, was, that they might here enjoy,
unmolested, God's holy word and ordinances, without such heterogeneous and
spurious mixtures as were offensive to their well-informed consciences: When we
consider the narrow, censorious and bitter spirit that prevails in too many of
the episcopalians among us; and what might probably be the sad consequence, if
this growing party should once get the upper hand here, and a major vote in our
houses of Assembly: (in which case the church of England might become the
established religion here; tests be ordained, as in England, to exclude all but
conformists from posts of honor and emolument; and all of us be taxed for the
support of bishops and their underlings:) When we consider these things, and
too many others to be now mentioned, we cannot well think of that church's
gaining ground here to any great degree, and especially of seeing bishop's
fixed among us, without much reluctance -- Will they never let us rest in
peace, except where all the weary are at rest? Is it not enough, that they
persecuted us out of the old world? Will they pursue us into the new to convert
us here? -- compassing sea and land to make US proselytes, while they neglect
the heathen and heathenish plantations! What other new world remains as a
sanctuary for us from their oppressions, in case of need? Where is the COLUMBUS
to explore one for, and pilot us to it, before we are consumed by the flames,
or deluged in a flood of episcopacy? -- For my own part, I can hardly ever
think of our being pursued thus from Britain into the wilds of America, and
from world to world, without calling to mind, though without applying, that
passage in the Revelation of St. JOHN: And to the woman were given two wings of
a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place; where
she is nourished -- from the face of the serpent. And the serpent cast out of
his mouth water as a flood, after the woman; that he might cause her to be
carried away of the flood.

ONE of our Kings, it is well known, excited his Scotch subjects to take up
arms against him, in a great measure, if not chiefly, by attempting to force
the English liturgy upon them, at the instigation of the furious episcopal
zealots of that day; by whom he was wheedled and duped to his destruction. But
GOD be praised, we have a KING, whom Heaven long preserve and prosper, too
wise, just and good to be put upon any violent measures, to gratify men of such
a depraved turn of mind. -- It is not my design, however, to dishonor the more
moderate and Christian spirit of the English bishops since the REVOLUTION,
particularly of this day, by comparing it to the persecuting, antichristian
spirit of many prelates, antecedent to that glorious ERA of British liberty.

SECTION XXIII. Part of two letters of Sir WILLIAM ASHURST, Knight and
Alderman, relative to the Society; with short Remarks on them.
THE author has in his hands two original letters of Sir WILLIAM ASHURST,
President of the Society for propagating the gospel in New England and the
parts adjacent in America; of which Dr. DOUGLASS says, The whole revenue of the
corporation is L. 500 to L. 600 sterling per Annum. At present they exhibit
small, but well placed salaries to several missionaries, English and Indians.
Sum. Hist. and Political, etc. Vol. II. page 122.

THE AUTHOR's Father was more than 60 years a preacher of the gospel to the
Indians; employed by the Commissioners of this Society.


-- These letters of Sir WILLIAM were written to a person in Boston, concerning
the affairs of that Society; but contain some strictures on the other; by which
it appears how early it was suspected, that their views were not altogether so
public-spirited and catholic, as might have been wished. The first of them is
dated, London, August 5, 1704. and contains the remarkable words following --
We have lately had a new Corporation erected here for propagating the gospel,
etc. among the episcopal clergy. In my last letters in March, I sent Mr. SEWALL
a scheme of their proceedings. I envy not their engaging in so pious a design,
but heartily wish them all imaginable success. But their first steps discover
no great deal of charity for their fellow Christians. For they would insinuate,
that WE have no ministers employed in this conversion work in America; and
therefore I cannot expect much from them. I doubt not but those employed by US
are as good ministers as the best of them, (though they have not episcopal
ordination) and may be fitter to be employed in this work, etc.

THE other letter bears date August 10, 1714. and contains the following
passage -- It is a great rejoicing to us, to hear from you of the success that
our endeavors have had amongst those poor people; [i. e. the Indians] and I
heartily wish the Society you take notice of had made greater improvements of
the advantages they have over us. But I am afraid God will not bless their
endeavors; they having neither right ends in their view, nor employing proper
instruments in the work. To propagate the Christian religion in its purity and
simplicity, is an heavenly work; but to make it only a color to aggrandize the
hierarchy, and to promote the interest and glory of what they call The church,
cannot either be called a good work, nor can expect a blessing upon it. --

WHETHER the conduct of the Society since these letters were written, and the
series of facts relative thereto, do not prove to a demonstration, that the
Society have been influenced by narrow, party, unworthy views in a great
degree; and consequently, that Sir WILLIAM was no ill prophet, is submitted to
the judgment of the intelligent and impartial reader.

SECTION XXIV. That by the Cession of Canada, etc. there is now a noble
Prospect of much being done toward christianizing the Indians, provided this
good Work is heartily and discretely prosecuted.
WHAT is past cannot be recalled, or undone: But abuses may be reformed, if the
authors should be sensible of them, and not above altering their measures. The
cession of Canada and the best part of Louisiana, if confirmed to
Great Britain, will give the several religious and charitable Societies in
England, Scotland and New England, erected for promoting the common cause of
Christianity, advantages for spreading the gospel among the heathen in America,
much superior to what they would otherwise be. And though some of the political
reasons for attempting the conversion of the Indians, may not be altogether so
strong as they were, while we had the French so near us for rivals and enemies
on this continent; yet all the obligations arising from humanity, piety and
charity remain in their full force. Yea, these are really heightened in the
same degree that obstacles to this good work are removed out of the way. It may
be naturally expected that the Indians will be more accessible and tractable to
us and our missionaries, by reason of the fall of Canada, and the French power
in America, than they were before, either to us or to the French; as they will
now be rather more dependent upon us. These circumstances, of such great
importance to the prosperity of the British colonies, and to Great Britain
herself, may well be considered as a loud call of providence to her and them,
to engage heartily in the business of christianizing the Natives: And the
religious obligation hereto, increases in proportion to the prospect, or
probability of success in the attempt; as was hinted before.

THERE is no reason to doubt, from any thing that is past, but that the
Societies referred to before, excepting one, will be forward to improve the
opportunity, and all advantages which God in his providence affords, for
spreading the knowledge of his truth, and the common salvation among the
American Savages. And so far as words and professions can go, -- even the most
solemn, and addressed to the greatest personages, there is the strongest reason
to conclude that that Society will not neglect so fair an opportunity as is now
presented to them, for propagating Christianity among these nations. For the
Society for propagating the gospel in foreign parts, in their address to His
Majesty, 1760, presented by the Archbishop of Canterbury, express themselves
thus -- This Society was wisely founded by our great deliverer King WILLIAM,
that the remotest of the plantations, by the instruction of an orthodox clergy,
might be preserved from the danger of infidelity, and guarded against the
restless attempts of popery; and that the pure light of the gospel might be
spread amongst those around them, who sat in the darkness of heathenism. The
glorious acquisitions which have enlarged your Majesty's empire in America,
open a yet more extensive field for our attention and care. And we do HUMBLY
AND SOLEMNLY ASSURE your Majesty, that, so far as our ability reaches, -- we
will exert our utmost endeavors, that no part of your Majesty's dominions for
which our duty calls us to provide, may remain unfurnished with the means of
being instructed in genuine Christianity: and will GO ON [ Quere, Whether this
should not rather have been, BEGIN] to study and use diligently the most
probable methods of converting, not only the NEGRO SLAVES, but the neighboring
INDIANS. Vid. Scots Magazine: Appendix, 1760. p. 693.


IT is to be hoped that the venerable Society will not forget these SOLEMN
ASSURANCES, as they seem to have forgotten others similar to them in times
past; and go on to misapply large sums annually, for supporting and increasing
the episcopal party or faction in New England, instead of using diligently the
most probable methods of CONVERTING either the NEGRO SLAVES or neighboring
INDIANS. If Indian conversions have hitherto been undertaken by the Society
only "incidentally, and as it were ex abundanti," as Mr. Apthorp says; yet it
may be expected that, after these protestations, they will undertake them in a
different manner; with more zeal and vigor, and a less sparing hand as to
money; curtailing their superfluous expenses in the Massachusetts and
Connecticut, The author has, within a few days, been informed, that in the
province of New Hampshire there is a legal provision made for the support of a
public religion, similar to that in those two other New England governments.
where their assistance is not needed to save Us from atheism, infidelity or
popery; where "Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis Tempus eget" -- Or if
their memory should be treacherous, it may be hoped there will not be wanting
those about his Majesty's person, to remind them of their humble and solemn
assurances to HIM: Especially since their non-observance of them may prove of
very pernicious consequence, not only to His American dominions, but to
Great Britain. Of which in the following section.

SECTION XXV. Of the political Reasons still remaining, for endeavoring to
christianize the Indians.
SOME people may perhaps imagine, that since the cession of Canada, etc. there
are no motives or reasons besides merely religious ones, to attempt the
civilizing and converting the American Indians. That the political ones which
before subsisted, are lessened in some degree, is not denied; but, that they
are wholly ceased, no one who duly considers the matter, can suppose.

TO say nothing of the benefits that might result herefrom to the agriculture,
fishery and navigation of the colonies, and to the British commerce, even upon
supposition that there was not a jesuit, popish priest, emissary, or one
Frenchman upon this continent; it is to be remembered, that human affairs are
subject to great changes and revolutions, as we have lately seen, particularly
in America. We cannot be certain that others may not take place hereafter,
almost as much to our prejudice, as those are to our advantage. At least, human
prudence requires that every thing of that sort should be guarded against, as
far as human foresight and power can do it. And one means hereof doubtless is,
using the present opportunity of spreading, as far as may be, the Christian,
protestant religion among the Natives; and thereby engaging them heartily in
the British interest, in opposition to the French.

THE French are a very powerful and politic, ambitious and enterprising nation:
They do not long sit down easy under great losses; and they soon recover
themselves by peace, after being exhausted by war. In all probability, they
will continue to carry on intrigues with the Indians of Canada, and on the East
of the Missisippi, by means of their emissaries, to the prejudice of our
colonies; not without hopes of finding their ends in it at lest -- The reverend
and learned EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH, D. D. HOLLISIAN N. B. This Professorship was
in great part endowed by the worthy Mr. THOMAS HOLLIS of London, some time
since deceased; a very generous benefactor to our College. The present worthy
THOMAS HOLLIS of London, Esquire F. R. S. etc. has also, more than once, presented
some valuable books to the library of said College.
Professor of divinity at Harvard College in Cambridge, who has thought much
and long on the affair of the missions and the Indians, has obliged me with two
or three letters since I have been writing on this subject. In one of them
(which I obtained his leave to make use of on this occasion) he speaks
particularly of what has last been hinted at. And, I conceive, the best use I
can make of it, is to give the public the substance of it in the Doctor's own
words, as follows.

-- Probably it may now be generally thought, that since Canada is reduced,
nothing more is to be apprehended from the Indians; but that we shall live in
perpetual peace and good neighborhood with them. Though it may be thought a
weakness, I must own, that I entertain very different apprehensions. I believe
that the French, in spite of all precautions that can be taken, will continue
missionaries among all those tribes of Indians, who have been used to have
them; and will thrust them into as many others as they possibly can. One great
business of these will be, to keep up a strong disaffection to the English in
the Savages, in hopes of making use of them, at some future favorable
conjuncture, to distress our provinces again, and recover their own losses. To
answer such an end, the French missionaries will make no difficulty to dress
and paint like Savages, and pass for as very Indians as any of them, even in
visits to our sorts and frontier towns. And I know of nothing that can prevent
such mismanagements, but our having missionaries among the Indians, who shall
be men of genius enough to gain their esteem, and the same ascendency over
them, which the French missionaries get, wherever they come.

IF any should be so sanguine as to flatter themselves, that we shall never
again have a weak administration at home, which may encourage the French to
attempt to recover what they have lost in America; yet we have found by
experience, when Mr. DUMMER commanded in chief, that by jesuitical influence
the Indians may be spirited to make war upon us, even when the French dare not
appear to help or abet them. And if that war had not been conducted in a manner
very different from the conduct of any other war we have ever had with our
Eastern tribes of Indians, before or since; they would have been no more
humbled then, than they used to be at other times; but might have continued to
harass our borders, till we had been much more weary of the war than they. And
if any tribes of Indians now should be set on, by secret French emissaries
among them, to ravage our new settlements, and murder the inhabitants; I
suspect they might live better by it than by hunting: And they might [perhaps]
be better supplied with all they want, except money for our scalps, by such
English provinces as they were pleased not to molest, than they ever were by
the French in Canada.

THE preceding extract is given, not only as very clearly and precisely
expressing my own apprehensions; but because it is naturally concluded, that
coming from an aged gentleman, of so superior and respectable a character as
Dr. WIGGLESWORTH, it will have a greater attention paid to it, than the same
things coming only from myself could have claimed. Let me add; It is undoubted
fact, that in some of our French and Indian wars, the Savages have been
supplied even with ammunition from one or more of the British colonies: And it
has been reported, I believe truly, that the clothes of some of our people,
butchered by them, have been very amicably sold at Albany, with the blood upon
them -- In a word, the necessity of having a considerable number of
missionaries among the Indians, is so apparent and urgent, in a political, as
well as religious consideration of things; that one can hardly help
entertaining some hopes that the government, either at home or in America, or
both, may in their wisdom see cause to do something toward sending and
supporting them: At least, that the several corporations erected in part, if
not chiefly for that very end, will pursue it with a zeal adequate to the
importance of it.

SECTION XXVI. Containing some farther Strictures on the Manner of Mr.
Apthorp's conducting his Defense of the Society.
MR. Apthorp's defense of the Society is entitled, "CONSIDERATIONS," etc. And
though it has not been thought needful to follow him step by step; yet, I flatter
myself, enough has been said to convince the impartial, that those
Considerations were both written and published with far too little
consideration. He began his triumph, however, or rather insult, in the
title page, by a long, scornful, most contemptuous motto; in which he
intimates, how much beneath him he thought it to enter the lists with any
person, who was so hardy as to object against the Society; reproaching them
all, in effect, as vain, impudent liars -- "Vanos continuo ac mendaces esse" --
This reviling motto, which serves him as an exordium, is from the Evangelical
Preparation of EUSEBIUS: And on the other side of the same leaf are advertized,
"SERMONS on PRAYER, with FORMS of "DEVOTION": which we may charitably suppose
designed for general use; -- both for those who had devotion before, without
much formality; and those who had formality enough before, without much
devotion. Next appears his humble submission of his defense, to the "judgment
and decision" of his venerable Clients, the Society, of which he is himself a
member. In the first page, (numbered 7) he proposes a question that is hardly
intelligible; speaks of it as very "interesting", and modesty expresses his
intention to determine it " once for all" -- And this, without the least
intention of offense or controversy, (p. 8.) He also says there, The proposed
vindication is designed to convince the candid. To confute the obstinate, and
silence the malicious, is not in the power of reason. But, by the way, I have
always supposed that the obstinate were as capable of being confuted by the
power of reason, as others; though much more hard to be convinced, or put to
silence: And I hope that this gentleman will never serve as an example, to show
the wide difference betwixt these things, which he now seems to consider as the
same. But be that as it may, "Quid dignum tanto feret hic PROMISSOR hiatu!"

IT appears that he was put upon this desperate undertaking, by something
which, it seems, hid offended him in a news-paper, relative to the missions.
And p. 9. he threatens the unknown author of a supposed insult on the dead,
with instant destruction from his powerful quill; saying with the old Trojan
Hero, Extinxisse nefas --, et sumpsisse merentis
Laudabor poenas --
Considering the occasion, I wonder he did not adopt the next words also -- --
Animumg; explesse juvabit
Ultricis flammae, et cineres satiasse meorum.
And the following line may perhaps be proper for a motto for him, if he should
again write on the subject: viz. Talia jactabam, et furiata mente ferebar. But
as he was to determine the matter once for all, this is not to be expected.

FROM the 9th to the 18th p. we find him chiefly employed, first in misquoting,
and then in misrepresenting the charter; in putting in an exclusive claim to
orthodoxy for the clergy of the church of England; making the Society stewards
and sovereign proprietors, in the same breath; reproaching others with "great
ignorance, or something worse"; reviling the religion of our Forefathers in the
most opprobrious terms; and showing how greatly our reformation in religion, --
without the improvement of our morals or piety, is the work of the Society.

HAVING thus prepared the way, he proposes (p. 18.) to take leave of this
popular objection [against the Society] with so full a confutation, that it
will be disingenuous ever to advance it again. How is that to be done? -- Why,
by confidently resting his proof on the unexceptionable testimony of two --
Prelates --; both of them members of the Society -- Let us see how many
metamorphoses they have already past through; 1st. they were Clients, 2dly.
Judges, 3dly. they are Witnesses; and all in the same cause, their own. But
then, they are most unexceptionable Witnesses -- incapable either of mistake or
misrepresentation in a matter so thoroughly known to them. And (p. 19) he
speaks of the "invincible reasons" of one of them. So that Mr. Apthorp's
fruitful imagination has produced another metamorphosis. It seems they are now
neither Clients, Judges, nor Witnesses; but, 4ly. Reasoners, pleading their own
cause. What they say, whether called their testimony or their reasoning, has
been taken notice of; and others may think for themselves, whether it is
unanswerable and invincible, or not.

PAGE 23. Mr. Apthorp, as well he might, makes an apology for his undertaking
to vindicate a Society, which is above censure, as it is incapable of wrong
motives. -- An extraordinary Society indeed! And surely some apology was needed
for officiously undertaking the defense of a Society so incapable of erring. So
that he has, in effect, infallible Clients, infallible Judges, infallible
Witnesses, and infallible Reasoners; all on the same side with his own
infallible Self, and all in the same persons! Did ever any man undertake a more
needless work! He seems indeed to repent; and promises, in amends, to employ
his studies, for the future, to better purposes, (p. 23.) Upon which condition,
I think he ought to be forgiven; and, all things considered, I know of none so
unlikely to overlook his officious error, as the Society themselves -- But it
would seem hard, not to show some lenity to him; especially if, as he there
says, This business, in truth, was forced upon him -- In such a case, whose
stars could possibly prevent their writing; if they will but make the sad case
their own! This force, it seems, was chiefly put upon him by a Braintree
gentleman, who, as he supposes, had insulted the memory of a deceased
missionary; and by the honor done him of sharing in the insult; as he has
accurately expressed it. He is very severe on the said Braintree gentleman:
Whom, however, I should think almost as inhuman and barbarous as he has been
represented, if he desired any severer revenge on Mr. Apthorp, than that he
should write more SUCH CONSIDERATIONS and DEFENSES.

Mr. Apthorp then passes some other compliments of a pretty extraordinary
nature, however just, on the Society, the honor of our age and nation, etc.
These might possibly, however, have come from some other person with as good a
grace, as from a member of the Society; according to that old maxim, Let
another praise thee, and not thine own mouth. He then gives it as his opinion,
that the Society cannot better apply their munificence than in providing,
throughout our colonies, for the decent celebration of public religion. By
which, according to his whole argument, he must mean planting episcopal
churches even in those colonies, where the people have the means of religion
already, in other protestant communions. And who can doubt, but that this is a
better way of applying their munificence, than sending missionaries to the
heathens, or only to the heathenish colonies, almost abandoned to atheism and
infidelity!

IN the last page, however, he talks in a rapturous strain about beholding this
extensive country, just won to the British empire, gradually acceding, AMONG
its numerous inhabitants, to the empire of JESUS CHRIST, and of consequence,
flourishing in ARTS, in SCIENCE, etc. The arts and sciences are indeed very
valuable in their places; though they do not seem to be AMONG the primary or
principal of those important blessings, which flow from the knowledge and
obedience of JESUS CHRIST. However, they are not to be despised. And who can
doubt, but that they will be as much improved by the mission of so accomplished
a Scholar as Mr. Apthorp, in the confines of our College, as the religious
state of the country has been amended by the episcopal missions in general?
This was perhaps one design of the charitable Society therein; that so the
advancement of learning among us, may in time be as greatly their work, as the
reformation of our religion is at present: I would hope, much more so --

AFTER quoting something on this noble occasion from VIRGIL, Mr. Apthorp
concludes with some fine lines from Mr. POPE's MESSIAH: Though if he had either
mentioned POPE's name, or marked them as a quotation, he might perhaps at once
have been thought less a poet by the common people, and given ill-natured
critics less occasion to tax him as a plagiary. Not that I myself in the least
doubt his poetical talents. For even in this didactic performance, he has
obliged us with many specimens of a singular imagination, a florid, rhetorical
diction, a brisk, lively way of reasoning, mavelous turns of argument,
surprising hyperboles, and diverse other licenses even in grammar, truly
poetical: Nay, he has altered, not to say corrected two of these lines from
POPE! [Dum male recitas, incipit esse tuum -- ]

NOW, from a gentleman whose prosaic, argumentative compositions are so
agreeably bemused, what might not be expected, if he were to write poetry in
earnest! -- But it may be doubted whether he will be able to spare time from
his more important concerns, to oblige the world in this way; especially if, as
some of late suppose, -- his reverend mind Begins to grow right-rev'rendly
inclined --

THE CONCLUSION.
WHATEVER Any may imagine, the author of the foregoing Observations seriously
declares, that he heartily wishes Mr. Apthorp well; happy here and hereafter.
And if these observations should contribute any thing toward showing him to
himself, this will not tend to obstruct, but to promote that benevolent end --

BUT the main end which he had in view, was much more extensive, general and
important; -- that of serving the cause of truth and righteousness, of pure and
undefiled religion in America; in distinction from all private, party-opinions
whatsoever. He is very far from making any pretensions to an exemption from
mistakes. But as to his sincerity, and the uprightness of his intentions; if it
were expedient to make protestations in such cases, he could very cheerfully
appeal to that tribunal, at which ALL are finally to appear.

NOTWITHSTANDING he is in principle and profession an anti-episcopalian; yet he
sincerely loves and honors all virtuous, candid and moderate men of all
denominations among Christians; by no means excepting those of the episcopal
communion; with several of whom he has a personal and agreeable acquaintance,
which he would be glad to keep up: Nor would he willingly and unnecessarily
give offense to any persons of that persuasion.

THOUGH he wishes the people of New England to stand fast in the liberty
wherewith CHRIST has made them free; and not to return under that yoke of
episcopal bondage, which so miserably galled the necks of our Forefathers, that
they were not able to bear it, and therefore took refuge in America; yet he is
far from desiring to inflame the passions of any one sect or party against
another: So far from it, that he would sincerely rejoice to be in the least
degree instrumental of uniting them in the bonds of Christian charity, on the
true plan of the gospel. In order to which, he cannot think an exact uniformity
either in sentiment, or in modes of worship and discipline, necessary. The
former is impossible in this imperfect state, on diverse accounts; and the
latter not to be expected, unless in countries where the invaluable blessing of
liberty is sacrificed to a far inferior object. Zealous attempts to establish
an exact uniformity in religion, have generally, if not always proved
pernicious to the peace of society, to christian charity and morals, in a very
high degree: All ecclesiastic history is a proof of this. Such an uniformity
and the advancement of the hierarchy, have too apparently been favorite
objects with the SOCIETY all along particularly as to New England; while the
heathenish colonies, the poor Negroes and Indians have been proportionably
neglected. And to what one valuable purpose? -- unless causing alienation of
affections, and animosities among us, can be accounted such! -- And these are
the principal fruits which, considering the religious state of this country,
can in reason be expected from a continued prosecution of this design.

THE author concludes with his humble and earnest prayers, that GOD would unite
all the SOCIETIES for the propagation of TRUE RELIGION, whether in England,
Scotland or America, in a sincere desire to promote that alone; and afford them
respectively such lights and directions as may serve to advance this one,
single, most important end, to his own glory, and the good of mankind; till in
the revolutions of times and seasons, which He keeps in his own power, the
GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM shall be preached for a witness among ALL NATIONS; and
that grand event shall take place, in praying for which all sincere Christians
are already united; -- even that HIS KINGDOM may come, and HIS WILL BE DONE ON
EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN. AMEN!

CORRECTIONS.
Page line from read 16 8 top or hurt 18 3 top their charity 49 12 top the name

N. B. 52. The first part of the marginal note there, ought to have run thus,
viz.

By what I can learn, there was no episcopal church in N. England, 'till about
An. 1685, or 1686, in the reign of the infatuated roman-catholic K. James II,
and the administration of the roman-catholic Governor Sir E. Andross. Though K.
Charles IId had before given his allowance for one in Boston, when our charter
was called into question, An. 1679. It was at this time, that, etc. 63 17 --
too often 69 12 top is engaged. 87 1 bottom too far 90 16 top predestining 103
Title of Sect. 14, to establish 115 14 bottom truth,


