CHRISTIAN SOBRIETY: BEING EIGHT SERMONS ON TITUS II. 6. PREACHED WITH A
SPECIAL VIEW TO THE BENEFIT OF THE YOUNG MEN USUALLY ATTENDING THE PUBLIC
WORSHIP AT THE WEST CHURCH in BOSTON. Published more particularly at their
Desire, and dedicated to them.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. PASTOR OF THE SAID CHURCH.

MAKE no tarrying to turn to the LORD, and put not off from day to day; for
suddenly shall the wrath of the LORD come forth, and in thy security thou shall
be destroyed -- My son, gather instruction from thy YOUTH up: So shall thou
find wisdom till thine OLD AGE. JESUS the Son of SIRACH. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND:
Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL DRAPER, in Newbury-Street: EDES and GILL, in
Queen Street; and THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill,
1763.

The Author To the YOUNG MEN who usually attend his Ministry; and, more
particularly, To those of them, at whose REQUEST the following Discourses are
published.
My dear young Brethren,
I HAVE now before me a paper directed to me, signed by a considerable number
of you; in which you express both a full persuasion, and a grateful sense of my
friendly design in preaching the followlowing sermons: At the same time
desiring a copy for the press, in terms at once too respectful to me to be here
repeated, and too plainly indicating a serious turn of mind, to permit me to
deny your request. The paper here referred to, was signed by about fifty
persons of the younger sort.


I SHOULD, indeed, do an injury to myself, if I denied that my aim in them was,
as you suppose, "the bettering your minds and morals." And the manner in which
you attended to them, when preached, together with your being so well satisfied
with them as to desire to read them in print, affords ground to hope that, by
the blessing of GOD, the fountain of truth, light and wisdom, the intention of
them will be in some measure answered. This agreeable prospect has much
alleviated the trouble I have been at in reviewing, correcting and transcribing
them; which would otherwise have been a tedious labor to me, especially in so
cold and severe a season. But if they are only a quarter part so useful to you
as I pray GOD to make them, I shall be very amply rewarded.

IN composing them, I must own, I had no other sermons in view as a model;
which may, perhaps, be one reason that they are no better. They were written
entirely from the scriptures, and from my own heart; of the latter of which at
least, they are a true, though imperfect representation. Least of all had I in
view as a model, either the sermons of any bigoted devotees to particular
systems of religion, distinct from the general and glorious one of the gospel;
or such cold, uninteresting discourses as hit the frivolous taste of those, who
value sermons only for an imaginary delicacy of sentiment and expression,
without solidity, without force or energy; without entering into the spirit and
importance of religion. I do not think mine the worse, for not being imitations
of such as either of these. The former are my aversion, as the illiberal
productions of slaves, who desire to tyrannize over other men's consciences: The
latter my contempt, as the superficial, insipid, empty harangues of vain men;
which do not deserve the name of sermons. If discourses from the pulpit are
adapted only to please the ear and the fancy, like many of the modern
fashionable ones; instead of having a direct tendency to alarm the conscience
of a sinner, to warm the heart of a saint, or to enlighten the understandings
of any; they serve, in my opinion, to no better purposes, than those of
unseasonably amusing the hearers, disgracing the places in which, and the
persons by whom they are delivered, as frivolous, conceited declaimers; who
seek only the applause of men, by their sounding brass and tinkling cymbals;
instead of designing to do good, by manifestation of the truth, and commending
themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of GOD. I must own, I should
be a little mortified, as well as greatly disappointed, if any persons who are
charmed with such lullabies and opiates to the conscience from the pulpit,
should think the following discourses in any measure tolerable.

THE subject is handled in such a manner as to give you a general,
comprehensive idea of true religion, with its advantages and importance: I
mean, of Christianity, according to my own conceptions of it. The scheme or
plan of the sermons is very extensive: It opens a wide field, almost boundless
on every side, and presenting numberless objects to the view. Whoever looks
over the contents of them, will see that they are not deficient in point of
variety, whatever other faults they may be justly charged with. But, in this
way of treating the subject, it was impossible to handle any particular
doctrine or precept of the gospel fully, or with accuracy and precision. Had I
pretended to handle the various branches of religion here touched upon, in this
manner, each sermon would have swelled to a folio; and they must have employed
more years than I was days, in composing and preaching them.

THE general design of them, viz. to instruct the YOUNG, and, by the blessing
of GOD, to form their minds to the love and practice of true religion, cannot
but be approved by all wise and good men; how much soever I have failed in the
method, or execution. The instruction of the YOUNG, in order to their being
well principled, and acting a proper part in life, is a thing of the utmost
importance to themselves and to society. This has, accordingly, been a
favorite, a principal object with some of the wisest men, in their respective
ages and countries. Three such persons in particular, at once present
themselves to my mind; SOLOMON, SOCRATES and CICERO.

THE first of these, SOLOMON among the JEWS, had a very particular attention to
the YOUNG, in his invaluable writings; a treasure more to be prized than
millions of gold and silver. He himself informs us, and it is obvious from the
most cursory view of them, that their more immediate and special design was,
"to give to the YOUNG MAN knowledge and understanding."

The second, SOCRATES, so renowned among the GREEKS for his wisdom and virtue,
is also known to have devoted his time and great talents, chiefly to the
instruction of YOUNG MEN. Though he left nothing in writing, which is come down
to us; yet authentic history gives us this account of him: And the dialogues of
PLATO, his learned disciple, in which the sentiments and discourses of SOCRATES
are represented, clearly evince the same thing. He was, however, in that
superstitious, corrupt and idolatrous, though polite age, accused, tried and
condemned as a perverter of the YOUTH of ATHENS; more particularly, as it is
said, because he taught them the UNITY of GOD; ridiculing polytheism, with the
numberless superstitions and follies which time, ignorance and prejudice had
consecrated, as the sacred mysteries of religion; i. e. in other words, he was
considered as an impious heretic and blasphemer. This it was, that enraged the
priests, the politicians, and even the poets of ATHENS, against that
extraordinary person; and finally brought him, as a martyr for the truth, to
drink the fatal hemlock in a jayl: A poor requital for such important services
to his country! But thus it is, that "the world gives;" -- thus, that it often
rewards its benefactors, of whom it is not worthy. And even the SON of GOD
himself, was by wicked hands crucified and slain as a blasphemer, for asserting
that the only true GOD was his FATHER; thereby making himself, as the priests
maliciously accused him, equal with GOD!

CICERO among the ROMANS, the third of these renowned men, the wisest and best
of his time and nation, had a special view to the benefit of YOUNG MEN, in
diverse of his admirable writings; particularly in that very valuable book his
OFFICES, inscribed to his son MARCUS. He also took great pains in some of his
other writings, to expose the folly, superstition and knavery of the priests
and augurs, and other supposed holy men of those times; and to preserve both
the Old and Young from the sad effects of their delusions and hypocrisy, though
he was himself One of their order. He was, accordingly, accounted an heretic by
them. And though he did not fall at last as a martyr directly for true religion;
yet he fell as one of the most glorious advocates for LIBERTY, that the world
ever saw: An honor next to that of suffering martyrdom for religion; and, in
some sort, the same thing; true religion comprising in it the love of liberty,
and of One's country; and the hatred of all tyranny and oppression.

IT is evident, moreover, from the epistles of the great apostle PAUL, and of
JOHN the beloved disciple of our Lord, that both of them had a particular
attention to the YOUNG, in their writings: Not to mention the many excellent
divines, or other learned and good men, who, in later ages, have devoted a
great part of their time, and their noble talents, to the service of GOD and
their generation, in this way. To say the least, therefore, I have no occasion
to blush, for having employed my meaner talents with a particular view to the
benefit of my YOUNG brethren, when I consider these illustrious examples:
Especially, when I also reflect on what passed betwixt our LORD and PETER, when
the former, the chief Shepherd, was just ascending to his FATHER and our
FATHER, to his GOD and our GOD. JESUS says to Simon Peter, Simon son of Jonas,
love thou me more than these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord; thou know that
I love thee. He says unto him, FEED MY LAMBS.

WHILE others, who are rich in wisdom, cast in of their abundance into the
treasury and offerings of GOD, for the immediate service of the YOUNG, the
LAMBS of CHRIST's fold; I may be permitted, like the poor widow, of my penury
to cast in a mite or two. In which respect, I may also accomodate to myself,
and adopt the words of the last-mentioned apostle, PETER, originally spoken
with another view, on a particular occasion: "Silver and gold have I none; but
such as I have give I you." If what I here offer, as my own, is neither gold,
silver nor precious stones; yet, I trust, it is not wholly dross, wood, hay or
stubble. And, mean as it is, I am already assured, my beloved young brethren,
that you will not despise it: Nor do I doubt, but that the infinitely good and
merciful GOD will graciously accept it through JESUS CHRIST, as sincerely
intended for his glory.

IT is said by some, that these times are very corrupt and degenerate, in
comparison of those of our forefathers; and particularly, that the YOUTH of
these days are remarkably light and vain, loose and profligate, both in
principle and manners. There is doubtless always room, and great occasion in
this present evil world, for reformation. I am not certain, however, that the
abovementioned charge is strictly just: Possibly they who bring it, may not
"inquire wisely concerning the former times," or the present, when they think
that those were so much "better than these." Be that as it may; yet I am
persuaded, the most likely way to produce a reformation, is not to rail at the
times, or to make such invidious comparisons betwixt the age present, and those
which are past. I have, therefore, wholly declined this kind of rhetoric and
declamation in these discourses: Contenting myself with plainly telling you the
truth and your duty; and urging it upon you by such considerations, as are at
all times proper. But if there is any real foundation for such a charge against
the YOUTH of the present age, these discourses will be so much the more
seasonable, and claim your attention accordingly.

I HAVE addressed you in them, and endeavored to treat you, as reasonable
creatures. You will not, it is hoped, think it less incumbent upon you to show
yourselves men by your conduct, though but young, than it was upon me to treat
you as such. To the many arguments and motives to that end, used in these
discourses, let me here subjoin, that a number of you have been blessed with a
liberal and learned, as well as religious education; and, that the more is
expected of you both by GOD and man, on this account. Take heed, my brethren,
that you do not any of you disgrace your education, and bring a reproach upon
that respectable society the COLLEGE, whose public honors you have received, by
a conduct unworthy both of that and yourselves; -- either by a vicious and
profligate, or even by a low, sordid and vulgar behavior. In either of which
cases, especially the former, you may be assured, that what would otherwise be
for your honor, will, in the end, turn to your shame and reproach. I say this,
you know, as your friend, not as your enemy.

THE great regard and kindness with which I have been treated by your parents,
and the honored and beloved people of my pastoral charge in general, lay me
under some peculiar obligations, not only to them, but to you; -- to do
whatever in me lies, to promote your honor, your temporal and eternal good. If,
therefore, you should think my private advice on any particular occasion, or my
good wishes and my prayers worth any thing, you may depend upon having them;
the former, whenever it is asked, and the two latter without it.

LET me just add, that if any of you, after hearing, and requesting the
publication of these discourses on christian sobriety, should conduct
yourselves unsoberly, unrighteously and ungodly in the world, instead of living
as the grace of GOD which has appeared, teaches you to live; these very
sermons, and your own written, signed request, will be as swift witnesses
against you: You will be judged out of your own mouths, like wicked servants;
and condemned, as it were, under your own hands and seals. God forbid, that
what is now a token for good concerning you, and a testimony in your favor,
should eventually be a means of aggravating your guilt, and inflaming your
condemnation! As my beloved brethren I warn you; at the same time hoping
"better things of you, and things that accompany salvation:" Being

Your sincere Friend and Brother, Jonathan Mayhew.
BOSTON, February 1763.
CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Observations on TITUS and the Epistle to him. The design and method
of the following Discourses exhibited. Remarks on the Terms Young Men, and
sober-minded: And, what is implied in exhorting them to be so, particularly
shown. Page I. SERMON II. OF Sobriety in general, in Principle and Practice.
More particularly, That it implies (1.) A Belief of God's Being, Perfections
and Providence. (2.) Of the Christian Revelation. And (3.) Sober Thoughts of
One's self. Short Reflections on each. P. 35. SERMON III. CHRISTIAN Sobriety
further explained, viz. (4.) Of Repentance. (5.) Of the Faith which is saving.
(6.) Of an external Profession of Christianity. (7.) Of Prayer. And (8.) Of
universal Obedience to Christ's Commandments. P. 82. SERMON IV. OF some Things
contrary to Christian Sobriety, viz. (1.) Of taking God's Name in vain. (2.) Of
neglecting the public Worship. (3.) Of light and irreverent Behavior at it.
(4.) Of excessive, riotous Mirth at other Times. (5.) Of sinful Diversions and
Recreations. (6.) Of excessive Expense and Pride in Apparel. (7.) Of the
neglect of Business, and Mis-spence of Time. P. 121. SERMON V. OF some other
Things contrary to Sobriety, viz. (8.) Of a disrespectful Behavior to
Superiors. (9.) Of Falsehood and Lying. (10.) Of rash and immoderate Anger.
(11.) Of Envy. (12.) Of Intemperance in Eating and Drinking. (13.) Of
Uncleanness. (14.) Of Fraud and Injustice. (15.) Of Covetousness. And (16.) Of
Enthusiasm. P. 161. SERMON VI. YOUNG Men exhorted to Sobriety by various
Considerations, viz. (1.) Of the Reasonableness thereof. (2.) Of their
religious Education. (3.) Of the constant Goodness of God to them. (4.) Of his
corrective Visitations. (5.) Of their Vows and good Resolutions in Times of
Trouble. (6.) Of the inward Peace attending Sobriety. (7.) Of the Esteem and
Honor which it procures. P. 215. SERMON VII. YOUNG Men exhorted to Sobriety,
from other Considerations, viz. (8.) Of their temporal Advantage. (9.) Of their
Usefulness in the World. (10.) Of those Persons whom they will please hereby.
(11.) Of those whom they will gratify by the contrary. (12.) Of one End of
Christ's coming into the World, namely, to "purify unto himself a peculiar
People," etc. P. 256. SERMON VIII. YOUNG Men exhorted to Sobriety by some other
Considerations, viz. (13.) Of an happy Death, and (14.) Of eternal Life, as the
Consequence thereof. (15.) Of the miserable Death of the wicked. And (16.) Of
their Punishment in the World to come. The extreme Folly and Danger of delaying
to be sober-minded. Miscellaneous Counsels and Warnings to young Men: And the
whole concluded with a Prayer more particularly for them and the Author. P.
291.
See Corrections at the End.

SERMON I.
Observations on TITUS and the Epistle to him. The design and method of the
following Discourses exhibited. Remarks on the terms young men, and
sober-minded: And, what is implied in exhorting them to be so, particularly
shown.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
TITUS, to whom the apostle Paul wrote this short, but excellent epistle, is
generally supposed to have been converted to the christian faith by his
ministry: And it is doubtless with reference hereto, that the apostle calls him
"his own son, after the common faith Chap. i. 4.
". Titus being a young man of great hopes, when he first became a disciple of
Christ, St. Paul seems to have had a particular kindness and regard for him;
sometimes taking him with him as his companion and assistant in the kingdom and
patience of Christ, while he traveled from country to country, to preach his
unsearchable riches among the gentiles. It appears from diverse passages in the
new testament, that Titus was a person of no small consideration among the
Christians of that day, even before he came to reside at Crete; being deputed,
sometimes by one apostle or another, and sometimes by an whole church, to
transact affairs of great importance to the common cause of christianity; which
trusts he seems to have discharged with great ability and reputation.

WHETHER Titus went with St. Paul to Crete, in one of his peregrinations, as
seems most probable: And whether it was by his, or the apostle's own ministry,
or by that of some other person, that the gospel was first planted in that
island, is not material at present to be inquired, or determined. It is still
evident that they were, on some occasion or other, both together at this
populous island; famous long before that time, as the supposed place of
Jupiter's birth; for Minos, its just king; for its labyrinth, its hundred
cities, etc. It is now more commonly known by the name of Candy, from its chief
city, founded by the Saracens; and at this day subject to the Turks. It is,
moreover, certain that, at the time when St. Paul and Titus were together at
Crete, there was a considerable number of christian converts there; who were,
it is likely, part Jews by birth, and part Gentiles. It is still farther
certain, that the apostle being about to depart from thence, left this
excellent person, who had by this time acquired great knowledge and experience,
in Crete, to superintend the affairs of the church; to regulate things there,
and particularly to ordain elders, or pastors, in all the cities wherein it
should be needful. For this cause left I thee in Crete, says he, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every
city, as I had appointed thee. Chap. i. 6.
From whence it appears that the church, or churches of Crete, were not
hitherto reduced to due form, rule, or order; most, if not all the cities being
destitute of regular, fixed pastors, or overseers.

AND here, by the way, it is natural to take notice of a groundless conceit of
a modern sect; to the people of which, however, God knows, I bear no ill
will; and who, in some other respects, are rather to be commended, than blamed.
The people usually called Quakers, assert that it was never the intention of
Christ the "chief shepherd", or of his inspired apostles, that there should be
a certain order of men separated to the gospel ministry; or regularly settled
and ordained as pastors, elders, or by whatever other name they are called, in
particular cities and churches. Upon which supposition let them, if they can,
give a plain and direct answer to the question, For what end it was, that the
apostle Paul left Titus at Crete? This notion of the Quakers is, in short,
diametrically repugnant to many passages of scripture; and contrary to the
known custom in the apostles days, under their own eye and direction, as well
as to the sentiments and practice of all Christians in general from that time
to the present, the Quakers themselves being excepted, who are but a novel
sect. The supposed novelty of this sect would, however, be no solid objection
against it, if its tenets and practices were truly apostolic. For whatever
bears this stamp and character, has really the most venerable antiquity on its
side; in comparison of which, no other, however gloried in, is of any
consideration. But one need not scruple to say, that our modern
Quaker-societies, meetings or assemblies, wherein there are neither any stated
pastors, nor sacraments, bear, in that respect, no resemblance of the churches
planted by the apostles, their companions, or their immediate followers. In all
which churches in general, there were both regular pastors, elders (or bishops)
and deacons: And, in them, the sacraments of baptism and the Lord's supper were
administered; all nearly according to the present mode and practice of our
churches in New England; though I will not presume to say, exactly so in every
circumstance.

ST. PAUL wrote this epistle to Titus very soon after he left him at Crete. As
is commonly supposed, it was written by him from Macedonia, about the year of
our Lord 65 or 66. He though it proper, it seems, at once to show his regard for
Titus, and his care for the yet-un^^rmed, unregulated churches of Crete, to
send him this letter; containing more particular counsels and directions,
probably, than he had given him verbally before; that, by having these in his
hands in writing, to read, and to communicate to others, they might be the more
strictly observed both by him and the churches there, as they were respectively
concerned herein. And having reminded Titus, as was before observed, of the
general design with which he left him at Crete; he immediately proceeds to give
him directions respecting the qualifications which he was to regard in the
elders or pastors, to be ordained by him. "If any be blameless," Chap. i. 6.
etc. From whence some have imagined that Titus himself was constituted by the
apostle, a bishop, and the first, of Crete, in that sense of the word, in which
a bishop is now distinguished from a pastor, elder or presbyter. Others, who
suppose that in the new testament, there is no such distinction of order or
office, made betwixt them, which is an undeniable and manifest truth; yet
suppose that Titus was actually ordained and fixed by the apostle in that
office, by whatever name it be called. The first of these opinions is certainly
an ill-grounded one; and the latter, most probably, a mistake also. For Titus
was, in all probability, a bishop of Crete, neither in one nor the other of
these senses; but was what, in scripture, is called an "evangelist"; an officer
quite distinct from a presbyter, pastor or bishop; which were then the same.

Do you ask then, What is meant by an evangelist? I will answer in the words of
a divine, very learned in matters relative to the apostolic times, churches and
customs. The evangelists were a sort of secondary apostles, who received their
doctrine and authority immediately from the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:
They were not fixed bishops, or pastors, of particular churches, but watered
the churches which the apostles had planted, perfected what they had left
deficient, planted churches by their orders, or rectified abuses; carried and
brought back letters and messages [of importance], and did all they could to
supply the place of an apostle, when he was necessarily engaged elsewhere Dr.
GEORGE BENSON, the Author's learned friend and correspondent, lately deceased.
. The account which we have of Titus in the new testament, corresponds
extremely well with this description of an evangelist; and he was, in all
probability, an officer of that superior rank, betwixt an apostle and a bishop,
or presbyter. And as the apostolic office, in the highest and properest sense
of it, was discontinued when the apostles personally died; so, according to the
description of an evangelist before given, the latter office must have also
been discontinued with the other; i. e. in such sort, that no evangelist, in
the highest and strictest sense, could be appointed, when there was no apostle
surviving to appoint him. But, this notwithstanding, there is no reason to
doubt but that the bishops, pastors or presbyters, who survived the apostles,
had sufficient authority, not only to preach themselves, but to ordain others,
for the defense and propagation of the gospel. And the ministers of the gospel
at this day, by whatever name or title they are called, have still both these
powers united in them; unless, perhaps, some of them have renounced one of
them, by putting themselves into a state of servile dependence upon, and
subjection to, those who have no right to "lord it over God's heritage", 1 Pet.
v 3.
or them. Be that as it may, the church of Christ, which is his body, never
was, nor will be, so forsaken of its head, as not to have within itself, as
derived from him, sufficient power, sufficient authority, for appointing all
officers necessary for its support; and also for "making increase of the body,
by that which every joint supplieth, to the edifying of itself in love". Ephesians.
iv. 16.


THE remaining part of the first chapter of this epistle, is taken up with the
proper qualifications for an elder, or christian bishop; with hints at some
vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision; and with
remarks on the general character of the Cretians, which was probably much
better known to the apostle than to Titus; and yet very needful for the latter,
who was to reside among them for a time, to be well apprised of.

BUT, whether Titus were left at Crete as an evangelist, or as a presbyter of
prime distinction; or even though it were in the capacity of a bishop in the more
modern and unscriptural sense; yet it must still be remembered, that he was to
be a PREACHING One; not merely to ordain others to that laborious service, and
to oversee them therein. For, in the second chapter of the epistle, the apostle
proceeds to give him some directions concerning the discharge of that duty; and
the regard which he was therein to have to persons of different ages, sexes,
and stations in life; admonishing him to adapt his instructions to them
respectively. Alluding to the deceivers, and vain talkers, spoken of in the
former chapter, he begins the second thus: But speak thou the things which
become sound doctrine. And, what things those are, we will, if you please,
leave the apostle to explain for himself; as he does in the following verses.
He immediately subjoins; That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in
faith, in charity, in patience. These then, are some of the things which become
sound doctrine. What are the others? -- The aged women likewise, that they be
in behavior as becomes holiness; not false accusers In the Original, "not
Devils".
, not given to much wine, teachers of good things. -- Of what good things? --
That they may teach the young women to be sober, as the apostle goes on; to
love their husbands, to love their children, to be discrete, chaste, keepers at
home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the "word of God be not
blasphemed. But how were the elder women to teach the younger such good things
as these? Doubtless, by their own exemplary practice, and private counsels, as
opportunity presented: For the apostle allowed not women, except inspired, to
teach in any other, or more public manner See 1 Con. xiv. 34. and 1 Timothy ii 11,
12.
. Thus it is then, that the elder women were to teach the younger these
excellent things; amongst which are good Economy, and a prudent, discrete and
virtuous behavior in their families; as for other reasons, so particularly,
lest the word of God should be blasphemed: i. e. lest the gospel of Christ
should fall under the contempt and reproach of men, by reason of the ill
conduct of women professing godliness; whether old or young.

THE apostle goes on; Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded. And he
immediately subjoins [ver. 7.] In all things showing thyself a pattern of good
works, etc. Intimating to Titus the great importance, the absolute necessity,
of taking heed to himself, as well as to his doctrine; and of being an example
of that sobriety, that godly and virtuous conversation, which, by his
preaching, he was to recommend to others. The apostle then considers the state
and duty of servants; enjoining Titus to teach them to be obedient unto their
own masters, and to please them well, etc. that they might adorn the doctrine
of God our Savior in all things. And these duties of the old and young, male
and female, bond and free, the apostle suggests to Titus, should be enforced
upon them respectively, by motives drawn from the the nature and design of the
gospel of God's grace." For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all
men, [so it might, and, I think, ought to be rendered] has appeared; teaching
us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and
the appearing of the glory of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These things speak and
exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee. Thus ends the
chapter.

AND from this cursory view of the chapter, we may form a good general idea of
what the apostle intended in the beginning of it, by "sound doctrine", and the
"things which become it": viz. more especially the plain, obvious, and
indisputable doctrines of the gospel, respecting the redemption of mankind by
the Son of God, and his appearing in glory hereafter to judge the world;
together with the practice of sobriety, righteousness and godliness; those
duties, the excellency and the obligation of which, are in some measure
apparent from the light of nature, tho more clearly made manifest, and more
forcibly taught, in the gospel of the grace of God; in the faith of which they
are to be performed. And this account of the things which become sound
doctrine, may receive both illustration and confirmation from the same
apostle's first epistle to Timothy, written on a similar occasion with this to
Titus -- The law is not made for a righteous man, says he, but for the lawless
and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy and profane,
for murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, for
whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers,
for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be ANY OTHER THING THAT IS
CONTRARY TO SOUND DOCTRINE, according to the glorious gospel, 1 Timothy i. 9, 10,
11.
etc.

HERE then, you have the Apostle's idea, both of the things which become, and
which are contrary to, sound doctrine. But, alas! how different conception have
many persons, concerning the gospel, its great design, and the things which
become sound doctrine? Are there not multitudes in the countries subjected to
the papal tyranny, who think that the things which more especially become such
doctrine, are, telling beads, going on pilgrimages, crossing themselves,
kissing and worshipping images; and other suchlike foolish and abominable
practices, many of which are directly contrary to sound doctrine? And among the
protestants, the reformed, are there not many, in whose yet-depraved, and
un-reformed opinion, some of the appendages, and the circumstantials of
religion at best, have usurped the highest place and estimation, as the things
that more particularly become sound doctrine; while the infinitely more
important and indispensable duties of morality are despised, perhaps, as "weak
and beggarly elements"? Are there not many protestants, in whose yet-unreformed
and depraved judgment, hardly any thing merits the honorable appellation of
sound doctrine, besides the subtleties and refinements of speculative men,
respecting certain abstruse, and, at best, very doubtful points? -- Such as,
One may safely say, very few people can even understand, and fewer still were,
probably, ever the better for; though it is likely very many have been the worse:
If not the worse, merely by believing them, yet by getting their minds soured
about them, and embittered against their christian brethren, who were so
unhappy, or, perhaps more properly, so happy, as not to see with their eyes.
For my own part, I cannot but think it much more safe to form my conceptions of
sound doctrine, and the things which become it, by this apostolical account
thereof, than by the writings of any uninspired, self-conceited and arrogant
men whatsoever: Especially men, who were hardly ever easy, but when they were
either coining some new, unscriptural definitions and distinctions, in the
ungolden mint of their own brain, or imperiously imposing this drossy,
counterfeit coin upon their neighbors; hereticating and persecuting, cursing
and murdering all, who would not receive it as true and genuine, unless when
something else proved a more efficacious restraint with them, than either the
fear of God, or the love of man: endeavoring to engage heaven and earth, and,
with more success, probably, to move hell in their quarrel; Flecture si nequeo
Superos, Acheronta movebo. AEn. vii.
; asserting that their spiritual coin, for which, good men! they desired only
worldly honors, and perishing gold in exchange, was the true riches, and
evidently bore an heavenly, divine impression: While those to whom they would
put it off, purely for their eternal benefit, could, alas poor blinded men!
discern upon it no image or superscription more sacred and venerable, than the
mere terrestrial one of the mortal coiners; the image of the earthly, not of
the heavenly ADAM. -- O detestable hypocrisy and villainy! -- Such in fact were
both the spirit and the practice of many of those men, who are now followed by
multitudes of protestants, as the greatest luminaries of the christian church
since the apostles days, and the preachers of "sound doctrine", by way of
distinction from others, at least as learned, and of a far more peaceable,
pious and virtuous conversation; which is, indeed, paying these reputed unsound
men, but a very indifferent compliment.

BUT, to return to the apostle and his epistle, from those who were so unlike
him both in doctrine and manners: -- His epistle having been written with a
view to direct Titus in his behavior as a minister of the gospel; and
particularly, though not primarily, respecting that material branch of his duty
as such, his doctrine, or preaching; the particular directions relative hereto,
are doubtless obligatory upon the preachers of the gospel in succeeding ages;
as is, at least generally, allowed. And, by the way, however ever superior
Titus may be supposed to have been in some respects, to any or all of the
ministers of the gospel at this day; yet the directions given him by the
apostle, are given with such an air, in such a manner, as supposes him to have
been only on a level with them in another, viz. as an uninspired man, who was
to receive the doctrine which he preached, and the rules to be observed by him,
immediately from the apostle, not from the Spirit of God, who spoke in and by
him. I think myself, therefore, (one of the least considerable, indeed, of
those who have the honor to sustain this sacred office) obliged to preach found
doctrine, and the things which become it, according to this account and
representation thereof, in all its branches: But shall now confine myself to
that single point, to which my text relates; the "exhorting young men to be
sober-minded".

IT has been the remark of many persons, and, I suppose, not wholly without
foundation, that, amongst my honored and beloved hearers of this society,
there is a pretty large proportion of "young men"; a larger proportion,
perhaps, than in most of the other assemblies in the town. I can truly say, I
am, as it is certainly my duty to be, tenderly concerned for their interest,
reputation and honor; for their real good in this world, as well as their
eternal happiness in the other. And, though I have not been unmindful of them in
times past; yet, methinks, it will be no more than a proper piece of respect,
and mark of my unfeigned love and regard to them, if I adapt and devote a
number of discourses more particularly to their service, agreeably to the
apostolic injunction in the text. This is what is proposed; and may almighty
God, by his blessing, render these discourses as truly useful and salutary to
them, as they are sincerely designed for that end!

AFTER some remarks on the principal terms in the text, the method which, by
divine permission and assistance, will be pursued, is as follows. It is
intended.

FIRST, Somewhat distinctly to explain to my young brethren, the nature of that
sobriety which is spoken of in the text; and to recommend it in a cursory way.

SECONDLY, To point out, particularly, some of the many sins, follies and
criminal excesses, which are repugnant to it; and against which young men
especially, may need to be cautioned.

THIRDLY, It is proposed, more largely and distinctly, to exhort them to this
sobriety of mind, and to dissuade them from the contrary. And,

FOURTHLY, To show them the extreme folly and danger of delaying to be
sober-minded, till they are farther advanced in years; the common, and often
fatal error of the young.

LET me make some remarks on the principal terms of the text, before I proceed
to the main design, as represented above. And,

1. THE persons who are to be thus exhorted, are "young men." It may not be
amiss just to observe here, that what is translated young men, in two words, is
only one in the original: the "young", or "younger", in the plural number, with
a masculine termination to denote the sex intended; there being nothing besides
this termination, to warrant the addition of the word "men," as in our common
translation: with which, however, I would not be thought to find any fault on
this account. For the original word is in general well enough rendered thus.
Under this term, or these terms, [young men] may be comprehended all persons of
that sex, between children, and those whom we commonly call middle-aged persons.

HUMAN life, or the age of man, has been variously divided. One, and, I
believe, a pretty ancient method of dividing it, is into four periods; viz.
childhood and youth, complete, perfect manhood, and old age. Those who divide
it thus, reckon the state of childhood, from the birth to fourteen years; of
youth, from fourteen to about twenty five; of complete, perfect manhood; from
twenty five to fifty; and of old age, from thence-forward till death; whether
that come at the end of threescore years and ten, or, by reason of strength,
not till fourscore years; or though people should live still longer "in labor and
sorrow. Psalm xc. 10.
"

ACCORDING to this division of human life, you perceive that all betwixt
fourteen and twenty five years, are to be reckoned in the class of young men.
And as to those who either a little fall short of, or exceed these years; they
may yet well enough be comprehended in the text, under the denomination of
young men. Neither the holy scriptures, nor moral discourses in general, aim at
precision in such matters as these. It would, indeed, be no better than
trifling to insist, in discourses of this kind, upon the punctilio of a few
weeks, months, or even years.

IT may be farther remarked here, that when, in common discourse, we speak of
young men, we often mean those that are in a single state, or the unmarried, in
contradistinction from the married, though SOME of the former are OLDER than many
of the latter. But the apostle does not appear to speak of young men in this
restrained sense, exclusively of the married; but rather to include both; though
he might probably have a more particular view to the former. That he does not
speak of the unmarried by way of distinction from the married, is at least
probable from what he had just before said concerning the young women, as he
calls them; [ver. 4.] some of whom he, nevertheless, supposes to be married, to
have husbands, and children: That they may teach the young women to -- love
their husbands, to love their children. etc. From hence it may be naturally
inferred, that the apostle, in the next verse but one, speaking of young men,
did not intend to be understood of the unmarried only: Especially if it be
considered that some of these, who have never entered into that state of life,
which he says "is honorable in all," instead of being young, are indeed OLD: At
least this is the case among us at this day -- However, as was intimated
before, the apostle may naturally be supposed to have had the unmarried more
especially in his eye; as being, perhaps, at once the greater number, and
standing in some peculiar need of such an exhortation to sobriety --

IT is accordingly designed to accommodate my discourses upon this subject,
more particularly to those whom we commonly mean by young men, or the
unmarried. But this, it is hoped, will not prevent others, the married, and
even the aged of both sexes, from reaping some benefit from them. For, as
sobriety, virtue, or true religion, is one uniform thing, in which all persons,
of whatever age, sex, or condition, are concerned; so whatever is said upon
this universally-interesting subject, if said with tolerable propriety, may be
in some measure for the edification of all in general, though it be most
particularly adapted and directed to "young men." But,

2. IT will be proper to give you here, a brief explanation of the term
"sober-minded"; and, hereby, some general idea what that is, to which the
apostle would have young men exhorted.

THE original word and its derivatives are used, sometimes in a more narrow or
restrained, and sometimes in a more extensive, comprehensive sense. When used
in the former, they may signify, and are translated, grave, chaste, temperate;
in opposition to lightness, leudness, and an immoderate indulgence of the
sensual appetites. They are used in such a restrained sense, even in several
places of this same chapter; of which it is unnecessary to give particular
instances. And in the like restrained sense the English word "sober," is often
used.

BUT the original may well bear a much more comprehensive meaning. It may
signify, to be of a "sound mind" in general; to have an enlightened, a
well-informed and healthy mind; a mind rightly disposed; a proper temper, a
duly regulated will and affections, accompanied by a corresponding external
behavior: In opposition to an erroneous, ignorant mind; a blind and depraved,
a carnal or fleshly mind; a mind set upon folly and vanity; a disorderly,
unruly will and affections; and those evil practices, which are the natural
fruit and consequence of having a mind thus darkened and corrupted. The original
word will very easily and naturally bear such an extensive signification as
this. SOPHRONEIN, sobrius esse, sapere, vel sana mente esse praeditus,
SOPHRONISMOS, sanitas animi, sapientia. Vid. 2 Timothy l. 7. -- "a sound mind."
And there is the more reason for understanding it thus in the text, because
the apostle, directing Titus as to his ministerial application to young men,
sums all up in this single word, that he should exhort them to be
"sober-minded:" Whereas he branches out into several particulars, in what he
says with reference to aged men, aged women, and young women, in the preceding
context; and to servants, in the verses following. From hence it appears pretty
evident, that this single word was designed to comprehend a great deal in it;
in short, every thing, in effect, to which young men need to be exhorted. I
therefore understand it much in the same latitude and extent, that Solomon
commonly uses the word wisdom, in his writings, viz. as comprehending true
religion in general, both in principle and practice; allowing only for the
difference of times and circumstances, or of the dispensations which Solomon
and we are under: -- He under the Mosaic, and we, the Christian.

3. THE next thing, and all that is farther necessary to be considered, for the
explanation of the text, is the manner of address which the apostle enjoins
Titus to use, expressed by the word "exhortation." -- Young men likewise
"exhort," etc. And, what this implies and supposes in it, may appear from the
following observations.

(1.) EXHORTATION differs widely, in the nature and idea of it, from
commanding, imperiously injoining a thing upon another, or authoritatively
requiring it, as a master may command, injoin, or require any thing of, his
servants. The ministers of the gospel have no such authority as this over old
or young. Even the inspired apostles claimed no such power; declaring that they
had no dominion over the faith of others: And they particularly admonish other
ministers, not to behave themselves as "lords over God's heritage."

(2.) MINISTERIAL exhortation differs, on the other hand, from merely
requesting something of another, or expressing a simple desire of it. One
person may, in numberless instances, express a desire that another would do
this or that, and yet not exhort him to it. For example, if a poor man should
make known his wants to his neighbor, and ask an alms of him, no one would
call this "exhorting" him to be charitable, or merciful.

(3.) CHRISTIAN and ministerial exhortation implies in it, reasoning, urging,
and endeavoring to persuade, by the use of such arguments as are adapted to
touch the conscience, to move the will, and to excite people to the performance
of what is considered as their duty, or that which they ought to do; pressing
it upon them with earnestness, and a proper pathos, as being of great
importance. So that the manner of address expressed by the word exhortation, is
a medium betwixt commanding and simply desiring a thing; the former of which
supposes such an authority as no minister of the gospel has, and the latter of
which implies nothing more than what a child might do as well as an apostle.

(4.) THE use of exhortation, as now explained, supposes men, even the young,
to be reasonable creatures; capable of understanding what is said to them; of
seeing the force, and feeling the weight, of rational arguments; and so, of
being influenced by them. No man, in the due exercise of his own reason,
employs it in giving exhortations to irrational creatures; to such as are, in
their own nature, incapable of being wrought upon, or moved by such means; on a
stock or a stone, on the horse or mule, which have no understanding. The end of
exhortation is to move, to incline the will, by offering proper, intelligible
motives and arguments to the understanding, or conscience; as was said before.

(5.) EXHORTING young men or others, to be sober-minded, supposes that they
need it, by reason of some natural or adventitious aversion, or disinclination
thereto: At least it supposes, that they need further information; and to have
motives, or arguments set before them in a stronger light; so as to touch their
hearts, and give a proper turn to their will and affections. For there would be
no room, at least no occasion, for exhortation, if their minds were supposed to
be already properly informed, and their wills, hearts, and affections under due
regulation; such as they ought to be under.

(6.) SUCH exhortation does not, however, suppose that the great end or design
of it is to be answered, merely by its own power, force, or energy,
independently of the blessing and grace of God concurring. What it really
supposes, as was said before, is, a reasonable creature, or a proper subject, a
free, moral agent, one naturally capable of understanding, and being influenced
by rational motives; and, at the same time, one that needs instruction and
excitement, in respect of some natural or adventitious darkness of mind, or
irregularity of the will and affections. But, whether the best-adapted
exhortations that man can give, shall be effectual in the event, to answer the
proposed end, depends upon God. For it is not without his gracious influence,
that these arguments will actually so touch the heart, as to produce their
designed effect; however rational or scriptural they may be. There is really no
true sobriety, no good fruit, no increase, no spiritual harvest, besides that
which God gives, even though a Paul planteth, and an Apollos waters: As,
indeed, there is not any fruit, any harvest produced even in the natural world,
without his secret energy and blessing, however diligent or skilful the
husbandman may be.

(7.) CHRISTIAN and ministerial exhortation implies in it, a kind, friendly and
courteous manner of address, in opposition to a rough, haughty and imperious
one. The apostle well knew, that it was by gentle and paternal treatment,
rather than by harshness, rigor and severity, that young men are, by the
blessing of God, to be made sober-minded, virtuous and good. He therefore
directs Titus to "exhort" them to be so. The same apostle in his first epistle
to Timothy, written with the like general design with this to Titus,
particularly enjoins upon him a respectful, courteous and obliging manner of
treating all, both the old and young of both sexes. "Rebuke not an elder," says
he, (by an elder, here, doubtless meaning an old man only, not a pastor or
bishop) but entreat him as a father; and the younger men as BRETHREN; the elder
women as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all purity. And in his second
epistle to the same person, he gives him the following caution against a rough
and arrogant behavior in his ministerial capacity. The servant of the Lord must
not strive," says he, but be gentle unto ALL men, apt to teach, patient, in
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging the truth. The same great apostle
appeals to the Thessalonians as witnesses of the kind and paternal manner, in
which he conducted himself toward them, when he preached the gospel among
them: Ye know, says he, how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one
one of you, AS A FATHER DOES HIS CHILDREN, that ye would walk worthy of God,
who has called you unto his kingdom and glory. 1 Epis. Chap. 11.


THESE passages may help to informs us, what sort or manner of address the
apostle intended, by the word "exhortation;" -- how great a regard he had for
decorum, meekness and decency, in the ministers of the gospel; and how
tenderly, kindly and courteously he would have even "young men" treated by
them. If these rules have not been duly observed by all ministers since; if
ill-natured reproaches, revilings, angry invectives, and harsh, imperious
menaces, have been sometimes heard, instead of the kind voice of exhortation
and gentle persuasion, in the spirit of meekness and charity; it is not because
the ministers of the gospel are not sufficiently warned against such a
prostitution of their sacred office and character, in the holy scriptures
Besides: religion is a reasonable service. It requires in the very nature of
it, an enlightened mind, a convinced judgment, the consent, approbation and
love of the heart; as being in itself most amiable, the foundation of all true
happiness here and hereafter. And, surely, this conviction of its excellency,
this complacency in, and love to it, are not to be produced, either in the old
or young, by reproaches, invectives, or an imperious address, in the teachers
of religion. In this respect, very particularly, the apostolic maxim will ever
hold true; the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. And these
rules of charity and decorum, my beloved young brethren, shall stand as a
perpetual reproach to my self, if I deviate from them, by railing at, reviling,
or lording it over you, instead of "exhorting you to be sober-minded." But,

(8.) IT would be a wrong inference from what has been said respecting this
point, that these ministerial exhortations may therefore be innocently
disregarded: Or, that those to whom they are given, are at liberty either to
receive or reject them, without any danger of incurring the displeasure of God.
Exhortations that are founded in truth and reason, and are according to the
word and will of God, by whomsoever given, cannot be despised, or set at
naught, without guilt and peril. The ministers of the gospel are indispensably
obliged to take heed, what they deliver as his word and will; what they exhort
you to; not "teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." And if they do
the latter, either knowingly and wilfully, or through a criminal neglect to
inform themselves what they ought to preach, great is their guilt, and great
the condemnation which belongs to them. Neither, on this supposition, are you
obliged to believe them, or to regard their exhortations; nay, you are bound in
reason, duty and conscience to reject them. But, on the other hand, if they
deliver to you real and important truth; if they exhort you to what is
according to the word and will of God; certainly such exhortations as these
are, in their own nature, binding. I mean, they are obligatory upon your
consciences: You cannot disregard them, without acting contrary to reason,
without sinning against God, and exposing yourselves, hereby, to his righteous
displeasure. What though the ministers of the gospel are not your masters, or
lords? What though they have no authority to command you how you shall conduct
yourselves? What though they have no right to call you to an account, for
contemning and disregarding their exhortations? or to harm you in any respect
whatsoever, as certainly they have not. Yet are you not accountable to God? Are
you not accountable to yourselves? Are you at liberty to act unreasonably? Have
you a right to reject the truth? the commandments of God? Are you without law
to him? Have you, in short, a right to reject any exhortations that are given
you agreeable to his word and will, by those who, in his providence, sustain
the character and relation of teachers and instructors to you? or even by any
other person? You cannot think you have any such right as this, to do wrong; or
that you may "use liberty for a cloak of maliciousness."

IN many cases, counsels and exhortations are refuseable; or they may be
rejected without guilt or danger. But this is only when they are in their
nature bad, or indifferent, doubtful, or merely prudential. No exhortations of
this nature, are binding upon the conscience; but the persons to whom they are
given, are at liberty to reject them, if they choose to do so; yea, they are in
reason and conscience bound to do it, as to those counsels that are positively
bad; as was observed before. But when you are exhorted to be sober-minded; when
you are counseled to receive and embrace the truth, sufficiently proved to be
such; when you are persuaded to do what is in its nature fit and reasonable to
be done; when you are admonished to fear God, and keep his commandments; in a
word, when you are exhorted to do your duty, and what God himself requires of
you; certainly these are counsels and exhortations of such a kind, that they
cannot be disregarded without great guilt and danger. They do not come under
the head of indifferent, doubtful, or merely prudential counsels; much less,
under that of bad ones: But they are such as ought to have all the weight and
influence of commands; even the commands of God himself. Such, indeed, they
are, in one sense: For God authoritatively requires of you, whatsoever you are
exhorted to, conformably to reason, his word and will, whoever the exhorters
themselves may be; and although they have no dominion over you, nor any right to
exact an account of your behavior, except in the way of sober remonstrance,
expostulation, and friendly reproof, if there should be occasion for it.

IF the young men of Crete had not "suffered the word of exhortation" from
Titus, but scorned and rejected it; would they not have been justly blameable?
Without doubt. If you should do the like, what would be the consequence? You
need not be told? The obligation to regard and follow exhortations, depends
much less upon the character, office, or qualifications of him that gives them,
than it does upon the nature of the exhortations themselves. Though, as to the
former, there is no evidence, nor even probability, that Titus was an inspired
preacher. He received his doctrine and directions from the apostle. If others
therefore, though the meanest of Christ's ministers, follow the doctrine and
directions of the same apostle, of all the apostles, and even of Christ
himself; will not their exhortations be as binding upon you, as those of Titus
were upon the Cretian youth? -- Judge even of yourselves what is right.

(9.) ALTHOUGH the term exhortation implies in it a friendly and courteous manner
of address; yet, certainly, it is not designed in opposition to reproving and
rebuking those that do evil, when there is just occasion for it. For, in the
same chapter, the apostle enjoins Titus to do thus: These things speak and
exhort, and rebuke with all authority; let no man despise thee. Where you will
observe, that exhorting and rebuking are joined together; so that the former
could not be intended in the text, in opposition to the latter. And in the
preceding chapter, speaking of the gross immoralities of the Cretians, as even
one of their own poets had characterized them, he immediately subjoins, "This
witness is true; wherefore rebuke them sharply, etc." Chap. 1. 12, 13.
In his epistle to Timothy, he also says, Them that sin, rebuke before all,
that others also may fear. 1 Timothy V. 20.
Or, as it might, and, I suppose, ought to be translated: "Them that sin before
all, rebuke," etc. For, surely, they were not to be rebuked before all, or in a
public, solemn manner, unless they had sinned before all, or their crimes were
notorious and public; as the common reading implies.

BUT it is farther to be observed here, that even reproof and rebuke, which are
needful in some cases, and which may seem to imply somewhat of rigor and
severity in their nature; may yet be administered in a truly friendly and
paternal manner. And they doubtless ought to be given in such a way, if
possible, as to convince those to whom they are given, that they are kindly
intended for their amendment, and real good; since, otherwise, there is little
or no benefit to be hoped from them. Yea, they are more likely to have a bad,
than a good effect, if they are seen to proceed from pride, resentment and
anger, or are attended with insulting and reviling expressions. And, that the
apostle did not design such rebukes as these, but quite contrary ones, in the
spirit of charity and meekness, is sufficiently evident from his own words, in
his second epistle to Timothy; where he joins reproving, rebuking and
exhorting, together; saying, "Reprove, rebuke, exhort " with all long-suffering
and doctrine;" and this, even where he is speaking professedly of those, who
"would not endure sound doctrine." Chap. IV. 2, 3.


(10.) AND lastly, It cannot reasonably be thought inconsistent with the
kindness, meekness and gentleness of the gospel, or of that manner of address
which is implied in the word exhortation, to lay open the folly and danger of
vice, or of disregarding the word and commandments of God, in the plainest,
fullest and most forceable manner possible: To show to all people, whether old
or young, the guilt and misery of a state of alienation from God, and of enmity
to him in their minds by wicked works; together with the imminent hazard which
wicked men are in, of perishing in their sins; and "warning them to flee from
the wrath to come." It is not here meant, that this may be done by prejudging,
or pointing out particular persons, as the heirs of wrath and perdition; which
were indeed an abominable piece of arrogance and presumption; but, by showing
in a clear and forceable manner, that the paths of vice and folly, by
whomsoever trodden, are the paths that lead to destruction.

THERE are some persons, who profess to have a relish for discourses upon the
excellency and rewards of moral virtue, with exhortations to the practice of
it; and yet do not well like to have the evil and danger of sin insisted on; or
the terrors of the Lord set before them. This is what some people consider as
savouring of harshness, sourness and severity; hardly consistent with the
meekness and charity which become the ministers of the gospel. Nor, indeed,
will I deny, that these topics may be treated upon, not only in a manner that
is very justly disgustful, but too frequently; or to the neglect of others
which are equally proper and useful; and are, at the same time, more pleasing;
yea, probably, better adapted to produce a good effect upon the minds of many
persons. And, to say the least, I do not envy those men their particular
temper, and cast of mind, who seem to be hardly ever so much in their element,
as when they are thundering "hell and damnation" in the ears of people, with
all the most frightful images and expressions, which they can collect together.

BUT still, these less agreeable topics of persuasion, are in themselves very
proper and necessary: And the insisting on them at times, in a scriptural way,
ought not to be imputed to sourness, gloominess or moroseness of temper; or to
any want of charity and good will. Is the physician thought to be wanting in
kindness, good will or respect to his patient, for letting him know, in some
cases, the nature and danger of his disease? Especially if, at the same time,
he informs him of the remedy; exhorts him to use it, and to take all possible
care and pains, that he may recover his health, and live happily. The disease
would be the same in itself, though the patient were not thus informed concerning
it; and the real danger, very often the greater, for a reason too obvious to
need mentioning. Is the pilot who, at a distance, observes a vessel in a storm,
just running upon rocks or quicksands, and likely to be foundered in a few
minutes, thought to want good will to the people on board, because he gives
them the signal of their danger, and directs them to a secure harbor! Is the
watchman that cries "Fire" aloud in the night, through the streets of a city, to
awake the sleeping inhabitants, lest they should be consumed in their beds;
calling upon them to arise, and extinguish the flames, supposed for that
reason, to want benevolence to them, and a proper concern for their welfare! No
one is so absurd as to reason after this rate. In these cases, neither the
physician, the pilot, nor the watchman makes the danger; but only discovers it,
and exhorts those whom it concerns, to escape it: Which, surely, are acts of
kindness and charity; and such as each of them was under obligation to perform.
To have done otherwise, would have been at once a neglect of duty, and great
cruelty.

WHY then should it be thought unkind, or ungenerous, in the spiritual
physician under Christ the Chief, to show to youth, or others, their spiritual
diseases? their danger of eternal death? Especially if, at the same time, he
shows the remedy, the means of obtaining eternal life, and exhorts to the use
thereof. Why should it be thought an unkindness for the spiritual pilot, to
warn those of their danger, whom he sees carried down the gulf of error and
vice with a rapid course; and ready to be swallowed up in the abyss of
destruction and misery? Especially if, at the same time, he points them to the
great ARK, and to a secure haven; where neither winds, nor waves, nor storms
can hurt them. Why should it be accounted a cruel thing in the spiritual
watchman, to awaken those that are asleep in their sins, and every moment in
danger of being consumed in the fire of God's indignation? -- to "cry aloud,"
and even to lift up his voice like a trumpet; exhorting them, if I may so
express it, to extinguish those terrible flames with the tears of repentance,
while there is opportunity for it? Is not this the truest charity? As was said
in the other cases, he does not make, but only give warning of the danger, that
it may be escaped. And has not God enjoined this upon all who are, by office,
the preachers of righteousness? He says to each of them, in effect, as he did
to the prophet of old: Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of
Israel: Therefore hear the word at MY MOUTH; and give them warning from ME.
When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die; and thou give him not
warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his life;
the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require AT
THY HAND. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor
from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered THY
SOUL. Ezekiel. Chapter III.


IT should also be remembered, that exhorting young men, or others, to be
sober-minded, must, by natural and just implication intend, using all arguments
and motives that are proper to that end. And therefore, such as the
last-mentioned, must not, cannot be omitted; though there are many others to be
insisted on, with the same general view. Indeed, a minister of the gospel shows
no less benevolence and tenderness to his hearers, by admonishing them of the
danger of infidelity and impenitence, provided it is done in a rational and
scriptural way; than by exhorting them to be sober-minded, wise and virtuous,
from a consideration of the present peace, and future rewards of religion: Such
considerations as those which now close this discourse, addressed by Solomon to
his own Son; and found among those excellent proverbs, the design of which was,
to give subtlety to the simple, to the young man knowledge and understanding --
My son -- Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies:
and all the things thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Length
of days is in her right hand: and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to
them that lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that retains her. Prove.
III. 11 -- 18.


SERMON II.
Of Sobriety in general, in Principle and Practice. More particularly, That it
implies (1) A Belief of God's Being, Perfections and Providence. (2) Of the
Christian Revelation. And (3) Sober Thoughts of One's self. Short Reflections
on each.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to the sober-minded.
MY beloved young brethren of this Society, having a design to adapt a number
of discourses particularly to your service, as a mark of the respect and
good will which I bear to you, as well as from a regard to my duty more
immediately to God, whose I am, and whom I serve with my spirit, though in
weakness: I thought I might very properly make these words of the apostle Paul
to Titus, the subject of my intended discourses.

IN the morning I made some remarks on Titus and the Epistle to him; on the
terms "young men", and "sober-minded"; and then considered, more particularly,
what that manner of address implies in it, which is expressed in the text by
the word "exhortation". These several observations were designed only as
introductory to my main design; which was exhibited in the preceding
discourse, under four general heads. The first of these, to which I shall now
proceed without farther preface, was,

FIRST, By divine assistance, somewhat distinctly to explain to you the nature
of that sobriety, which is spoken of in the text; and to recommend it to you in
a cursory way.

BUT, let me here just remind you of something observed in the preceding
discourse; that the original Greek word, though perhaps most commonly used in a
restrained sense, to signify being grave, chaste, temperate or moderate, yet
easily and naturally admits a very extensive meaning. It may comprehend all
that is commonly intended in the writings of Solomon, by "wisdom"; i. e. true
religion in general, both in principle and practice. And there is, if I mistake
not, a particular positive reason for understanding it in such a latitude in
the text. In this comprehensive sense, it will accordingly be considered in the
ensuing discourses.

FOR the farther illustration hereof, it may be observed that this expression,
"sober-minded," naturally suggests to us, that true sobriety, or all true
wisdom, begins, and has its seat in the mind, soul or spirit; the intellectual,
immortal, and most excellent part of our compound nature: That it consists in
the soul's, or mind's being rightly informed, disposed, and under due
regulation. If the mind be not duly enlightened, rightly affected, and under a
proper influence, no person, whether old or young, can be truly wise, virtuous
or sober. Not the body, but the mind itself, is most properly the residence, or
seat, of true wisdom and sobriety; of all morally good qualities. However
inoffensive, blameless or regular a person's external behavior in life may be;
yet if you suppose him at the same time to have a mind destitute of knowledge,
uninformed with truth, void of sincerity and good principle; or, in one word,
if you suppose him destitute of a "sober mind," in the strict, literal sense of
these words, you certainly suppose him to be neither wise nor good, in a moral
sense, You suppose, indeed, some appearance of wisdom, of sobriety, or of
virtue; but it is only the appearance, not the reality; the shadow without the
substance. Or, if I may be indulged the expression, you suppose a fair,
magnificent temple, but no Deity, no God within. Nay, farther; If you suppose
the soul, or mind of man, unadorned with knowledge, virtue, and good principle;
do you not, of consequence, suppose it to be deformed and debased by error,
ignorance, vice, or positively bad principles? Doubtless you do. The mind of an
infant has, indeed, been considered by some, as a charte blanch, or clean
paper, fit to receive any inscription, impression or character; and though not
endowed with any knowledge or virtue, still not positively erroneous, vitiated,
or morally corrupted: With the truth and justness of which supposition, I am
not now concerned. But you cannot even suppose a person that is come to years,
so as to be a moral agent, in such a middle state as this, betwixt knowledge
and error, good and evil dispositions. If such a person, though but a young man,
is destitute of wisdom, virtue, and a right turn of mind, he is certainly and
positively erroneous, foolish, vicious, or wrongly disposed. Whatever may be
imagined respecting the soul of an infant; yet the soul of such a moral agent,
cannot be conceived destitute of all thought and sentiment, of all opinion and
principles; and if it is not under the influence of such as are true and right,
virtuous and good; it must of course be defiled, corrupted and depraved by such
as are erroneous and vicious; as was said before. So that though I just now
compared a person, who is apparently sober or virtuous, but without sincerity,
without good principle, to a beautiful temple in which no Deity resides; it now
seems that such a one may, with far more propriety, be likened to a whited
sepulcher, which indeed appears beautiful outward, but is within full of dead
men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Mat. 23. 37.


Now, if the very "mind and conscience are thus defiled", thus under the
influence of error, of wrong dispositions and affections; surely you cannot
think such a person "sober-mined", whatever his external appearance may be. Let
me just add here, that though, in many characters, there is such a strange
mixture of wisdom and folly, virtue and vice, sincerity and hypocrisy, that it
is next to impossible for any mortal to determine, whether the good or the bad
qualities predominate, so as to constitute the general character; yet
doubtless, either the former or the latter actually do so in every man. For
otherwise, there would be a moral agent without any moral character! -- unless
this can be justly accounted one -- That he is neither wise nor foolish,
virtuous nor vicious, good nor bad, but something, no one can tell what,
between both: Which, to be sure, will not be easily admitted even as a
supposeable case or fact, by those that have given their attention to the
important subject of morals and religion.

BUT though it is suggested by the very expression in the text, that the mind
itself is the seat of virtue, wisdom or sobriety, as was said before; yet you
are not to imagine that when you are exhorted to be sober-minded, this
exhortation respects your minds, or inner man only; or, that it has no
reference to your outward behavior. There is an external sobriety of the
manners, as well as an internal one of the mind; though the latter is, indeed,
the first to be considered and regarded. But the mind being set right, or duly
informed and disposed; your outward actions and conversation are also to be
under a proper regulation; such as corresponds to a sober mind. Yea, farther,
if your minds are endowed with true wisdom or sobriety, your outward conduct
will, without doubt, be sober and regular also. These things cannot well be
separated even in imagination. The former of them infers the latter; though the
latter of them does not, at least not so necessarily, infer the former. For we
may much more easily conceive of a person's having the external appearance of
virtue and sobriety in his behavior, without the reality of it in his mind,
than we can, on the other hand, conceive of his being really wise, or
sober-minded, and yet commonly acting foolishly and viciously. The former is
not an impossibility; but the latter is so, even in nature. There being,
therefore, such a close and manifest connection betwixt sobriety of mind, and
of conversation, both which are necessary to constitute a truly good character;
the exhortation which we are considering, must be supposed to respect and
comprehend both; the former of them, indeed, primarily, and most directly, and
the latter of them indirectly, or consequentially; but yet no less truly and
certainly than it does the other, the sobriety of the mind.

IT should be further observed, that there are not, properly speaking, two or
more different kinds of true sobriety, wisdom or religion; one for the old,
another for the middle-aged, and a third for the young; or one for male, and
another for female: But there is one kind of religion, wisdom or sobriety for
all; even as there is but one God, one Lord, one faith, one hope of our
calling; one general rule, or manner of conversation, prescribed for all. There
are, indeed, some peculiar obligations and duties resulting from our respective
relations and circumstances in life. There are certain things incumbent upon
the aged, which are not so, upon the young; at least not in the same degree:
As, on the other hand, there are some, to which youth are more especially
obliged; and some follies, indiscretions and vices, which they need more
particularly to be warned against. But these are no more than circumstantial
differences. True sobriety, wisdom or religion, is still essentially one and
the same thing, not only in old and young, but in male and female, bond and
free; the particular duties which are proper and peculiar to these states or
conditions respectively, making no essential difference. As a man in health may
in reason be bound to do some things which a sick one is not, and vice versa;
or as a man in civil office and authority may be bound to do some things which
a man in a private capacity is not obliged to do, yea, cannot do lawfully or
innocently; and yet a truly wise and sober man is of the same religion both in
health and sickness, and whether he sustains a public, or only a private
character: So the old and the young, male and female, the great and small, all
persons in general, are under obligation to be of the same religion,
essentially considered, notwithstanding some differences in their respective
duties, arising out of their particular relations and circumstances in life.
And the same spirit of truth, of virtue and wisdom, actually resides, operates
in, and actuates them all, if they are truly sober-minded.

Now, that sobriety of mind to which young men are to be exhorted, is
unquestionably a religious sobriety; founded in a due regard to almighty God;
conformable to the dictates of right reason, and such as all persons in
general, of whatever age or condition, are under obligation to; and including,
moreover, whatever particular duties are, either exclusively, or more
especially, incumbent upon the young. It cannot, surely, be supposed that the
apostle, in the text, intended any thing short of a truly religious, pious, or
godly sobriety of mind; as was just now intimated. And there is the more reason
for particularly observing this to you; because there is something that often
passes in the world under the name of sobriety, which, though really implied and
comprehended therein, and therefore good and commendable in its place, does yet
by no means come up to the full and proper idea hereof; but is essentially
defective, being without any piety at bottom.

THIS matter deserves to be more particularly stated and explained. We
sometimes speak of sobriety particularly in opposition to intemperance in
eating and drinking; and when we mention any one as a sober man, we mean,
perhaps, no more than that he is free from these gross and shameful vices.
Sometimes by a sober man, we mean only one that is not addicted to lewd,
lascivious practices. Sometimes by a sober man, we mean no more than one who is
externally grave and solid, in contradistinction from a light, airy and
fantastic one. Sometimes we use the same word in a little larger sense; meaning
perhaps, by a sober man, one that is of a grave and serious deportment in
general; free from all the gross vices of intemperance, and debauchery, of
rioting and lasciviousness; and one that steadily minds his proper worldly
business, being, in that respect, a good member of society. Now, although these
things are all really commendable in their places, and, without doubt, included
in that sobriety of mind which is intended in the text; yet they are an
extremely imperfect and deficient notion of it. This appears, indeed, in some
measure, from what has been already said, respecting the necessity of internal
sobriety; which is not necessarily implied in such an externally grave and
sober conversation. But what I still more particularly intend here, is, that
this idea of sobriety is very defective and imperfect, inasmuch as it does not
necessarily suppose a due regard to God, or any truly religious principle, as
the spring and source of it.

AN Atheist, or the fool who faith in his heart, There is no God, may possibly
be a sober man in this low and partial sense. There is such a thing as
constitutional gravity, or a natural sedateness and solidity, and sort of
aversion to those gross vices in some men: Or a mere sense of decency may
preserve some therefrom, while they are destitute both of the love and fear of
God, or of all religious principle. A person may abstain from them, and in that
partial sense be a sober man, from worldly prudence and policy only; motives,
which though not positively evil, yet cannot be accounted good in a religious, or
even moral sense: For, to be good in this sense, supposes a regard to God, and
to moral obligations.

LET me add, though it may seem strange, perhaps, at the first thought, that it
is possible this external sobriety of behavior may, in some cases, be owing to
a positively wrong and vicious principle: So that if a person were of a less
degenerate and depraved mind than he is in some respects, he would of course
also have less of this outward gravity and sobriety. This observation might be
illustrated and confirmed by diverse examples; but one may suffice. A man, then,
may be worldly-minded and covetous to a prodigious degree; having all his
thoughts and desires centred on earthly riches, and his mind continually
employed on the methods of obtaining and keeping them; while he says to the
gold, Thou art my hope; and to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence. Now this
is unquestionably an irrational, vicious principle; a positively wrong and
depraved turn of mind. And yet it is, in its natural consequences and
operations, a check, and powerful restraint to the vices of leudness and
luxury, of riot and debauchery. Such a predominant, boundless love of riches,
naturally and directly leads to a diligent application to worldly business; to
an external gravity of deportment; and to sobriety of conversation, in that
partial sense of it, spoken of above; or as it stands in opposition to the
wasting, impoverishing vices of idleness, luxury, and an excessive indulgence
of the sensual appetites. These vices are, in their very nature, incompatible
with extreme avarice. Nor did the world ever yet see a thorough MISER, that was
addicted to them; seldom one, who did not loudly declaim against them as
odious, scandalous and ruinous ones. Were such a grave, rich -- poor -- happy
-- miserable man, freer from this particular predominant vice, he might very
probably have less external sobriety; and, instead of always preaching against
the follies, extravagances, and criminal excesses of young men, sometimes
condescend to make one of a party with them in these excesses -- Mere pride,
that hateful sin, may, in some cases, be supposed to produce the like external
gravity and sobriety, by absorbing, as it were, all the feebler lusts and
passions. In short, it comes to this at last, that one enormous, gigantic and
voracious vice,

"Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest". POPF.


THUS, you see, it is possible, not only for real, but great and enormous vices
of the mind, to contribute to the appearance of virtue and sobriety in the
external conversation; particularly in the instances which have now been
mentioned. But that sobriety to which all, and young men in particular, are to
be exhorted, as was said before, is primarily in internal sobriety of the mind;
and not merely so, but a truly religious sobriety, resulting from a proper
regard to God, his authority and commandments. Whatever sobriety, whether of
mind or manners, or both, may be conceived of without piety, without religious
principle; this is not that which is intended in the text. It is essentially
defective; it does not deserve the name of sobriety in a religious sense, though
it may be so called in a civil or political one; and though it may contribute to
a man's reputation and interest in the world; yea, may render him a very useful
and respectable member of society. Nor should we, indeed, ever indulge to
groundless suspicions about the sincerity of particular persons; which were
highly injurious and criminal.

IT must be observed farther, that the sobriety to which you are exhorted, is
not only in general a religious, but a truly Christian sobriety of mind and
manners: Such as corresponds to the faith of the gospel, and to the
commandments of God as promulgated by his Son Jesus Christ; and therefore
presupposes belief in him as the light, the savior and judge of the world. We
may be very certain that the great apostle Paul, (who himself desired neither
to preach nor to know any thing, in comparison of "Jesus Christ and him
crucified") giving directions to Titus as a minister of the gospel, and
enjoining him amongst other things, to exhort young men to sobriety, had in his
mind nothing short of that sobriety which is in its nature truly christian;
agreeable to the glorious discoveries, and the genius of the gospel; such an
one as is regulated by its precepts, and made manifest in a conversation
becoming this divine institution. It were quite unnatural to suppose that the
apostle had in view, only such a sobriety as a mere pagan who believes the
being of a God, may possibly be the subject of: Nay, it would be so, to suppose
he intended only such a sobriety as a Jew, still under the Mosaic dispensation,
might possess, or practice. It cannot be reasonably imagined, that he would
have had Titus exhort the young men of Crete, who were partly Gentiles, and
partly Jews by birth, to be sober-minded upon the principles of the gentile
theology, which were so vain and absurd; and which he himself every where
decried: Nor yet only upon the true principles of natural religion; which
discovers not any way wherein sinful creatures may certainly obtain eternal
life: Nor yet, lastly, upon the footing of the Mosaic law, which was "weak
through the flesh"; and of which the same apostle himself says, that as many as
are of the works of it, "are under a curse." If we consider the character of
the writer, and of the person to whom he wrote, together with the time,
occasion and circumstances hereof, we cannot doubt but that St. Paul's meaning
was, that Titus should exhort the Cretian young men to receive the revelation
of the grace of God by his Son from heaven, upon its proper evidences; and to
live in a practical conformity to the holy precepts of the gospel.

THAT he intended nothing below, or short of, such a truly christian sobriety
of mind, is farther evident from hence. The several exhortations which Titus is
enjoined to give to the old and young, etc. respectively, are introduced thus,
with particular reference to some persons, "whose mouths were to be stoped, --
especially those of the circumcision"; -- But speak thou, says the apostle, the
things which become SOUND DOCTRINE: That the aged men, etc. And one reason
particularly assigned, why Titus should teach, and exhort to, these things, and
others practice them, is, "that the WORD OF GOD be not blasphemed." Now,
certainly, what the apostle intended by the word of God, and sound doctrine, is
neither more nor less than the gospel of God. This, if proof were needed, would
be manifest from a parallel passage in his first epistle to Timothy -- And if
there be any other thing that is contrary to SOUND DOCTRINE, according to the
glorious gospel of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust 1 Timothy 1,
10, 11.
. This gospel of the kingdom then, is the sound doctrine intended, and that
word of God, which should not be blasphemed. Who then can doubt, but that the
sobriety of mind spoken of by the apostle, is the same thing in effect, with
the belief and practice of the christian religion? Or, if any like this
expression better, -- a practical faith in the gospel; though, for my own part, I
know of no real difference in the sense of them.

THE same thing is farther manifest, beyond all doubt, from the words of the
apostle a few verses after the text: Where he suggests some other motives to,
or reasons for, the observation of the several exhortations beforementioned:
-- That they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. For the
grace of God -- has appeared -- teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly -- looking for that blessed hope, and --
our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us,
etc. The text being considered thus in connection with what preceeds and follows
it; the sobriety intended therein, is evidently such a sobriety of mind, not as
Socrates or Plato, not as Cicero or Seneca taught, though in some respects truly
excellent; nor yet merely such as Moses and the prophets taught; much less
still, such as Lord Shaftsbury and Lord Bollingbroke taught: But such as the
LORD FROM HEAVEN, and his inspired apostles taught; and such as all are to
practice, who hope to ascend thither where he is, to behold, and to partake of
his glory. And whosoever pretends to exhort any, whether old or young, to be
sober-minded, without keeping in view, and proceeding upon, this truly divine
plan -- the doctrine of our redemption from sin and death by Jesus Christ, and
of life and immortality bro't to light through the gospel, at best does his work
to the halves; and, by no means, frames his exhortation according to the
manifest design, and true spirit of the text.

THUS, my young brethren, I have given you some general and imperfect idea of
the sobriety to which you are exhorted: Nothing beyond this was intended by the
foregoing remarks relative hereto. Let me now descend to a more distinct
explanation of it, in conformity to this general idea, and to these cursory
observations, which I shall still keep in view; and if you should do the same,
it might not be unuseful to you. In the first place, then,

I. THIS sobriety of mind is founded in a firm belief of God's being and
perfections, his moral government and universal providence, agreeably to the
light of nature, or natural reason, and to the express doctrine of holy
scripture; for these do not contradict, but mutually confirm and illustrate
each other. One of the sacred writers uses a very bold, and equally noble
figure, in speaking of the clear evidence which God, who is invisible, has
given of his existence and perfections, to mankind in general, by the visible
effects of his power. That which may be known of God, says he, "is manifest in
[or to] them" [the gentile nations;] for God has shown it unto them. For the
INVISIBLE THINGS OF HIM from the creation of the world are CLEARLY SEEN, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.
Romans 1. 19. 20.
Although the world by wisdom knew not God; i. e. though mankind in general did not
actually attain to any tolerable knowledge of the true God by natural reason
and philosophy; yet it is certain, even upon principles of reason, both that
there is One, and but One God; an all-perfect being: One, and but One, who is
underived, unbegotton, proceeding from none, and absolutely independent: "Of
whom, and through whom, and to whom [of consequence] are all things;" -- all
other persons and beings, whether visible or invisible. So that no one, of whom
it can be truly and properly said, that he is either made or created, begotten
or produced, derived from, or dependent upon another, is himself the unmade and
uncreated, the unbegotton and unproduced, the underived and independent
Creator, or only living and true God: For this were a contradiction in terms.

THE divine attributes, as discovered to us by the wonderful works and word of
God in conjunction, are, eternity, independence, or necessary self-existence;
immensity, or omnipresence; incorporeity, or spirituality; boundless power,
perfect knowledge, and unerring wisdom; perfect purity, holiness and justice,
truth and faithfulness, goodness, mercy, and immutability. For in all these
respects, in all truly divine perfections, God is necessarily, and therefore
immutably the same, even from everlasting to everlasting, without variableness,
or shadow of turning. And as God originally created all things; so he
continually preserves, presides over, and governs them by his providence, in
the most wise, righteous, good and gracious manner: Being a lover of all virtue
and goodness, and abhorring all vice and wickedness, even while he is merciful
to the wicked; good and kind even to the unthankful and to the evil. It will
not be amiss to observe further here, that the holy scriptures speak much
oftener, and far more largely and particularly, of God's goodness and mercy,
than of any of his other perfections; assuring us, that "the Lord is good to
ALL, and his tender mercies over ALL his works;" that "there is none good but
One, that is God;" that "God is love" -- goodness and love itself, perfect and
universal, eternal and immutable love: And it is repeated no less than
twenty-six times in one psalm, that "his mercy endures for ever." Psalm 136.


Now, faith in God, his perfections and providence, and particularly in his
goodness and mercy, is not only an essential ingredient in, but the very
foundation of, all true sobriety, or religion. For, in the language of
inspiration, which is in this respect at least, the language of reason also,
without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes to God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Heb. XI. 6.
Though I cannot but observe by the way, that some modern pretended reformers
of the supposed errors and heresies among us, seem rather to have aimed at
establishing it as a fundamental article of faith, that God is NOT "a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him;" but that men may seek him, not only
earnestly and diligently, but do so all their lives, and yet not find his favor
extended to them, or finally receive any reward of him -- except the reward of
unrighteousness in eternal torments! But if this be accounted orthodoxy, I
must, for my own part, humbly confess with the apostle Paul, that after the way
which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers; believing all
things which are written in the law and the prophets, [and the gospel of Christ
also:] and have HOPE TOWARD GOD: Acts XXIV. 14. 15.
Which even the best men upon earth can hardly have, upon the principles of
such a spurious orthodoxy as that just now referred to.

BUT to return. If, instead of believing the existence and perfections, the
moral government and universal providence of the equally great and good God,
you have him not in all your thoughts; if you do not duly regard him; but
banish him, as it were, out of his own world, the universe which sprung from
nothing at his word: If you do thus, it is impossible that you should have any
true sobriety of mind, any real wisdom. For the knowledge or fear of the Lord,
is even literally "the beginning of wisdom." They that know not God, know
nothing as they ought to know it; nor do any thing as they ought to do it.

LET me therefore, my young brethren, take occasion here to caution you against
listening with a favorable ear, to any atheistical notions; such as strike at
the being, attributes, or moral government of God; and, thereby, at the very
root of all religion and virtue. There are not wanting those in this apostate,
this foolish and wicked world, who scruple not even to tell others, they are
fools, by intimating that they "say in their hearts, There is no God;" or at
least, no such holy, wise and righteous one as is commonly supposed; none, from
whom we have any thing to fear if we do evil, or to hope if we do well. And
there are some young men, though, I would charitably hope, not amongst you; --
yea, some that are more advanced in years, who either from an unwillingness to
part with their lusts, or, at best, from great levity of mind, and an
affectation of singularity, listen with pleasure to such senseless notions,
when they hear them advanced; and read the books with delight, in which some
persons even of the last and present age, have shown a strange ambition to
record their own folly and impiety to the ages that are to come. Take heed, my
beloved brethren, lest any of you should also be carried away with these errors
of the wicked; of such fools as these.

I HARDLY need desire you, by way of antidote against the poison, and mortal
venom of such principles, to lift your eyes to the heavens above; to observe
the stupendous magnitude, the regular motions, the beautiful order, of the
numerous worlds that roll there; or to ask you, how they came there? and by
whom they are preserved from age to age in this wonderful order and harmony? I
scarce need, for this end, to desire you even to look down upon the earth, or
to look round the world which you inhabit; in which there are actually
innumerable, indefinite marks and characters of infinite power, of the most
consummate wisdom and goodness. It will be sufficient if you consider those
microcosms, those little worlds, your own bodies; which are indeed "fearfully
and wonderfully made;" -- with amazing skill, an art truly admirable and
astonishing to every attentive observer. And whose hand formed and fashioned
these? Certainly no human one: The art, wisdom and power of all the sons of
Adam united, would not suffice for the forming a single fly, emmit or mite.
Nay, all human wisdom cannot even comprehend the workmanship and art of the
least insect; though it may see enough thereof, to be at once convinced and
confounded. What then will you say of your own bodies? Whose workmanship are
they?

BUT if even your bodies must necessarily be the product of a wisdom, a skill,
an art and power, so much surpassing all that is human; what will you say of
your minds, your souls, which direct and governs them? From whence come
knowledge, reflection, memory? from whence, will, choice and liberty? from
whence the power of at once looking back on what is past, and forward on what
is future? Are these intellectual powers and faculties of yours, eternal and
necessary? No. It is but a few days since you yourselves came into existence.
Were they then without any cause? No. Nothing can be so, that is not both
eternal and necessary. Were they then the product of inert, unknowing,
senseless matter? That cannot be: Knowledge, choice and power cannot, surely,
be derived from that which is itself destitute of all knowledge, choice and
power. From whence and from whom then, came these intellectual powers? To
suppose that you need to be told, would hardly be consistent with the very
supposition, that you are possessed of them. From hence appears at once, the
being and the spirituality of God; and the extreme stupidity of all
image worship. For there never was a more rational, a more conclusive argument
than this which follows -- For-asmuch then as WE are the OFFSPRING OF GOD, we
ought not to think that the GODHEAD is like unto gold, or silver, or stone
graven by art, and man's device. Acts XVII. 29.


MOREOVER: Do not your moral faculties, particularly your sense of right and
wrong, justice and injustice, demonstrate the moral character of Him, whose
offspring you are? Undoubtedly, in the clearest manner; and, consequently that,
under his government, virtue shall be rewarded and vice punished. Each man's
own conscience, is in a sort a divine messenger, a prophet to himself;
foretelling, as one may express it, a day wherein God will judge the world in
righteousness. O then, let not this prophet within you, preach righteousness
and sobriety, or prophecy to you, in vain. If you hearken to the dictates of
this prophet, one may very safely conclude, that you will not reject the
testimony of those who appeared in the world in ancient times; and
particularly, not JESUS of Nazareth, who was a phophet mighty in deed and word,
before GOD, and all the people. [Luke XXIV. 19.] -- But this naturally brings
me to observe more distinctly, though in conformity to what was intimated before,

II. THAT the sobriety of mind to which you are exhorted, implies a belief of
the gospel, or of the christian revelation: For it is not merely a religious,
but a christian sobriety, that is intended in the text. And this certainly
includes, or supposes, a belief of Christ's gospel; a due regard to him in the
high relation which he bears to mankind; a serious consideration of his person,
character, doctrine, precepts; the design of his manifestation and sufferings
in the flesh; his resurrection, ascension, the glory to which he is exalted;
his future appearing, and the end and consequences thereof. Without the
knowledge, belief, and consideration of these things, there can be no sobriety
of mind, deserving the name of Christian. Let me therefore descend to a few
particulars here; such as seem to me very important. In doing which, I shall be
obliged to be brief, and shall of choice, as far as I think consistent with my
own duty and your good, avoid every thing of controversy; in which I do not
delight. And,

1. OF the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is styled, in scripture, "the
image of the invisible God, the first born of every creature." Col. 1. 15.
He often alluded to, and sometimes spoke expressly of, a "glory which he had
with the FATHER before the world was." To be readmitted into which glory, he
once earnestly prayed, saying, -- "O Father, glorify thou me with thine own
self, with the glory which I had with thee," etc. John XVII. 5.
It is said of the Logos, or Word, that he was in the beginning with God, and
was God; that all things were made by [or thro'] him John I. 1. 2. etc.
-- And, in diverse other places, the worlds, and all things, are said to have
been created by, or through him. Which passages, to say the least, do not seem
easily to admit the sense put upon them by the learned Socinus and his
followers; who understand them of the new creation, or the renovation of all
things. This, I confess, appears to me to be a forced, very unnatural, and
quite inadmissible interpretation of these passages.

BUT, to prevent your drawing any wrong inferences, on the other hand, from
these expressions; let me remind you of two or three passages of scripture,
which may help to explain them. In the epistle to the Ephesians, we find this
expression: -- "GOD, who created all things by Jesus Christ." Chapter III. 9.
In that to the Hebrews, the following: "GOD -- has in these last days spoken
to us by his Son -- by whom also HE made the worlds." Chapter I. 1, 2.
These passages may help to explain those, in which the worlds, even all
things, are spoken of as having been made, or created by, or through Christ the
Son of God, without any particular mention of the FATHER. Moreover; to prevent
any wrong inferences from its being said by St. John, " In the beginning was
the Word;" you need only to be reminded of the very first words in your bible:
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Again: To prevent any
wrong inferences from Jesus Christ's being styled God, as he is several times
in scripture; it will be sufficient only to remind you of his own words on one
or two occasions. When the captious Jews charged him with blasphemy, because,
as they said, he, "being a man, made himself God;" his answer was, Is it not
written in your law, I said, ye are gods? If He called them gods, on whom the
word of GOD came, and the scripture cannot be broken: Say ye of him whom the
FATHER has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I
said, I am the Son of GOD? John X. 33 -- 36.
And here by the way, I cannot but observe that many, instead of being content
with giving our Savior this scriptural title, so often taken by himself, and
given him by the sacred writers, "The Son of God," choose commonly to change it
into, God the Son; an expression which never once occurs in the holy
scriptures. With how fair, candid and pious an intention they do this, others
may conjecture, but themselves doubtless know -- But my business here was only
to remind you of two or three passages, for explaining those in which Christ is
styled God. I have given you a very observable one already. The next shall also
be the words of our Lord himself, in his prayer to the Father, a little before
his death: And this is life eternal, that they might know THEE the only true
GOD, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. John XVII. 3.
[This is the literal translation] Another passage directly to the present
purpose, shall be from the apostle Paul, who is, by some, supposed himself once
or twice to have styled Jesus Christ, GOD: If so, it is but candid to let him
be his own interpreter -- There is none other GOD but ONE. For though there be
that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth; (as there be gods many,
and lords many) but to us there is but ONE GOD, the FATHER, of whom are all
things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, BY whom are all things, and
we BY him. Cor. VIII. 4. 5. 6.


WITH respect to the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, it must be farther
observed, "That in the fullness of time God sent forth his son, made of a
woman;" -- that the "Word was made flesh;" that forasmuch as the children were
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same; -- that he
was found in fashion as a man; -- and is often styled the son of man, and a
man; -- Jesus, a man approved of God; -- the man Christ Jesus; -- that man whom
God has ordained, etc.

IT should, moreover, be very particularly observed, that GOD, even the FATHER,
did, in a very particular and eminent, a transcendently glorious and
inexpressible manner, dwell in our Lord Jesus Christ, manifesting his glory in,
by and through him. On which account it doubtless is, that he is sometimes called
God; and that they who had seen him, are said to have "seen the FATHER;" who
yet, strictly speaking, is "the invisible GOD;" and whose "image," even "the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person," hypostasis,
substance, or essence, Jesus Christ is said to be. As to the particular mode of
the divine inhabitation in Christ, it is neither revealed, nor to be
comprehended by mortal men; who cannot even comprehend the manner in which
their own spirits dwell in their bodies. But I repeat it, lest I should be
misunderstood, that it was "God, even the Father," according to scripture, that
dwelt or inhabited in Jesus Christ, in this ineffably glorious manner. For thus
he declares of himself, and his mavelous works: I speak not of myself; but
the FATHER that dwells in me, HE does the works. John XIV. 10.
The like manner of expression is common with him. According to which, it was
not some other divine Being, agent or person, distinct from the FATHER, that
dwelt in the man Christ Jesus, as some have imagined, (not very consistently
with the divine unity) but the FATHER himself. And it is no less the positive
doctrine of scripture, That there is but ONE GOD, the FATHER, "who is above
all, and through all, and in you all," -- even the "GOD and FATHER of our Lord
Jesus Christ"; than it is, That there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
the FATHER in truth and love; -- the Son of the BLESSED; -- "the Son of the
HIGHEST;" and of whom an angel from heaven prophesied thus before his birth: He
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the HIGHEST; and the LORD GOD
shall give unto him the throne of his father David. Luke 1. 32.
But to proceed,

2. THE general and grand, both the primary and ultimate end of Christ's coming
down from heaven, or of his incarnation, was, to glorify his God and Father, by
doing his will. For I am come down from heaven, said he, not to do mine own
will, but the will of him that sent me John VI. 38.
-- I honor my Father -- I seek not mine own glory. Chapter VIII. 49, 50.
-- I have not spoken of myself, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak -- I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. John VIII. 49. 50.
-- I have glorified thee on earth; I have finished the work which thou gave
me to do: And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, etc. Chapter
XVII. 4, 5.
This general end of Christ's incarnation, comprehends all others. But more
particularly,

3. ONE principal end of Christ's manifestation in the flesh, was, to make
known the Father; the nature and truth of God, or the principles of true
religion, in a more clear, full and perfect manner, than they had been made
known before, by Moses or any of the ancient prophets, or even John, that
burning and shining light; the greatest of all the prophets, till the Son of
God himself appeared in that character from heaven.

AT the time of our Lord's coming into the world, the Jewish revelation was
very grossly corrupted; the priests having long "taught for doctrines the
commandments of men;" so that though they were not wholly ignorant of the true
God, yet "in vain did they worship him." Among the gentile nations, there were
hardly any traces of true religion to be found. Divine knowledge, the only true
wisdom, was far from obtaining among the nations of the world, in proportion as
the polite arts and sciences had done. In many countries, particularly Persia,
Chaldea, Egypt, Greece and Italy, these arts and sciences had been carried to a
surprising degree of perfection. The poet's numbers were harmonious, and his
song sublime. The musician almost enchanted wild beasts, and the woods which
they haunted, as well as savage men. The orator thundered and lightened; and,
at pleasure, either raised or allayed a storm in the breasts of his auditors.
The noblest piles and structures arose under the hands of the architect. The
canvass was taught to glow with life, borrowed from the painter's pencil; and
brass and marble to breath under the chissel of the statuary: While the
astronomer surveyed and measured the heavens; even those heavens which declare
the glory of God. But notwithstanding all these improvements, these wonderful
efforts of human genius and industry, "the world by wisdom knew not God!" With
respect to the knowledge of Him, and of true religion, there was in fact no
material difference betwixt the most refined, and the most savage and barbarous
nations under heaven. Witness the multitude of the gods and goddesses
acknowledged in them; so great, that it were easier to call all the stars by
their names, than to number such a promiscuous rabble -- heroes, strumpets,
diseases, plagues, monsters, vices, constellations, beasts, birds, and creeping
things! And if such were the gods, judge you, what the worshippers must have
been; how wise, pure and holy! Upwards of thirty thousand pagan deities have
been mentioned by writers. Min. Faelix alone, may satisfy any person of a
moderate curiosity, upon this subject.


SUCH, in brief, was the religious state of the world; such thick darkness
covered its inhabitants, especially the heathen nations, at the time when God
though it fit, last of all, to speak unto men by his Son from heaven. He
accordingly appeared, saying, I am the light of the world; he that follows
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. John VIII. 12.
In which words he tacitly compares himself to the sun in the heavens, that
rules by day; enlightening, warming, and diffusing blessings on all below:
Which was indeed agreeable to one of the glorious characters, under which he
had been prophesied of -- the sun of righteousness arising with healing in his
beams. No man had seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who was in the
bosom of the Father, declared him to the world. And as none perfectly knew the
Son but the Father; so neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he
to whomsoever the Son reveals him. He came to bear witness to the truth; and
did it with such clearness, and convincing evidence of his coming from God,
that his few disciples might then, with great propriety say, We know that we
are of the truth, and the whole world lies in wickedness. And we know that the
Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we might know him
that is true: and we are in HIM THAT IS TRUE, in HIS Son Jesus Christ. THIS is
the true God, and eternal life. 1 John V. 19. 20. Compare John XVII. 3. Which
clearly determines the sense of this text, if people will be determined solely
by scripture authority.


4. JESUS CHRIST came into the world, not merely as a light to lighten it with
the knowledge of the "only true God"; but to declare his will and commandments
authoritatively in his name. I am come, says he, in my Father's name, etc. He
came into it as a preacher of righteousness; to inculcate obedience to God's
laws which were already known; to rescue others from the corrupt
interpretations, which by time, the ignorance of the people, and more
especially the wickedness of the priests, had been put upon them; whereby the
commandment of God was made of none effect He came to put an end to the
peculiarities of the Jewish dispensation; to gather in one the children of God
that were scattered abroad; to form them into one spiritual body, or church,
under himself as head; that there might be "one fold, and one shepherd". And he
promulgated certain new laws and ordinances relative to this spiritual kingdom,
for the due interior regulation of it, and for its support and enlargement,
till "all nations should flow into it*

5. HE came to give mankind the most perfect and engaging example of obedience
to the will of God; of all piety and righteousness, humility and charity,
temperance and patience; -- a living example in frail human flesh. For though he
were made in the "likeness of sinful flesh;" yet in him was no sin: He was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. He said to his disciples upon
a certain occasion, "I have given you an example that ye should do as I have
done to you." The like might have been said on other occasions. Indeed, he
admonished his disciples in a more general way, to keep his commandments, "that
they might abide in his love, even," says he, "as I have kept my Father's
commandments, and abide in his love." And the apostle Peter says of him, that
he "left us an example, that we should follow his steps."

6. HE came to make an atonement for the sins of the world; "to put away sins
by the sacrifice of himself." This he did upon the cross, when he offered
himself up to God, as a lamb without blemish and without spot. He is said to
have redeemed men to God by his blood; to have died for us, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us unto God. And it should be particularly observed
here, that he died thus, not only for a few particular persons, as some seem to
imagine, but "died for all," -- "tasted death for every man;" and "gave himself
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Agreeably whereto, the apostle
John speaks of him under the following character -- Jesus Christ the righteous,
who is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the WHOLE WORLD. So the apostle Paul speaks of it as the substance of
that ministry of reconciliation which he had received, That God was, in Christ,
reconciling the WORLD unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.
And he accordingly beseeches all, in Christ's stead, to be "reconciled unto
God."

7. HE was raised from the dead, and exalted to the highest heavens; not only
to "appear in the presence of God" as an intercessor and advocate with him for
his disciples; but to be crowned with glory and honor, as being by the Father
appointed heir, and Lord, and Judge of all; or as having all power given unto
him in heaven and in earth.

8. HE is to be revealed from heaven at an appointed time; the time of the
restitution of all things, spoken of by all the prophets since the world began,
in the glory of the Father, to judge the world in righteousness -- Let me now
close these short remarks with the words of the apostle Paul -- Then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to GOD, even the FATHER; when
he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power. For he must reign
till he has put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death. For, He has put all things under his feet: But when he
says, all things are put under him, it is manifest that HE is excepted which
did put all things under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him,
then shall the Son also himself be subject unto HIM that put all things under
him, THAT GOD MAY BE ALL IN ALL! 1 Cor. xv. 24 -- 28.


THE several things thus briefly hinted at, I consider only as some of the more
obvious and important ends of Christ's mediation; some of which are spoken of,
or referred to, in almost every page of the new testament, as things
particularly worthy of our daily meditation. Neither can you be sober-minded,
as you ought to be, without believing, and often thinking upon these capital
doctrines of the gospel. For, as has been before observed, without christian
faith, there can be no such thing as christian practice or sobriety, in the old
or young.

LET me, therefore, here take occasion, my beloved young brethren, to warn you
against the fatal principles of our modern deists. As Jesus Christ has his
ministers to exhort you to believe his gospel, and to be sober-minded, in order
to your present and eternal good; the devil has also his emissaries and
apostles to dissuade you from it: men who, in all countries that are blessed with
liberty, abuse that liberty by "speaking evil of the things, which they
understand not": men who both declaim and write against the gospel of their
salvation; and have even the hardiness to ridicule and blaspheme what angels
desire to look into, and consider at once with delight and admiration; -- all
those of them, I mean, who "kept their first estate": For, as to the rest, they
doubtless blaspheme these things also; though they neither disbelieve nor riducle
them; but "believe and tremble." -- These men, in their talk and writings,
commonly pretend great benevolence and goodwill. They will profess their sorrow
to see you enslaved with superstitious notions and fancies about revelation.
They will tell you, perhaps, that you are debarred from the innocent pleasures
of life, and held in a miserable kind of bondage, by the fabled terrors of
another world. Whereas, could you east off these childish prejudices of
education, and become One of them, you would enjoy a most delightful ease and
freedom of mind, from a full persuasion, either that there is no future state,
or at least no hell, where frail creatures are to be tormented for a few
sallies and indiscretions: And, that you may depend upon it, if you should
survive the shipwreck of death, you shall go to some far happier region -- some
Elisian field, where you may sport and play to eternity.

THESE men, however, generally pretend to a great regard for moral virtue; more
especially, universal love to mankind: Nay, they sometimes even speak
respectfully of God -- And, to use the words of the apostle, No marvel; for
Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great
thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness;
whose end shall be according to their works 2 Cor xi 14, 15.
. In a word, these are the very men whom the apostle Peter describes, and
forewarns you to beware of, in the following words: These are wells without
water, clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the mist of darkness is
reserved for ever. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they
allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them who live in error: While they promise them liberty,
they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome,
of the same is he brought in bondage.

THE divine mission and authority of Jesus Christ, or, in other words, the
truth of the christian religion, is established by "many infallible proofs".
However enthusiasts have declaimed against reason, and rational preachers,
while themselves were deplorable examples of the contrary, the religion of
Christ is a most reasonable religion; the wisdom, as well as the power of God
to salvation, to every one that sincerely believes it. Both its doctrines and
precepts, as delivered by him and his apostles, are rational in the highest
sense, however they have been perverted since; bearing a truly divine
character, to those that have eyes to see, instead of being blinded by the God
of this world. In Jesus Christ were fulfilled many illustrious prophecies. He
wrought still more numerous and astonishing miracles, by the finger of that God
who dwelt in him. He was also raised from the dead himself, after having raised
others, "by the power of the Father". He was often seen and conversed with by
many credible witnesses, who had well known him before. He was visibly taken up
into heaven: And, soon after, in conformity to his own promise, many miraculous
powers were bestowed upon his apostles, and other disciples; particularly the
gift of tongues; by means of which the gospel, under the apparent management of
a few fishermen, and other poor Galileans, made a surprising progress in
opposition to the united wit, malice and power of the world, both Jewish and
Gentile. And diverse of Christ's and his apostle's predictions have since been
fulfilled, and others of them are daily fulfilling.

THE plain consequence of these facts, is, That Jesus Christ was, indeed, the
Son of God; and that the religion which bears his sacred name, is the true
religion, which, in all reason, you are bound to receive with the profoundest
reverence and gratitude. Let me therefore just remind you further here, of the
words of Peter in his own, and the name of the other apostles, upon a
particular occasion. When many of our Lords disciples forsook him, in the days
of his flesh, and walked no more with him, he turned and said, in an
affectionate manner, "Will ye also go away? -- at once intimating his
unwillingness that they should do so, and his determination to leave them to
their own choice and liberty. Here upon Peter made the following answer, in
which you, my young brethren, must be left to join with him or not, as God
shall give you light -- Lord, John vi. 68, 69
to whom shall we go! Thou have the words of eternal life. And we believe, and
are sure, that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living GOD. Dr LELAND's
excellent Review of the Deistical Writers, deserves to be read by every young
man who has (...) to reading.


HAVING thus shown that sobriety of mind supposes (1) A belief of God's being
and perfections; and (2) Of the christian revelation; let me now observe.

III. THAT it also implies, thinking soberly of yourselves. This is an
essential, a most important ingredient in christian sobriety; and it
comprehends diverse particulars, which shall be mentioned with all convenient
brevity. And,

1. THIS implies a sense of your natural ignorance, or the native darkness of
your understandings. You may conclude that I do not here intend any thing that
is peculiar to you; but speak with reference to what is common to you with
others, All men in general are born into the world, absolutely ignorant of
every thing; they know nothing of what is passing in this world or any other.
Whatever any know, it is not innate, or born with them; but acquired
afterward. And so feeble are their intellectual faculties, that however
ambitious they are of knowing, or being thought to know a great deal, what they
can actually attain to, is comparatively but very little, even though they spend
much time in the pursuit of knowledge. They are as it were doomed to ignorance
by the very condition of their birth, nature and life in this world,
notwithstanding either their thirst after, or affection of wisdom. This is the
sentiment which is expressed by Zophar in the book of Job: Can thou by
searching find out God; can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is
as high as heaven; what can thou do? deeper than hell; what can thou know?
-- He knows vain men -- For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a
wild ass's colt Chap. xi. 7 -- 11.
. Young men especially, are generally prone to entertain too high a conceit of
their knowledge, and of their capacity for knowing more: Which often makes them
over-positive in their own way, and self-sufficient. It leads them to despise
the opinions and counsels of others; of their parents, and other persons, though
older and, most probably, wiser than themselves. This is of pernicious
consequence in many respects. If, therefore, you would be sober-minded, think
soberly of, and know yourselves: It becomes you to be modest, and
self-diffident; not to lean too much to your own understandings; but, from a
consciousness of your inexperience, to listen to advice, and endeavor to learn
of others; though by no means to resign up your own understandings implicitly to
the dictate of any; and, least of all, in matters of conscience and religion,
which are peculiarly your own concern. Indeed, you might well suspect the
probity of any man's design, whatever were his character, who should persuade
you to put out, or to blind your own eyes in a thick wood; promising, that when
you had done so, he would be your faithful guide out of it; -- especially if
you had money about you. Whoever act such a part as this by others in their
spiritual concernments, they do not so well deserve the name of ministers of
the gospel, as that of thieves, robbers and assassines.

2. THINKING soberly of yourselves, implies a due consideration of your moral
frailty and depravity; whereby, as in what was last mentioned, your natural
ignorance-nothing is intended that is peculiar to yourselves, but what is
common to the offspring of Adam. There is a great deal of perverseness and
vice, which may be considered as in some sense natural to mankind; arising from
ignorance, or weakness of understanding on the one hand, and from strong
passions on the other. Both these are certainly natural to mankind. And what is
the natural, not to say, unavoidable consequence of such a union, or
concurrence of ignorance and passion in the same subject, but irregularity of
desire, will and behavior, in many respects. But how does the case stand in
fact? Do not all go astray, at least in some degree, from the paths of reason
and virtue, very early in life? so early, that it occasioned the Psalmist to
say, (...) indeed without a figure, that they are estranged from the womb; and
go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies. This, to be sure, is not
literally true; nor was it designed to be so understood. The meaning is, that
the ignorance and passions of children are such, that they speak and act
unreasonably, and deviate from the rules of virtue, in a greater or less
degree, almost as soon as they are capable of speaking and acting at all. And
the wiser son of David has said, to the same purpose, that childhood and youth
are vanity; and that folly is bound up in the heart of a child. By which he
doubtless means something that is in a degree vicious; not simple, unavoidable
ignorance only: For he adds, that the "rod of correction will drive it far from
him;" which could not be said with propriety, of mere natural and unavoidable
ignorance. It is not my design to suggest, that either you, or any others, were
really and properly vicious, sinful and criminal, before you were capable in
any measure of distinguishing betwixt good and evil: Much less, that you were
justly liable to eternal torments, either on account of any corruption of
nature which you brought into the world with you, or by reason of the
imputation of Adam's sin to you. For I find nothing in the scriptures that
implies either of these things; and, beyond them I do not choose to be wise. But
were you not sinful creatures, in a degree, as soon as you began to act
viciously? Was not that very early in life? And is not this at least, just
matter of humiliation to you, and to all? If you are sober-minded; if you think
soberly of yourselves, even as you ought to think, the most harmless and
innocent of you will not be pure in your own eyes; but acknowledge that you are
unclean; having been guilty of numberless irregular desies, and faults; of many
vicious actions, from your childhood, since you were actually capable of
discerning betwixt good and evil. So that if God were strict to mark iniquity,
even the most innocent of you could not stand in judgment. What then would be
the consequence, as to the most criminal!

3. THIS leads me to observe, that thinking soberly of yourselves, implies the
serious consideration of your state as you are morally polluted creatures,
guilty before God, and standing in need both of purification, and forgiveness
with God. That darkness of the human mind, that irregularity of the will, and
disorder of the affections, which may justly be termed natural, in the sense
before explained, are certainly infelicities at least, from which all, for
their own sakes, should desire deliverance; that instead of them, there may be
knowledge in the mind, regularity in the will, and a due subordination of the
passions and affections to right reason. Herein summarily consists that moral
purity which was just now hinted at; and which stands in opposition to the
natural blindness and depravation of the mind. But you ought to consider
yourselves, not merely as carrying about with you a mental disease, which needs
a remedy; but also as culpable and criminal in the sight of God, on account of
your actual deviations from the rule of your duty, so far as you have really
departed from it, in thought, word or deed; and therefore, as was said before,
standing in need of forgiveness also. An holy God, though he may pity, and show
mercy to, yet must needs be displeased with, those who knowingly violate his
commandments, or the laws of reason and virtue; as you have all doubtless done
in many instances. If God had been rigorously just, or destitute of mercy, you
might have been cast off by him even in childhood, for your sins committed in
that state. Your transgressions have still been growing more numerous, and,
probably, more aggravated with your years: So that it is not owing to your own
innocence, but to the Lord's mercy, that you are not consumed. And, in order to
being sober-minded, you are to think thus soberly of yourselves and your state,
with reference to God and his laws; for this is no more than what you ought to
think, it being only truth and fact; and such truth, the serious consideration
of which, has a very close connection with christian sobriety of mind; or
rather, is comprised in it.

4. THIS implies a serious consideration of your natural frailty, or mortality;
of the many evils to which you are liable in this world; of the shortness and
uncertainty of human life, and the certainty of death approaching. Many people,
and particularly the young, are apt to entertain fond, romantic conceits about
worldly felicity, and to put far away the evil day of death, of adversity and
sorrow; seldom, perhaps, thinking of it at all, and when they do, generally
flattering themselves that this day is at a great distance. But if ever you are
truly sober-minded, you will think differently upon this subject. You will see
the vanity of the world and its enjoyments; even of all that is in the world,
the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life. You will
often have in your thoughts, the bodily pains and diseases, the numerous
crosses and disappointments, and the many other natural evils, to which mankind
are subjected in the present state; agreeably to the representations of
scripture, and to the experience of all ages -- That the creature,-that mankind
are "made subject unto vanity". You will not therefore, if you think soberly of
yourselves, and the present state, depend upon any great, uninterrupted and
lasting felicity in this "evil world": or even upon living long in it. For
there are hardly any more obvious truths than these: That man that is born of a
woman, is of few days and full of trouble: He comes forth as a flower, and is
cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and continues not. How frequent are the
examples of mortality, even in the young; in the hail and strong, who had the
fairest prospect of any, of long life? How often have you yourselves seen the
words of Job verified? -- That one dies in his full strength, being wholly at
ease and quiet. His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with
marrow. It is not of so great importance for you to know particularly, how
mankind originally came into such a state as has been mentioned, as it is to
know, and duly to consider, the certainty of it as a fact. It may therefore
suffice here, to observe to you in general, that the holy scriptures speak of
this as having been occasioned by the sin of our first parents, or their
apostasy from God -- But just sentiments concerning human life, mortality and
death, considered as facts, are doubtless a very material branch of that
sobriety, to which young men should be exhorted.

5. A SERIOUS consideration of the consequences of death, belongs also to this
head. These consequences are most important and interesting in their nature,
according to the holy scriptures; which represent this short life as a state of
trial or probation, and that which follows it, as a state of recompense; which
is therefore to be either a most happy or miserable one to all men
respectively, according to the deeds done by them "in the body." Tho your
bodies are mortal, your souls will survive them: "It is appointed unto all men
once to die, and after that the judgment." Now you will not, certainly, deserve
the character of sober-minded, unless you often think seriously of these
things; -- approaching death, the immortality of your souls, the righteous
judgment of God, and the unfading, eternal joys, or the unutterable woes, which
will be the consequence of that decisive judgment.

THERE are many other things necessary for the illustration of christian
sobriety: Of which in the next discourse. But

I CANNOT conclude, my young brethren, without cautioning you against pride,
vanity and self-sufficiency; than which there is nothing more repugnant to true
sobriety. Consider yourselves at all times as the degenerate offspring of
Adam. Consider the narrowness, weakness, and great imperfection of your
intellectual faculties; how naturally-dark your minds are, as you come into the
world; how little you really know at present, how much you are wholly ignorant
of, and will be, should you live ever so long. Consider the moral depravation
of your minds; your proneness to vice; the many sins and follies which you have
been guilty of, from your early childhood; how justly you might be condemned by
Him, that is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; who charge even his
angels with folly, and in whose sight the heavens are not clean. Consider the
need which you have, both of cleansing from the filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, and of pardon, through the blood of Jesus Christ. If you entertain such
sentiments as these; if you think thus soberly of yourselves, it will be a good
step toward that sobriety of mind to which you are exhorted. But there will be
but little ground of hope respecting you, if you are vain and proud; if you are
puffed up with an high opinion of yourselves; of your own knowledge, innocence
and virtue, or your righteousness in the sight of God -- In saying these
things, you doubtless perceive on one hand, that I do not mean to flatter you
in any evil or false way. You may be equally assured on the other hand, that I
do not mean to reproach and revile you; but only to represent the simple truth
to you, that you may now acquaint yourselves with God, and be at peace; so that
good may come unto you in the end.

LET me also, in conformity to what has been said before, caution you against
those fond and groundless conceits about worldly happiness, particularly in the
gratification of your sensual lusts and passions, which the minds of the young
are so commonly filled with; while they neglect that pious and virtuous
practice, in which alone true felicity is to be found. Such imaginations as
those, are mere dreams, or the delusions of him that is said to be a liar and
murderer from the beginning, on account of his tempting our first parents with
the fair forbidden fruit; telling them that they should not surely die by
eating of it, but become happy and immortal as gods. The like delusions he
practices from age to age with success, upon the unexperienced sons of Adam and
Eve; so that they also flatter themselves with the hopes of happiness, by
eating "forbidden fruit;" and in doing those things, of which God has said,
that the end of them is death. It would be your wisdom to take warning by the
fate of our common progenitors: And also to trust the experience of those in
all ages, who having made the trial, have found that vicious pleasures are but
pain in the end; particularly the experience of that great KING, and PREACHER
SOLOMON.
to young men, who, after so much trial, said: Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity -- I have seen all the works that are done under the sun, and behold all
is vanity and vexation of spirit. Hear then, my beloved brethren, what the same
wise, great and royal PREACHER calls "the conclusion of the whole matter"; --
the result of all his observations, inquiries, reflections and experience --
Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole of man. For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.

SERMON III.
Christian Sobriety further explained; viz. (4.) Of Repentance. (5.) Of the
Faith which is saving. (6.) Of an external Profession of Christianity. (7.) Of
Prayer. And (8.) Of universal Obedience to Christ's Commandments.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
MY first discourse upon this subject contained such observations as were though it
proper by way of introduction to the main design. What that was, has also been
shown already; and not only so, but entered up on in the second and last
discourse. It will now be proper just to remind you, that the FIRST part of
that design, was,

SOMEWHAT distinctly to explain to my young brethren, the nature of that
sobriety which is spoken of in the text; and to recommend it to them in a
cursory way.

IN pursuance of which branch of it, diverse remarks have already been made upon
the nature of sobriety, considered both internally and externally; and more
particularly, the three following, viz.

1. THAT it is founded in a firm belief of God's being and perfections, his
moral government, and universal providence.

2. THAT it implies a belief of the gospel of Christ, or the Christian
revelation. And

3. That it also implies, thinking soberly of One's self.

THESE things were as distinctly explained as I could well do it, unless I had
spent more time upon them. And, without any further repetition, I shall now
proceed, by divine permission and assistance, to some other particulars
comprehended in Christian sobriety: For as to any other sobriety, my young
brethren, whether real or imaginary, we shall now have no concern with it. To
proceed, therefore.

IV. THIS sobriety supposes and implies in it, sincere repentance; such a
repentance as the Lord Jesus Christ and his apostles preached to the world. In
the preceding discourse I mentioned to you, thinking soberly of yourselves, as
a necessary ingredient in true sobriety of mind: And that, as was then shown,
implies a serious consideration of the darkness and depravity of mind which are
common to you with the rest of mankind. It also implies a consideration of your
past sins and miscarriages; and of the state of guilt which you are in, in
consequence of having transgressed God's commandments. But something beyond
this, is implied in repentance. Let me, therefore, show, as briefly as may be,
what the holy scriptures intend hereby. And,

IN general, repentance properly signifies a change of sentiment, of mind and
disposition, in consequence of reflection; an after-wisdom in One that has been
in error and vice; and, in one word, the conversion, i. e. the turning of his
heart from sin and folly to righteousness and wisdom, -- from the power of
satan unto God. This, in general, is the true scriptural idea of repentance; as
it is, indeed, explained by these scripture-expressions, repentance from dead
works, and repentance toward God. But, more particularly,

1. REPENTANCE implies a sense of having erred from the paths of truth and
virtue; or a conviction of the mind and conscience, that a person has done
amiss; that he has done what he ought not to have done, and neglected those
things which he was in reason bound to do. Some persons have indeed been much
more criminal than others: their deviations from their duty have been more
numerous, and their faults of a more heinous nature. But all are in some degree
culpable. And no person ever did, or can repent, without being first convinced
of his errors.

2. REPENTANCE Implies, not only a sense of having done amiss, but of having
therein transgressed God's commandments, which are holy, just and good: Or, in
other words, of having sinned against God. Even an atheist, continning such,
may be convinced of his having transgressed the laws of right reason, and of
justice; but he cannot repent; which implies a conviction of the mind that One
has sinned against God, or transgressed his laws, considered as such: "For sin
is the transgression of the law" of God.

3. REPENTANCE implies shame, and remorse of conscience. And this is, indeed,
very closely connected with a conviction of mind, that One has violated the
commandments of the all-wise, holy and good God. The penitent sinner finds
himself pierced and wounded at the heart; or, in the language of scripture,
"pricked in the heart", as with a poisoned arrow, or a deadly dart.

4. IT implies self-condemnation, a sense of ill-desert, an apprehension of
God's righteous displeasure, and fear of "the wrath to come," However easy or
secure the sinner were before, yet when the holy law of God, and his own sins
are at once brought into his view, the very sight is as it were mortal to him.
This is the twofold state, or rather, these are the successive states of mind,
which the apostle Paul represents in the emphatical words following: "I was
alive without the law once; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I
died."

5. THOUGH repentance implies remorse of conscience, and self-condemnation, it is
essentially different from despair. True repentance is ever attended with a
degree of hope toward God; despair implies a fear of wrath void of hope, which
is the state of devils. That carries the soul to God, as a merciful and
gracious being, who delights not in the death of sinners: This drives it from
him, and plunges the sinner into a state of greater guilt and misery than he
was in before. The despairing sinner has, if I may so express it, both his eyes
fixed on the holy law, or justice of God: The true penitent, but one of his;
the other being turned on God's mercy, or grace, manifested in the gospel. So
that repentance and faith, though often treated of distinctly, and though really
distinct in some respects, mutually infer and imply each other, when we speak
of that repentance and faith which are truly evangelical.

6. TRUE repentance implies an ingenuous sorrow for, and hatred of all sin in
general, as it is most unreasonable in itself, and contrary to the holy nature
of God; not merely as it exposes the sinner to his wrath and curse.

7. IT is, accordingly, attended with a sincere and fixed resolution, by God's
grace and help, to forsake all the known ways of vice and folly without
exception. If I may so express it, repentance outs "of the right hand," and
"plucks out the right eye": It severs betwixt the heart and every former lust,
how beloved soever; or how sovereign an empire soever it once maintained over
the blinded and enslaved soul.

9. THE sincere penitent is resolved, not only that he will "cease to do evil",
but by God's grace, "learn to do well"; and live in obedience to all his
commandments.

It should be farther observed.

10. THAT such a repentance as this, which is the gift of God by the ministry
of the gospel, under the conduct and influence of his Holy Spirit, constitutes
that renewed state of mind, which the scriptures express by a "new heart",
being "born again", the "new creature", the "new man", and the like.

Now true repentance is absolutely necessary in order to true sobriety of mind.
Our Lord Jesus Christ preached the necessary of it himself, saying, "Except ye
repent, ye shall all -- perish". He commanded his apostles to do the same through
out the world, with this addition, that the remission of sins should be
proclaimed at the same time in his name. This he did, in the most explicit
manner, not till after his resurrection; as in the following words: Thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day. And that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations -- And
ye are witnesses of these things. And behold I send the promise of my Father
upon you: but tarry ye -- until ye be endued with power from on high Luke 24
46-49.
. The apostles punctually followed his directions in this, as in other
respects. For immediately after they had received "the promise of the Father",
-- the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven in conformity to his promise, on the
day of pentecost, we find them preaching thus; Repent, and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins Acts II. 38.
: And again soon after, to the same purpose, thus: Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out -- Chapter III. 19.
They did the like wherever they preached, whether to Jews or Gentiles. And
accordingly the apostle Paul, giving an account of his own doctrine, does it in
this comprehensive manner: "Testifying both to the Jews," says he, "and also
to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Chapter XX. 21.
"

CERTAINLY then, you cannot imagine yourselves sober-minded, without that
repentance which Jesus Christ and his apostles taught thus, as a grand,
fundamental part of the religion of sinful creatures. Be assured that, whatever
you may believe concerning God and his Son Jesus Christ, concerning the common
degeneracy of mankind, or any other matter, you will yet be the subjects of no
sobriety deserving the name of Christian, without godly sorrow for your own
sins respectively, and a deep repentance; such an one, in general, as was
briefly described before; and particularly such an one, the consequence of
which shall be the actual forsaking of every known wicked practice. If you have
no other sobriety of mind, than what will consist with an habitual indulgence
of your lusts, this is a strange sort of sobriety indeed; such as neither the
scriptures, nor common sense, knows any thing of. What a solecism would it be,
to speak of a sober-minded young man, still "walking in the way of his heart,
and in the sight of his eyes;" and resolved in those wicked courses, for which
God has positively declared, he "will bring him into judgment"? You would not,
surely, think it any commendation of you, to be characterised as sober young
men, and then to have your sobriety explained after this manner: You would
immediately and justly conclude, that you were reproached in the bitter
language of sarcasm and irony -- And God grant, there may be very few such
sober-minded young men amongst us! Imagine not therefore, you have any sobriety
that is worthy the name, till you have repented of all your sins in dust and
ashes; till you find in yourselves a fixed resolution to forsake them; till you
implore the forgiveness of them with truly broken and contrite hearts; till you
cast yourselves on the grace of God as manifested through Jesus Christ, saying in
the humble spirit of the Publican, "God be merciful to me a sinner!" Nor, in a
word, till you internally and truly consent to that method of salvation which
the gospel reveals. Every thing short of this, will leave you destitute of
christian sobriety.

AND this leads me to speak a little more distinctly than I have hitherto done,
of that faith which the scriptures speak of as having the remission of sins,
justification and eternal life connected with it. Which faith, though it
includes, yet certainly intends much more than, what is usually called a
speculative belief of the christian revelation; the necessity of which latter,
was spoken of in the foregoing discourse.

To proceed therefore,

V. CHRISTIAN sobriety of mind, implies in it that faith, which is often spoken
of in scripture as justifying and saving. Let me explain this matter to you
under the following observations: For a thing of so great importance ought not
to passed over with a cursory mention of it.

1. SINFUL men, as such, need a mediator between God and them; a redeemer and
savior from sin and death. God is, indeed, perfect in goodness and mercy, even
essentially, or in his own nature. But according to the representations of
scripture, it was not consistent with his wisdom and majesty, or the dignity of
his laws, and the honor of his government; (the due support of which, by the
way, is actually for the good and happiness of the intelligent creation in
general) It was not consistent herewith, I say, for God to overlook, or to
forgive the transgressions of men, without the intervention of a mediator; who
should do and suffer what might have a tendency, and be sufficient to vindicate
the honor of his laws, by exciting and preserving in all, a just veneration for
his government, at the same time that guilty creatures were made partakers of
his lenity and grace.

2. THE Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, is the one and only person, who
sustains this character of a mediator betwixt God and sinners. For there is one
God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time 1 Timothy 11. 5.6.
. He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world; having died for all,
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. -- Neither is there
salvation in any other: For there is none other name given under heaven among
men, whereby we must be saved. Acts 4. 12.


3. THE Lord Jesus Christ was appointed and ordained to this office by God,
even the Father, from the original clemency and goodness of his nature; by him
(...) manifest the riches of his grace to those that were obnoxious to his
righteous displeasure, or in a state of sin, condemnation and death. For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his son
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. John III 16, 17.
And, In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent
his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the
propitiation for our sins. 1 John 4 9, 10.
The mediation of Christ, therefore, is the effect, the consequence of God's
love and grace to sinful men, not the cause or ground of it, as it has often
been represented, not a little to the dishonor of God's goodness, and of his
free, rich grace to the children of men.

4. GOD himself having appointed his Son to the mediatorial office, there can
be no doubt but that he is in all respects duly qualified for it: And able to
save them unto the uttermost, that come unto God by him. To which end, it
pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell.

5. THE holy scriptures frequently speak of the Lord Jesus Christ, as
sustaining a threefold character, or relation to mankind; and as executing
three high and important offices in the capacity of a mediator between God and
men. He was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people. He
is the high priest, the "great high priest of our profession": And he reigns as
a king; God having "given him all power in heaven and in earth"; or put all
things under his feet, and [particularly] given him to be head over all things
to the church. Ephesians. 1. 22.


6. THE revealed method of obtaining the forgiveness of sins, deliverance from
wrath, and a title to eternal life, through Jesus Christ, is most usually
expressed in the new testament by the terms "faith", "believing" on him,
"receiving him," and "coming to him." -- "That whosoever believes on him,
should not perish," etc. -- "Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus." -- "As many as received him, to them gave he power" [the high and
glorious privilege] "to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
his name." -- "Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life." -- Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." These
various expressions are undoubtedly synonimous, or signify in general the same
thing.

7. THESE expressions being compared with other passages of scripture, and the
whole tenor of the new testament, can intend nothing short of a sincere
acquiesence in, or assent and consent of the heart to, that method of salvation
which is revealed through Christ: For it is with the heart that man believes
unto righteousness. So that the faith which in scripture is said to justify and
save, might be defined in the following manner, conformably to the foregoing
remarks; viz. Faith is the act of a self-condemned, humbled and repenting
sinner, flying to, and casting himself upon the free grace of God in Jesus
Christ; whom he trusts with the concerns of his soul, as the only, and
every-way sufficient Savior of sinners, provided and appointed by the Father;
internally receiving and submitting to him in the whole of that character, as
he is revealed in the gospel, viz. as a prophet, priest and king: Which faith
implies in it the new birth, or the renovation of the heart, and is a living,
operative principle of love and obedience; never failing, when there is time
and opportunity for it, to produce good works, or a virtuous, holy and godly
life. -- Let me distinctly, though briefly, explain the several parts of this
definition.

THAT faith which has forgiveness, justification and salvation connected with
it, then, is an "act"; the act of the soul, or mind. In which respect it agrees
with believing, assenting, or consenting, in any other case whatever: all which
are real acts or operations of the mind. Our Savior himself calls believing a
"work," in answer to that question, "What shall we do, that we might work the
works of God"? -- "This is the work of God," said he, that YE believe on him,
whom he has sent. John VI. 28, 29.
Moreover,

IT is the act of "a self-condemned, humbled and repenting sinner." None but
such an one can, in the nature of the thing, truly believe in Christ as the
savior of sinners, or have any desire, how much need soever he may have, to be
saved by him. It is, accordingly, those that "labor and are heavy laden" with a
sense of sin, that Christ invites to come unto him, or believe on him, saying,
-- "And I will give you rest."

Again,

IT is the act of such a sinner, "flying to, and casting himself upon the free
grace of God." It is implied in his being "self-condemned," etc. that he trusts
not in himself, or in any innocence or righteousness of his own: So that all
his hopes must necessarily terminate at last, or the mere grace and mercy of
God. And faith is that act of the soul, by which it has recourse to this mercy,
or humbly depends upon the God of all grace, for pardon and salvation. But

IT is on the mercy, or free grace of God "in Jesus Christ." that the repenting
sinner thus casts himself by faith. However certain it may be upon principles
of reason only, that God is a good and merciful being; yet the true believer
trusts in his mercy, as it is revealed and manifested through Christ; "coming
unto God by him." Heb. 7. 25.


AGAIN: He casts himself on the grace of God in Christ, whom he also "trusts
with the concerns of his soul." Faith implies a sinner's relying or depending
upon the Lord Jesus Christ as a Redeemer and Savior. And that, in the next
place,

AS the "only, and every-way sufficient Savior of sinners." The true, penitent
believer does not doubt of Christ's being in all respects a suitable and
adequate Savior of sinful men: (For to do so, is the essence of infidelity.)
And as the only one, in conformity to the apostle's words, "Neither is there
salvation in any other."

Moreover,

HE trusts in him thus, as the Savior "provided and appointed by the Father."
This is implied in what was said before; and so needs not to be insisted on.
Only it should always be remembered, that Christ does every thing in the affair
of man's salvation, in conformity to the sovereign and gracious pleasure of
God, even the Father -- "Who gave himself for our sins," says the apostle --
"according to the will of God and our Father." Gal. 1. 4.


THE penitent believer in Christ as a Savior, does at the same time, and
thereby, "internally receive and submit to him in the whole of that character,
as he is revealed in the gospel." Christ, as a Savior, is not divided, nor are
his offices or benefits divided. Neither does christian or saving faith respect
him, considered in one of his capacities exclusively of the other; but in all
of them in conjunction; as the one undivided mediator, in conformity to the
doctrine of the gospel; viz.

"As a prophet, priest and king." Now, internally to receive and submit to him
as a "prophet", is to consider and regard him as such; to give entire credit to
whatsoever he has said, so far as it is known; sincerely to desire to "learn of
him", and to be instructed by him in the things which pertain to the kingdom of
God. As faith respects him in his "priestly" office, it means depending upon
the mercy of God for pardon and salvation through his sacrifice, atonement, or
blood shed upon the cross, and his intercession with the Father in consequence
thereof. And faith, as it respects him in his regal or "kingly" character,
means subjection, or dutiful and loyal submission of heart to him, his
authority and government; or a sincere consent of the mind to be ruled and
governed, as well as protected, and finally saved by him, Nor did ever any
person properly receive and submit to the Lord Jesus Christ, or believe on him,
in any one of these characters, (such is their connection) without doing so
with respect to them all.

Again:

SUCH a faith as this, implies or connotes the new birth, or that renovation of
the the heart by the Spirit of God, so often spoken of in scripture. This is
evident from a consideration thereof, as it has now been briefly explained. And
the same thing is also connoted or implied, in the says spoken of in scripture
as saving -- To them gave he power, says St. John, to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God John (...), 12, 13.
. -- Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ [truly and properly believes
it] is born of God John 5. 1.
. -- Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. 26.
-- And if children, then heirs, etc. Romans 8. 1, 7.


THIS faith is of consequence, as was said before, "a living, operative
principle of love and obedience; never failing, where there is time and
opportunity for it, to produce good works, or a virtuous, holy and godly life.
For, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin 1 John 3. 9.
: But -- overcomes the world; and this is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our faith Chap. 5. 4.
-- In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but faith that works by love. Gal. 5. 6.
-- Will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? -- By works
was says made perfect. See James 11. 14.
It must be particularly observed, however, that a sinner is no sooner the
subject of such a faith, than he is actually in a state of pardon,
justification and salvation, whether he lives afterward to perform good works,
or not. If he lives, he certainly will perform them, having such an holy and
operative principle in his heart. For it is a contradiction to suppose, that a
person who was once a rebel, should at length internally submit himself to
Jesus Christ as his king, and yet not act as becomes a loyal subject of his
kingdom, by doing his commandments. But if he has no opportunity for this, by
reason of death, he is yet equally safe, equally justified: His faith; the
loyalty and obedience of his heart, virtually contain all good works. And, by
the way, from this scriptural account of the faith which justifies and saves,
appears the great error of those, who speak of justification as antecedent to
repentance, says and regeneration; it being manifestly subsequent, or
posterior thereto, in order and conception, according to the scriptures.

SUCH, my young brethren, is that faith, so much spoken of in the new
testament; that faith which is truly justifying and saving; and without which
there is no salvation. For he that does not believe thus, or in the true sense
of scripture, is "condemned already." No kind or degree of repentance or
reformation, intitles any person to salvation, independently of faith: It is by
means of this faith, which indeed includes or supposes repentance, that sinners
are delivered from condemnation and wrath. This, therefore, is indispensably
necessary, in order to your being sober-minded in a christian sense. Whoever
falls short of this, falls short of christian sobriety. For surely, that cannot
be a truly christian sobriety of mind, which leaves a sinner in a state of
guilt and condemnation. Any sobriety which a person may be the subject of, and
yet perish in his sins at last, as a despiser or neglecter of the salvation
revealed through Christ, is essentially defective.

WHATEVER concern then, you may have upon your minds about your past sins; though
your external practice may be much reformed; and though you may be really
desirous of eternal happiness; (as who is not?) Yet if you do not give the
consent of your hearts to be saved by Jesus Christ, in the way that the gospel
makes known; if you do not sincerely, penitently and humbly cast yourselves on
the mercy of God, receiving and submitting to Christ as a prophet, priest and
king; you are not sober-minded in the full and just sense of the text: You are
not yet actually in the spiritual kingdom of Christ and of God, though you may
not be far from, but near to it, and in a hopeful way of finally inheriting the
blessings of it. This is not, however, a state to be rested in as safe or
secure. If you are burdened with a sense of sin and guilt, and fear the wrath
to come, remember the gracious words, and hearken to the invitation of Him, who
once said, and still says, Come unto me -- and I will give you rest. Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me -- and ye shall find rest unto your souls: Matt.
XI. 28, 29.
That is, in other words, Become my true disciples and followers: believe in
me, and submit yourselves to the laws of my kingdom: Doing which, you will
enjoy great peace of mind at present, and inherit everlasting life.

YOU will observe, that what has been said under this head of discourse,
relates immediately, not to your external practice, but to that faith which is
truly saving, and is itself the substance or essence of Christian sobriety
internally considered; the root and principle of all true holiness, or
Christian obedience.

IT is therefore to be observed, in the next place, that Christian sobriety
implies in it.

VI. AN external confession of Christ's name, a profession of the religion
which bears it, and an explicit dedication of One's self to the service and
glory of God in him. No person of adult age has any right to be looked upon as
a sober-minded or real Christian, till he has given reason for others to think
him such, by making a christian profession in conformity to the order of the
gospel, or the commandment of our Savior, and the laws of his kingdom. And
here,

1. IT is required, not only that you believe in Christ, but voluntarily, or by
an act of your own, take upon yourselves the character of his disciples and
followers, by "naming his name" in a solemn and public manner, or "before men";
thereby visibly devoting yourselves to God in him, and laying yourselves under
obligation to conduct your selves in other respects, as becomes the professed
followers of him, who was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners."
The Lord Jesus Christ not only encourages such a public confession of him, by a
gracious promise on one hand; but discountenances the neglect hereof by a most
awful threatening on the other. Whosoever shall confess me before men, says he,
him shall the Son of Man also confess before the angels of God. But he that
denies me before men, shall be denied before the angels of God. Luke 12, 8, 9.
In another evangelist it is, -- before my Father which is in heaven. Matt.
10th Chap.
He says, nearly to the same purpose, elsewhere. -- Whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall
come in his own glory and his Father's, and of the holy angels. Luke 9. 26.
These are very solemn warnings against disowning Christ, his name or "his
words," even in times of sore trial and persecution for righteousness sake; to
which times they more particularly refer. But, to be ashamed of, to disown or
to neglect confessing them, when there is nothing of that sort to be feared, is
doubtless far more criminal and dangerous. It is manifest from the whole
current of the new testament, that the faith of the heart is to be accompained
with the confession of the tongue; and that as necessary to salvation, except
in extraordinary cases. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
says the apostle, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Romans X. 9,
10.
Indeed, if any who know this to be the will and commandment of Christ
respecting them that believe on him, the contempt or wilful neglect thereof, is
absolutely inconsistent with a sincere regard to him and his authority: It is,
in its nature, inconsistent with such a faith in him as the scripture speaks of
as saving; which faith respects him as truly in his regal, as in his prophetic
or sacerdotal character. But,

2. THOUGH it is positively injoined upon those who believe in Christ, to confess
him before men; yet it is not to be supposed necessary, or the thing intended
hereby, that persons should stand up in the midst of an assembly, and, viva
voce, or in express words uttered by themselves, declare their faith in him.
For some cannot even speak at all, and much less in such a public manner.
Neither can it be supposed necessary for them to profess their repentance,
faith and experiences in a long writing, under their hands; -- a common
practice formerly in this country, but growing daily more and more into disuse;
and not without sufficient reason, as being attended with diverse
inconveniences, which need not be particularly mentioned. Therefore,

3. NOTHING more, or farther, can be supposed necessary as to this matter, than
that people should, in a solemn, public manner, and by some sign, or
significant gesture, commonly understood, make such a declaration of their
faith in Christ: signifying their consent to the covenant of grace established
in him, and their resolution, by the help of God, to walk in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless; or to conduct themselves in
all respects according to the laws of Christ's kingdom. This may be effectually
done, without any speaking or writing on their part, in public. And as nothing
beyond this can reasonably be supposed to be required, by confessing Christ
before men; so neither can any thing short of it be supposed to come up to the
thing really intended thereby, in any natural construction of the words, or in
consistency with the practice of the christian church from the earliest times.

4. UNDER this head, I must not omit particularly to mention the christian
ordinance of baptism, which our Lord instituted as the outward, visible sign of
initiation into his church, or a mark of discipleship to him; saying to his
apostles, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore,
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost Matt. 28. 18, 19.
. The known practice of the apostles afterward, being compared with this
injunction, shows that our Lord designed water baptism therein. For, that they
actually baptized with water, is evident from many passages in the
new testament; not only in the Acts, but Epistles of the apostles: And
doubtless they did so in obedience to Christ's command, which they understood
much better than the modern deniers of water baptism. Mr. Robert Barclay has
descended to cavil and trifle upon this subject, in a manner much below a
person of his learning and good sense: Asserting that though John's baptism was
by or with water. Christ's was to be without water, or merely an internal and
spiritual baptism. His principal argument to establish this doctrine, is
grounded on the words of John Baptist himself: I indeed baptize you with water
unto repentance; but he that comes after me -- shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost and with fire Matt. III. 11.
. According to which distinction and opposition, he insists, that as John's
baptism was by water without the Spirit, so christian baptism is solely by the
Spirit without water: So that there neither is, nor ought to be, any baptism
under the Gospel dispensation, and in conformity to Christ's commandment,
besides that of the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost; this being it self, and this
alone, christian baptism.

To overthrow which sophism, I need remind you only of two passages of
scripture, both in the Acts of the apostles. Soon after they themselves were
baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire i. e. received the Spirit, which
appeared to them in the form of "cloven tongues, like as of fire" Acts II. 3.
; we find them preaching thus to the people: Repent, and be baptized every one
of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost Ver. 38.
. According to which, the Holy Ghost was to be given them in consequence of
their being baptized in the name of Christ. Therefore receiving christian
baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost, do not mean precisely the same thing, as
it is pretended; one of them being prior to the other, and a means thereof. And
what could that be, but waterbaptism in Christ's name, in consequence of which,
the persons baptized were to receive spiritual baptism, or the Holy Ghost?

BUT there is another passage which still more clearly refutes the learned
Barclay's comment upon the above cited words of John. We are informed that St.
Paul came to Ephesus, and finding certain disciples, he said unto them, Have ye
received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said, We have not so much
as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. And he said unto them, Unto what then
were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John's baptism. Be pleased particularly
to observe what immediately follows, in which there is an express reference to
the words of John: Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, That they should believe on him which
should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands
on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them Acts xix. 1 -- 6.
. Now, could there possibly be a plainer distinction than this, either, first,
betwixt John's baptism, and baptism in Christ's name afterward; or, secondly,
betwixt these persons being baptized in Christ's name, and their receiving the
Holy Ghost? This was subsequent to the other, and not till after Paul had laid
his hands on, as well as baptized them. Christian baptism then, and receiving
the Holy Ghost, were not the same thing; but the former of them, ordinarily at
least, prior to the latter, and an instituted means thereof: And what could
that be, but water baptism? Whereas, upon Mr. Barclay's principles, it was
John's baptism only, that was by water; Christ's being entirely spiritual.

UPON the whole then, the plain sense of John's word's, on which so much stress
has been laid by the Quakers, may be expressed thus -- I indeed baptize you
with water [only] unto repentance: But Jesus Christ will soon institute another
baptism, which, though performed by an external washing with water, as mine is,
shall yet have far more glorious effects. For penitent believers in Christ,
being baptized in conformity to his institution, shall, in consequence thereof,
receive the Holy Ghost -- There is nothing harsh in this paraphrase; the
difference betwixt John's and Christ's baptism is sufficiently preserved
thereby; and there is a necessity for such an one, in order to account for the
apostles baptizing with water, as they certainly did. Let me add, that if this
be an instituted means of obtaining the Holy Spirit, it may be justly feared
that those who neglect and despise it, have some what less of the Spirit among
them, than they would be though it to have: Though I do not presume to judge any; for
to his own master every one stands or falls.

YOUR duty then, in this respect, is clear: All who believe in Christ, not
having already been baptized with water, are obliged to be so, in obedience to
his command. -- Though as to the far greater part of you, my young brethren of
this society; I conclude you were baptized in your infancy: So that you are not
to be exhorted to be again baptized. But there are many of you, who have not
yet made this as it were your own act, by visibly taking upon yourselves the
bonds of the christian covenant. And the neglect hereof, in those that are come
to adult age, is not very consistent with christian sobriety. Nor can you be
though it to have yourselves confessed Christ before men, in the manner required by
him, by being devoted to him by your parents or others, in your infancy.

5. THERE is a considerable number of those that may be justly accounted young
men, though not unmarried, who, in order to obtain baptism for their children,
have made a profession of their faith in Christ, and solemnly bound themselves
to observe all the laws of his kingdom; and yet turn their backs upon the
Lord's table from year to year, as if this were no christian institution; -- as
though Christ had never said, This do in remembrance of me; and as though the
inspired apostle had not said, As often as ye eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup, ye do show the Lord's death, till he come. It is not very easy to
reconcile this neglect, with the supposition of your having been sincere and in
earnest, when you engaged to obey all Christ's known commandments and
institutions; -- upon supposition that you allow this to be one of them, as you
cannot deny it to be. I have often, and very particularly shown what your duty
is in this respect; though with much less success than was desired. However, I
will not be weary or discouraged in reminding you of it; hoping that the time
will come, when what is seriously said to you upon this head, will be as
seriously attended to; and have a proper influence upon your practice: Which
will be a better evidence of your being truly sober-minded, than any that you
can well give, while you habitually absent yourselves from the fellowship of
Christ's church and people in one of his ordinances.

INDEED, if unchristian terms of christian communion are insisted on in any
church or churches, your not being incorporated with them, provided it is
solely for this reason, will not be your fault, but that of the imposers of
such terms. Nor can it be denied, that there has been a great deal of this kind
of antichristian imposition and tyranny practiced in different ages;
particularly in respect of creeds, or articles of says. For, instead of being
contented with such a simple, plain and apostolic confession as this, "I
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of GOD" Acts VIII. 37.
; or even with a general and serious profession of faith in the holy scriptures
as the word of God; many churches have imperiously required an explicit
profession of unscriptural articles of faith, as the pretended "form of sound
words"; though almost barbarous enough, perhaps, both in expression and
sentiment, at once to wound the ear, affront the sense, and shock the humanity
of an Hottentot!

BUT, surely, it is time that all protestants, especially
protestant-dissenters, should make the holy scriptures the standard of a sound
faith and christian practice, in opposition to ALL OTHER forms of sound words;
as some are pleased to mis-call the reveries of poor crazy monks and lunaticks,
half-distracted schoolmen, superannuated enthusiasts, and proud, factious,
avaritious zealots for a party, pretending to make black white, and white
black; and then scolding at, and cursing all the world, that would not
implicitly believe their unholy ravings, and submit to them as the true,
uncorrupted catholic faith! -- God, in his own time, which is approaching, will
put an end to all these antichristian usurpations in his church. Christ's "fan
is in his hand, and he will thoro'ly purge his floor." And happy is it for
those who, in the mean while, neither exercise such tyranny over others, nor
suffer under it; at once allowing to all, and enjoying themselves, that just
and reasonable "liberty, wherewith Christ has made his disciples FREE from
every such yoke of bondage."

VII. CHRISTIAN sobriety implies frequent and fervent prayer to almighty God in
the name of Christ, for the pardon of sin, for the Holy Spirit, for light,
support, sanctification, comfort; in a word, for all needed blessings, temporal
and eternal: Together with devout and grateful praises for all blessings
enjoyed of every kind, to the Father of lights, from whom "every good gift, and
every perfect gift comes down." An habitual neglect of prayer, is absolutely
inconsistent with the spirit of christianity. And if ever you are really
sober-minded, you will find in yourselves an heart, a disposition to pray, and
to give thanks to God and our Father for all things, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. It will not be a grievous task or burden to you, as it is to a
secure and hardened sinner. So far from this, that you will find yourselves
uneasy if you are long without pouring out your hearts before God. You will not
only pray to him in public with his people, and in a more private manner, if
you have opportunity; but in secret. And even when you are engaged in the
lawful and necessary business of life, your hearts will frequently be lifted up
to God in the heavens, in holy desires, grateful praises, and good resolutions:
Thus, in the language of the apostle, praying always with all prayer, and
supplication in the Spirit, watching thereunto with perseverance. Ephesians. VI. 18.


I MIGHT mention many other particular duties, as belonging to the head of
christian sobriety; for, indeed, there is no one duty, but what belongs to it.
But, instead of descending to more particulars, I must observe now in the last
place,

VIII. THAT christian sobriety implies living a truly religious, virtuous and
holy life, in conformity to the precepts of the gospel, the laws of Christ's
kingdom. Our Lord frequently cautioned his disciples against depending upon an
external profession of faith and religion, without good works, without
obedience to his commandments. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
says he, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of
my Father who is in heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you:
depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Matt. VII. 21, 22. 23.
So that, whatever wonderful works men may do, yet if they neglect good works,
or still work iniquity, they are not true disciples of Christ. How many devils
soever they cast out; yet if they leave one to reign in their own hearts, so
that they "do his lusts," they are most expressly excluded from all hopes of
eternal life. Indeed, living in the practice of any known sin, is absolutely
inconsistent with true repentance, and that faith which is saving, according to
the account before given of them. "How shall they that are dead to sin, live
any longer therein?" Or how shall they that are "alive unto God by Jesus
Christ," not live to God, or not obey his known will in every respect! It is
impossible: If the tree be good, the fruit will be good; if the heart be
renewed and sanctified, the life will also be renewed and holy. The love of God
and of man, understood in their proper and just extent, and considered as
principles in the heart, the effects of Christian faith through the influences of
the holy Spirit, do in a sort comprehend all Christian duties and virtues.
Known, wilful and habitual disobedience to God in any respect, is inconsistent
therewith; inconsistent with christian sincerity, and therefore with sobriety.

IF, therefore, you aspire to the character of being sober-minded, "having
believed in God, you must be careful to maintain good-works:" You must keep his
commandments in view, endeavoring, by his grace, to glorify him in all things;
to form your temper, and whole course of life, according to those reasonable,
just and good precepts which Christ has left his disciples to walk by; not
forgetting his own admirable example of piety, purity and humility; of meekness
and charity, of temperance and patience; nor allowing yourselves in any thing
which you know, or in your consciences believe, is contrary to the will of God.
For, as was intimated before, doing so, is absolutely inconsistent with
integrity and uprightness of heart, as well as with that holiness of life which
God has required of all whom he has favored with the light of the gospel, and
called to his eternal kingdom and glory by Jesus Christ.

I HAVE now done with the first general head of discourse proposed, having
somewhat distinctly explained to you the nature of that sobriety, to which even
"young men" are to be exhorted.

LET me conclude for the present, with some short reflections on, what has been
said upon it.

And, 1. YOU would do well, my young brethren, to apply this to yourselves
respectively, in the way of serious self-examination. It becomes you to
consider both your past and present ways; what sentiments and dispositions are
predominant in your hearts; and by what rules and maxims your lives are
directed: That so you may be able to judge, what your own true characters
respectively are; whether you are truly religious and virtuous, or
sober-minded, or not. For, as has been observed more than once, true religion,
and true sobriety, are not really different; but essentially one and the same
thing.

IT shall now be taken for granted, that you do not disbelieve the being,
perfections and providence of God, or the general truth of the christian
revelation; and also, that you have some just conceptions of the common frailty
and degeneracy of mankind. Neither of these things shall in the least be called
into question -- But have you sincerely repented of your own sins before God?
Have you, in a deep sense of your guilt and unworthiness, fled for refuge from
his justice to his grace and mercy, through his Son Jesus Christ; and internally
consented to that method of salvation which is revealed in the gospel? Have you
also confessed Christ's name before men, in the manner required by him; and
visibly dedicated yourselves to God in him? Do you live in the frequent
practice of sincere and fervent prayer? And do you conscientiously endeavor to
walk according to all Christ's known commandments? It would be convenient for
you to put such questions as these to yourselves, as in the presence of God,
who is greater than your hearts, and knows all things.

2. THOSE of you who can truly answer these questions in the affirmative, (as I
hope some of you can) may assure yourselves that you are indeed sober-minded;
and have great ground of comfort, peace and joy, as being the sons of God, and
heirs of eternal life. I might address and congratulate you in the language of
St. John, in his first epistle: -- I write unto you young men, because ye have
overcome the wicked One. And again, I have written unto you young men, because
ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the
wicked One. Happy you, my beloved brethren, who even in youth have, through
grace, attained to that state and character, which so many other persons, though
advanced in years, are yet far from! But,

3. BE not high-minded, but fear. A sober mind, is always an humble one. Boast
not of your religious seize, as the shameful and hypocritical manner of
some is: And if you ever glory even in though it, let it be only in the Lord. "For
what have thou, that thou did not receive?" Be sensible of your
imperfections; and beware of a relapse into any sinful courses -- "The just
shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him." Heb. X. 38.
There is still ample room in the best of you, for improvement; for increase of
sobriety, knowledge, strength, and all christian virtues. Endeavor therefore,
to make progress in the ways of wisdom and holiness: For he that stands still;
instead of pressing forward in the christian race, is on the point of going
backward. And it were doubtless better for any not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment
delivered unto them. 2 Peter II. 21.


4. As to those of you, my young brethren, who cannot pretend to be
sober-minded according to these scriptural marks and rules of sobriety; you
have no reason to be satisfied with your present condition, or to think it
safe. For there is no real safety in any state below that of true christianity;
or in any thing short of that repentance, faith, and renewed state of mind,
with which eternal life is connected by the promises of the gospel. If you
should die short of this, you would die in your sins; unpardoned, uninterested
in the redemption wrought out by Christ: And what the consequence of this would
be, you need not, surely, to be now informed! But,

5. LEST I should be misunderstood, I must tell you, I do not mean hereby, that
if you are deficient in any of these respects, or fall short of such a truly
christian state, you are of consequence destitute of every degree of sobriety
that is of any consideration; and so are to be ranked in the same class with
the most profligate and abandoned sinners. God forbid! The holy scriptures, in
numberless places, suppose a measure of knowledge, conviction of sin,
seriousness of mind, and desire to know the will of God and the way of life,
antecedent to a saving illumination and repentance, faith and regeneration; and
yet preparatory thereto; which things, being considered in this view, are truly
valuable and important. And indeed, they are the effects of God's gracious
influences upon the heart; in conformity to what is said of Lydia in the Acts,
That the Lord opened her heart to ATTEND to those things which were spoken by
Paul. Our Savior also tells such a serious, inquisitive person, that he was
"not far from the kingdom of God." Nor do the holy scriptures leave us any room
to doubt, but that all persons living under the gospel, who are so far
convinced of their sinful state, and so desirous of obtaining eternal life, as
sincerely and perseveringly to seek God's face and favor, shall actually attain
to a saving knowledge of him. If any of you are in such a state of mind as
this, there is just and great reason to hope, that being already near to God's
spiritual kingdom, you will ere-long be actually translated into, and become
the happy subjects of it forever. But, as was said before, this is not a state
to be rested in. You may, without all doubt, relapse into your sinful courses
after such a partial reformation: In which case, "the latter end will be worse
with you than the beginning." It highly concerns you therefore, to beseech the
God of all grace, both to keep you from falling, and to give you repentance to
the acknowledging of the truth; -- the truth as it is in Jesus; that knowing
him, and the only true God in and by him, you may obtain eternal life.

6. IF even such thoughtful and serious young men as were last mentioned, are
not yet, however, in a state of safety, or at present entitled to glory, honor
and immortality; how far, alas! are those from being so, who do not at all
consider their ways, nor so much as make the important inquiry, "What they
shall do to be saved?" -- those who live in the allowed gratification of their
lusts; and, instead of seeking after God, if happily they may find him, rather
say to the Almighty, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways! Alas! my young brethren, if there are any present, to whom this character
justly belongs; (for I neither particularly know, nor accuse any;) your
condition is truly deplorable. For is it not so, to be in a state of enmity
against God your Creator? against Him, in whom you live, move and have your
being; Him, from whom you can neither fly, nor effectually hide yourselves in
any secret place, not even in the dens and rocks of the mountains, or though the
rocks and mountains should, at your entreaty, fall on you and cover you; -- and
against whom you can make no resistance; Him, who is at once omnipotent,
omnipresent and omniscient, as well as infinite in holiness and righteousness!
It is dreadful indeed, to be "enemies to such a Being in your minds, by wicked
works!"

BUT lest the very thought hereof should too much overwhelm you; lest the
"spirit should fail before God, and the souls which He has made;" Isai. LVII.
16.
let me remind you, that God is no less good and merciful, than he is holy,
great and powerful. He "will not contend forever, neither will he be always
wroth:" He is even now waiting to be gracious to you; -- to every one that will
attend to the voice of love, and turn at his reproof, how numerous soever your
sins have been. His mercy is at once higher than the heavens, and lower --
"deeper than hell;" as it saves those who are deserving of it! The blood of
Jesus, that hallowed fountain, in which so many millions of polluted souls have
been cleansed and healed, has not yet lost its purifying, salutary virtue; nor
will it do so, while there are any sinners on earth willing to be cleansed and
saved by it; nor even after there are none! The Holy Spirit of God is, I doubt
not, now striving with your hearts; and, if I may so express it, moving upon
the face of the chaos, Genesis 1. 2.
toward the production of the new creation in Christ, as it once did at the
time of the old, to the perfecting thereof. O then, my young brethren, let not
this be your condemnation at the great day, That you at once despised the
riches of God's goodness, leading you to repentance; -- accounted the blood of
the covenant wherewith you might have been sanctified, an unholy thing; -- and
did despite unto the Spirit of grace, by which you would otherwise have been
sealed to the day of redemption!

SERMON IV.
Of some things contrary to Christian Sobriety, viz. (1.) Of taking God's Name
in vain. (2.) Of neglecting the public Worship. (3.) Of light and irreverent
Behavior at it. (4.) Of excessive, riotous Mirth at other Times. (5.) Of
sinful Diversions or Recreations. (6.) Of excessive Expense and Pride in
Apparel. (7.) Of the neglect of Business, and Mis-spence of Time.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
MY young brethren, having, in the first discourse, made some remarks on the
text, introductory to my main design; and having, in the second and third,
somewhat distinctly explained to you the nature of that sobriety which is here
spoken of, as also recommended it to you in a cursory way: I proceed now, by
divine assistance, as was proposed in the second place,

SECONDLY, To point out, particularly, some of the many sins, follies and
criminal excesses, which are repugnant to christian sobriety; and against which
young men especially, may need to be cautioned.

THIS, it is conceived, may, by the blessing of God, be very serviceable to
you, not merely by showing you what you ought not, but what you ought to do;
and so giving you a still more distinct idea of christian sobriety. For, to
every vice that is to be avoided as contrary to this sobriety, there is an
opposite virtue or duty, which ought to be practiced as a branch of it: And, it
is well known, that in all cases in general, contraries serve for the
illustration of each other. So that when you are shown what things you ought to
avoid, you will the more clearly discern what that manner and course of life
is, to which you are exhorted: Nor shall I fail, as I go along, particularly to
remind you of the duties and virtues, to which the sins that are to be
mentioned, stand in opposition. And if some of these sins and excesses have
been hinted at already in any of the preceding discourses; yet that will not
render a more particular caveat with respect to them, superfluous or improper.

LET me farther premise, That though in the enumeration of these sins and
follies, it is rather my intention to give you friendly warning as to the
future, than to accuse, reproach and upbraid you, as to any faults which you
may have been guilty of in times past; yet it will be highly proper for you to
make the application to yourselves respectively, so far as you have been really
guilty of any of these crimes. You ought, with shame and ingenuous sorrow, to
acknowledge them to God; humbly imploring the forgiveness of them through Him, who
once appeared to put away sins by the sacrifice of himself. For he that
covers his sins shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them,
shall find mercy with the Lord; who is not willing that ANY should perish, but
that ALL should come to repentance. -- Let me begin then,

I. WITH the mention of an heinous sin more immediately against God; I mean
that of "taking his name in vain." To use the name of the great and holy God
irreverently or lightly in common discourse; and more especially to swear by it
rashly, falsely, wantonly, or without lawful occasion; to imprecate the curse
of God, either upon yourselves or others, whether in jest or in earnest;
together with whatever commonly goes under the name of profane language: All
these things, I say, are doubtless prohibited in that well known, and yet often
violated command of the decalogue, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain. And the words immediately following, clearly and strongly express
the high displeasure of the Almighty against those who break this commandment,
together with the certainty and greatness of their punishment, unless it be
prevented by deep repentance -- For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that
takes his name in vain. There are many other passages of scripture, in which
this species of common and gross impiety, is severely prohibited and condemned.

"HE that planted the ear, shall he not hear?" Psalm XCIV. 9.
-- particularly shall he hear and punish the profane oaths and curses, the
abominable imprecations of ungodly sinners! If wicked men are to give an
account in the day of judgment, even of "every idle word" that they speak, as
our Savior positively declares they shall; how much rather shall they give an
account of such impious, such abominably wicked words, as I am here speaking
of! And what religious sobriety, do you think, can possibly be in the mind of
that person, whether old or young, whose mouth is thus filled with curses, and
other profane language? -- in the mind of One, who scruples not to trifle with
that venerable name, at which holy angels bow with love and reverence, and
devils themselves tremble, and are horribly afraid! -- in the mind of One, who
upon any slight discontent or uneasiness, or perhaps without any sort of
provocation, calls upon the great God to damn either himself or another, or the
like? Certainly, there can be no true sobriety in those persons, whoever they
be, that addict themselves to these practices, saying perhaps with the wicked
of old, "Our lips are our own; who is Lord over us?" The use of such language
evidently discovers the want of all due reverence to the great God, and a mind
depraved to a sad degree, upon any supposition that can be made. There is no
tolerable excuse for it; nothing that can be said by way of apology for those
that are chargeable with it, but what will much more effectually show their
great guilt and impiety. For example:

IF it should be said, that they really mean nothing, when they lightly use the
name of God, and imprecate the vengeance of heaven upon themselves, which is
the most favorable supposition; yet does it not discover a total absence of
reverence to God, and of all serious concern about his favor, his blessing or
his curse, when people can often use his name without thinking of Him, and
speak of his curse, or of damnation itself, without meaning any thing thereby!
What? have the name of God frequently in their mouths, and yet not have "God
himself in all their thoughts!" -- often speak of his blessing and curse, of
heaven and hell; and yet not think of them, or mean any thing thereby! What a
totally irreligious? -- what a "reprobate," undiscerning, blinded, and
monstrously depraved mind does this imply? How near is it to right down
Atheism? But it will perhaps be said, that though some persons do really think of
God, of his wrath and curse, when they speak of them; yet they are only in
jest, when they use such language, and intend not as they say. What? jest with
the holy and venerable name of the great God! and speak of his blessing and
curse, of heaven and hell, for merriment and diversion! Is not this to make the
matter still worse? Would it not, of the two, be less criminal to have no
design at all, than such a one as this? Doubtless it would. But you will say,
perhaps, that they use such language, because it is by some reckoned
fashionable and polite; and to avoid the imputation of being precise, notional
and whimsical. Be it so. The time has indeed been, though I hope it is not the
case at this day, when those who scrupled to curse and swear profanely, were
stigmatized as puritans and fanatics; the enemies of the church at least, if
not of the state! -- But how does this help the matter? What? trifle with the
most sacred and awful things, profane the name of God, and break his
commandments, for the sake of being thought polite and fashionable! or for fear
of being thought precise; that is, in other words, being thought to fear God
and his displeasure! For this must be the true and only meaning of preciseness,
in the present case. And what a monstrous pitch of impiety must that man be
arrived at, who is ashamed and afraid of being thought to fear God and his
wrath? and who will break his known commandments, profane his holy name, and
trifle with the most sacred things, to convince some [supposed] polite and
fashionable people, that he does not fear him! -- Is not this worse and worse?
Without doubt. What then, shall next be said by way of apology for profane
swearers? -- that they are in earnest, and really wish God would damn them or
others, when they imprecate his vengeance? It were needless to say any thing to
show their madness and impiety upon this supposition: Which are as great as any
that the devils themselves are guilty of!

THIS practice is no less irrational, or contrary to the light of nature, than
it is to the revealed will, and express law of God. And it is one of those
enormous sins, against which young men need to be particularly warned. It is
not, indeed, a crime that is peculiar to them. Some persons that are advanced
in years, are notoriously guilty of it: Yea, it is said, there are certain
creatures both old and young, appearing in female apparel (for I will not
prostitute the respectable name of women, by giving it to them) who are no
ordinary proficients in this kind of impiety! But whoever are, or are not
addicted to it, You, my young brethren, must either wholly refrain from it, or
else renounce all pretensions to sobriety, and confess that you have no love or
reverence for, no fear of God before your eyes. The most untutored savage in
the woods of America, might with as much reason, and as good a grace, assume to
himself the character of a refined politician, or a shrewd philosopher, as any
profane swearer and blasphemer could pretend to be religious, or sober-minded.
The fear of the Lord is the very "beginning of wisdom:" And if that finds any
place in your hearts, you will have a sacred veneration even for his name, as
well as for Him: You will never mention it, or speak or think of the great GOD,
but in a sober and reverent manner. It will be as impossible for you, either in
jest or earnest, either for no end at all, or to please fools and madmen, to
swear lightly by the name of God, or to call upon him to damn yourselves or
others, as to lay violent hands upon yourselves. And yet how common a thing is
it to hear both old and young, and even children in the streets, who can hardly
stammer out an oath or a curse, using this kind of language? All of them
without exception, hereby making it manifest, that they neither fear God nor
regard man, however well-bred they may conceit themselves; and are destitute of
the first principles, not only of grace and sobriety, but of decorum and good
manners: For this practice is an affront to every reasonable and virtuous man,
as well as an heinous, aggravated offense against Almighty God.

II. ANOTHER sin, against which you are to be cautioned, is, neglecting the
public worship of God upon the "Lord's day;" either staying at home in
idleness, or unnecessarily employing yourselves in worldly affairs, when you
ought to be with the people of God; joining with them in praising and praying
to him, or in hearing his word read and preached, for your instruction and
edification in the things pertaining to his kingdom, and to your eternal good.

YOU know, doubtless, that as early as the time of Moses, i. e. above three
thousand years ago, God appropriated one day in seven to be observed as an holy
sabbath to himself, or a day of rest from common secular business, and to be
spent in religious exercises: Saying, Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy.
Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work: But the seventh day is the
sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. Exodus XX. 8. -- 11. N. B. Notwithstanding
what is said in Genesis 11. 3. concerning God's "blessing the seventh day and
sanctifying it;" and notwithstanding public social worship is in itself a most
reasonable thing; yet it does not appear from scripture, that any sabbath was
actually instituted by God, or any particular set time held sacred for that
purpose by good men, before the law was given by Moses.
It seemed not improper to remind you of this original institution of a
sabbath: Though I must acknowledge, that I think christians have no concern with
the sabbath, most properly so called, (I mean the Mosaic or Jewish sabbath) any
more than they have with circumcision, the passover, and other sacrifices, etc.
All these things were but "a shadow of good things to come." And when Christ
the body, the substance came; -- when his church, most properly so called, in
distinction from the Jewish, was established, those things ceased: At least,
the Gentile converts were under no obligation to observe any one of them; no,
not even the moral law, considered merely as a part of the law of Moses. For if
they had, they would have been also bound to observe all the others for the
same reason. So that if Gentile Christians are obliged to any of the things
which were enjoined in the law of Moses, as they doubtless are; yet they are
only those, that are either of moral and eternal obligation, or else adopted,
and taken into "the law of Christ," and considered as a part of his
institution. The Mosaic, or seventh-day sabbath, is neither of these. If it
were, properly speaking, of moral obligation, it would be so to all nations in
all ages; universally and perpetually binding, so that the law relating
thereto, could no more be either repealed or changed, than those commandments
which require us to love God and our neighbor. And there are few, if any
persons, who pretend to say, that Christ or his apostles ever enjoined
Christians to observe the seventh-day sabbath instituted by Moses; making that
part of the decalogue, a part of the Christian rule of life. Neither is there,
according to the gospel of Christ, any other sabbath, or day, to be observed
with a Judaical rigor and severity; with which the more liberal, ingenuous and
filial spirit of christianity, very little agrees. And whoever at this day,
pretends to maintain the obligation to regard any seventh day as a sabbath,
either upon the footing of the law of nature, or that of Moses, will have a
disgraceful overthrow, or a very contemptible opponent.

UPON what footing then, you will ask me, do I assert an obligation to observe
"the Lord's day," or "the first day of the week," in a religious manner? I
answer, entirely upon a Christian basis; upon a footing quite distinct from
that on which the Jewish sabbath was instituted and observed. Let me briefly
explain this matter.

IT is in general consonant to the light and law of nature, that God should be
worshipped, etc. in a social, public manner. And if so, it is convenient and
necessary, that some particular times, and even places, should be more
especially appropriated to that use, or end. For otherwise, people would not
know when or where to go, in order to meet with others to join with them in
these offices of religion. It evidently appears also from the new testament, to
have been the will of Christ and of God, not only that social worship should be
upheld under the gospel dispensation, but more particularly, that "the first
day of the week," on which our Savior arose, and was "declared to be the Son
of God with power," should be religiously, gratefully and joyfully observed, in
praise, prayer, etc. For this day is diverse times mentioned in the new
testament, as the day on which Christians assembled together in a more especial
manner, in the first age, for religious purposes. Compare John XX. 1. Acts XX.
7. 1 Cor. XVI. 2. and Rev. 1. 10.


IT must be remembered also, that the primitive christians came together thus
on the first day of the week, under the immediate eye, countenance and
direction of the inspired apostles; who used to meet and pray with, teach,
exhort and preach to them, thereon: At which time also the Lord's Supper used
to be celebrated. So we read particularly, [Acts XX. 7.] And upon the first day
of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them, etc.

THIS example of the first Christians, considering all circumstances, and
particularly their meeting on this day, under the immediate inspection of, and
with the inspired apostles, is sufficient to give that day the preference to
any other, for the purposes aforesaid: Especially when we consider it as the
day of that grand and important event, the very basis of the Christian
religion, Christ's resurrection; from whence it is called "the Lord's day."
Public, social worship being a duty, and some particular time being needful to
be fixed on for that end; here are positive reasons for the first day, rather
than another: And no man can pretend any particular reason against this, or
object against it; except upon the footing of the antiquated Jewish sabbath,
with which we have no concern -- But this is only example, you will say; not
precept. Now, instead of insisting upon it, as I think One might do with great
reason, that this example, all circumstances being considered, ought to have
the force of a command with us; I observe,

THAT the words of the apostle [Heb. X. 23, 24 and 25,] can be considered as
nothing short of a positive precept, to the purpose aforesaid. Let us hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering -- And let us consider one another
to provoke unto love, and to good works: Not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another. --
Now, these words ought, in all reason, to be understood and interpreted in
conformity to the known general practice of the Christian church in that age;
which was to assemble for the exercises of religion on "the first day of the
week" more especially, though not exclusively. So that in any natural and fair
construction of this passage, the apostle must be considered, (1.) As giving
his entire approbation of this general usage among Christians; as one way in
which they were to "hold fast their profession," to excite one another "to
love, and to good works," etc. (2.) As solemnly warning Christians against
neglecting to meet together for the said purposes on the first, or Lord's day
-- "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together." And (3.) As blaming
and reproving certain of the looser, and less sincere professors of
christianity, who even in that age absented themselves from these assemblies of
the faithful -- "as the manner of some is" -- This is no forced or labored,
but an easy and natural construction of the apostle's words. So that this
practice, so reasonable in itself, and conducive to many important ends, civil
and temporal, as well as religious and eternal, wants neither apostolic example
nor precept for its support; and even to bind it upon the consciences of all
who acknowledge subjection to Jesus Christ.

WHY then should any as it were turn Jews, or become "Moses's disciples," for
the sake of establishing an illiberal, Mosaic sabbath, to be observed with an
unscriptural, Jewish, and even Pharisaical rigor, altogether aliene from the
genius of the gospel; instead of contenting themselves with "the Lord's day,"
to be observed with grateful praises, with religious joy and festivity, as that
day was observed by the body of Christians for two or three centuries at least?
What need is there for having recourse to Moses and his law, for the divine
institution of any sabbath that Christ's disciples ought to observe! Though, by
the way, "the Lord's day" is not properly called the sabbath. It is never
called so in scripture; and giving it that name since, has been the unhappy
occasion of filling many people's heads with Jewish and antichristian notions
about it --

BUT not to digress: It being plainly the will of Christ and of God, that the
Lord's day should be observed, as has been shown, entirely upon the plan of the
gospel; it will be an heinous sin in you, if you neglect the public worship
thereon; spending that time in idleness, in unnecessary worldly labors, or in
diversions, which you ought to spend in the exercises of religion with the
people of God. If you do thus, you will not in any measure deserve the
character of being sober-minded. Forsake not therefore, the assembling of
yourselves with them on this day, as the manner of some, I might say, of many
is. For even in this town, where the Lord's day is, perhaps, as generally and
regularly observed as in any other place without exception, it is supposed by
some, that at least a fourth or fifth part of the people, though they can hardly
look out at their windows or doors without seeing one or more places of public
worship, are yet hardly seen in them twice a year. And yet possibly these very
persons may be so strangely deluded as to think themselves Christians! Let me
tell you, my young brethren, that whatever wrong and superstitious notions some
may entertain about a particular sabbath under the gospel; yet a due
observation of the Lord's day, is a most material branch of christian sobriety.
The neglect of it is of pernicious consequence in many respects; as is seen in
some parts even of New England, where, by this means, the people are but little
better than savages. The due observance, or the neglect of the Lord's day, will
probably have a very extensive influence, good or bad, upon your whole temper,
and general conversation. And it is evident from long experience and
observation, that those persons who are remarkably negligent of this branch of
christian sobriety, are generally very defective in all others: The exceptions
are very few, if any. The SABBATISMOS, sabbatism or "rest," which is said to
"remain to the people of God," Heb. IV. 9. means not any particular day to be
observed by Christians as a sabbath, in distinction from other days; but in
general, an holy rest from sin, and rejoicing in Christ Jesus, as "the end of
the law for righteousness;" and more especially, that future rest from all pain
and sorrow, which is promised to the faithful in the kingdom of heaven. And
sabbaths are particularly mentioned, Col. II. 16, 17. amongst other Judaical
and ceremonial things, which were only a "shadow" of the better things to come
by Christ; and to be then discontinued -- Let no man therefore judge you in
meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of
SABBATHS: which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ. The
same apostle, Gal. IV. reminding Christians that they were redeemed from the
law, that they might "receive the adoption of sons," ver. 5. and ver. 7. Says,
"Thou art no more a servant, but a son" -- And he then upbraids the Judaizers
and Sabbatizers in the following words: How turn ye again to the weak and
beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be bro't into bondage. Ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed upon you labor in vain: Ver. 9, 10, 11. If a man will observe any
sabbath upon the plan of the Mosaic law, or with a Jewish, servile rigor, I
insist on it, that he ought, upon his own principles, to be circumcised also,
and to keep that whole law. -- As far as I am acquainted with the learned Mr.
CALVIN's sentiments respecting "the Lord's day," my own are very nearly the
same with his: Except that I cannot go so far as that learned man is said to
have done, in countenancing recreations thereon -- And I am far from thinking
it unreasonable, or any hardship, if, in Christian countries, the civil
authority interposes to prohibit people from such worldly labors and diversions
on the Lord's day, as would be an interruption to the devotions, or religious
exercises of others.
But,

III. IT is not only a common and unnecessary neglect of the public worship,
that is inconsistent with christian sobriety: All light and indecent behavior
in the house of God, when you come to worship before him, is so likewise. --
Barely attending, or being present at, the public worship, however constant you
may be therein, is no certain evidence of religion, or sobriety. What signifies
a merely bodily presence without the heart? You are to glorify God, not only in
your bodies, but also, and more especially in your spirits, which are his. For
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth. There is no more sobriety in coming to the place of public worship on
the Lord's day, independently of the views and designs which you have in it,
than there is in going to an alehouse or opera. People may have either
reasonable and good, or foolish and wicked designs in coming to the public
worship; and may, accordingly, be either well or ill-employed while they are at
it. If they come with an intention to do honor to God, to pray to and praise
him, to be instructed in the knowledge of his holy will and the way of life,
with a sincere desire to walk therein; and if they accordingly give their
attention to these things while they are in the house of God, there is no doubt
but their intention is good and laudable; and thus far they are sober-minded.
But what if it should be pride or vanity, that brings them to the place of
worship; -- that they may show an agreeable person and air, or a fashionable
suit of clothes? What if it should be, the "lust of uncleanness;" -- that they
may indulge the rovings of loose desire in a promiscuous assembly? What if it
should be, right down impiety; -- that they may divert themselves with the
seriousness of others, and secretly make a mock at the sacred word of God, read
or preached? Would persons be the more sober-minded, for coming to the place of
worship with such views as these! They are all of them supposeable. In the
first-mentioned case, it is plain, they come not to worship God, but to be
worshipped themselves. In the second, they come not to pay a pure and spiritual
homage to the holy One of Israel, but an impure and carnal one to Venus and her
train. In the third, it is manifestly, not to serve God, but the devil by
dishonouring Him. And what worse things than these, could a young man do at an
alehouse or an opera! He might possibly be much more innocently employed at
either of them, even on the Lord's day.

Now, the best interpreter of your views in coming to the public worship, will
be your external behavior thereat; I mean the best interpreter hereof to men:
For God is greater than your hearts, and knows all things, even your
"thoughts afar off." If you should come into the house of God with a light and
careless, or a vain and ostentatious air: If you should often come very
unseasonably, when great part of the public worship is over; and, by your
indecent noise and blustering, as if you aimed to have the eyes of the assembly
turned upon you, interrupt the devotion of others: If you should make it your
practice to stare idly or lasciviously about you, to laugh, or the like: If you
should do thus, I say, instead of coming seasonably, and in a decent manner;
instead of behaving with gravity, joining with apparent devotion in prayer and
praise to God, and giving a becoming attention to his word read or preached;
what evidence would this be of your sobriety? Would it not rather be a proof of
the vanity, levity and impiety of your hearts, than of a sober-mind? -- an
evidence, that you had no sense of religion, and of the important ends of
public worship? So far would such a behavior, in coming to, and while at the
public worship, be from a proof of your sobriety, that it would be a clear
evidence of the contrary. And, in this case, you might justly apply to
yourselves with shame, those words in the Proverbs of Solomon -- I was almost
in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly. Chap. V. 14.
Which words the wise man introduces, as part of the supposed confession of a
foolish young One, in the deepest anguish of soul; -- One, who had hated
instruction, and his heart despised reproof; who had not obeyed the voice of
his teachers, nor inclined his ear to them that instructed him: As in the
verses immediately preceding.

LET me therefore, my young brethren, warn you against such an unseemly, such a
criminal behavior at the public worship; lest your coming there, when
considered in all its circumstances, instead of being the least evidence of the
sobriety, should be a full and incontestable one of the vanity, great depravity
and impiety of your minds. If you aspire to the character of being
sober-minded, you are to attend the public worship constantly, unless
necessarily detained from it; to come to, and behave yourselves at it, with a
decent gravity. And, let me add, that you are to observe the like decorum in
going from it, instead of leaving the house of God with laughter and merriment,
as if you were going from a comedy, or a loose play, instead of a prayer, a
sermon, and the worship of your Creator. This I the rather mention, because it
is notorious that some young men in the town, though I do not say, of this
Society, often go from the public worship in such a rude, and almost riotous
manner, as is quite shocking, not only to people of real sobriety, but to all
that have any sense of decorum. And how must that behavior appear in the eyes
of the holy God, which is so justly offensive, not only to them that truly fear
him, but to all persons that have the least sense of decency, or propriety of
behavior? -- that which would hardly be consistent with decency, in the open
streets, at any other time!

IV. I MAY here naturally take occasion to caution you against excessive,
extravagant and riotous mirth in general. For it is certain that there is such
a thing as this, which both proceeds from, and tends to evil; and is censured
as criminal in the word of God. Christian sobriety stands in opposition to all
such foolish and outrageous mirth. Not that cheerfulness and laughing are, in
all cases, inconsistent with true sobriety; far from it. Solomon observes that
there is "a time to laugh," as well as "a time to weep;" which he would not
certainly have said, if laughing and cheerfulness had been criminal. For there
is no "time for" lying, for profane swearing, or for any thing that is immoral
in its nature. It is far from being a duty for any, and particularly for young
men, to appear always with a grave face, a gloomy, sorrowful or dejected
countenance. I have a very contemptuous opinion of this face-religion; though it
seems to be almost the only religion of some people. We know how much of it the
Scribes and Pharisees had of old; and our Savior speaks of it as one instance
of their hypocrisy, that they "disfigured their faces;" or affected to make a
grave and devout appearance, while their hearts were full of pride,
covetousness and malice. The Jesuits, and other religious orders of the church
of Rome at this day, are also abundantly stocked with this sort of religion:
And yet we have no reason to entertain a very high opinion of their piety, or
the sanctity of their manners. And, in whomsoever an uniform gravity of
countenance is affected, it is a much surer mark of cunning, knavish designs,
and imposture, or at best of folly, than it is of religion or wisdom. It is
doing violence to nature, without any good end: For man has been defined "a
risible animal," with as much justice and precision, perhaps, as "a reasonable
one." And I cannot but think it very comely and agreeable, as it is far most
natural for people, especially the young, to be gay and cheerful; provided
only, that it is not at unseasonable times, or beyond the bounds of a decent
moderation. Yea, it answers very valuable ends with relation to bodily health,
and in diverse other respects.

BUT yet, my young brethren, as was said before, there is certainly such a
thing as unseasonable, extravagant and sinful mirth. For you cannot suppose
that the wise man had no meaning, when he censured himself for indulging to
mirth in the following words: I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove
thee with mirth; therefore enjoy pleasure: And behold, this also is vanity. I
said of laughter it is mad, and of mirth, what does it? Eccles. II. 1, 1.
And again: -- "The heart of fools is in the house of mirth. It is better to
hear the rebuke of the wise man, than for a man to hear the song of fools. For
as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool: this
also is vanity. Chapter VII. 4, 5, 6.
In conformity hereto, a Greater and Wiser than Solomon has said, Woe unto you
that laugh now; for ye shall weep and lament. Luke VI. 25.
It would doubtless be trifling, to prescribe particular times and limits, or
to give formal rules for mirth and laughter; and, in a sermon, this might,
perhaps, provoke them both very unseasonably. It is, however, certain in
general, that this natural, comely and useful passion, ought to be under the
restraint of reason, as well as the other passions; and, that sobriety of mind
implies such restraint. I know of no better general direction relative to this
matter, than this; -- to remember that you are reasonable, as well as risible
creatures; and to have an habitual sense of God's presence with you at all
times, and of moral, religious obligations. This may be a sufficient, and
perhaps the best guide and security, against all unbecoming levity of mind, all
unseasonable and excessive mirth.

LET me, however, just remind you of one negative rule relating to this matter,
which is implied in the general one above. And that is, that you are never to
indulge your own mirth, or to provoke that of others, by singing profane,
loose, immoral or obscene songs; nor even willingly hear them. For even "the
rebuke of the wise, is better than the song of fools." And, Is any merry, says
the apostle, let him sing psalms. It would, indeed, be a piece of weakness and
superstition to suppose, that this which St. James recommends, is the only way
in which mirth and joy can be innocently indulged. But yet it gives me a fair
opportunity to recommend to you the learning of psalmody, that agreeable and
useful art: Which might not only be the means of our carrying on this part of
public worship in the most decent and edifying manner; but prove a delightful
entertainment to you in private, and a means to prevent your spending some of
your hours in such mirth, as can hardly be accounted innocent -- The transition
from hence to diversions and amusements, of which the young of both sexes are
so fond, will not be unnatural. Wherefore,

V. IF you would deserve the character of being sober-minded, you are to
refrain from all sinful diversions, or recreations. For christian sobriety
doubtless stands in opposition to every thing that properly falls under this
head.

BUT, lest you should think me unreasonably austere, I will plainly own to you,
what is indeed implied in the manner of expression just now used, -- "sinful
diversions," -- that every thing is not sinful, which goes under the name of
diversions. Neither reason, nor the law of God, absolutely forbids every thing
of this sort. Nay, I will go further: The present frail, and imperfect
condition of human nature, which will not, cannot submit to an uninterrupted
application to labor, or to grave, serious and weighty matters, seems to
require some relief, some relaxations of this kind. And certainly, if they are
lawful or innocent in any persons, they are so in the young, who need them
most. I am therefore far from thinking, a young man ought to be superciliously
condemned for being sometimes at a concert of music, or a dance. It may be
added, that persons of a studious, recluse, or any sedentary way of life,
almost universally need, once in a while, to take some sort of bodily exercise,
not merely as a relaxation to the mind, but for health. For, in this sense,
"bodily exercise profits" much, how little soever it may profit in any other.
If people can, at the same time, promote this valuable end, and innocently
amuse, relax and unbend their minds, so as to return with new spirits and vigor
to their stated business, there is neither law, gospel nor reason against it.
And it is a maxim, that those exercises of the body, with which the mind is in
some measure gratified, usually contribute most to the recovery and
preservation of health. In which view, riding, dancing, hunting, fishing, and
diverse other manly exercises, according to peoples different tastes, have been
often recommended by the ablest physicians, and found salutary by the
experience of many persons. The author hopes that the concessions which he has
made above, relative to diversions, will not be offensive to any serious and
judicious christian, who duly considers the present state of human nature;
especially after reading the restrictions in the following paragraphs. If One
were to ask, Whether it was criminal for boys of 6, 8 or 10 years old, to whip
a top, to play marbles, or the like? Whether it would answer any valuable ends
to keep them wholly from these pastimes, and oblige them to apply themselves
constantly to their books? Or whether it is supposeable, that prophets and
apostles should be commissioned to prohibit these sports of children? -- Every
one would, probably, answer in the negative; and confess that this would be the
readiest way to make children dunces instead of scholars, by giving them a
distaste to their learning, and breaking their spirits, if it did not ruin
their health also. The case is, in a degree, the same, not only with young men
and women, but even with those who are more advanced in years, unless they are
of a very saturnine, heavy, melancholy or superstitious make. Even the Old,
generally need some kind of relaxations. But, to keep the young wholly from
diversions under religious pretenses, is quite irrational; and the direct
course to make them irreligious, by giving them a distaste to all religion, as
a sour, gloomy and morose thing. And some well-meaning men have probably much
disserved the interest of religion, by their too great rigor and severity in
this respect.

IT may be farther observed as to dancing in particular, (though the author
himself had never any taste for it) That the wisest and best heathen moralists
recommended it, not only as an healthy, but a kind of sacred and religious
exercise. But it is countenanced by a far greater authority than theirs; --
that of the holy scriptures. The royal psalmist calls upon the children of Zion
to praise the Lord's "name in the dance -- with the timbrel and harp." [Ps.
cxlix. 2, 3. and cl. 4.] And Solomon says, There is "a time to dance." [Eccles.
iii. 4.] How then did Christians come to have a more gloomy, austere religion
than Jews! Did they learn it from Christ's being at "Cana of Galilee?" -- or
from his inspired apostles? Neither. And the zeal of some Christians against
dancing in general, is the more remarkable, because this is one of the joyous
images, under which the Spirit of prophecy has represented the glory and
happiness of the MESSIAH's kingdom; and this even mixed dancing. [Jer. xxxi.
13.] Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old
together. For I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and
make them rejoice from their sorrow. [See Luke xv. 25.] -- How much wiser are
some of our modern sages and reformers, than either DAVID or SOLOMON, or --!
Superstition, though appearing under the larve and disguise of religion, is in
fact one of its worst enemies, by making it appear four and unamiable. And we
very frequently see, both how much occasion there was for certain admonitions,
and how little some regard them -- "Be not righteous over much" -- [Eccl. viii.
16.] -- "Every word of God is pure -- Add thou not unto his words, lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar." [Prov. xxx. 5, 6.]




HAVING made these concessions, at once as large as you can reasonably desire,
and no larger than ought to be made by those, who will neither "speak wickedly
for God," not be wiser than his word: You must now allow me, on the other hand,
solemnly to warn you against what is really criminal, relative to the point in
hand, and therefore inconsistent with christian sobriety.

IN the first place, then, there are some diversions which are criminal in
their very nature; and of the most pernicious tendency. Such, I think, ought to
be accounted all sorts of gaming for money, or other things of considerable
value. Gaming is not a lawful and honest way, either of getting gain, or of
losing One's substance. This is, in too many respects to be now mentioned, a
practice fruitful of evil; and therefore to be shunned by all christians as one
of the greatest vices. Laying wagers is nearly, if not altogether as criminal.
Neither is any kind of diversion to be thought innocent, in which cruelty is
exercised toward the animal creation, for no other end than to afford a savage
entertainment to the authors, or the spectators of it. Amphitheatrical shows
and entertainments, even when no gladiators appeared to fight, either with one
another, or with wild beasts, Some have supposed that the apostle Paul, where
he speaks of his having, after the manner of men, sought with beasts at
Ephesus, 1 Cor. xv. refers to his having been exposed to them by his
persecutions in an Amphitheatre, as the heathen used to expose their slaves and
captives, for diversion; but was miraculously delivered. He speaks also, 2 Timothy
iv. 17. of his having been delivered out of the mouth of the lion. But this
lion, and those beasts, were probably only human ones.
but only beasts with beasts, were therefore condemned with great reason by
Christians, from the earliest times. These, and some other diversions that
might be mentioned, are doubtless sinful in their nature; of a very bad moral
tendency, and contrary even to humanity, as well as to the genius of the
gospel. To these I may particularly add, the frequenting loose, immoral and
profane plays; such as the greater part of those, perhaps, are, which have been
acted upon the stage, even in christian countries. There are doubtless some
which deserve a different character; and which might be heard, or seen, not
only innocently, but profitably, in any country where the laws did not forbid
it. But wherever, almost, plays and theatrical entertainments are publicly
allowed, the abuse is so gross, and the effects so pernicious in many respects,
that I cannot but take so fair an opportunity to testify my joy, that the
government has interposed to prohibit them here; being persuaded that the
allowance of them, especially in this infant state of the country, would
occasion much evil, and very little, if any good. Moreover:

As to all such diversions and recreations as may be justly accounted innocent
in their nature; it is to be remembered, as was hinted before, that even these
may become criminal by the abuse, in diverse ways. The following restrictions,
cautions and regulations may be helpful to you in avoiding such abuses, and
criminal excesses.

THE first is, that the company with which you frequent these entertainments,
consists in general at least, of persons of a decent deportment such as avoid
every thing in speech and behavior on these occasions, which is justly
offensive to piety and virtue. For otherwise you cannot safely, or even
innocently, associate yourselves with them, without some more urgent call than
that of amusement. Though you should be innocent yourselves, you will be in great
danger of contracting defilement and guilt, by frequenting vicious company --
"Evil communication, says the apostle, "corrupts good manners:" And Solomon;
"He that walks with wise men, shall be wise; but a companion of fools shall
be destroyed."

ANOTHER necessary restriction is, that you do not frequent these diversions
too often, or spend too great a proportion of your time in them. You are not to
let them interfere, either with the duties of religion, or with the weighty and
necessary business of common life. However innocent any amusement may be in
itself; yet you are to remember, it is but an amusement; and therefore ought to
give way to business, unless when your application to this, has already been so
intense or long, that nature requires relief.

AGAIN: You ought not to attend diversions at unseasonable hours; so as to be
late absent from home at night, to the interruption of that good, religious
order, which ought to be kept up in christian families; or so as to indispose
you for business the following day. The principal end of recreations, according
to the proper signification of the word, is to renew, to revive, to refresh One
after fatigue either of body or mind; and thereby by to prepare him for a
renewed application to business. It is therefore a great abuse thereof, when
they disqualify for business, instead of being a preparation for it.

LET me add another caution. You should not suffer the love of any diversions
to reign, to be predominant in your hearts; or to engross your thoughts and
affections, to the exclusion of those things that are truly noble and important
in their nature. To have the heart and affections strongly attached to
amusements or diversions, so as to think chiefly of them, and to be impatient
for their return, is a mark of great levity, and a frivolous turn of mind, even
though One should not transgress any of the foregoing rules by reason hereof;
which yet is hardly a supposeable case. Nor is this merely a weakness, but a
sin: For it implies an absence of the grand concerns of life and godliness from
the thoughts; and shows the heart to be immoderately set upon mere trifles. If
you ought to take heed, as certainly you ought, that your affections are not
immoderately set even upon the lawful business, gains and occupations of this
life, in opposition to those things that are above, the high concerns of
religion and eternity; much more ought you to take heed, that they are not thus
set upon mere diversions and pastimes; the occasion for which, you are to
remember, arises from the imperfection of human nature, sometimes calling for
them as a little relaxation from grave and momentous affairs. Nor should you
forget, even in your recreations, that you are in the presence of the
omniscient and holy God. Neither should you allow yourselves in any kinds or
degrees of them, which render the thought of such a presence uneasy and
terrifying to you: For, to you at least, those which do so, are sinful. That
which you cannot do, considering yourselves as in God's presence, without
fearing his displeasure for it, is certainly criminal in you, whatever it might
be in other persons.

IF you would be sober-minded, my young brethren, you are to observe these, or
the like restrictions and regulations respecting your diversions: And I should
have particularly subjoined one more, relative to them, had it not fallen
naturally under, what seems to be of consequence enough to make a distinct head
of discourse, as follows; viz.

VI. PRIDE, and extravagant expense in apparel, or the external adorning of
your persons. This is an heinous sin, very frequently, and most solemnly
censured in the word of God. It is a sin against which, not only young women,
but young men, are to be particularly warned, as inconsistent with christian
sobriety -- It were well if some even of the aged of both sexes, did not need
the like caution -- It is, indeed, far from being a virtue in any, particularly
in young men, to appear in rags, in an uncleanly or slovenly dress, if it is in
their power to appear otherwise, in clean and becoming apparel, especially in
public. And if this is not in their power, it is a necessity to be pitied, not
a virtue to be commended. It may be added, that not only the custom of all
civilized nations in all ages, but the holy scriptures themselves, warrant some
distinction of dress in persons, answerable to the difference in their stations
and circumstances in life. There seems to be a propriety in this; and some
valuable ends are doubtless answered hereby, considering the state and temper
of mankind, and our connexions in civil society.

BUT it is the great unhappiness and sin of many young people, that their
hearts are set on gay and costly apparel, as if this were a matter of mighty
consequence. And many of them, instead of being content with such clothing as
is suitable to their degree and circumstances, to their own or their parents
worldly estate, aspire after what is far beyond either; often to the great
prejudice of their too indulgent parents, and to their own real interest: I
might add, to the hurt of their credit also. For their reputation suffers
hereby in the opinion of all wise and discrete persons, who are acquainted with
them and their circumstances. And yet, when they have thus exposed themselves
by the gaiety and costliness of their clothing, wholly disproportionate to
their rank and circumstances; they are often still farther unhappy, and the
more worthy of derision, by being proud of it; making a sort of merit of their
folly and vanity; and treating with contempt, their equals, perhaps their
superiors, whose apparel is more modest and decent. By this means those good
ends which might otherwise be answered in society, by the distinctions of
dress, are in a great measure defeated; for this confounds all ranks, destroys
due subordination, and even inverts the natural order of things, by setting
poor people of low degree above the rich, and those that are of high; i. e. so
far as mere pride, and sumptuous clothing, can do it. And besides; how many
people have, chiefly by this very means, been reduced to want and beggary? -- a
very congruous punishment, which the wise Author of nature and of order has
ordained for those, who so vainly and wickedly attempt to confound and invert
them! All who know any thing of the world, and particularly of this town and
country, know that this is a just representation of facts; not at all
heightened or exaggerated. I do not mean, that all young men are justly
chargeable with this sin and folly, but that it is a very common one amongst
us. And all who know any thing of the holy scriptures, know that extravagant
expense, and pride in the article of dress, are often forbidden, and severely
condemned in those sacred oracles. Yea, the light of nature, or common sense,
easily discerns these to be egregious follies and vices.

I MUST therefore warn you against these things, my young brethren, as quite
inconsistent with gravity and christian sobriety. They are not to be
countenanced even in the other sex; for the peculiar cast of whose minds, some
may possibly think, a little allowance should be made: Much less ought they to
be countenanced in ours, whose thoughts and cares ought, certainly, to be
employed about matters of far greater importance, than the beauty or richness
of our apparel, and making a gay external appearance, to catch the eyes of
idle, empty starers; and to disgust those of the knowing observer. In a word,
sobriety and foppery are incompatible with each other.

ALL the young would do well to remember the fatal garden and the fig leaves;
the sad occasion, upon which the use of clothing was first introduced into
this apostate world. Innocence would have wanted no covering for shame and
dishonor. If you consider this, you will not pride yourselves in any kind of
apparel, however gay or sumptuous, unless you are of such a frivolous and
depraved turn of mind, as to glory in your shame. For your clothing, as it is
the consequence, is also a natural memento, of your first parents fall, guilt
and dishonor; and, in some sense, of your own also.

IF you are in any degree sober-minded, there is another kind of clothing
which will so far engross your thoughts and cares, as to leave but little room
for any about the quality of your external dress. I mean that, of which Job
says, I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: My judgment was as a robe and
a diadem. The same, of which our Savior speaks under the name of "a wedding
garment"; for the want of which, so many persons, and some of those of the
highest rank, even those that are in kings courts, and of royal dignity, will
hereafter be excluded from "the marriage supper of the Lamb," though at present
"clothed in soft raiment" -- That which our Savior again speaks of, in his
message from heaven to the church of Laodicea, saying -- Thou say, I am
rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. I counsel
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire -- and white raiment, that the shame
of thy nakedness do not appear -- That with which the spouse of Christ, his
true church, is adorned: Of whom it is said, that to her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the
righteousness of the saints -- And, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his shame!

UNDER these metaphors and similitudes the sacred writers, and our Lord
himself, represents that faith and substantial piety, that virtue, holiness and
good works, which the gospel enjoins upon its professors; and all which are
comprehended in being sober-minded. To be clothed with these, to be adorned
with this righteousness, is to have the righteousness of Christ, the
righteousness of God by faith. This is a garment which, unchanged, will serve
for all seasons of the year, and for every climate. It will neither be worn out
nor impaired in beauty, by use and time; but become the firmer, the more
splendid and beautiful. It will endure all weathers, winds, rains and storms,
without fading; even eternity will but increase its luster. And though,
perhaps, it may not entitle you to what is called good company, -- the company
of the great-little, rich-poor men of this world; yet you need not esteem it
the less on that account: For it will be the means of your gaining admission
hereafter into the kingdom of heaven; into the fellowship of just men made
perfect; of the noble army of martyrs; of the innumerable company of angels; of
Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and of God the judge of all; whose face
you shall behold in righteousness! To desire to be clothed with such a robe as
this, and to wear such a diadem, is a truly great and reasonable ambition. And
when you are possessed of it, yea, whenever you sincerely desire it, one of
your least concerns will be, "what you shall put on," or "wherewithal you shall
be clothed," in any other respect.

VII. ANOTHER sin, against which you are to be particularly warned, is
idleness, the neglect of business, or mis-spence of time; all which come nearly
to the same thing. Time is indeed precious, if eternity itself is of any
importance! It ought to be spent in such a manner, as will turn to good
account; that is, in a reasonable, pious and virtuous manner; And none of it
ought to be spent otherwise, or thrown away. I do not mean, that people are
obliged to be always either at their devotions, or their labors, the business
of life. Some time is requisite for taking food, for rest, sleep, conversation,
and even for recreation and amusement, considering the present imperfect state
of human nature; as has before been observed. And the time so spent, under
proper restrictions, is far from being thrown away or lost: It is spent
according to nature, reason and religion. But the article of sleep being
excepted, which alone requires more than a quarter part of our time in general,
a small proportion of it may well suffice for all the others together, for
people that are in health; except, perhaps, for children. And whatever time is
spent in any of these ways, beyond a reasonable, due proportion, be that what
it will, is at the best thrown away and lost; perhaps much worse. It is morally
impossible for any person to neglect the proper duties of life, or to live long
in idleness, without falling into such practices as are positively criminal:
For the idle person is not only peculiarly exposed to the snares and seductions
of the "wicked One;" but does, as it were, tempt the devil to tempt him.

AND considering at once, what real calls there are for labor on one hand, the
general aversion to it on the other, and the pernicious consequences of
idleness, both with respect to civil life and religion: Considering these
things, I say, it is not without the highest reason, that the holy scriptures
abound with strict prohibitions of idleness, and many positive injunctions of
diligence. The fatal consequences of sloth, both with regard to the present and
future life, are also represented in the strongest colors, in the sacred
oracles. Yea, the experience of all ages, has afforded sensible demonstration
of the ill effects of this vice. A lazy, slothful course of life, is not only
absolutely inconsistent with christian sobriety, as being itself sinful in an
high degree; but it naturally, and almost necessarily leads to many other
vices, as was intimated before. There are very few persons, if any, that can
live a considerable time together in a state of inactivity, as serpents, bears,
and some other animals are said to do in their holes and dens, for many months
of the year in cold climates. A man, particularly a young man in the spring,
the warmth and highest vigor of life, will ordinarily be doing something,
either innocent and good, or bad and criminal, except when he is asleep. And he
that neither serves God, nor his generation according to the will of God, in
some honest and laudable way, will of course serve the devil and his lusts, and
be much less a blessing than a curse to the world, and to himself.

HOW many young men have some of us known, the sad examples of this truth! --
young men whose ruin, to all human appearance, both as to this world and the
next, took its rise from idleness, and the disuse of any lawful calling:
Sometimes through the criminal and cruel neglect of their parents to put them in
any way of business, and to excite them to diligence therein; and often through
their own native love of idleness and pleasures, and their aversion to any kind
of steady application to business. Would to God, I could myself call to mind to
very striking and melancholy instances of this sort! And if you, my young
brethren, know of any such, it will be your wisdom to take warning by them.

BUT when an idle life is spoken of as repugnant to a sober one, and industry
as an important branch of that sobriety which young men ought to practice; it
is not meant hereby, that they are all obliged to what is commonly called hard
labor; or to employ themselves in mechanical arts or husbandry, in merchandise
or navigation. No: There are many ingenuous, laudable arts and employments,
tending to the ornament and use of human life, which come under neither of
these heads. A just and necessary war, also furnishes employment for many; and
it is truly an honorable employment to fight for the defense of One's King and
country, for laws and liberty, whether in the field or upon the mighty waters.
There are also many civil offices, in the exercise of, or at least in the
preparation for which, young men may be worthily engaged. There are also those
three, which are commonly called the learned professions, Law, Physic and
Divinity.
in the exercise of which, or in acquiring the needful qualifications for them,
young men may be laudably employed N. B. All under 25 or 26 years are
considered as "young men," in these discourses.
. Any of these referred to, are lawful employments; and all that are so, though
not equally honorable, may yet be accounted so in some measure; and, of
consequence, those persons who faithfully and worthily discharge them, are
worthy of honor in their respective stations; in conformity to the apostolic
injunction, "HONOR ALL MEN."

BESIDES: There are some persons, whom God has blessed at once with riches, and
with large, sagacious and contemplative minds, who may both very worthily as to
themselves, and usefully to the world, devote the greater part of their time to
study, to making observations on, and discoveries in, the word and works of
God, and communicating their discoveries to mankind; instead of applying
themselves to any other business. To such men as these, the world has been, and
is, greatly indebted; and the glory of God, at the same time, is eminently
promoted by them. What more honorable or useful employment can there well be,
than this?

NOW, all that is intended, when the great sin of idleness, and the necessity
of a virtuous diligence are insisted on, is, that young men are indispensably
bound to be diligent in some one or more of these honest and laudable ways;
having something habitually in view, which they consider, and to which they
give their attention, as a business; and in which they accordingly employ the
greater part of their time. Without this, I think, no young man can well
deserve the character of being sober-minded: Since, if he lives an idle life,
in opposition hereto, he is in such a course of life as is unreasonable in
itself; such an one as the holy scriptures have most expressly and repeatedly
forbidden; such an one as exposes him to many great and peculiar temptations;
such an one as it is almost impossible to continue long in, without falling
into some of those practices, which are still more apparently immoral and
wicked; such an one as will probably be pernicious to those about him, ruinous
to himself in this world, and terminate in his destruction in the other.

IN a word then, my young brethren, take heed how you employ your TIME. It is
at once fleeting, precarious, precious; and even of infinite importance to you,
if that ETERNITY is so, which depends upon the use you make of it!

SERMON V.
Of some other Things contrary to Sobriety; viz. (8.) Of a disrespectful
Behavior to Superiors. (9.) Of Falsehood and Lying. (10.) Of rash and
immoderate Anger. (11.) Of Envy. (12.) Of Intemperance in Eating and Drinking.
(13.) Of Uncleanness. (14.) Of Fraud and Injustice. (15.) Of Covetousness. And
(16.) Of Enthusiasm.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
IN the foregoing discourse I mentioned to you several sins and excesses,
against which young men need to be particularly warned, as inconsistent with
that sobriety to which they are to be exhorted. In doing this it was my design,
not merely to show you what you ought to avoid, as contrary to christian
sobriety; but also positively, what manner of life you ought to lead, as
agreeable thereto: And, at the same time, in a cursory manner, to dissuade you
from the one, and excite you to the other. There are many more vices, follies
and criminal excesses, my beloved young brethren, against which you may need to
be cautioned; considering the depravity of your hearts, and the many snares and
temptations of this evil world. I shall accordingly, by God's leave and
assistance, proceed to speak of some others of them in this discourse, with the
same view; -- not to accuse, but to warn and advise you. And may He, from whom
all light, and true wisdom are derived, cause you to profit by these friendly
instructions! -- The next sin, against which I would particularly caution you,
is,

VIII. A DISRESPECTFUL or contemptuous behavior toward your superiors,
whether in age or in office. Refusing, or even neglecting to give honor to
these, to whom it belongs, is an heinous offense against the laws of God, and
against society, as well as against the particular persons, to whom the
disrespect is shown. And such refusal, or neglect, generally, though not always,
proceeds from great pride of heart. Sometimes it may be owing to mere
ignorance, or inadvertence; in which case it is much more easily excused by
all, than when formally designed; for then it is justly considered as the
effect of envy, pride and insolence. But it can hardly be accounted quite
innocent, even when it proceeds from inadvertence only: Because all the members
of society in general, ought to know and consider what is due from them to
others; and therefore the giving honor to whom honor is due, and fear to whom
fear, is the subject of a christian precept.

SOME persons have, indeed, made a strange pretense of religion and conscience
for declining the use of most of those external gestures, motions, etc. which
custom has established as marks of respect, civility or good manners; scrupling
to bend their bodies, to uncover their heads, or the like, even in the presence
of their king: Though the great patriarch Abraham, the father of the faithful,
stood up, and bowed himself even to the children of H^th. Genesis XXIII. 7.
On the same pretense they decline giving the customary titles, expressive of
civil regard and honor, such as Sir, Master, and the like; fearing that this
also would be a kind of idolatry. These are at best groundless and
superstitious conceits, though there is doubtless a medium to be observed as to
things of this sort; for there is hardly any thing, however innocent in its
nature, in which there may not be a foolish, or even criminal excess. But in
general it is, doubtless, not a sin but a duty, to show regard to those to whom
it is due, in all those ways which the different customs of nations have
established as external marks and signs of a civil respect; provided only, that
they are not in their nature evil. To refuse to give those tokens of respect,
which are thus established, if innocent in themselves, is actually contrary to
the true spirit of the apostolic precept before mentioned, concerning giving
honor to those to whom it is due. For this giving of honor, cannot be thought
to refer entirely to an inward esteem or veneration, of which there are no
visible tokens or signs; but must be supposed to comprehend the customary
external proofs and manifestations of such a regard; only under the
restrictions hinted at above. And let me add, that wise and good men in former
ages, to speak in the most moderate terms, were never so whimsical and
superstitious as to think what is now commonly called decency and good manners
amongst men, offensive to God. It is plain that they conformed to all the
innocent civil customs in general, established in the countries where they
lived; and particularly to those, the neglect of which might have justly been
construed into pride, sourness, an undue contempt of, or disrespect to those,
with whom they had any intercourse. Not to show courtesy to our equals, and
much more, to decline giving due honor to our superiors in such ways as these,
may be justly accounted an immoral thing, a violation of God's commandments.

ALL other circumstances being alike, age has doubtless a right to expect
regard and deference from youth. This is agreeable to that order which the
Author of nature has established. It is also required in the word of God, that
the young should honor the aged. And there is one command to this purpose,
expressed in such a manner as is worthy of a very particular attention: Thou
shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and
fear thy God. Levit. XIX. 32.
A disrespectful treatment of the aged, is represented in scripture as no light
or trivial misdemeanour, but an heinous sin in the young; more especially if
the aged, whom they treat with contempt, are also good men, the servants of the
most high God. For the hoary head is [most eminently] a crown of glory, if it
be found in the way of righteousness. Prove. XVI. 31.
And all the young would do well to remember the curse of God, which befell
those children who, in contempt and derision, formerly said to the venerable
man of God, Go up thou bald-head, Go up thou bald-head. 2 Kings II. 23, 24.


IF then, you would deserve the character of being sober-minded, or rather, if
you would actually be so, you are not to treat your superiors in age with
contempt or neglect; but to pay all due honor to them: And especially those, to
whom you owe honor and subjection on account of the particular relation which
they bear to you, as well as on account of their years. For in this case, there
is a twofold obligation lying upon you to regard and honor them; and the
neglect hereof will be proportionably criminal.

AND here, in the first place, I would particularly remind you of the honor
which you owe to your natural parents, your fathers and mothers; and which is
due to them by such a double bond and obligation, as was referred to above. It
will be highly criminal in you to despise them, to treat them with any kind of
mockery or disrespect, though you should discover some weaknesses and
infirmities, or even vices in them; a supposition which, however, I do not make
without reluctance. You would do well to remember the story and the sin of
Cham, who, instead of dutifully concealing his father's shame and disgrace, as
he lay exposed in his tent, went and blabbed it to his brethren, that they also
might be witnesses to his dishonor. An high crime indeed, which brought the
curse of God upon his posterity. A contrary behavior in his brethren, brought
a blessing upon them and theirs. Genesis Chapter IX.
You should also consider that solemn warning in the book of Proverbs: The eye
that mocketh his father, and despises to obey his mother, the young ravens of
the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it. Chapter XXX. 17.


THE apostle, speaking to the young, of their duty to their parents, reminds
them of that ancient and well-known command, "Honor thy father and mother;"
particularly reminding them at the same time, that this is "the first
commandment with promise:" referring to the gracious promise implied in the
words immediately following -- "that thy days may be long upon the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee." It is indeed well worthy of observation, that
this is the only commandment in the decalogue, to which any promise at all is
annexed.

YOUNG men, especially such as are still under the immediate care and
government of their parents, are indispensably obliged to pay them, not only an
external respect and reverence, but to hearken to their counsels, and to "obey
them in the Lord;" i. e. in all things lawful, and agreeable to the Lord's
will. And as to those of you, my young brethren, who are not still under the
immediate eye and government of your parents, but are gone from them, and have
families of your own; you will always be under a natural and religious
obligation to treat them with great respect, deference and honor: And, let me
add, to take care of, and to provide for them in their age, if there should be
occasion for it on their part, and ability on yours. Which is certainly no more
than a proper return to those, who brought you up with so much tenderness, cost
and care; and to whom, probably, under God, you are chiefly indebted for
whatever worldly possessions and prosperity you enjoy.

BUT you are to honor your other superiors in age and station, as well as your
parents; or though you have none of the latter. Some of you may have guardians,
who are instead of parents to you; and to whom, in diverse respects, a similar
regard is due from you. Others of you may be servants, apprentices to
tradesmen, merchants, etc. And you are bound to respect and obey them in that
relation. Some of you may be so young, as not yet to have left the schools; but
to be "under tutors and governors," and instructors in various branches of
useful literature. On which supposition, you are in reason and duty bound to
respect and honor them; to hearken to their counsels, to obey them and their
orders in things relative to their office: And to do otherwise will be highly
displeasing to God. I shall say nothing here particularly, respecting your duty
to religious instructors, the ministers of the gospel, who are over you in the
Lord, admonish you, and watch for your souls as they that must give an account:
Thinking that, after what has been said relative to persons in other stations,
what is due to them, may be safely referred to your own ingenuity, your
unbiassed judgment and consciences. Indeed, it ever appeared to me both a vain
and arrogant thing, for the ministers of the gospel to think of "magnifying
their office," and gaining esteem, by crying up the dignity of it; and
demanding respect and homage, "as the manner of some is:" Especially if, at the
same time, they rather disgrace their office by a behavior unworthy of it,
than honor it themselves, by a faithful discharge of the important duties of
it. And, by what I have read and observed, I believe it very seldom happens
that any minister, who magnifies his office only by acting worthy of it, wants
that regard which justly belongs to him; except, perhaps, from a few particular
persons: Nor has any thing contributed more to bring a reproach upon it, than
the vain attempts to magnify it by other means, to the neglect of this.

BUT I must not omit particularly to remind you of the honor and obedience
which you owe to your civil superiors; whether to the king as supreme, or to
governors as unto them that are sent by him, or to others clothed with
authority under either. The apostle, in this same epistle to Titus, gives him
the following direction: Put them in mind, says he, to be subject to
principalities and powers, to obey magistrates. Chap. III. 1.
You are indispensably bound to obey the good and wholesome laws of society, and
all magistrates and officers without exception, in the due execution of those
laws; and this not for fear of "wrath," at least not only that, "but for
conscience sake." For they are the "ministers of God for good;" ordained by him
for the "punishment of evildoers, and for a praise to them that do well." To
oppose, insult or resist them, in the exercise of a lawful authority, or
lightly to speak evil of, and defame them, is an heinous sin: It is, in effect,
to speak evil of, and oppose an ordinance of God, of the utmost consequence to
human society. And the apostle says, "they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation." Meaning hereby, that if particular persons rise up in
opposition to the government and laws established where they live, they shall
be condemned of God: Not that a nation or people, generally oppressed and
tyrannized over, by the exercise of an exorbitant, illegal power, subversive of
the fundamental laws of a kingdom, may not rise up in defense of their laws, of
the constitution, of their civil liberties and rights, in opposition to such
lawless violence; as some sacerdotal sycophants, and other tools of power have
pretended, with equal folly, imprudence and impiety; that they might encourage
kings to be arbitrary, unjust and cruel, and reduce subjects to a state of the
most abject, miserable slavery. The most virtuous, the bravest and most
enlightened spirits of antiquity, of all ages, have ever asserted it to be
right, honorable and glorious for a people, by any means to rid themselves of
such monsters as common tyrants; even as they would of tigers, wolves, bears
and lions: A sentiment, which will never be lost out of the world, so long as
any good sense, true religion and virtue remain in it.

TO conclude this branch of my discourse: You will, by no means, deserve the
character of being sober-minded, if you allow yourselves in the violation of
any of God's commandments respecting the honor, duty and subjection which you
owe to your parents, the civil powers, or any of your other superiors, whether
in station or years. Whatever young man disobeys these important precepts of
religion, he is not only destitute of all christian sobriety, but of all due
regard to the light and dictates of nature, to which they are perfectly
consonant; and is so far from being a loyal and worthy subject of Christ's
kingdom, that he is a disgrace to the civil society of which he is a member,
and hardly worthy to live in it.

IX. LET me in the next place, my young brethren, caution you against the
odious, horrid sin of falsehood and lying, as utterly inconsistent with all
sobriety of mind. This was one of the sins, for which the Cretians were
particularly infamous. The apostle, therefore, reminds Titus of their character
in this respect, as given them by one of their own prophets or poets; which he
confirms, and gives Titus a direction relative thereto. One of themselves, even
a prophet of their own said, The Cretians are always liars -- This witness is
true: Wherefore rebuke them sharply. Titus I. 12, 13.
And well, surely, did they, who were not only sometimes guilty of this
detestable sin, but "always liars," deserve to be sharply rebuked.

THIS vice is found in persons of all ages, and all characters, almost, --
except good ones. Even some of the Old, if they are not always liars, yet are
sometimes so: And as they have lived with a lie in their mouths, so they
probably die at last with one in "their right hand." But this seems to be, very
particularly, one of the sins of youth. There is no sin, which at once so early
and so fully discovers the pravity of the human heart, as lying. And this is
the reason why the psalmist, speaking of the wicked, and their early wandering
from the paths of virtue, gives this, rather than any other, as an example
thereof; saying, somewhat hyperbolically indeed, That they are "estranged from
the womb; and go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies." Many children
there are, who grow up in this evil practice; and strengthen, by custom and
habit, the corrupt biass and propensity of nature: Of whom it may be said, with
particular propriety, that they are of their father the devil; for he is a
liar, and the father of it; and the lust of their father they do.

THERE are many sorts of lying and of liars in the world; -- political,
forensic, medical, mercantile, martial, mechanical, ecclesiastical, etc. etc. A
circumstantial description of any one of them, particularly of the first and
the last mentioned, would fill many volumes. But I must content myself with
only observing in general, That under this head of lying, comes all wilful
deception of others by words, to their prejudice, or to the injury of any
person or persons whatsoever; whether in the way of defamation or flattery, of
bearing witness, or of common narration, of trade and commerce, of political
wrangling, of juridical debate, of empirical juggling, of ecclesiastic
imposture, of trade and commerce; whether with reference to the business and
concerns of life, ordinary or extraordinary; whether relative to this world, or
to that which is to come. Whosoever wilfully deceives another in either of
these ways, with any view to benefit himself, or to hurt and injure any other
person, is -- a LIAR. Consider then, how many persons of this infamous
character there are in this wicked, false world; and how capacious a "lake"
must that be, in which it is said, "ALL liars shall have their part." Rev. XXI.
8.


FALSEHOOD is a principal prop of the kingdom of darkness and of satan; of
iniquity, superstition and idolatry, of all vice and unrighteousness amongst
men; the grand engine which the devil works, partly with his own skilful hand,
and partly by those of his children, in order to accomplish his malicious and
accursed designs, to subvert all order, to confound all right and justice, and
to destroy mankind. For it is by "deceiving the nations," that he ruins them,
and supports his kingdom. Truth, on the other hand, is the foundation of God's
kingdom, consisting in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Christ
therefore came into the world, to bear witness to the truth. This is the grand
support of religion, order, justice and human society; neither of which can
subsist without truth. Lying is therefore one of the greatest sins; and loving
and speaking the truth, one of the most necessary, the most important virtues.
This is a material and essential branch of christian sobriety. They are,
accordingly, sometimes joined together in scripture, as being closely
connected: As when the apostle says, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak
forth the words of truth and soberness. In which passage, by the way, truth and
sobriety stand in opposition, not merely to known, wilful falsehood; but also
to enthusiastic error and delusion, superstition and religious madness. I am
not mad -- but, etc. This is an observation, of which I shall have occasion to
make some farther use, before I close the present discourse.

LYING is a sin, so frequently and solemnly forbidden in the holy scriptures;
and the speaking of truth is so often and positively enjoined therein, that it
is not necessary to refer you to any particular passages to this purpose. You
can have no pretense to sobriety, unless you abstain from, and abhor lying, as
one of the most pernicious, execrable vices; a vice which is destructive of the
whole religious and moral character, and inconsistent, in its very nature, with
every good and amiable quality, except in appearance only. You are then, to
speak truth at all times, and with all persons; to be sincere and open, frank
and ingenuous in all your intercourse with the world: So as to avoid the very
appearance, and much more the reality, of this shameful and abominable sin of
lying; the very name of which is odious, and the imputation of which is usually
and justly considered as the highest reproach, the greatest affront that one
person can well offer to another.

THOSE who have had a good, or even tolerable education, are almost shocked at
the very sound of the word lie: At least, they generally affect to be so, even
while, perhaps, some of them have no religion or virtue, and often commit the
sin itself; disguising, as well as they can, the horror and infamy of it under
some softer name, through an hypocritical sort of delicacy. But things should be
called by their proper names. A lie does not cease to be so, and become an
innocent thing, by being covered with a good name, any more than a ravening
wolf is transformed into an harmless animal, by "coming to us in sheep's
clothing." And let me add, though it may perhaps be a paradox to some, That a
great lie does not become absolutely no lie, by being told by a great man, or a
grave one, or a young one of a genteel education: No; not even though the first
punishes lying in little sinners, and the second preaches against it in the
laiety, while the third affects to be thunderstruck, as it were, with the very
mention of it! -- It were well if people as generally and sincerely abhorred
this servile, sordid, execrable vice, as they dislike the imputation, and dread
to lie under the scandal of it. But, alas! the same royal psalmist, who
observes that "men of low degree are vanity," observes also, that even "men of
high degree are a lie." All people in general, and particularly those that are
well educated, show a just notion of the foul, hateful and infamous nature of
this sin, by their so highly resenting the charge of lying: And if,
notwithstanding this, they practice it in any shape or form, their just
conceptions of its foulness, will serve only to increase their own infamy,
guilt and punishment. Let those of you therefore, my young brethren, that have
delicate ears, or nice notions of honor, have true, sincere and upright hearts
also; and mouths undefiled with lying. In the language of the psalmist, "keep
your tongues from evil, and your lips from speaking guile -- For lying lips are
an abomination to the Lord." They are also an abomination to every good man; to
every person of any religion, virtue, or real honor.

X. LET me next caution you against rash and immoderate anger, furious
resentment and a vindictive spirit, as contrary to christian sobriety of mind.
The passions of young men are generally strong, impetuous, and hard to be kept
within due bounds. This is true, in particular, of those passions which are
distinguished by the name of the irascible, or the angry and wrathful ones.
They are often awakened in the breasts of the young, with very little, or no
just provocation. Or, if there is any warrantable ground for them; yet they are
often excessive in degree; tumultuous, violent and outrageous; breaking forth
like savage beasts from their dens and caves, seeking to destroy and to devour;
aiming at little or nothing short of the utter ruin of the person who roused
them up. Hence frequent quarrels and fightings, and sometimes bloodshed and
murder. Anger, when undirected, uncontrouled by reason, is only another name
for fury and frenzy, madness and distraction; in the paroxisms of which, even
though but short, people often do things that give them cause for repentance as
long as they live; and indeed, not seldom, what brings them to an untimely end.
-- Qui non moderabitur irae,
Infectum volet esse, dolor quod suaserit et men's,
Dum poenas odio per vim festinat inulto.
IRA FUROR BREVIS est. --
HOR.


SUFFERING these passions to reign in, and to be masters over you, is plainly
incompatible with sobriety of mind, unless madness and sobriety are consistent
with each other. In every sober mind, reason is predominant; keeping all the
passions, and particularly anger and resentment, under subjection, or within
its proper bounds. Any man, whether young or old, who is often as it were drunk
with anger and revenge, is as far from being a sober one, as if he were as
often intoxicated with strong drink. Nay, the former is, of the two, rather
more criminal than the latter; there being nothing so directly contrary to that
love or charity, which is the bond of perfectness, the spirit of the gospel,
and the fulfilling of the law, as a wrathful, revengeful and implacable spirit.
If one of them does, in a sort, make fools and beasts of men, the other, I had
almost said, makes them devils.

THE angry passions are as natural to mankind as any other: They are born, and
also grow up with us to a criminal excess, unless prevented by a religious
education, and the grace of God. This is the true meaning of an expression in
one of St. Paul's epistles, often perverted to an unscriptural and horrid, if
not blasphemous sense -- Among whom we all had our conversation in times past,
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the
mind; and were by nature children of wrath, even as others. Ephesians. II 3. N. B.
TEKNA PHUSEI ORGEES, ("by nature children of wrath") according to the Greek
idiom, signifies children naturally of a wrathful temper, or angry disposition;
the subjects of wrath considered as a passion inherent in, and natural to them:
Not the objects of God's anger, as if they were odious to him, or under his
wrath, even from their birth. Neither does TEKNA, [children] here, any more
intend infants just born, than the same word means infants in almost numberless
other places. Thus in this same Epistle, Chapter 5 1. "Be ye followers of God as
dear children." -- And chapter 6. 1. Children, obey your parents in the Lord" -- So
I John 3. 10. "In this the children of God are manifest," -- And Romans 8. 17. If
children, then heirs, heirs of God," etc. In the language of scripture adult,
and even aged persons, are all styled children. Nor is there any reason for
understanding infants hereby, in this famous text. It was indeed before allowed
that anger, or wrath, is a passion that is natural to mankind, and born with us
as our other passions are. And if it is indulged afterward to excess, it
doubtless becomes criminal in the sight of God. This is the utmost that can be
made of this place. To suppose the meaning of it is, that even infants, are
objects of God's wrath, is to put a sense upon it which the Greek will not well
admit: And it is besides, a most irrational, unscriptural interpretation --
What ideas must those have of the justice, goodness and mercy of God, who
imagine that infants just born, are the objects of his wrath? yea, that many of
them, without actual sinning, are eternally damned! I seriously declare that I
would not trust my person, or property, with those who have such conceptions of
the divine justice and goodness, if I did not charitably hope, that many of
them think themselves bound in duty to be much juster and better than they
represent their God.
In conformity whereto, the same apostle, in his Epistle to Titus, describes
his own temper before his conversion, [i. e. his temper "by nature"] and that
of others, in the following words: We ourselves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful and hating one another. Tit. iii. (...).
This is a temper and practice, directly the reverse of that which, in the
preceding words, he exhorts Titus to inculcate upon the Cretians; viz. to obey
magistrates, to be ready to every good [charitable] work, to speak evil of no
man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men.

THE sins of rash anger, and excessive resentment, are particularly forbidden
in the holy scriptures, as contrary to true wisdom, virtue, and that
self-government, in which sobriety of mind very essentially consists. They are
sometimes represented as sure signs and marks of folly. The fool rages and is
confident, says Solomon: He that is soon angry deals foolishly. Prove. xiv.
16, 17.
And again: Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry; for anger rests in the
bosom of fools. Eccl. vii. 9.
On the other hand, the Wise Man speaks of suppressing wrath, and forgiving
injuries, as a person's wisdom and glory: He that is slow to anger is better
than the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a city.
Prove. xvi. 32.
The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression. Chapter xix. 11.
And once more: He that is slow to anger, is of great understanding: but he
that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly. Chap. xiv. 29.
There is a dignity and glory in suppressing resentment, and in being of a
placable, forgiving temper, which a little, dark and grovelling mind has no
conception of; but, on the contrary, looks upon it as mean, base and
dishonorable.

THE apostle Paul, allowing the lawfulness of anger in some cases, cautions us
against the excesses of it, in a manner which supposes unreasonable anger to be
a peculiarly diabolical passion: Be ye angry, and sin not, says he; let not the
sun go down upon your wrath; neither give place to the devil. Ephesians. iv. 26, 27.
Our blessed Savior, who was truly meek and lowly in heart, assures us, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
judgment. He expressly makes the forgiving of injuries, one condition of our
being forgiven of God; saying, If ye forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you. Matt. vi. 14, 15.
Let me remind you of another passage of scripture, which so fully expresses
your duty, both negatively and positively, as to the point in hand, that it
will hardly be necessary to add any thing farther upon it -- Recompense to no
man evil for evil -- If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto
wrath. [i. e. to the righteous judgment of God.] For it is written, Vengeance
is mine; I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, seed
him; if he thirst, give him drink. For in so doing thou shall heap coals of
fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Romans
xii. 17, etc.
Thus you see, how an angry and wrathful, a malicious and revengeful temper of
mind, stands in direct opposition to that charity and meekness, that
peaceableness and universal good will, which is at once so eminently the
characteristic of the christian religion, and so little cultivated by many of
its professors: Yea, which a false and hypocritical zeal, not according to
knowledge, often sacrifices merely for the sake of promoting, by any means,
right or wrong, whatever has, in particular countries, obtained the fascinating
name of orthodoxy; though, perhaps, the very dregs of antichristian error and
heresy; or, at best, some minute and doubtful speculations of fanciful men
mis-spending their leisure hours. But you, my beloved young brethren, will put
on a meek, charitable and friendly disposition toward all men; never indulging
yourselves in that wrath, which works not the righteousness of God; and least
of all, when religion, holy and heaven-born religion, is the thing in question.
In a word, you will remember the admonition of the apostle James, with which I
close this head of discourse: If ye have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where envying and strife is,
there is confusion, and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy: And the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace. James iii. 14, etc.
-- Envy being mentioned in this passage, as a great sin, and one principal
source of confusion and evil works; I may from hence take occasion, in the next
place, to speak briefly of it. Wherefore,

XI. AN envious temper is inconsistent with true sobriety of mind. This is an
uneasy passion that is well known, arising from observing the real or supposed
felicity of others, in some one or more respects, on a comparison of our own
condition with theirs; being a particular modification of inordinate self-love,
or a natural result thereof. For, in propriety of language, we envy nothing to
others, but what we secretly covet ourselves; wishing that we, instead of they,
had the possession and enjoyment of it; whether it be riches, power, beauty,
wit, learning, or any thing else. So that envy is a criminal impotence of mind,
standing in opposition to reasonable self-love, and contentment with our own
condition, and to that charity which delights in the felicity of others. The
envious man thinks that he has too little, and the object of his envy too much,
of what he considers as good and desirable in its nature. From hence results
that peculiar feeling or sentiment, expressed by the term envy; at once
irrational and criminal; nor less tormenting to the mind subject thereto, than
the wracks of the cruelest tyrants are to the bodies of their slaves. Invid is
alterius macrescit rebus opimis:
Invidia Siculi non invenere tyranni
Majus tormentum --
HOR.
Yea, it drinks up the spirits, and consumes the very flesh, bones and marrow.
"A sound heart is the life of the flesh," says Solomon; "but envy is the
rottenness of the bones."

No person is qualified to live easily and happily in this world, that is of an
envious disposition; much less is he prepared for a better. In any world you
must needs be miserable, unless you conquer this evil passion; which yet is,
perhaps, one of the hardest and last that is subdued. It is not without great
difficulty that even wise and good men wholly suppress the workings of it in
their breasts; especially when they observe foolish and wicked men in great
outward dignity, honor and prosperity. The psalmist (Asaph) speaks of this as a
sore trial to himself. As for me, says he, my feet were almost gone; my steps
had well-nigh slipped: For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked. -- Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more
than heart can wish. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning
oppression: they speak loftily. They set their mouth against the heavens; and
their tongue walks through the earth. See Psalm LXXIII. 2, -- 14.
This is a temper which you must carefully guard against; and particularly,
take heed that you do not indulge it with respect to bad men. Here the chief
danger lies. You may without pain, possibly with pleasure, see wise and good
men prosper in the world; and yet be highly criminal in repining at seeing
those that are of a contrary character, wallowing in riches and pleasures, or
"set in great dignity:" thinking this is rather an honest indignation against
vice, than any sin in you. But you are mistaken if you think so. It is owing,
either to your not duly considering the providence of God, which overrules all
things, or to your having too high an esteem yourselves for those earthly
things, which you envy to bad men; or rather to both.

IF you would be truly wise, or sober-minded, you must bear without envy, to
see others excel you even in things that are good and praiseworthy; in
learning, wisdom and virtue; you must love and esteem them the more for it, and
endeavor, as far as may be, to imitate them. Much less ought you to be vexed,
and to murmur, if you see others richer, and more prosperous in the world than
yourselves; more regarded and esteemed; if they live in more gaiety, affluence
and splendour, than it is in your power to do; or if their designs meet with
success, while yours are crossed and frustrated. Such things as these, my
young brethren, you must learn to bear, if you would be wise and virtuous, or
live happily. Let me add, that if those persons that are richer, more esteemed,
and more highly exalted in the world than you, are also wiser and better, as
may possibly be the case; certainly you ought to rejoice with them in their
prosperity, in the blessings of divine providence bestowed upon them, instead
of being envious at them; according to the apostolic injunction, "Rejoice with
them that do rejoice." But if they are foolish and wicked, while you are wise
and virtuous, there is still the less reason why you should envy them any
outward prosperity. This were as if an honest man should envy to the thief,
robber or murderer, the rich velvet, the fashionable wig, and laced clothes, in
which he sees him carted to Tyburn! To cure you of envying the foolish and
wicked, only do as Asaph did -- Enter into the sanctuary of God, and understand
their end. Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them
down to destruction. How are they brought down to desolation as in a moment!
Psalm lxxiii. 17 --
This is the most effectual preservative against that common weakness, that
criminal impotence of mind, envy; as well as a sovereign remedy for so sad a
disorder, in those upon whom it has already seized, whether old or young. I
shall therefore dismiss this particular with the counsel and prescription of
the royal psalmist. Fret not thyself because of evil doers; neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down like
the grass, and wither as the green herb. -- Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust
also in him. -- Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him. Fret not thyself
because of him that prospers in his way, because of the man who brings evil
devices to pass. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself in any
wise to do evil. For evil doers shall be cut off -- Yet a little while, and the
wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be. Psalm. xxxvii. 1 -- 10.


XII. ALL excessive indulgence of your sensual appetites in eating and
drinking, is directly repugnant to sobriety. We often speak of sobriety, more
especially in contradistinction to the shameful vices of intemperance; of which
these two are not the least brutal The apostle speaks of the several vices of
intemperance, under the terms -- "pollutions of the world;" and compares those
persons who return to, after having forsaken them, to a "dog returning to his
vomit," and a "sow, to her wallowing in the mire." [2 Pet. ii. 20, 22] The
courtly Horace did not think the same images too gross or indelicate, in
speaking of the same vices under the fable of the Circaean cup -- and this with
express reference to a King, ULYSSES -- Quae si cum sociis stultus, cupidusque
bibisset,
-- fuisset turpis et excors;
Vixisset canis immundus, vel amica luto sus.



. They are probably more frequently the vices of youngmen, than of the old,
though far from being peculiar to them. But be that as it may; it is certain they
are great, dishonorable and pernicious vices, by whomsoever they are
practiced. They are destructive at once to the health of body and mind; and are
great occasions of consuming both the time and the substance. They indispose
people for serving either God or their generation. They are fruitful of
mischief, not only to those that are guilty of them, but to society; and more
particularly to their own families, if any they have.

THESE vices are very frequently and severely censured in scripture, under the
well-known terms, drunkenness and gluttony. Let me remind you of some of the
many scriptural warnings against these shameful and ruinous excesses. "Hear
thou, my Son," says Solomon, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way. Be
not amongst wine-bibbers; amongst riotous eaters of flesh. For the drunkard and
the glutton shall surely come to poverty; and drowsiness shall cloth a man
with rags. Prove. xxiii. 19, 20, 21.
And again in the same chapter: Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness
of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine -- Look not thou upon the wine when
it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves itself aright.
At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Amongst
diverse other woes and curses, denounced against several sorts of sinners,
[Isai. chapter V.] this is one: Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning,
that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame
them. And the harp and viol, the tabret and pipe, and wine are in their feasts:
But they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his
hand.

YOU would do well also to consider our Savior's well-known parable Luke xxv.
of the foolish young man, who wasted his substance with riotous living; and
the misery and dishonor to which he was reduced, when he became the keeper and
feeder of swine for another, and would fain have filled himself with their
husks, after he had spent all he had in luxury and excess; but was not
permitted to do even that. Though the ultimate design of this part of the
parable, is to represent the misery and shame to which all wicked men in
general bring themselves by forsaking God, and the house of their heavenly
Father, where there is "bread enough and to spare" -- true and abundant
felicity; yet it may be usefully improved in the literal sense, as an example
to the young, of the sad effects of riot, luxury and intemperance; and a solemn
lesson or warning to them, to beware of those vices in particular. But our
Savior gives you a more direct admonition with reference to these sins: "Take
heed to your selves," says he, "lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness -- "and so that day come upon you unawares."
Luke xx. 34.
-- "Lest at any time" -- There are times of peculiar temptation to these
vices; particularly seasons of rejoicing, whether public, or more private. And
there are persons who, though not habitually given to intemperance, are yet
sometimes shamefully overtaken on such occasions. It will, therefore, be your
wisdom and duty, to be particularly upon your guard at all such seasons.

THE apostle Paul speaks of some persons, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is their shame. This is peculiarly applicable to the drunkard and the
glutton; especially to those who even make their boasts, what mighty feats they
have done in eating and drinking; what heroes they are at the table; and how
many men of might, by means of their superior prowess, they have seen fallen as
dead under it. Such shameful and shameless men there are in the world; and some
of them perhaps, at the same time, very zealous for the religious observation
of Chrismas, or of Thanksgiving-days, thinking those who disregard them, very
impious, wicked men! -- The same apostle admonishes you and all, who are
blessed with the light of the gospel, to abstain from all such works of
heathenish darkness and ignorance as these; saying, Let us cast off the works
of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly as in
the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not
in strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; and make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

NOW, it is evident that he is void of christain sobriety, who addicts himself
to either of these vices. For what a solecism would it be, to speak of a
religious, sober drunkard or glutton! If you are truly sober and virtuous, you
will not allow yourselves in an over delicate and luxurious way of living; much
less in such grossly criminal excesses as these. One design of our Savior's
parable of Lazarus, and the rich man who was clothed in fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day, Luke xv;
seems to have been, to reprove such a way of life as dangerous, and contrary
to the spirit of religion; even though people should abstain from all gross acts
of intemperance. And it is, unquestionably, inconsistent with christian
sobriety, to make it as it were a business to pamper the body, and to live a
delicate, luxurious life; though a person should never be chargeable with
gluttony or drunkenness. If this is what is uppermost in a man's thoughts and
concerns, instead of the cultivating his mind, and pleasing God, he does,
without doubt, "make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof," in
the sense wherein it is forbidden by the apostle; and walks after the flesh,
not after the spirit.

TO conclude this head of discourse: If you are sober-minded, you will make the
pleasing of God your end, your habitual endeavor; and will of consequence,
restrain your natural appetites within the bounds of such a temperance, as is
best adapted to health, strength, and activity; such a moderation, as will most
contribute to the vigor both of body and mind; and thereby fit you for
discharging the various duties of life and godliness, with spirit and
alertness: Instead of having your bodies and senses stupefied, and even your
diviner part benumbed, borne down and carnalized, -- Vides ut pallidus omnis
Coena desurgat dubia? quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
HOR.
by an excessive load of meat and drink; at once to your own shame, and to the
scandalous abuse of the bounties of providence, given to be received only with
temperance and thanksgiving, by them that know the truth. From these, One may
naturally proceed to speak of some other lusts of the flesh, which are to be
avoided as contrary to sobriety. Accordingly let me caution you, in the next
place,

XIII. AGAINST all those vices which, in the language of scripture, are
comprehended under the terms uncleanness, and the lust of uncleanness. The
several vices included in these general terms, are emphatically the vices of
youth. And they are accordingly suppoposed to be the sins primarily intended by
the apostle Paul, in one of his epistles, by youthful lusts 2 Timothy ii. 22.
-- "Flee also youthful lusts," says he: i. e. all the vices of lasciviousness
and incontinence, or those which are opposed to chastity.

UNCLEANNESS is a sin of a very heinous nature, directly opposite to christian
sobriety, and of pernicious consequence to society, as well as to them that are
enslaved to it. There are not indeed wanting, old sinners and servants of
satan, who transgress in this way, to their own infamy; and often, to the ruin
of their estates, families, health, bodies and souls at once. But yet, as was
intimated before, this is a sin which reigns more generally amongst the young;
who therefore need to be very particularly warned against it. The holy
scriptures abound with prohibitions, and very severe censures of it. So that
there will be scarce need of my doing any thing more upon this head, than to
remind you of some of the many passages of scripture relative hereto; to the
folly and misery of this vice, and the heavy curses of God denounced against
those who are guilty of it.

YOU cannot be ignorant that one of the ten commandments, in which the moral
law is epitomized, or contained in brief, relates particularly to this sin --
"Thou shall not commit adultery." And as this vice, in the various evil forms
of it, frequently accompanies intemperance in other respects, yea, is often the
effect thereof; we find it mentioned and censured together with them -- "I will
punish them for their ways, and reward them for their doings. For they shall
eat, and not have enough; they shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase;
because they have left off to take heed to the Lord. Whoredom, and wine, and
new wine take away the heart." Hos. iv.
So again: -- "When I fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops to the harlots houses. They were as fed horses
in the morning: Every one neighed after his neighbor's wife. Shall I not visit
for these things? says the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a
nation as this!" Jer. Chap. V.


THERE are many passages in the Proverbs of Solomon, which particularly set
forth the folly, dishonor, and ruinous effects of this vice: And, surely, no
person was more capable of giving good counsel to young men in this respect
than he -- "My son," says he, "attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my
understanding -- For the lips of a strange woman [i. e. an harlot] drop as an
honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than oil: but her end is bitter as
wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. Her feet go down to death, and her steps
take hold on hell -- Remove thy way from her, and come not nigh the door of her
house; lest thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel:
Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house of
strangers: and thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are
consumed." Prove. Chapter V.
And again, toward the end of the same chapter -- "Rejoice with the WIFE of
thy youth -- And why will thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman? -- For
the ways of (...) before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings." In the following chapter, speaking still of the strange woman, or
harlot, the wise man says, "Lust not after her beauty in thine heart, neither
let her take thee with her eyelids. For by means of an whorish woman, a man is
brought to a piece of bread; and the adulteress will hunt for the precious
life. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt?" -- He
speaks a little after of those who are addicted to this vice, as destitute of
understanding -- "Whosoever commits adultery with a woman, lacks
understanding; he that does it, destroys his own soul. A wound and dishonor
shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away." Prove. Chap. VI.


THE next chapter is chiefly taken up with an account of the lewd woman, or
harlot, and the deceitful, wicked arts, which she practices too successfully on
young men void of understanding and experience. After a very circumstantial
description of her guileful, serpentine managements and enticements, the wise
man proceeds to relate the miserable end of the foolish unhappy young one; and
to set him up for a warning to future ages. The account ends thus: "With her
much fair speech she caused him to yield; with the flattering of her lips she
forced him. He goes after her straitway," (be pleased to take particular
notice of what follows --) "as an ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to
the correction of the stocks; till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird
hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life. Hearken unto me
now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of my mouth. Let not
thine heart decline to her ways; go not after her paths. For she has cast down
many wounded; yea, many strong men have been slain by her. Her house is the way
to hell, going down to the chambers of death." Prove. Chapter VII.


TO these solemn counsels and warnings out of the old testament, let me subjoin
two or three from the new -- "Mortify therefore your members which are upon the
earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence --
For which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience."
Col. III. 5, etc.
And again: "The Lord knows how -- to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished; but CHIEFLY them that walk after the flesh in the lust
of uncleanness" -- 2 Pet. Chapter II. 9, 10.
"Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy." 1
Cor. III. 16, 17.
-- "Know ye not that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid! -- He
that commits fornication, sins against his own body." Chap. VI. 15, etc.


THERE are diverse kinds of leudness and impurity, which belong to this head,
besides adultery and fornication in the common gross sense. We read in
scripture of "committing adultery in the heart;" and of some persons who have "
eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin." All obscene, lascivious
or unchaste words, are also criminal: To which the apostle refers, when he
says, "Fornication, and all uncleanness, let it not be once named among you, as
becomes saints: Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking and jesting, which are
not convenient." There are some still more unnatural, shameful and brutal sins,
which belong to this head. For, as the apostle observes, it is "even a shame to
speak of those things which are done of some in secret." I shall therefore
spare at once your modesty and my own, in not being more particular --

Now, my young brethren, if you are sober-minded, you will keep yourselves pure
from all these abominations; against which the wrath of God is so plainly
revealed from heaven. Particularly, you will avoid all forbidden intercourse
with lewd, prostitute and infamous women; of whom, it is said, there are many
amongst us. I know not; but wherever they are, they may justly be accounted the
disgrace, not only of their own sex, but of human nature; the pests of society;
the contempt and abhorrence of all good men; the daughters of satan, and the
execration of the Almighty. And will you give your substance, your strength,
your honor, to such infamous wretches as these; who thirst for your wealth, who
lay wait for the precious life, and whose doors are the gates of hell! Would
you dishonor the members of Christ? -- would you defile the temple of God,
which is holy, with such filthy and detestable, though probably painted and
gilded idols! -- Or, as to any of that sex, who are yet undebauched, would you
be "first in the transgression?" Would, or could you, if you though it of the
matter, be guilty of so dishonorable, so base, so cruel a thing, as to entice
an innocent, virtuous young woman to forfeit her virtue and honor? -- at best
to her shame and grief all her days; and, not improbably, to the utter loss of
her reputation, and engaging her in such a course of life, as will ruin her
both soul and body! O base, horrid, infamous deed! And if the person thus
ensnared and ruined by you, should be one that had any regard for you; this
would but increase the blackness and horror of the crime, by adding ingratitude
to it!

THE infinitely wise and beneficent Author of nature, and of all the social
passions, affections and instincts in mankind, has, by his express laws and
institutions, made provision for the regular, virtuous and honorable
gratification of them. And, in one very material instance, relative to the
point in hand, the following passages of scripture will show you at once, both
what that course of life is, which He has ordained, and the great guilt and
danger of deviating from it: I mean those very grave and sober words of the
apostle Paul -- "To avoid fornication, let EVERY man have his own wife, and
EVERY woman her own husband." 1 Cor. VII. 2.
-- "Marriage is HONORABLE in ALL, and the bed undefiled: But whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge." Heb. XIII. 4.
Among the numerous bad effects of pride and luxury in life, the prevention of
MARRIAGE is not the least. There are many men in the world, who, though in
circumstances to support a family comfortably and decently, will not comply
with the order of God and nature, because they are not in a capacity to live in
such affluence and splendour as they desire; such as their fathers live, or
lived in; or such as many of their acquaintance live in: That is, in other
words, because they have not much more of the world than they need. And the
young, of the other amiable sex, having been brought up in a delicate,
sumptuous way, will not marry, perhaps, till they have the offer of such
matches, that they can immediately be maintained near, if not quite, in as
genteel and grand a manner as that, in which they were brought up in their
fathers houses; or that in which they see some of their contemporaries live.
These are facts, as to many persons of both sexes. But how irrational is it,
that young gentlemen and ladies should expect to begin the world with as much
equipage and grandeur, or to live at first in as sumptuous a manner as their
parents could well do at last, after having, by the blessing of God on many
years industry, acquired riches? Can any expect that their parents should
either make away with themselves, or give up all to them while they live? One
of these would be necessary in order to their living in the like affluence. Nor
would even this suffice, except in a few cases. For most parents have more than
one, two or three children; many have six, eight, ten, or more, to inherit
their estates. So that giving up all to be divided amongst them, would not put
them into such circumstances, as to enable them to live in the same manner in
which they were brought up. Which, or something very near it, is what many seem
to insist on, as the condition of their entering into the marriage state. Vain
and extravagant imagination indeed! It is to expect what is naturally
impossible. And the consequence hereof is, that many persons live all their
days, and more still, much the greater and better part of them, in an unnatural
state, contrary to the express ordinance of God. And many of the men who live
thus, betake themselves to such positively vicious courses, (it is needless to
say in what respects) as are at once dishonorable to themselves, ruinous to
many persons of the other sex, of low condition, and as render both, the
nusances and disgrace of society.

Besides: the increase of mankind is hereby prevented. For as to those who live
continently all their days in a single state, (whether many or few) they are
the occasion of no addition to the numbers of society: They are "written
childless;" and do not leave any to supply even their own places, when they are
taken off the stage. And as to those who live otherwise, in a promiscuous or
lawless concubinage; the experience of all ages has verified one part of the
curse denounced against such persons, by the God of nature and order, viz. They
shall commit whoredom, but they shall not increase; because they have left off
to take heed to the Lord. [Hos. iv. 10.] That is, they shall not increase in
any sort of proportion to those who observe the divine institution of marriage.
So that, instead of leaving behind them many sons and daughters honorably
born, for the support, increase and ornament of society, they furnish it only
with a few b-st-rds; who are also commonly brought up in such a way, unhappy
persons! as gives themselves, their guilty parents and the commonwealth, cause
rather to wish they had never been, than the contrary! There are, indeed, some
persons born under these unhappy circumstances, who prove real ornaments and
blessings to society: Nor ought any of them to be despised merely on account of
their having had such profligate parents.

These are a few of the many civil and political bad consequences of celibacy;
one principal occasion of which in this country, is that "pride of life, which
is not of the Father, but of the world:" -- A kind of pride, which will not
permit people to marry, unless they have much more than nature requires; and
can live, not only comfortably, but in splendour, make a figure in the world,
and "fare sumptuously every day:" -- A kind of pride, which seems to be growing
upon us instead of abating, and threatens the worst of evils, temporal and
eternal. It is partly owing to this, that not a few persons are arrived at such
effrontery and impiety in their celibate, criminal way of life, as even to
defame the original institution of Heaven, and that state which the Spirit of
God has since declared honorable in all. This is one of the surest evidences
of a grossly depraved mind. And I cannot but add, that that pride of life, which
is one principal means of preventing marriage, is of much worse consequence in
a young country, thin of inhabitants, than in an old one, already nearly, or
perhaps fully peopled.




XIV. LET me remind you, in the next place, that all fraud and injustice are
absolutely inconsistent with sobriety. Certainly, a dishonest, injurious person
cannot be a sober One, in the sense of scripture; wherein every species of
dishonesty, unrighteousness and fraud, is so frequently and solemnly forbidden.
What! know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? --

SOME of you, my young brethren, are yet in your minority, under the immediate
care and government of your parents, or of guardians. Others of you may be
servants or apprentices. Now, you may not, in any respect, wrong or defraud
either your parents, your guardians, or your masters, any more than another
person, by taking any thing to your own use, which belongs to them: I mean,
without their express permission, or their known general allowance and
approbation. One might here apply, not improperly, the words of the apostle,
though written originally with another view -- The heir as long as he is a child,
differs nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all; but is under tutors
and governors, until the time appointed of the father. Gal. IV. 1
Some children and heirs may, perhaps, imagine that it is no crime for them
clandestinely to take and use what belongs to their parents; but this is a
great mistake. They have no right, no more than a servant has, to any thing
besides what is given to, or allowed them: And it will be highly criminal in
you to take, at your own discretion, any thing that is your parents. Neither
may sons, servants or apprentices be, in any respect, unfaithful to the trust
reposed in them respectively. They are obliged to be punctually honest, upright
and diligent in whatever is consided to their care, and in whatever they are
employed by their parents or masters; faithfully regarding their orders and
interest, as they will answer it to God.

I HARDLY need to add, after this, that you are all in general, both those that
are minors, and those that are of age to act for yourselves, to be strictly
just and upright in all your dealings and intercourse with others; doing to
them "whatever you would that they should do to you." For this is not only the
law, the prophets, and the gospel of Christ; but the dictate of nature; and
found, almost in the same words, in some of the heathen moralists. So that all
injustice, iniquity and fraud toward man, of every kind and degree, is
repugnant to the light of nature, as well as to christian sobriety, and the
strict morals of the gospel. I may therefore dismiss the present head, with
this brief mention of it; only referring you to the holy scriptures, and to
your own consciences, which will at once consent to every thing enjoined
therein, relative to justice betwixt man and man. -- I proceed therefore to
observe, in the next place,

XV. THAT an avaritious, covetous and worldly disposition, or the immoderate
desire and love of riches, is also repugnant to sobriety. He that makes haste
to be rich, says Solomon, shall not be innocent. -- And, "they that will be
rich," says the apostle Paul, "fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For
the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." And
our blessed Savior has said, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth"
-- "Take heed and beware of covetousness." He speaks of a strong attachment to
the world, as absolutely inconsistent with true religion; saying, No man can
serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else
he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

COVETOUSNESS is indeed commonly and justly accounted the vice rather of old
age, than of youth. However, instances of it even in the latter, are not so
rare and extraordinary, as to render a caution of this nature superfluous or
inexpedient in a discourse to young men. The apostle John, to be sure, did not
think such admonitions needless for them. For it is more particularly and
directly to young men, that he addresses himself thus in his first epistle -- I
have written unto you, young men -- Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him -- And the world passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the
will of God, abides forever.

As I just now intimated to you, there are some examples of a covetous, worldly
temper even in young men: And there is one melancholy instance hereof recorded
in the new testament. The story is related by three of the evangelists, Mat.
Chapter XIX. Mark Chapter X. and Luke Chapter XVIII.
without any considerable variation; and it is particularly worthy of your
serious attention. This unhappy young man came to our Savior with an apparent,
and doubtless some real concern, about the salvation of his soul; saying, "Good
master, what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life?" By what
follows, it appears that he was free from all gross and scandalous vices, in
the usual sense of these terms. And one of the evangelists says, that "Jesus
beholding him, loved him." However, our Lord knowing at the same time, that the
love of this world reigned in his heart; perceiving also, that he had far too
high an opinion of his own virtues and righteousness; and being willing to
prove him, and show him to himself, said, "If thou will be perfect, go and sell
that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven:
And come and follow me." But the manner in which he received this counsel and
admonition, and his conduct thereon, as related in the next verse, shows that
even this apparently serious young man, who was, in some respects, beloved by
our Lord, still preferred a present treasure on earth, to a future one in
heaven, that fails not. For it is said, "But when the young man heard that
saying, he went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions." From whence our
Savior took occasion to admonish all that were present, concerning the
deceitfulness of riches, the danger attending them, and the fatal consequences
of a worldly mind; saying, "Verily, I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven." Or, as it is expressed in another
evangelist, "How hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the kingdom of
God!"

Now, if you are truly wise, you will not follow the example of this unhappy
young man; but consider it as left upon record for your warning: And not suffer
the love of gold that perishes, to reign in your hearts, instead of the love
of Christ and of God, and of the true riches; -- that far more excellent,
enduring substance and treasure in the heavens, "where neither moth nor rust
does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal." The inordinate
love of riches is absolutely inconsistent with christian sobriety. There is
hardly any surer evidence of a sordid and insane mind than this: So far is it
from being compatible with a truly sober one.

IT is not the design of these scriptural counsels and warnings respecting
riches, that you should have absolutely no regard for them; much less, that you
should wholly neglect all worldly affairs, business and commerce, under a
pretense of being heavenly-minded: A notion which some lazy people, and
dreaming enthusiasts have espoused; thinking to be subsisted in idleness by the
labor and alms of others. Wealth is the gift of God, and considered in
scripture as one of those worldly blessings, for which men ought to be thankful
to the Father of lights. It is therefore, though a trial, yet a real good; and
not to be absolutely despised. In the possession of a wise and good man, it may
contribute not only to the comfort of his own life; but enable him to do much
good in the world in diverse ways, particularly in the honorable capacity of
God's almoner to the poor: While fools, or wicked men, are often the more
unhappy themselves, and do hurt to others, by means of those riches which they
abuse. Solomon recommends an honest industry, as the natural and appointed
means of providing a comfortable livelihood; saying. "Go to the ant, thou
sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise: Which having no guide, overseer, or
ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the
harvest." The apostle Paul says, as from the Lord, that "if any will not work,
neither should they eat." There is much more to the same purpose in the new
testament: And it would be a great perversion of our Savior's words -- "Labor
not for the meat that perishes;" -- "Take no thought for the morrow;" -- and
suchlike admonitions, to understand them as prohibiting that prudent care and
diligence, in order to provide for ourselves, and "that we may have to give to
him that needs," which are positively enjoined in many other parts of
scripture.

THE true sense of scripture upon this head, is in general this: That though you
ought to be industrious in some honest course of life, and to be thankful to
God, if he bestows riches upon you; yet you are always to regard this world,
and the perishing riches of it, in due subordination to the other, and to those
far greater and better things, which God has promised to them that love him: --
That you should not be immoderately set in the pursuit of riches, or gripe them
too fast when acquired, so as to withhold your alms from the proper objects of
it: -- That you should not trust in them, but in the living God, who "gives us
richly all things to enjoy:" -- That you should make such a wise and reasonable
use of them, as is agreeable both to nature, and to the will of God; and be
ready to part with them at his call, in hope of a better and more enduring
substance; even those things that are "above, where Jesus Christ sits at the
right hand of God." Neither are you to imagine yourselves sober-minded, as
Christians are obliged to be, till the temper of your minds is conformable to
such sober maxims as these: For there is nothing in them that favors, in the
least degree, of superstition or enthusiasm; which are so far from being the
characteristics of a sober mind, that they are directly repugnant thereto. And
this leads me to observe more particularly, in the last place, what was hinted
in the former part of this discourse, viz.

XVI. THAT all enthusiastic notions, and superstitious practices, stand in
opposition to christian sobriety; and ought to be guarded against. A sober mind
is not, surely, an insane, fanciful, overheated or raving one; but a sound,
composed and rational mind; a mind well-informed with the knowledge of God, and
of true religion; and, upon rational principles, or proper grounds of
conviction of the truth, excellency and importance of christianity, firmly
attached to it, as it was preached by Christ and his apostles. All enthusiastic
rants and conceits, all superstitious notions and practices; I mean, all such
as are warranted neither by reason, nor by the holy scriptures, are therefore
repugnant to sobriety.

THAT sobriety of mind ought to be considered in opposition to all such
fancies, and religious madness, is very obvious from one passage of scripture
at least, directly in point. It is in the Acts of the apostles, Chap. XXVI. 24,
25.
and was referred to before. We there find the apostle Paul giving a particular
account of his conversion to the Faith of Christ, before King Agrippa, and
Festus the governor; apologizing for himself, and speaking of the truth and
evidences of christianity. And as he thus spoke for himself, Festus said with a
loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning does make thee mad.
Whether Festus spoke sincerely or ironically about the apostle's learning, is
not at present material: It is evident that he thought him now disordered in
his mind, and a religious, raving enthusiast. Upon which the apostle calmly and
respectfully replied, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak forth the
words of truth and soberness. In which answer, you perceive that speaking the
words of "truth and soberness," stands in opposition to the reproachful charge
as to his being "beside himself" and "mad." One obvious remark upon this piece
of history, is, that men of dark and depraved minds may mis-call truth and
soberness, madness: For such men receive not the things of the spirit of God;
which are foolishness and madness to them. This, however, does not in the least
invalidate, but rather confirms the other observation, that real enthusiasm, or
religious madness, actually stands in opposition to true sobriety of mind, how
often soever one may be mistaken for the other.

IF therefore, you aspire to be sober-minded, you are always, and in all
things, to be governed by right reason, truth, rational evidence, and the
genuine doctrines and duties of christianity; and to be upon your guard against
all wild notions and conceits; all superstition and enthusiasm, whether in
principle or in practice. -- Though there have been times and places, wherein it
seemed, by the preaching chiefly in vogue, to be an established maxim, that
people, and particularly the young, must be first put "beside themselves," and
made "mad," by a furious application to their passions, with little or no solid
instruction to their minds, in order to make them sober! Yea, sobriety of mind
seems to have been thought by many, to consist chiefly in an heated
imagination, in wild, unscriptural fancies, and in such consequential
practices, both in respect of religion, and the affairs of common life, as are
directly repugnant to all true sobriety, or a sound mind. And young people need
to be particularly cautioned against these delusions and infatuations; being,
through inexperience, the warmth of their blood, and the strength of their
passions, peculiarly exposed to them; especially when recommended to them
either by a very soft and delicate, or a tragical, boisterous and outrageous
address.

SUPERSTITION and enthusiasm are not, indeed, commonly considered as vicious,
or any ways criminal in their nature; but rather only as innocent human
infirmities. But it is not easy to see, why they should be treated with so much
tenderness, except in some particular cases, wherein they appear to have their
origin in corporeal disorders. When this is the case, the subjects of them are
to be pitied, like other unhappy people under a total or partial distraction,
arising from similar disorders in the animal frame. But such cases as these
being excepted, they are real and great vices of the mind; I mean, wherever
they are found in a great degree. For they strongly imply a criminal misuse of
the understanding, and of the word of God; which, being rightly used, would
effectually preserve people from these errors and delusions. A person that
makes such use of his reason, and of the holy scriptures, as he ought in duty
to make, never did, never will, never can fall into the errors of a raving,
wild enthusiasm; so contrary to all true sobriety, and so fruitful of mischief
in the world. For all which mischiefs the enthusiast is as much accountable, as
the drunkard, and the man whose anger has got the better of his reason, are for
the disorders and outrages committed by them respectively.

ENTHUSIASTS are commonly full of pride, self-conceit, wrath and bitterness.
All their dreams and reveries are sacred with them, all divine: And they who
dare to contradict or dispute them, are of consequence heretics, unconverted,
wicked men, the enemies of God. Hence rash judging and condemning: Hence fatal
breaches in families, amongst neighbors, in churches, in civil societies:
Hence envying and strife, and every evil work. Enthusiasm is generally
outrageous and cruel as the grave, under a pretense of zeal for religion and
the glory of God. They who are possessed of this evil spirit in a great degree,
commonly think they can neither say nor do too much against those, upon whom,
in the pride and naughtiness of their hearts, they have waged war, as
unorthodox enemies to the most High: Conceiting that by "killing them, they
would do God service." Almost all great enthusiasts evidently discover a
disposition to be persecutors, and to destroy their opposers, if they dared,
and had it in their power: Unhappily mistaking a kind of possession for
inspiration, and the loss of humanity for the acquisition of a divine nature!

ENTHUSIASM has, perhaps, been productive of as much evil in the world, as the
most flagrant and acknowledged immoralities: Yea, it leads naturally and
directly to such immoralities; as was intimated before. It is directly the
reverse of "the wisdom that is from above," in its nature and effects; though
mistaken for it. It is neither pure, nor peaceable, nor gentle, nor easy to be
entreated; it is not full of mercy, or of any good fruits; it is not without
partiality, nor without hypocrisy; neither are the fruits of righteousness sown
in peace by enthusiasts, but the seeds of all unrighteousness, in divisions and
discord. What dreadful confusions and calamities enthusiasm has sometimes
occasioned, nearly, if not quite to the overturning of kingdoms, is known to
those that are conversant in history. And let me add, that if our own country
has diverse times since the first settling of it, been the wretched theater of
suchlike disorders and miseries in a great degree, it will render my giving
you a very particular caution against enthusiasm, the more expedient. Let me
therefore, in the fear of God, and in friendship to you, warn you never to
forget that you are reasonable creatures. There is nothing, which is not
founded in reason, truth and nature, and in the holy word of God, which is the
highest reason, that in any measure deserves the name of religion. You are
always to make the holy scriptures the rule both of your faith and practice,
exercising your best reason in discovering the true sense thereof; never
admitting any thing as religious truth or duty, but what is agreeable thereto;
and let me add, giving your chief attention to the plain, indisputable
doctrines and duties of christianity, which are certainly of the greatest
importance. The observation of these counsels will, by the blessing of God, be
a sufficient security to you against all enthusiastic, superstitious notions
and practices; so contrary to sobriety of mind, and of such fatal consequence,
as has been represented.

THUS, my beloved young brethren, I have particularly mentioned, and warned you
against, some of the principal of those follies and vices, those sinful
excesses and irregularities, both in principle and practice, which stand in
opposition to christian sobriety. An ugly, deformed picture, set by the side of
a fair and beautiful one, serves as a foil thereto; making its beauty the more
conspicuous, and recommending it to the best advantage. It is therefore hoped
that what has been said of irreligion, folly and vice, in this and my last
discourse, will serve to illustrate and recommend to you that pure and
undefiled religion, which was explained to you in some preceding ones. If any
of you have unhappily, heretofore, preferred vice to virtue, and impiety to
godliness; it was doubtless, in part at least, because you did not clearly
discern the real beauty of the one, and the deformity of the other. I have
endeavored to place them both in such a light, that you can hardly help doing
it now, unless the god of this world has sadly blinded your eyes, lest the
light of the glorious gospel should appear to them. May He that at first said,
"Let there be light;" and at whose word it "shined out of darkness, shine into
all your hearts, to give you the knowledge of his glory, in the face of Jesus
Christ!"

I HAVE endeavored faithfully, and in the plainest manner, by God's blessing
concurring, to lead you to the knowledge and love of the truth, free from all
human inventions, refinements, and commandments of men, whatsoever; in humble
imitation of the holy apostle, who said, -- Seeing we have received this
ministry -- we faint not: But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty,
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God. 2 Cor. VI. 1, 2.
If you are convinced in your own consciences, as I doubt not but you are, that
I have been recommending to you nothing but sober truth, and sober religion: If
you are also persuaded, that I have been warning you against nothing but what
is contrary to sound doctrine, and to christian sobriety, from a sincere desire
of your eternal happiness; then take heed how you reject these friendly
counsels and warnings. For in such a case, "he that despises, despises not
man, but God." -- If you are wise, you will be wise for yourselves; but if you
scorn, you alone shall bear it!"

HOW you have lived in times past, is best known to God and to yourselves. If I
certainly knew that any of you had been often and grossly guilty of any of the
crimes, which have been censured in this and the foregoing discourse, as I do
not; yet you may be assured, that I am so tenderly concerned for your
reputation in this world, as well as for your happiness in the next, that I
should not, without the greatest reluctance, speak of it by way of reproof and
rebuke, in this public manner. However, if any of you are conscious to
yourselves, that you have not hitherto walked according to the laws of
christian sobriety; I must admonish you to repent of all your violations of
them; and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, by forsaking your past
sins, and living soberly, righteously and godly for the time to come; that so
you may stand acquitted in the great day, instead of being "condemned with the
world."

LET me, on the other hand, exhort those of you that are already sober-minded,
to persevere in well-doing; to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; and to perfect holiness in the fear of God --
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think of these things. Those things which ye have both learned,
and received, and heard -- do; and the God of peace shall be with you. Ephesians.
Chap. IV.


SERMON VI.
Young Men exhorted to Sobriety by various Considerations, viz. (1.) Of the
Reasonableness thereof. (2.) Of their religious Education. (3.) Of the constant
Goodness of God to them. (4.) Of his corrective Visitations. (5.) Of their Vows
and good Resolutions in Times of Trouble. (6.) Of the inward Peace attending
Sobriety. (7.) Of the Esteem and Honor which it procures.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
MY young brethren, in the first discourse upon this subject, a variety of
observations were made upon the text, by way of introduction to the main design.

IN the two next discourses, the nature of christian sobriety was somewhat
distinctly explained, and cursorily recommended to you.

IN the two last discourses, some of the many sins, follies and criminal
excesses which are contrary to sobriety, were particularly mentioned to you;
from all which you were warned to abstain.

I HAVE spoken of nothing as a truth to be believed, or a duty to be practiced
by you, as a branch of this sobriety, without assigning some reason or reasons
for it, how briefly soever. Neither, on the other hand, has any thing been
mentioned as repugnant to sobriety, without offering something to your
consideration, by way of disswasive from it. So that I have, in effect, been
exhorting you to be sober-minded, while my professed design was rather only to
explain what is intended thereby, and to show you what is inconsistent
therewith. But it has been my intention all along, by the will of God,

THIRDLY, More largely and distinctly to exhort you to this sobriety of mind,
and to dissuade you from the contrary.

I SHALL, accordingly, now proceed to this branch of my design, by laying
before you such considerations and arguments of various kinds, as may be
effectual to persuade you to be sober-minded, by the blessing of God
concurring; or else, if they are disregarded, will leave you the more
inexcuseable. Which I pray God, may not be the case with any of you: Though if
it should, it will be nothing that is unusual; -- nothing but what often
happened of old, under the preaching of the apostles themselves, who were so
eminently faithful to God, and to the souls of men. Conscious of this fidelity,
they left the event, the success of their labor of love, with God; in full
assurance of his gracious approbation, whatever that might be. Whether their
hearers received and relished the word preached, to their salvation, or
disrelished and rejected it, to their destruction; yet they knew their own
conduct with respect to both, would be acceptable to God, who is pleased with
the faithfulness of his servants, whether successful or not. These are the
sentiments, which one of the chief of the apostles expresses in the following
words: We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in
them that perish. To the one we are the savor of death unto death; and to the
other the savor of life unto life -- For we are not as many which corrupt the
word of God; but as of sincerity, but as of God, so speak we in Christ. 2 Cor.
Chapter II.


LET me briefly premise a few things here, before I proceed to the proposed
exhortation. And,

1. AN exhortation to sobriety, implies the use of argument, of sober and solid
reasons, addessed to the understanding. General counsels, or loud, pathetic
exclamations, addressed solely to the passions; or merely calling upon people
to be sober-minded, without such intelligible motives as are adapted to
influence a reasonable mind, does not deserve the name of christian
exhortation: It is but empty harrangue and declamation; from which no good and
lasting effects can be expected, how much soever persons may be moved and
agitated thereby for a time. I shall therefore consider you as reasonable
creatures; and make use of such arguments and considerations, as are adapted to
work upon a rational mind.

2. THESE arguments will be of a general nature; respecting sobriety of mind in
that large, comprehensive sense, in which it was explained in the preceding
discourses, rather than any single branches of it. For the particular parts or
branches thereof, have had so much said upon them respectively already, that it
is the less necessary to insist upon them now. And it will be more expedient
and useful, to urge upon you sobriety of mind in general, considered as
containing all those particulars that have been separately spoken of.

3. THOUGH some of these arguments will be of less weight than others; yet none
of them, it is hoped, will be unworthy to be mentioned in a grave discourse, or
undeserving of your regard. There is nothing of any real weight, that can be
said upon this subject, but what may properly claim attention, in proportion to
that weight. And it must needs be, that in a great number of arguments for
sobriety, there must be a differrence in respect of their importance: They
cannot all be of the same, or equal force; though they may all be according to
truth, nature, reason and scripture. Some of those which I shall offer to your
consideration, are, I think, as weighty as the heart of man can conceive; and
none of them, I hope, superficial, fanciful or unsolid. But you shall judge of
them yourselves: For, I neither claim nor desire a blind, implicit deference to
any thing which I say, even from the young; but aim at giving you rational
conviction: Without which there can be no religion, whether in principle or
practice, becoming reasonable creatures; nor, consequently, any thing that
deserves the name of christian sobriety, either in the young or the old.

4. THESE arguments will have a primary respect to those persons, that are not
yet sober-minded; being designed and adapted both to awaken and to encourage
such; to show them, on one hand, the fatal consequences of persevering in their
sinful courses; and on the other, the reasonableness, and many advantages of
sobriety. But,

5. THOUGH the following considerations will be chiefly adapted to the state of
the vicious; yet they may be of use to all those persons, whether old or young,
that are already sober-minded; by confirming them in the faith and practice of
religion; by encouraging them to "go on unto perfection;" and showing them the
danger, either of a total or partial decline from "the right ways of the Lord."
It is hoped, there are some of the young amongst us, that are truly
sober-minded; who may yet greatly need encouragement and confirmation in the
faith, and in the continued practice of their duty. Neither would I have it
supposed, that I conclude there are none such, because I address myself more
especially to those unhappy young men that are, or may be, of a contrary
character.

THESE things being premised, my young brethren, what I would first of all
propose to your consideration, is,

I. THAT this sobriety, considered in one entire view as it has been explained,
is a most reasonable thing. Reason is a noble prerogative which God has given
you; whereby you are distinguished from the fowls of heaven, and from the beast
of the field; from the horse and mule which have no understanding. It should,
therefore, be your ambition, an ambition truly laudable, to act up to your
rational character in all respects; and never to degrade or dishonor
yourselves, by a conduct repugnant thereto. This, in general, you will all
readily acknowledge. And, to apply it to the grand point in view; what is
there, -- what can there be, so reasonable, as that you should be sober-minded,
or truly religious? This is the sum of human reason, of human wisdom, reduced
to practice: For which cause, in the writings of Solomon, wisdom is only
another name for religion, or sobriety; and folly, only another name for
irreligion and vice. There is nothing that deserves the title of wisdom, in
comparison of the former, which so much excels every thing else that passes
under the same name; -- nothing which deserves the title of folly, in
comparison of the latter, which so much surpasses all other folly. So the wise
man explains himself, when he says, "the foolishness of fools is folly;" i. e.
the folly of irreligious, wicked men, is emphatically folly, the greatest that
can be conceived of: All other folly is a kind of wisdom, in comparison of
this. On the other hand, all other pretended wisdom is but folly, in comparison
of knowing God and keeping his commandments.

NONE, certainly, but a fool, can say in his heart, "There is no God." And if
there be a God, the Creator and Lord of all, perfect in power, wisdom,
righteousness, etc. is it not evidently a most reasonable thing to love,
reverence, honor, trust in and obey him, even with all the heart, soul,
strength and mind? What greater folly, what surer mark of insanity can there
possibly be, than to contemn or disregard, to affront and disobey the only
living and true God? Will you abuse language so much, as to call any One that
does so, a reasonable and wise man! Moreover: If Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
came into this world to enlighten, to redeem and save it, according to the
scripture-account, of which there is rational, conclusive, abundant evidence;
then, certainly, you are bound in reason to believe in him; to respect and
honor him in the high relation of a "mediator between God and men;" to submit
yourselves to his teaching and authority, to believe his words, to trust in
him, and to obey all the laws of his kingdom, or the commandments of God as
promulgated by him, in the name, and by the authority of the Father. What can
be more, I will not now say, wicked and impious, but more irrational and
foolish, than either to reject those many "infallible proofs," which there are
of Christ's divine mission, and the truth of his gospel, or to despise him, and
to disobey his commandments, which are so holy just and good?

THERE are, comparatively speaking, but few things required of you as duties,
in and by the gospel, but what even the light of nature shows to be such; but
few things forbidden as sinful thereby, but what even your own reason and
consciences might tell you, are wrong and criminal. This is true of all the
moral precepts and prohibitions of the gospel; which are far the greater part.
The reasonableness of these, considered in their own nature, independently of
any revelation, is obvious to those who will duly attend to them.

As to the other commandments of the gospel, which do not belong to the head of
moral precepts; the things required or forbidden in them, are mostly such as
have a close and immediate connection with the truth of Christianity
speculatively considered; or with the doctrine concerning Jesus Christ, the
redemption of the world by him, his resurrection, ascension into heaven, the
power committed to him by the Father, and his future coming in glory to judge
the world. So that if this scriptural account of things is true, as it most
certainly is, the reasonableness and fitness of what is required in the gospel
in consequence of, and as grounded upon them, is plain and undeniable. If there
are any exceptions, they must be those two positive institutions of the gospel,
baptism and the Lord's supper. For as to public social worship in general; the
reasonableness thereof has been acknowledged by all civilized nations; None but
an athiest, or mere savage, can even doubt the propriety of it. And as to those
two positive precepts; to say the least, there is nothing absurd, nothing
irrational in them. Nay, there is an apparent propriety in them, when
considered with relation to their known, declared ends: One of them, baptism,
as a visible sign of our dedication to God in Christ, and both an emblem and
means of that death to sin, of that newness of life, and that moral purity, to
which we are called by the gospel, "through sanctification of the spirit unto
obedience;" from whence it is called, in this epistle to Titus, "the washing of
regeneration," and joined with the "renewing of the Holy Ghost." Chap. III. 5.
The other of these institutions, the Lord's Supper, is a commemorative rite of
that most wonderful and interesting event, the death of the Son of God upon the
cross, in human flesh, for the salvation of sinful men: And it is, at the same
time, a natural memento, both of the grace of God to us, and of the obligations
which we are under to love and obey him. The Lord's Supper, being considered in
this scriptural light, is evidently a very decent, proper and reasonable
institution; adapted, in its nature, to answer the most excellent moral ends;
such ends as all but athiests must acknowledge to be important; i. e. if
gratitude and love to God, righteousness, charity, purity, and universal
holiness, are of any importance.

IT appears then, my young brethren, That that sobriety of mind to which you
are exhorted, consisting in a due regard to God, to Jesus Christ, and to the
divine commandments, according to the faith and requisitions of the gospel, is,
in the whole of it, highly reasonable; the most rational thing in the world. I
would not, on any account, exhort you to do what is unreasonable in the least
degree; either to believe things without proper evidence of their truth, or to
act absurdly and irrationally in any other respect. To believe God's word and
to keep it, is, surely, neither of these. There is abundant proof of whatsoever
you are exhorted to receive as religious truth: And that pious, holy and
virtuous life, to which you are called, is the most fit, decent and rational
life, that any man on earth can lead. Neither can you reject the gospel, or
live a life of impiety, sin and vice, without contradicting, in the most
disgraceful, the most dishonorable manner, that reason which God has given you,
and on which you may justly value yourselves. I shall therefore close this head
of exhortation, with the words of the apostle Paul: I beseech you therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is your REASONABLE SERVICE.
Romans XII. 1.


II. THE far greater part of you, if not all, have, through the goodness of God,
been favored with a virtuous and religious education. You have, even from your
childhood, been instructed in the great and fundamental principles of religion,
both natural and revealed. I might say to you as the apostle did to Timothy,
then a young man, that from children you have known the holy scriptures, which
are able to make you WISE unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus; -- those scriptures which, having been given by inspiration of God, are
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that you might be perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good
works. Having been dedicated to God in your baptism, you were early taught to
read these instructive, sacred pages, according to the laudable practice of
this country; receiving at once, or together, the first lessons of piety and of
human literature. You have also, probably, often heard the sacred oracles read
in the families in which you were brought up, in the schools which you
frequented, and in the house of God. You have had the principal doctrines and
duties pertaining to godly sobriety, often incultated upon you by your parents,
your schoolmasters and your ministers, in private and in public. You have had
line upon line, and precept upon precept. I may add, that many of you at least,
have had virtuous and good examples set before you; -- examples of godliness
and christian sobriety, in the families in which you were brought up.

Now these are great favors in providence, by which you are laid under some
special obligations to be sober-minded, in addition to those which arise from
the reasonableness of the thing itself, in its own nature. Your guilt will of
consequence be greatly aggravated, if you should not know God and Jesus Christ;
if you should not remember your Creator, honor, love and obey him, after having
been thus instructed, admonished, and trained up in the way that you should go,
from your early childhood. Those unhappy persons who were born and brought up
in places, where the light of the gospel does not shine, or at best shines but
with faint, broken, and just-glimmering rays; -- where they have had far less
and fewer advantages for knowing and doing their duty, than you have enjoyed;
(which is the case of much the greater part of the young men now in the
christian world:) Such persons as these, I say, though really inexcusable if
they are not sober-minded, are yet far less criminal, less culpable in the
sight of God and man, than you will be, should you continue in the practice of
vice and folly, after having enjoyed these superior religious advantages. I
pretend to no peculiar sagacity or penetration: But I know so much of the human
heart, and the power of natural conscience, that I scruple not to say
positively, That that faithful witness for God which is in you, testifies to
the truth and justice of what I here say, if you lend me so much of your
attention, as barely to understand it.

YOU know, my beloved young brethren, and cannot but know, that you are laid
under peculiar, and very strong obligations to sobriety, by the advantages of
your birth, childhood and youth, beforementioned; and that your guilt will be
proportionably aggravated in the sight of God, to whom all hearts are open, and
by whom all actions, with their particular circumstances, are weighed in an
equal balance, if instead of being sober-minded, you should persevere in vice
and impiety. Let me therefore exhort you seriously to consider of this matter;
not only while you are here present before God, but after you are gone from his
house. If you duly reflect upon these privileges of your birth and education,
and having the things which belong to your peace, so early and frequently
inculcated upon you; it cannot but have some good influence upon your minds,
and future behavior. And, for your warning not to contemn and disregard these
things, let me remind you of the sad and shameful confession of a foolish,
heedless and obstinate young man; with which I close the present argument. It
runs thus: How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? and
have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me! Prove. Chap. IV.


III. IF you reflect upon the goodness of God to you in your daily
preservation, or in the course of his common providence; this will have a
tendency to make you sober-minded. The goodness of God, even in this view of
it, ought to lead you to repentance; which is the principal end thereof. Ever
since you were so fearfully and wonderfully made by him in the womb, and from
your birth to the present time, you have been cast upon him as your guardian,
your support, your friend, your Father. He has daily loaded you with his
benefits, and crowned you with loving kindness and tender mercies. How numerous
are the blessings which he has bestowed upon you? From how many evils and
dangers has he delivered you, during your feeble infant state, in childhood,
and in your riper years?

NOW, God having thus protected, nourished and brought you up as children; may
not heaven and earth well be astonished, if you continue to "rebel against
him," instead of making him that return of gratitude, love and obedience, which
is so justly required of you! This is a plain and very forcible argument: Nor
can it fail to have great weight in your minds, if there is any gratitude and
ingenuity in them. But as this is a very common argument, I will not enlarge
upon it; but close it by reminding you of a solemn expostulation of the
apostle, relative to the point -- Despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
forbearance and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath --! Romans Chapter 11.


IV. NOTWITHSTANDING the goodness and kindness of God to you, in the common
course of his providence, it is likely that he has often reproved, warned and
corrected you, by the visitations of that same wise and good providence; -- by
sickness, by the death of parents, or near relations, friends and companions;
or by other afflictive and grievous dispensations. Now all these things are to
be considered as kind chastenings and admonitions to you; designed in
providence to awaken you to serious reflection, and as one means of begetting in
you that true wisdom and sobriety, to which you are exhorted. And will you
"despise the chastening of the Lord?" This were, in some respects, an evidence
of greater stubborness and hardness of heart, than despising the more obvious
effects of his goodness: I say, the more obvious effects of it; because these
are as truly the effects of divine goodness, as any known and acknowledged
blessings. You have had fathers of your flesh, to whom you gave reverence when
they corrected you: Should you not much rather give reverence, and be in
subjection to the Father of your spirits, under his correcting hand, that you
may live? They, possibly, sometimes corrected you after their own pleasure, to
gratify a sudden, transient resentment, rather than with a truly parental
kindness, that you might become the wiser and happier thereby. But when God
corrects his children, his offspring, it is always kindly meant for their
profit; that they may be taught to fear and obey him; that they may become
partakers of his holiness, and made wise unto salvation.

HOW highly culpable will you then be, if you refuse to "hear the rod and him
that appointed it?" -- if you despise, not only the goodness of God in the
common preservation and bounties of his providence, but in the corrective
visitations of it; and will not learn righteousness and sobriety thereby; but
go on hardening your hearts against the fear of the Almighty! Let me close this
head of exhortation therefore, with the words of Solomon -- He that being often
reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. Prove. XXIX. 1.


V. IT is probable that most, or all of you, in certain seasons of danger and
distress, when you apprehended death was not far from you, have had your
consciences greatly alarmed. On these occasions your foolish and sinful courses
have probably been brought to your remembrance, so as to fill you with anxiety
and guilty fears. At these times you have doubtless had your hearts and eyes
turned to God, if you dared to look up to him, in importunate desires and
prayers for mercy and preservation; accompanied with secret promises and solemn
vows of amendment, and of devoting yourselves to the service of God, if you
might be spared a while longer. I believe there are, comparatively, but few
persons, old or young, especially amongst those who have been religiously
educated, but what have had experience of such seasons of distress, awakening
and fear; and of such workings of conscience, such vows and good resolutions at
those times.

FOR example: People are generally thus alarmed in times of contagious and
mortal sickness; when they see their friends and acquaintance carried away "as
with a flood," and especially when they themselves are, by sickness, brought
"nigh unto death." Such reflections as the abovementioned, are usually
awakened in vicious persons, on these occasions. They that are, by their
office, called often to the beds of the sick, as their advisers and comforters,
have frequent opportunities, without being inquisitive, to be informed of their
true sentiments in these serious hours. And the sentiments usually expressed at
such times by wicked men, and not uncommonly even by the good, correspond to
those words of the psalmist in his sickness: -- Surely, every man is vanity. --
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace from my
tears -- O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no
more. They also that go down to the sea in ships, that do business on the
mighty waters, and are acquainted with the perils attending that way of life,
know the fears and distresses often occasioned thereby. They are described in
one of the psalms, thus -- "The Lord commands, and raises up the stormy
wind, which lifts up the waves -- They mount up to the heavens, they go down
to the depths; their soul is melted because of trouble -- and they are at their
wit's end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble." -- There are
sometimes also storms, tempests and perils by land, as well as on the seas, at
which most people are greatly alarmed; and have their thoughts and desires
turned for a time, toward God and religion, in prayers, vows and pious
resolutions. Earthquakes are almost universally terrifying; and we all in
general know the sentiments of people on these occasions, by repeated
observation and experience. There are also the dangers of war; and many others,
which are common in the course of human life. On all which occasions, the
generality of people are in a degree of perturbation and fear; imploring the
divine preservation, and making suchlike promises and resolutions as have been
mentioned.

NOW, let me ask you several serious questions, my young brethren, relative to
these times of danger, fear and anxiety. In the first place then, have you not
had experience of such seasons yourselves? -- if not of all, yet at least of
some of them? And were not your sentiments on these occasions, such in general
as have been mentioned? Were not your consciences troubled within you? Did you
not greatly fear death, and the consequences of it? Did you not, at least
silently, implore God's sparing mercy, with vows of eternal gratitude and
obedience to him? Taking this for granted, let me ask again; Must you not even
now acknowledge, that those were reasonable reflections; and that, in general,
you had just cause for them? Were they not the result, the dictates of nature,
and of sound reason, though not the effect of long premeditation? Or do you now
consider them all as weak, childish fancies, and superstitious imaginations?
You cannot think them so, unless you suppose that all thoughts of God,
religion, virtue and vice, and of future rewards and punishments, are also
childish, superstitious fancies. I have too good an opinion of you, to suspect
the latter; and must therefore conclude, that you suppose you had some proper
ground for such apprehensions as those mentioned. Let me then ask you again,
Whether God was not kind and gracious to you, in hearing your cries at those
times, and saving you from these dangers? Have not many of you reason to think,
that if you had then been taken out of this world, according to your fears, you
would now have been miserable in another? And do you not think, that you ought
forever to bear in remembrance, both those perils, and these mercies and
deliverances; together with your vows and good resolutions, so as to fulfill
them, by living soberly, righteously and godly in the world? If you should
forget or break these promises and vows, or continue to live unmindful of God
and your duty, would not this be a great aggravation of your guilt? Or, though
you should be thus forgetful and ungrateful; yet do you not suppose that God
remembers these things, to call you to an account another day? And if he should
do so, what excuse, what apology, what tolerable plea could you make for
yourselves?

THESE, my young brethren, are indeed serious questions; but they are not
superstitious or fanciful ones: Neither can they be thought so by any,
excepting those who are so hardened in infidelity and vice, as to conceit that
every thing which is grave and serious, or which supposes the truth of
religion, ought to be discarded under the name of superstition -- Know then,
that your vows and promises are upon record in heaven! Be assured also, that
your sinful and ungrateful violations of them are so likewise; and will never
be erased without repentance and reformation, -- except, perhaps, when your
"names are blotted out of the book of life," and "from under heaven!" O then,
forget not the day of your calamity; forget not your vows; forget not the
sparing mercy of God to you; lest another time of distress and anguish should
come upon you even "as a whirlwind;" when though you shall call upon him, he will
not answer! -- I shall close this head of exhortation, by reminding you of the
conduct of the royal psalmist; his grateful remembrance of God's favors in
times of trouble, and of his own vows therein: An example worthy of your sober
attention and imitation -- "The sorrows of death compassed me," says he, "and
the pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow. Then called I
upon the name of the Lord -- O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul! Gracious
is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful -- I was brought low, and
he helped me. Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee. For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes
from tears, and my feet from falling. I will walk before the Lord in the land
of the living -- I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all
his people." And again, in another psalm: "I will pay thee my vows which my
lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble. I will offer
unto thee burnt-sacrifices," etc.

VI. THE peace of your own minds, which is far more desirable than any earthly
enjoyments, essentially depends upon the sobriety of them; or, in other words,
it depends upon your being truly wise and virtuous, and living such an holy,
reasonable life as I am recommending to you. There is no other life agreeable
to the superior, and most excellent part of human nature; none that yields such
solid satisfaction to the mind, -- the principal, the only seat of rational
happiness. Any other kind of life, i. e. any sinful, profligate one, must be
unhappy, because irrational; because it is contrary to the light and dictates
of the mind, or to natural conscience. Pride, envy, malice, covetousness, and
all other vicious passions, are in their own nature destructive of human
felicity: They at once pollute, poison and torment the soul. And besides: No
man, unless you suppose him a right down atheist, such an one as is hardly to
be found in the world, or a person quite stupefied and abandoned, can lead an
impious, vicious life, without being self-condemned; -- without having his own
reason and conscience against him, and being, sometimes at least, under
apprehensions of the just and awful displeasure of the Almighty. All men in
general, especially those that have been educated in the belief of the
christian revelation, have their serious hours; -- their times of reflection, in
which they cannot, if they would, avoid thinking of God and their own ways; of
their duty, and what the habitual violation of it must terminate in at last. No
man can live always in a frolic; or in such an uninterrupted course, either of
worldly business, or of pleasures and amusements, that grave and serious
thoughts will not at times force themselves upon him. And whenever they do so,
then the wicked man knows, and feels himself to be, what he actually is, a
wretch; a self-accused, self-condemned criminal, presaging in his conscience, a
light which "lighteneth every man that comes into the world," his future
condemnation at an higher tribunal. So that even in the midst of jollity,
laughter and criminal indulgences, the heart of such men is often sorrowful,
whether you a see sudden gloom appearing upon their faces, or not. How wretched
are they then, at other times!

CONSIDER then, the unhappy state of such a man; of One, whose only refuge from
conscious shame and dishonor, from guilty fears and anxiety, is in business,
diversions or sleep; -- in flying from thought, in flying as it were from
himself! Which yet he cannot always do so effectually, but that trouble will
pursue him from business to the banquet, to places of riot and guilty pleasure:
Nor will it leave even his sleep unmolested. For when he says, "My bed shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint;" then he is "scared with dreams,
and terrified with visions." Job. Chap. VII.
But consider, more especially, the miserable condition of such a man in times
of adversity and danger; such as were spoken of under the preceding head: When
he is forced more directly upon serious reflections on life and death, on
another world, and a judgment to come. Where is then his refuge, his support,
his confidence and "strong tower"? At these times he can no longer cheat and
delude himself by business or diversions, into an imaginary happiness: The
fool's paradise then vanishes quite away. Shall he therefore, when he is no
longer permitted to enjoy this, console himself with the thoughts of God and
his providence; and, "in the multitude of his thoughts within him," have his
"soul delighted with these divine comforts"? Alas! these reflections are
commonly the most dispiriting, the most gloomy and tormenting of any, to a
wicked man in adversity; they are themselves the principal source of his
distress. So that putting wicked men upon such a method to get comfort, is much
like comforting a self-condemned malefactor in prison, by reminding him of his
approaching trial, and the equity of his judge! When Paul preached of
righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, the guilty Faelix, even in the
height of his prosperity and glory, trembled on his tribunal before his poor
prisoner. This shows the great power of natural conscience; and, how truly
wretched and miserable those persons are, who live in the practice of known sin
and vice, whatever pains they may take, and how artful soever they may be to
disguise it. So that these observations of the prophet, are founded in nature
and experience, and are maxims of eternal truth -- The wicked are like the
troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked!

CONSIDER now, on the other hand, the inward peace and happiness, which
naturally attend sobriety, or the belief and practice of true religion,
according to the "glorious gospel of the blessed God." A sincere christian's
reason and conscience are his friends and advocates; approving and justifying
his general course of life to himself. He has the testimony of a good
conscience; and the consequence hereof is, that he considers God himself as his
friend. For "if our own heart condemn us not," says the apostle John, "then
have we confidence toward God." And the apostle Paul, "Our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world." The sincere believer, or real christian, has "strong consolation,"
even "all joy and peace in believing." His hopes, like the wise man's house,
are founded upon a rock, the "rock of ages;" and will not be beaten down by all
the rains and floods, the winds and storms of adversity; though they may
sometimes be shaken.

SUCH hope in God, as is the natural consequence of a sober mind resting itself
on the divine promises; or, of pure and undefiled religion: Such hope in God, I
say, at once heightens all the joyful scenes and occurents of human life, and
brightens every gloomy one. Great peace have they that love, -- that sincerely
love the law of God, and nothing shall offend them: "The work of righteousness
shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance
forever." Be assured that our blessed Savior did not delude or amuse his
disciples with a fallacious promise, and the expectation of an imaginary,
fanciful or unsolid happiness, when he said, "Peace I leave with you, my peace
I give unto you: Not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let not your heart
be troubled, neither let it be afraid." And again: "If ye love me, keep my
commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth -- I
will not leave you comfortless,." -- These promises like him that made them,
are faithful and true: And whoever will make the experiment, by an hearty,
unreserved dedication of himself to the service of God in Christ, shall find
them so; although it once appeared a mystery even to one of the apostles, "how
our Lord would manifest himself to them, and not unto the world." John XIV. 22.
Though a steadfast adherence to the doctrines and precepts of Christ, in
opposition either to Pagannism, Judaism, or the Antichristian corrupters of the
gospel, may sometimes be the occasion of outward trials and afflictions; yet
those who have had the honesty and fortitude of mind to stand these trials,
have, in no time or age, found themselves forsaken of God: But could say
experimentally with the great apostle -- Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort; who
comfort us in all our tribulation -- For as the sufferings of Christ abound
in us, so our consolation abounds by Christ. 2 Cor. 1, 3, 4, 5.


LET me therefore exhort you to be sober-minded, by these very weighty
considerations: That this is the way to enjoy true peace of mind, and a
substantial happiness in this world, whatever crosses, disappointments and
outward afflictions you may meet with: And, on the other hand, that if you
continue in the practice of folly and wickedness, you will be full of
disquietude within, and truly wretched whenever you dare to reflect on your
state, whatever outward prosperity may attend you. I will accordingly close
this head of argument, by reminding you of the words of the royal psalmist --
There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness into my heart, more than in
the time that their corn and their wine increased. I will both lay me down in
peace, and sleep: For thou, Lord, only make me dwell in safety. Psalm IV. End.


VII. As by being sober-minded, or truly religious, you will best secure inward
peace and comfort; so you will also best consult your credit and reputation in
the world; at least in the opinion of those, whose judgment is most worthy of
regard: I mean, all truly wise and good men; all who are of a sound mind
themselves. "The righteous is more excellent," and therefore more honorable
also, "than his [unrighteous] neighbor:" He is so in reason and nature; he is
so likewise in the estimation of all reasonable and good men. For it is one
characteristic of a citizen of Zion, that "in his eyes a vile [or wicked]
person is contemned; but he honors them that fear the Lord."

THIS is not, indeed, an argument of so great weight, as those which have been
mentioned before, and as others which are to be mentioned hereafter: And
people, as is well known, may be far too desirous of "that honor that comes
from men." But yet this is in itself a rational motive, and often used as such
in the holy scriptures. You ought, doubtless, to have some concern for your
reputation amongst men, though always in subordination to the "honor that comes
from God." For "a good name is better than precious ointment." This is of real
importance to all men in general, and particularly to young men just setting
out in the world. Their present interest depends very much, and sometimes
chiefly, upon their character. A young man who has no sense of shame, or no
regard for his own honor and reputation, is in a fair way, not only for
universal contempt, but ruin. And, as was said before, sobriety of mind and
manners is, according to the established course of things, the most effectual
means of securing a good name amongst men.

BUT you will say, perhaps, "However excellent a thing religion may be in
itself; however worthy of honor, and how much soever some persons may extol it;
yet the greater part of mankind, and those with whom One must be chiefly
concerned, are foolish and vicious. They do not esteem a person the more, some
of them the less, on account of his sobriety. Many will rather ridicule and
scoff at him, than honor, speak well of or befriend him, for his religion and
virtue." To strengthen your objection against my present argument, you may
possibly add, "That even some kings, governors and governments, after issuing
proclamations for the encouragement of piety and virtue, with assurances of
showing the most countenance, and giving the preference to those persons, who
should be found to practice them; and of discountenancing those of a contrary
character, have, in many instances, notoriously disappointed the public
expectation by a contrary conduct; by courting, caressing and preferring the
most vicious, worthless and sordid, and frowning upon, or at best neglecting,
men of known virtue and sobriety."

THIS is a pretty heavy charge upon the world: But as it naturally occurs by
way of objection to what was before asserted, I shall consider, and endeavor
to invalidate it, as far as is consistent with truth and justice, or, without
"speaking wickedly for God." The following observations, I imagine, will show
that this objection has much less weight in it than you may think; and leaves
my argument all the force that it was supposed to have.

1. IT must be allowed that piety and virtue are far from being honored so
much in the world, as they ought in reason to be. But put the matter upon the
worst supposition that can be made: -- Suppose that those who honor religion in
their hearts, or think the better of the virtuous and sober for being so, are
very few in comparison of those who inwardly despise both: Yet, upon this most
unfavourable supposition, let me ask, Which is the most to be desired, the
approbation and esteem of the few wise and knowing, who judge of things
according to nature, truth and propriety; or that of a vast multitude of fools
and madmen, who are really ignorant what true worth, excellency and honor
consist in? If you were painters, statuaries or architects; if you were poets,
musicians or orators; and not riches, but reputation was your principal end,
would you not be ambitious of pleasing the best judges, the greatest masters in
these noble arts, rather than vast ignorant multitudes, who had neither skill,
taste nor judgment in them? And so in all other arts and professions, if you
had a view to reputation only, not gain? Doubtless you would. The application
of this to the point in hand, is easy. If there were but three, two, nay, but
one wise and good man in the world; but one who distinguished rightly betwixt
persons or characters, and honored virtue and sobriety, you ought in reason to
covet the approbation and esteem of that one man, more than that of the whole
ignorant and wicked world beside: Especially when you reflect, that his
judgment is ratified in heaven, by Him that has said, Them that honor me, I
will honor; and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. But,

2. THE supposition here made, is very injurious to the world. For there are
great numbers of people in all christian and protestant countries, and
particularly in our own, who are sincere lovers of virtue and religion; and who
accordingly esteem those that practice them, far more than they do the vicious,
profane and dissolute. The proportion which the good bear to others, in point
of number, cannot be determined: But, that it is very considerable, cannot be
denied without great uncharitableness. And if you are sober-minded, you may
depend upon the esteem of these in general, so far as you and your characters
are known to them. All the truly virtuous and good, esteem and honor persons of
the same character, as such. And whenever it seems to be otherwise, it is
because they do not know them to be such; but are under a mistake as to their
character, either because of some particular opinions which they may hold, that
are supposed to be inconsistent with piety, or on some other account. But these
cases being excepted, which are very rare amongst the truly wise and sober; all
good men in general actually love and honor one another. If they ever dislike
each other, it is not, considered under their real characters as virtuous and
pious, but their mistaken characters as vicious or impious, that they do so.

3. THERE are many more people who honor virtue in others, than practice it
themselves. By what I have read and observed, there is a very general regard
paid to religion and virtue, even by vicious men. There is a witness for God
and religion in the breasts of very wicked persons; which causes them, in some
measure, to esteem and reverence that virtue in others, which they have not the
resolution and integrity to practice. Besides: Their own interest, which, you
may besure they love and regard, naturally leads them, some particular cases
being excepted, to form connexions, at least in affairs of commerce and
business, with the sober, honest and virtuous, who, they know, will not wrong
and deceive them; rather than with persons of openly profligate, or suspected
morals. Even knaves cannot ordinarily trust knaves with their interest; but
they can and do, much oftener and more freely, trust men of approved virtue and
integrity with it. When good men are despised or disliked by the bad, it is
generally, if not always owing to one or other of the causes following. Some
good men are, perhaps, of unpopular sentiments in religion; and hypocritical
zealots for the established orthodoxy in any country, may dislike them merely
on that account. Other good men may have a tincture of superstition, enthusiasm
or sourness; or they may have some personal oddities, singularities, or an
uncouth behavior; some disagreeable appendages of their religion, or some
natural imperfections attending them in a degree that is not common. Either of
these things may create a dislike, and kind of aversion to them, even in the
minds of those, who at the same time cannot but esteem them, considered as men
of sincere piety and virtue, or stripped of those blemishes and imperfections.
It must farther be allowed, that bad men, whether in high or low stations, may
occasionally have an aversion to the wise and honest, considered as standing in
opposition to their unrighteous, ambitious and avaritious designs. In which
cases, however, it is more properly said, that they have an inordinate and
criminal love to their interest, or to power and worldly honors, than that they
have any real dislike to those good men, considered as such: For they rather
esteem them in their hearts, even while they would be glad to have them out of
their way. Thus also bad men, whether of high or low degree, may occasionally
have some dirty jobs, and wicked work to do, in which none will serve them,
except dirty, lying, "lewd fellows of the baser sort;" whom they caress for
that very end, while they frown upon, and keep at a distance from, honest men:
Not because they inwardly esteem the former, or dislike the latter, as such.
For those they still despise, while they employ them in such work, and these
they honor in their hearts, though they will not do, but rather obstruct it. As
profane and vicious as the world is, there are in fact but very few, if any
persons in it, so abandoned as to hate or despise a good and virtuous man, only
for being so; nay, as not to have an inward esteem for him, and a secret
contempt for those that are of profligate principles and morals: So that if you
are truly pious and virtuous; especially if your religion is open and manly,
free from superstition, sourness and enthusiasm, and from any great
singularities and oddities, you may depend, not only upon the respect and
esteem of all the wise and virtuous in general, but also upon that of the
foolish and vicious, with a very few exceptions, Whereas, on the other hand, if
you are vicious and profligate, you may be assured that you will be secretly
despised, not only by the good, but even by the generality of the wicked
themselves.

4. AS to what was said in the objection, about men of bad morals being
countenanced in some countries, while the virtuous and good have been
neglected, after public edicts or proclamations which gave reason to expect the
contrary; this is easily to be accounted for upon the principles laid down
above -- Either the true characters of these persons respectively, were not
known; or else the promoters of the former, and neglecters of the latter, had
some particular sinister and dishonorable ends to answer by such a conduct;
which has doubtless sometimes been the case -- But, by the way, there cannot be
a clearer testimony given to the esteem and honor that are actually due to
religion, in the opinion of the world, or of that dis-approbation and contempt
which are due to vice, than such public acts, edicts or proclamations for the
encouragement of the former, and for discountenancing the latter; how often
soever the world has been deceived in past ages, by the honorable, excellent
and royal AUTHORS of them -- Though in all governments, other circumstances being
alike, those persons who were supposed to be the wisest and best, have in
general actually had the preference given them, in all ages.

5. ANOTHER undeniable proof of the general esteem there is in the world for
virtue and religion, is hypocrisy. How many persons, though wholly destitute of
the reality, "the power," yet put on the "form of godliness," merely for the
sake of their credit and reputation in the world? If an homely bird decks
herself out in the rich plumage of the peacock, it is doubtless in order to
make a better appearance in the eyes of spectators, than she could in her own
-- Wicked men know, that if they appear in their own proper colors, they must
be contemned, if not shunned and detested by most people; even by those that
are in the same "cage of unclean and hateful birds" Rev. XVIII. 2.
with them. They therefore dissemble, turn impostors, and adorn themselves, if
I may so express it, with the feathers, and more respectable plumage of
religious, honest men; that they may enjoy at once the reputation of religion,
and the imaginary gains and advantages of unrighteousness. There would be no
occasion for hypocrisy, and therefore no hypocrites, if wicked and profligate
men were generally as much esteemed and honored as the good; any more than
there would be counterfeit coin, if there were none genuine, that was commonly
valued, and that passed current in the world. So that hypocrisy itself, that
odious sin, is, in some sort a standing witness for God and religion, in all
ages and countries; as well as a proof of the general esteem there is for
virtue, how little soever there may be of the practice. It is a tacit
confession of the superior excellency and honor of true religion; and that vice
cannot well keep itself in countenance, even in this wicked world, without
putting on some appearance of virtue. And if vice avails herself thus of the
credit of religion; yet she does homage to her for it, though unwillingly. For
hypocrisy is a kind of tribute which the former, with an awkward and shameful
reluctance, pays to the latter, her acknowledged superior, from one generation
to another, in all ages and all nations.

6. WHY do you, my young brethren --? -- No, I will not say, You -- But, why do
the vicious and profligate choose secresy and darkness, as the fittest occasions
for perpetrating their crimes? Why are they that are drunken, usually "drunken
in the night," rather than in the day? Why does "the eye of the adulterer wait
for the twilight?" Why does that of the thief and assassin commonly do the
same? In a word, why do vicious men in general choose to sin in secret, rather
than openly; and, as far as may be, to conceal their vices from the world,
unless it is, because they know the world in general dislikes vice, and esteems
virtue; if not practically, yet in opinion?

7. DID you ever know any person that was addicted to slander and defamation,
pretend to reproach another, by accusing him of loving or fearing God; -- of
honoring Jesus Christ, and keeping his commandments; -- of observing his own
promises, and speaking nothing but truth; -- of loving his neighbor as
himself, and of being honest, sober and virtuous in his whole conversation? --
They that deal in defamation, understand their wicked art, and the sentiments
of the world, much better than to say these things of any One by way of
reproach; which they know would be the highest praise and commendation.

8. TO put this matter at once in the fairest and strongest light, let me ask
you the following question -- Suppose you had some mortal enemy, whom you would
be glad to ruin; and particularly, whom you desired to see despised and
detested by mankind in general; which do you think would contribute the most
effectually to this end, -- to represent him as a wicked and impious, a
vicious, faithless, debauched and profligate person; -- One that neither feared
God, nor regarded man: Or, as One that was truly pious and sober, upright and
virtuous; -- in a word, a sincere christian both in principle and practice? If
you were determined to hurt your enemy's reputation as much as you could; if
you were under no checks or restraints of conscience, and if you were sure to
be believed by the world, in whatever you said of him, which of these two very
opposite characters would you give the hated person? -- You can be at no loss
for an answer to so plain a question: And that very answer, which you have now
in your minds, shows that you are sensible, the world in general esteems
virtuous and religious men, and contemns and abhors those that are profligately
wicked. You know that even the bad in general, much prefer, in their judgment
and esteem, the former to the latter: Though even the good are often under a kind
of necessity of keeping in, having close connexions with, and courting the
vicious; -- sometimes, perhaps, for valuable public ends; but probably oftener,
for private advantage, or for fear of mischief from such persons; as our
American Indians are said formerly to have worshipped the devil. An unhappy
situation! How are they to be pitied, who have some real love to virtue; and
yet are obliged, as it were, to caress the profligate, on account of their
riches, power, and that influence which they often have in the affairs of this
foolish, corrupt and wicked world? --

I CANNOT but make this one short reflection on the foregoing observations, viz.
That from them it plainly appears, that vicious men, more especially under the
light of the gospel, are all in general self-condemned; inasmuch as they cannot
but acknowledge and approve the right, in their own judgment and consciences,
as honorable and praiseworthy; and yet habitually do the wrong, from an evil
propensity in their natures. To allude to the words of the apostle, they
consent to the law of God, that is holy, just, good and spiritual; but still
themselves are "carnal, sold under sin," as bond-servants and slaves to it;
whose tyrannical dictates they obey, contrary to the light and law of the mind.
For that which they do, they allow not; neither do they do that good, to which
they have some faint desire; but what they do in a sort hate, that they
practice -- O wretched, that they are! Who, or what shall deliver them from the
body of this death, but "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus?"

LET me exhort you, my young brethren, duly to consider those motives to true
religion, which have been mentioned in this discourse. Whatever your corrupt
passions may have to object, I know that I have a powerful party on my side in
your breasts and bosoms; I mean your own conscience, your own reason. To that,
and to God, the source of all reason, light, truth and justice, I have surely a
right to make an appeal from the partial, bribed, blind judgment of passion,
and carnal affections. I accordingly lodge my appeal there, with them: And you
must, whether you will or no, answer, and give an account of yourselves, at
both those tribunals; -- unless you should give up the cause by consenting, as
you are exhorted, "to be sober-minded."

LET me just add, with reference to the last-mentioned argument, as to your
reputation in the world; that this will very much depend upon your behavior in
youth. The character is most commonly formed and established in that season of
life, either as good or bad: And whichever of them it is, it will be of no
small consequence to you in this world, while you are inhabitants of it. A bad
name is often of fatal consequence to a young man just setting out in the
world, as to his interest therein. On the other hand, a good name is rather to
be chosen than great riches, and loving-favor, than silver and gold. A good
character preserves old, and creates new friends; it is at once agreeable and
advantageous in many respects. Allow me then, as One sincerely concerned for
your temporal, as well as eternal good, to exhort you seasonably to take care
of your reputation and honor, by a discrete, sober and virtuous behavior. And
if any of you have unhappily, by former miscarriages, brought disgrace upon
yourselves; lose no time, but immediately endeavor to retrieve your
characters, by making it manifest that you have seen your errors, and are
reformed.

THE world is candid enough to make some considerable allowances for the errors
of young men, if they are not obstinate in, but speedily reform them. In this
case, their unexperienced, tender age is a powerful advocate for them: It
pleads so eloquently in their behalf, that it never fails to excite compassion,
and to obtain a pardon for them from the world. And, what is of infinitely more
importance to you, if you sincerely repent of, and forsake your evil ways, God
will not remember them against you: He will not be always wroth, neither will
he keep his anger forever. "If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
has committed -- and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live;
he shall not die. All his transgressions that he has committed, they " shall
not be mentioned unto him" -- With God you have a far more powerful advocate
than your youth; -- One whom the Father hears always, even "Jesus Christ the
righteous." But still you ought to plead, still to implore mercy for
yourselves. And I shall conclude this discourse with reminding you of part of a
prayer of the royal psalmist, which you might do well to consider and imitate
-- Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness; for they have
been ever of old. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions:
According to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. -- For
thy name sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great! Psalm XXV.


SERMON. VII.
Young Men exhorted to Sobriety, from other Considerations, viz. (8.) Of their
temporal Advantage. (9.) Of their Usefulness in the World. (10.) Of those
Persons whom they will please hereby. (11.) Of those whom they will gratify by
the contrary. (12.) Of one End of Christ's coming into the World, namely, to
"purify unto himself a peculiar people," etc.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
MY young brethren, in the preceding discourse you were exhorted to be
sober-minded, by diverse considerations and motives, which need not now be
mentioned. I shall therefore, without any repetition, proceed in this
exhortation, by laying before you some other arguments; all, of real, though not
of equal weight: Hoping that, for your own sakes, you will give such an
attention to them, as they may reasonably demand. Wherefore,

VIII. TO be sober-minded will be most for your advantage in this world; most
for the health of your bodies, and for your outward prosperity in all other
respects. How this tends to the peace and comfort of your minds, and also to
your reputation in the world, was shown in the foregoing discourse. And it may
answer a valuable end, if I can now make it appear to you, that your temporal
felicity in other respects, very much depends upon your being truly religious.
Though this is not an argument of the greatest weight; yet it is of considerable
importance, as it may remove some prejudices against religion, arising from a
false supposition, that it is prejudicial to your worldly felicity. And I shall
insist the longer upon this argument, because, as I apprehend, it is not so
frequently and particularly discussed in the pulpit, as might be for the
credit, and thereby for the interest of religion.

BUT you will observe, that when I speak of it as being for your interest to be
sober-minded, in conformity to the principles and precepts of christianity, I
speak with particular reference to the age and country in which you live;
wherein this religion is publicly countenanced, and generally professed. For,
no regard being had to these circumstances, it is supposeable that the belief,
profession and practice of the christian religion, might be very detrimental to
a person's credit and worldly interest, in that sense of them which is here
intended. If you lived in an age and country, wherein the name of Christ was
generally odious, his religion not publicly tolerated, and his disciples, as
such, reproached, persecuted, subjected to the confiscation of goods, to bonds
and imprisonment; or even, wherein they were not allowed the privileges and
liberties common to other subjects; upon this supposition, I say, your godly
and christian sobriety would manifestly tend to hurt your reputation and
interest, instead of promoting them. This was the condition, this the
situation, these the circumstances of christians, for about three hundred years
after Christ; till the days of the Emperor Constantine the Great. The public
voice condemned them as an odious, impious sect; the laws were against them;
their enemies were inveterate, and had all the power in their hands. The
consequence was, that they were denied the common privileges of men; and
"whosoever would live godly in Christ Jesus, suffered persecution" in one or
other, and sometimes many of its hateful forms. Christians, in those sad times,
besides being reproached for the name of Christ, were often called to suffer
the loss of all things; they were haled before kings, governors and other
magistrates; they were imprisoned, thrown into dungeons, stoned, impaled,
crucified, slain with the sword, sawn in sunder; and forced to suffer
unnumber'd indignities and tortures, merely as christians; not accepting
deliverance, on the condition of renouncing the faith, and blaspheming the name
of Christ "that they might obtain a better resurrection." And though the
persecution did not rage against them in the same degree of fury, during the
long period beforementioned; yet in any part thereof, it was apparently
contrary to a man's worldly reputation and interest, to be a christian: As it
may be even at this day, in countries where the laws and people in general, are
against the religion and disciples of Christ; and as it may be for protestants
in roman-catholic countries, or any others called christian, where there is not
a general toleration.

BUT with respect to ourselves, and to this happy country of liberty, the case
is quite otherwise. Christianity is commonly professed; the laws countenance
and support it; the government is in the hands of christians, and christians
enjoy some privileges which others do not. There is here a general liberty and
toleration for all to worship God according to their consciences (not a little
grievous to some particular persons of dark, contracted and grovelling minds.)
And it is in general a very reputable thing amongst us, to be a pious, virtuous
and good man. Now, under these circumstances, I say, and you may easily
perceive, it is most for your worldly interest to be sober-minded; far more so,
in all respects, than it would be to be profligate and impious. Let me more
particularly observe a few things here, in order to set the present argument in
a proper light.

And,

1. AS, in these circumstances, virtue and religion will be a recommendation of
you to the esteem of people, it manifestly tends to your interest in this
respect; I mean, to what is commonly called worldly gain or profit. For people
in general, good and bad, some few cases being excepted, would much rather
trust, and have connexions in business with a sober, honest man, of an
established good character, than with a vicious and profligate one, of a
contrary character. And this evidently tends to a person's interest, whatever
be his station or calling in life; especially when it is considered, that the
wiser and better part, and those who ordinarily have it most in their power to
serve and befriend you, will be more particularly disposed to do so, from real
regard; while others, for their own interest, will rather employ, or have
concerns with an honest main, caeteris paribus, than with one of no religion,
or of bad morals.

2. AS to public posts of honor or emolument, for which some of you, perhaps,
either do, or may in time stand as candidates; it is to be hoped that, all
other circumstances being alike, your known integrity, and good behavior in
life, would be some recommendation of you, and procure a preference. Certainly
it would, under any tolerably wise and good administration of government;
especially in those governments which have a great mixture of the popular form,
and in countries where there are no iniquitous tests; as in our own. Let me
add, that if we have formerly, in certain instances, known persons of infamous
characters preferred to magistracies, or to other honorable and lucrative
offices, to the neglect of virtue and merit; yet I should be extremely loath to
suppose that this is either now a common thing amongst us, or will be so
hereafter.

3. IF we suppose the providence of God governs the world, in the manner
declared in the holy scriptures; those who love and serve him in sincerity,
have much more reason to expect his blessing upon their honest designs and
undertakings, in order to obtain a competency of the good things of this life,
than impious and profligate men have, to hope for his blessing upon their's;
especially upon such designs as are in their nature dishonest and criminal.
This is the least that can be said with reference to what may be expected from
divine providence, in the ordinary course of it, according to very numerous
representations in scripture; which are rather confirmed than contradicted by
experience. Though, as we do not certainly know the hearts of men, and may be
deceived as to their characters; we must needs be very inadequate judges, when
the conduct of providence is, or is not, strictly agreeable to these
representations. And though there may be some exceptions here, as under other
general rules; yet it is not improbable, that these may be much fewer in the
present case, than is commonly supposed. The examples of wicked men prospered
in this world, are indeed very numerous, and indisputable: For God is good to
the unthankful and to the evil. But it is not, neither can it be, so certain to
us on the other hand, that the good are often forsaken, or left destitute by
him. And it is not unworthy of remark, that in that psalm wherein the
prosperity of some wicked men, is set forth more amply than in any other part
of scripture, the inspired psalmist makes the following declaration, so much to
the honor of divine providence: The steps of a good man are ordered by the
Lord; and he delights in his way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast
down: For the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. I have been young, and now am
old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
Psalm XXXVII. 23, 24, 25.


4. IT should be observed, that many of those virtues which belong to the head
of christian sobriety, have, in their very nature, a direct tendency to promote
your temporal interest and happiness. For example; diligence in your worldly
callings, temperance in meat and drink, and a virtuous moderation in other
respects, have a plain, direct tendency to secure and advance your wealth, your
health and ease; and to prolong your lives. In comformity whereto, Solomon says
of wisdom, that "length of days is in her right hand, and in her left, riches
and honor."

On the other hand,

5. MOST of those vices and excesses, which are repugnant to sobriety, have as
direct and apparent a tendency to prejudice your worldly interest and
happiness. For is not this evidently true of idleness, intemperance, pride and
luxury -- of wasting your time, and squandering away your money in riotous
living, in leudness and debauchery, in the fopperies of dress, in frequent and
expensive diversions, and the like? These are all costly and impoverishing
vices: And some of them are as prejudicial to the health of your bodies, as
they are to your purses and your souls. How many sad examples have there been
of people, particularly of young men, that have, by these and suchlike follies
and excesses, absolutely destroyed themselves as to this world? -- their
reputation, their estates, their health, their lives! -- "Be not over much
wicked," says the wise man; "neither be thou foolish: Why should thou die
before thy time?" But when or where did you ever know a young man ruin and
destroy himself by his wisdom or sobriety, his virtue and religion!

6. IF it should be said, that a man has sometimes an opportunity to increase
his riches by dishonest means; -- for example, by lying, perjury, extortion,
taking bribes, theft, fraud, or lawless violence and robbery: And that, if he
foregoes these tempting and precious opportunities for the sake of religion and
a good conscience, his virtue is then prejudicial to his interest: I will not
"speak wickedly for God," by absolutely denying that any man ever did, or can,
increase his wealth by such unjust means: Even our own age and country might
furnish some examples of this kind. But let me make a few queries here. Do you
not think, there are many more people, who hurt their worldly interest in the
end by dishonesty; by losing their credit, character and business, than there
are who prejudice it by a strict adherence to truth and justice, and a steady
perseverance in honest courses? I think this will admit of no doubt: So that
the advantage, upon the whole, is still on the side of virtue and sobriety.
But, admitting that you were absolutely sure, as you cannot be, of bettering
your worldly circumstances in the end, by any iniquitous means; let me next
ask, How much you think it is honestly worth to be a knave; a liar, cheat, or
perjured villain? I conclude, you would not forfeit your honor and conscience
for a very trifling sum, as many have done. For how much then, do you think it
would really be worth while to do it? Even Balaam, who secretly loved the wages
of unrighteousness, could not but say in his calm reflections, when Balak the
King of Moab offered, him a large sum to do a wicked thing -- If Balak would
give me his house-full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment
of the Lord, to do good or bad. Psalm XXIV
-- Now, was this a reasonable reflection, or was it not? You cannot deny it to
be so. And can you hope, by any unrighteous means, to get more than a royal
palace-full of silver and gold? And if you could, yet would not these ungodly
gains be over-ballanced by the uneasy reflections in your own minds? Would not
your real happiness in this world be rather obstructed than promoted, by these
unrighteous, though gainful practices? But such great gains of iniquity and
fraud, as these, are wholly imaginary, unless perhaps, you were kings or
princes, or their chief ministers and favorites, -- If you are dishonest, or
ever so wicked and avaritious; yet you must play at far smaller games than
these. Nay, according to the ordinary, established course of things, interest
is actually on the side of virtue and honesty. Though religion, honor and
conscience were wholly out of the question; yet any common man would run a most
imprudent risque in becoming a knave and villain, with a view to worldly gain.
Almost all persons, except a few great men and their tools, hurt their, in
crest at last, instead of serving it, by injustice and oppression, fraud and
violence. How often do men utterly ruin their credit, and with it, their
temporal interest, by being greedy of gain, and using lawless means to obtain
it? Yea, how often do they hereby procure infamous punishment, with the loss of
all, from the hands of civil justice? and even capital punishment? It is
therefore evident, upon the whole, according to the good old proverb, that
honesty is the best policy; though we confine our views entirely to worldly gain
and profit. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning, says the
wise man, but the end thereof shall not be blessed. -- And again: Envy not the
oppressor, and and choose none of his ways -- The curse of the Lord is in the
house of the wicked: but he blesses the habitation of the just. And God
declares by the prophet Jeremiah, That as the partridge fitteth on eggs, and
hatcheth them not; so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave
them in the midst of his days; and at his end shall be a fool.

7. BUT you will say, perhaps, that giving alms to the poor is one of the
duties of religion; and that this is directly contrary to a person's worldly
interest, and tends to poverty. Let me briefly hint a few things, relative to
this objection. And, first; in giving alms every man is bound in reason to have
some consideration of his own ability, circumstances, real occasions, and the
obligations of justice to his family, and to others. No person, except in some
very uncommon cases, is obliged to give more than he can afford without much
difficulty, or streightning himself; never, more than is consistent with the
obligations which he is under to others in point of justice. In the next place,
if you are industrious, and avoid all foolish, extravagant and sinful expenses,
as religion obliges you to be and do, you may the better afford to give
something to the necessitous sick and poor. A quarter part of what many consume
in their expensive follies and vices, both to the hurt of themselves and
others, might make them tolerable good christians in point of almsgiving, if
employed in that way, from a good principle. Though you should discharge this
christian duty, as far as could in reason be expected of you, yet it would
probably be much less expensive to you than those vices, follies and excesses,
which are common amongst young men: And you would, at the same time, have a
rational and solid satisfaction therein; whereas shame and remorse are the
natural fruits of intemperance and luxury, riot and debauchery. Again: Though
you were wholly destitute of christian sobriety; yet if you had but common
humanity, you would not refuse an alms, once in a while, to a miserable
fellow creature ready to perish with cold or hunger, when it was in your power
to relieve him. So that your being truly religious, and giving alms from a
christian principle, might not, perhaps, be the occasion of any great addition
to your expenses of this sort: I mean, unless you were otherwise to be hardened
to a great degree indeed; so as to be destitute of the common feelings of pity
and compassion, as well as of the love of God. You must get rid of all sympathy
and humanity, and be worse than barbarians; I mean, become misers, if you would
save all expenses of this kind; for, merely being destitute of christianity,
will not answer the end. Moreover; you may reasonably expect the blessing of
God abundantly to make up to you whatever you bestow in discrete and well-timed
charity to the poor, according to his commandments. There are many passages of
scripture, directly to this purpose. I have time to remind you of two or three
only, from the writings of Solomon -- Honor the Lord with thy substance; -- so
shall thy barns be filled with plenty -- He that gives to the poor, lends to
the Lord; and that which he gives, he will surely repay him. And very
observable is the following passage: There is that scatters, and yet
increases: And there is that withholds more than is meet; but it tends to
poverty. The liberal soul shall be made sat; and he that waters, shall also
be watered himself. Prove. XI. 24, 25.
You can then have no reasonable objection against religion, on account of its
tendency to impoverish you in the way of almsgiving: But this objection stands
in great force against irreligion, oppression, uncharitableness, sloth, luxury,
riot, and every kind of vicious excess.

UPON laying together what has been said under this, and some preceding heads
of argument, there is one general, and very important reflection in favor of
religion, which naturally arises. It is this, that as a sober, religious life
is the only reasonable one; so it is by far the happiest, and, in all respects,
the most for your advantage in this world. If you place happiness in having
peace of mind; that has been shown to be the genuine fruit of religion; as
disquietude within, is the invariable consequence of irreligion, vice and
folly. If you place it in reputation, or the good opinion of others; that is
the natural attendant of virtue and sobriety; as contempt and disgrace are of
the contrary. If you place it in bodily health and long life; these are most
effectually promoted by sobriety; as sickness, pains and a premature death, are
the frequent effects of intemperance, and profligate morals. If you place it in
worldly riches; religion and virtue are very friendly to it in this view:
Whereas there are many vices which tend directly to poverty; much more so, than
any one virtue that can be named. These things are not only certain, but
obvious; they lie level to all capacites. And is it not a great recommendation
of religion to your judgment, your reason, that it is the most sure and
effectual means imaginable, same extraordinary cases being excepted, to promote
your temporal felicity in all these respects? -- your peace of mind, your
reputation and honor, your health with length of days, and your interest, in
the most usual sense of this word? This is strict truth, according to the
established course of things, at least in all countries where the true religion
is publicly countenanced, and generally professed. So that though "gain is not
godliness," as some may imagine; yet we have the best authority to say, that
godliness is profitable unto ALL things; having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. This is a faithful saying. Tim. IV. 8, 9.


WHAT then are all those imaginations which young people commonly entertain
about religion, as if it were unfriendly to their temporal interest and
felicity? What are all such imaginations, I say, but idle fancies, chimeras and
hobgoblins, which mere fiction, or the father of lies has invented, to impose
upon your credulity, and deceive you to your destruction? As if the ways of
wisdom, of virtue and of God, were gloomy, joyless, hard and disagreeable; and
those of folly, vice and satan, easy, profitable, delightful, and truly happy!
What a reproach is it to human nature, that such bugbears as these; --
conceits, so contrary to all probability and sense, to the word of God, and to
the experience of all wise and good men, should ever gain the least credit, so
as to frighten either the old or young from being sober-minded; and to make
them believe that true happiness is the fruit of error, folly and vice!

IT is probable that some well-meaning men have contributed largely to the
carrying on so strange and pernicious a delusion, not only by their own gloomy,
and over-austere behavior; but by abridging the innocent pleasures and
liberties of youth, in diverse respects; particularly by representing all
recreations and pastimes as inconsistent with pure and undefiled religion,
instead of being content with guarding against the abuses of them. There is
ground to think that these irrational and unscriptural severities, have been a
fatal stumbling block to many young people; and made them dread the very
thoughts of religion, as if it were an irreconcilable foe to all temporal
happiness. But as it is incumbent upon the teachers of religion, utterly to
discountenance every thing that is unreasonable, and contrary to the laws of
God; they ought doubtless, on the other hand, to allow and permit to all,
particularly to the young, all those innocent liberties and amusements, which
the word of God allows or permits. He that adds to the commandments, by
forbidding what God has not forbidden, is as presumptuous and criminal as he
that diminishes from them, by nullifying some of his precepts. In many cases
the former is of as bad consequence as the latter, to the interest of virtue
and religion in the world. It is so particularly in this case, when the young
are deterred from being sober-minded, by being unwarrantably abridged of those
recreations and amusements, which God has not prohibited, and which human
nature, in it is present state, seems to require. Nor are the "teaching for
doctrine the commandments of men," and laying "heavy burdens, grievous to be
borne, on men's shoulders," the slightest accusations which our Lord brought
against those grave, austere, proud, solemn-fac'd hypocrites, the ancient
scribes and pharisees. Of the lawfulness and the abuses of Recreations, (...)
Sermon. IV. page 143 -- 150 inclusive.
There is, in short, no one pleasure or satisfaction in life, that is proper to
the nature of man, but what may be enjoyed in far greater perfection, within
the limits and laws of a truly christian sobriety, than it can possibly be
enjoyed in the violation of them, or in the ways of folly, vice and criminal
excess. The ways of wisdom are, in the highest sense, ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace. This you will experimentally know, whenever you, in
earnest, make the experiment. To proceed,

IX. YOUR future usefulness, as well as your own honor, interest and happiness
in the world, greatly depends upon your sobriety and good conduct. He that
lives soberly, righteously and godly in the world, cannot be a mischievous
member of society: Nay, he cannot but be serviceable, and a real ornament to it
in his station, whether high or low; as every member of the natural body, in
the regular discharge of its particular office, contributes to the good and
perfection of the body. But can the same be said with equal truth and
propriety, of irreligious, wicked and profligate men? It cannot.

IT is indeed owned, that bad men sometimes do much good in the world. But this
is either, first, only accidentally; as we say good may be brought out of evil.
Or, secondly, the good which they do, is by such of their actions as are in
their nature good, lawful and right, externally considered; not by their wicked
and unrighteous deeds. Or, lastly, they may do good to the world by serving as
examples and warnings to it, of the shame and misery which are the natural
consequence of vice and folly: So that, by their means, others are deterred
from pursuing those courses which are ruinous and destructive. Thus, in the
first case, the pride, luxury and debauchery of the rich, may be the occasion
of dispersing their wealth, and feeding the poor. In the second case, a vicious
man who is diligent in his lawful worldly business, who fights bravely for his
king and country, or who discharges any civil office tolerably well, may
thereby do good. Any of these things may be done by a very wicked man; but yet
he that thus serves his country, does it not by his wickedness; but by that
part of his conduct which is lawful and right. And in the third case mentioned,
the thief, robber, or other malefactor, benefits his country by being hanged;
and serving for a terror and warning to evildoers. In these three senses, very
wicked men may be serviceable to the world. But how much mischief is commonly
done by them in other respects? What sore scourges? what curses, have many
wicked men been to the world, especially in high stations? -- to whole
provinces, countries and kingdoms? -- yea, to several kingdoms at once? And
other wicked men commonly do mischief in the world, in some proportion to their
station, and the sphere in which they act. Consider, on the other hand, what
great and extensive blessings many good men have been to the world, especially
in high stations; -- to their country, nation, and diverse nations at once: And
other good men in a lower degree, according to their situation, power and
influence. Which good they do directly, with design; not accidentally, as the
wicked may do it in some instances and degrees.

NOW, my young brethren, if you have the least ingenuity, or generosity of
mind, you would choose to be blessings, and not curses to the world. You would
choose to fill up your respective stations in life, at once with honor to
yourselves, and benefit to society: Both which you will do the most effectually
by being truly virtuous and sober-minded. Can you, without pain or regret,
think of living rather as common nusances, than to the advantage of those with
whom you are connected? -- or even, of living and dying useless? -- Or, if not
entirely useless; yet would you be willing that what good you do, should be as
it were by accident, as the indirect consequence of your behavior, instead of
being done intentionally and uprightly; so that it may be said to be the proper
consequence of a virtuous and laudable behavior? Or would you be willing to
benefit society, only by being sad examples and warnings to it, of the disgrace
and misery in which vice naturally terminates; and so making other men wise and
cautious, virtuous and happy at your expense? -- especially at so dear a rate,
as your own infamy and destruction! If you well digest these thoughts in your
minds, they will fill you with an ardent, a truly noble desire to do good in
your day; to be serviceable in your respective places, instead of hurtful; and
therefore to be wise and virtuous: Especially when you consider, that this will
be, beyond all comparison, the most honorable, profitable and delightful to
yourselves.

X. IT should be an argument of no small weight with you to be sober-minded,
that you will hereby please your best friends; whereas, by the contrary, you
will displease, grieve and offend them. Do you ask, who these good, these best
friends are? I answer, in the first place,

GOD, your Father in heaven. He, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth
is named, who is "good to all, and whose tender mercies are over all his
works;" He, I say, will unquestionably be pleased by your being truly pious and
virtuous -- "Ye have received of us," says the apostle, "how ye ought to walk,
and to please God." If God invites, if he encourages, if he requires you to
believe in, to love him, to walk in his righteous ways, certainly he will be
pleased with your doing so; and displeased if you do otherwise. Has he not
said, "I love them that love me, and they that seek me early, shall find me?"
Is not his holy Spirit said to "strive with men," to this end? and to be
"grieved" with these that resist and oppose him? -- with them that abuse his
goodness and oppose his light and truth; choosing to walk in the paths of
darkness and error, vice and misery? What compassion did God of old express
toward Ephraim? what pleasure at his repentance, and return to him? --
assuming, as it were, all the passion and tenderness of an earthly father. -- I
have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus -- I smote upon my thigh; I
was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? For since I spoke against him,
I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Jer. Chapter XXXI.
Consider also the well known parable of the prodigal son, as it is commonly
called; one principal design of which was, to represent the love and compassion
of our heavenly Father; and his pleasure in those that return to him. It is
said, that when the foolish, unhappy youth was on his return home, but while he
was "yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and
fell on his neck, and kissed him." And presently after, the father is
introduced, saying to the elder brother, "It was meet that we should make
merry, and be glad; for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was
lost, and is found." Thus compassionate is God, to those who err from his truth
and ways; and thus pleased when they repent and return. This is also the
principal scope of two other parables in the same chapter: Luke Chapter XV.
One of which our Lord himself explains and applies in these words: --
"Likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents;" -- and the
other of them, in words to the same purpose. "Like as a father pitieth his
children," says the psalmist, "so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." And,
surely, you have no friend equally good and great as the God and Father of all;
none whom you are under such strong obligations to please; none, whom you
ought, from a principle of ingenuity and gratitude, to be so cautious of
offending.

ANOTHER of those good friends, whom you will please by your sobriety, is the
Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ; who loved you so well as to come down from
heaven, to live a miserable life on earth, and to die an ignominious, accursed
death upon a cross, for your redemption. This you may be positively assured of:
For "he gave himself a ransom for ALL;" -- "tasted death for EVERY man," and is
the "propitiation for the sins of the WHOLE world." In the days of his flesh,
he showed the tenderest love and kindness, not only to young men, as is
recorded upon several occasions, but even to little children; taking them up in
his arms, blessing them, and saying, "Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven." Our
compassionate Savior is said to have been grieved for the hardness of their
hearts, who refused to receive his heavenly instructions, counsels and
warnings, designed for their good. And how tenderly did he lament the folly,
the impenitence, and the approaching destruction of Jerusalem, when he beheld
the city, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hidden
from thine eyes. Luke XIX. 42.
And again: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not! Matt. XXIII. 37.
What a lively representation is this, of his compassion even for obdurate
sinners? The Lord Jesus Christ, though set down in the heavenly places, far above
all principality and power, has the like love, the like pity, the like
tenderness for you all in general, now, that he had of old for Jerusalem. His
goodness is unchanged; he can still have compassion on the ignorant, and on
them that are out of the way; being a merciful, as well as faithful high
priest, in things pertaining unto God. And will you displease, will you grieve,
will you offend such a Friend, by persevering in sin and folly? -- One, who has
laid you under such immense obligations!

THE holy angels, though unseen and unknown by you, are other, and truly
excellent friends to you; whom you would highly please and delight, by obeying
their Lord and our's; and whom you displease by persevering in your sinful
ways. They are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to the heirs of
salvation: And it is particularly declared by our Savior, that "there is joy
in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repents." Surely
then, you will, on the other hand, give them trouble and sorrow, if sorrow can
touch those pure and blessed intelligencies, by resisting and disobeying the
truth. And does it become you to grieve these benevolent spirits, who are as it
were your appointed guardians; who delight in doing good offices for you, in
conformity to their charge; and who would be so rejoiced at your conversion to
God?

OTHER of your friends, some of whom were probably once known to you, though now
removed out of your sight, and whom you would please by being sober-minded, are
"just men made perfect;" the noble army of martyrs, and the whole church of the
first born, which are written in heaven. Amongst these are all your pious
ancestors, who have died in the Lord; and who now live with him, beholding his
face in righteousness. Amongst them are also, probably, some of your other near
relations, and cotemporaries; those whom you lately knew and conversed with.
All, all these, as well as the "innumerable company of angels," wish to see you
truly wise and virtuous; that so, in due time, they may hail you to those
blissful regions; and that you may be forever associated with them in one
glorious society, "a kingdom that cannot be shaken." Yea, my young brethren,
methinks, almost, I hear them now calling to you from the celestial mansions,
in the same words which the two witnesses heard from heaven, when a great voice
came to them, saying, "COME UP HITHER!" Revel. XI. 12.
-- For the bride, the Lamb's wife, [the church triumphant] as well as the
Spirit, says, "COME. And let him that hears say, COME. And let him that is
athirst, COME: And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." Chapter
XXII. 17.


YOUR best friends on earth, as well as in heaven, will be rejoiced to see you
wise and virtuous; and grieved to see you foolish and profligate. I may here
particularly mention your pious and good parents, who have done so much for
you, and whose love you cannot doubt. "A wise son," says Solomon, "makes a
glad father; but a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother." Every virtuous
and good parent, could sincerely address his child in the language of the same
wise king -- My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine;
yea, my reins shall rejoice. -- Prove. Chapter XXIII.
All good men had far rather see their children sober-minded, the friends and
followers of Jesus Christ, than beautiful, rich and prosperous in this world.
And whom, upon earth, should you be so desirous to please and gratify, or so
loath to grieve and disquiet, as those to whom, under God, you owe your very
being? -- those who have brought you up with so much care and tenderness,
taking unwearied pains for you; and whose chief worldly concern is probably, to
see you well provided for, virtuous and happy?

BUT you have many good friends besides your parents, who would sincerely
rejoice to see you truly religious. All your acquaintance in general, that fear
God, would be pleased to have proper evidence of your doing the same: And I
know of One in particular, that would be so. He shall be nameless: Only I may
tell you, he is One that, if his own mediocrity of years would allow him to use
the paternal style with reference to you, could, with great sincerity, adopt
those words of the apostle John in his third epistle -- I have no greater joy,
than to hear that my children walk in the truth. Let me just add, that he is
One who claims some sort of interest in you; as hoping to have you for his joy,
glory and crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus --

THESE then, my beloved young brethren, are the friends whom you will certainly
please by being sober-minded, and displease by going on in the paths of folly
and vanity, vice and misery. Think, whether they are not such as you ought to
be studious of gratifying in every reasonable way; and very loath to disoblige,
offend or grieve, by any ungrateful and unreasonable conduct.

XI. CONSIDER, in the next place, who those persons are, whom you will please
by a foolish, criminal and profligate behavior; that so, upon a fair
comparison, you may judge whether you ought to gratify the latter, or the
former: For you cannot please both; their views, dispositions and interests
being directly opposite to each other; just as opposite as light and darkness,
Christ and belial, heaven and hell.

AND here a certain ancient, famous Prince, who has far more subjects than the
greatest earthly Monarch, claims the inglorious precedence. I mean, "the Prince
of the devils" -- "the Prince of the power of the air," the wicked spirit that
works in all the children of disobedience. You will, without doubt, highly
gratify him and his angels, by continuing in your sins. He made himself famous
of old, by stirring up rebellion in heaven; and afterward on earth, by
deluding and betraying our first parents; by usurping a kind of dominion over
mankind; by deceiving almost the whole world for many ages; by his enmity and
opposition to the Son of God, when he came to rescue mankind from his cruel
tyranny, and to destroy the works of the devil. This wicked One has, ever
since, excited the children of darkness and disobedience to oppose the truth,
and the kingdom of God on earth; endeavoring by all means to deceive, to hurt
and to destroy mankind; in which he has succeeded to admiration. "Your
adversary the devil," says the apostle, "goes about continually as a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour."

NOW you cannot in the least doubt, but that you will highly gratify the devil
and his angels, by rejecting the truth of God; by denying and blaspheming Jesus
Christ; by neglecting the worship of God, despising the ordinances of the
gospel, and living wicked lives. These are the very things which they aim at;
which they have all along been, and are still temping you to do, not in vain;
the very things in which they place their joy, triumph and glory. Every time
you set yourselves to oppose the truth; every time you take God's name in vain;
every time you turn your backs with contempt upon Christ's institutions; every
time you speak falsely, or do any wicked thing, then it is that you please the
devil; and the farther you are from all sobriety of mind, the more dear will
you be to him. You cannot more disoblige these apostate spirits, than by a
gracious reception of the gospel, and bringing forth fruits meet for
repentance. They have a fixed aversion to all sobriety, all truth, all
godliness, righteousness, humility, charity and temperance. Besides: Whenever
any person, old or young, repents and returns to God, the devil is enraged at
the thoughts of losing a subject; he considers such a One as a rebel and
traitor to himself, and is sorely vexed at having the prey which he was on the
point of devouring, snatched as it were out of his jaws. These envious and
malicious spirits cannot endure that any of the earth-born sons of Adam, should
be eternally happy in those glorious mansions, from which themselves were
banished for their pride, their sedition, and rebellion against the King of
heaven. So that there is not one of the angels of darkness, numerous as they
are, but what you will gratify by continuing in sin and folly, and highly
displease by being sober-minded.

BUT what has satan ever done for you, that you should be desirous or willing
to please him? Is he your maker? No. Does he preserve and take care of you? No.
Did he die for you? No; and is angry even to rage, that Another did. Has he
laid you under any sort of obligation to please him? No. Has he any
encouragement to give you for pleasing him? No. He will afterward only upbraid
and torment you for your folly therein. Did he ever intend you the least good
in any one respect? No; nothing but mischief. Will you then gratify your
inveterate adversary, "that old serpent called the devil, and satan," or his
angels? -- especially when you consider that, by doing so, you will displease
the God that made and loves you; Jesus Christ who died for you; and grieve the
good Spirit of God, as well as all those holy angels that "kept their first
estate," and are daily employed in offices of kindness for you!

BUT besides the devil and his angels, you may perhaps, by your sin and folly,
please great multitudes of the human race, both old and young, that have lived
and died in their sins, and are now in the place of torment. It seems not
improbable, that these miserable souls might choose to have other persons tread
in their steps, and share their fate, instead of being sober, wise and happy.
This is the way in which envy and wickedness, disappointment and despair,
commonly work; I mean in this world. Though it seems in some measure doubtful,
whether you would please even those self-destroying persons, when we consider
our Savior's parable, commonly called the parable of Dives and Lazarus.
According to which, when the rich fool died, and lift up his eyes in hell, he
requested that warning might be sent from the invisible world to his brethren
on earth, lest they also should come into that place of torment. When I
consider this part of the parable, I cannot be confident that you would please
those wretched souls in darkness and despair, by following their example, and
having your portion with them; though there are some other passages of scripture,
which seem to favor this supposition; particularly the following -- Hell from
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: It stirs up the dead
for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth Isai. XIV. 9.
-- But supposing it were certain, that you would gratify all the wicked that
are already in the regions of woe, by being vicious and impious; yet there can
be no reason why you should be desirous to please them at all; especially at so
dear a rate; and when you consider, that you cannot do this without displeasing
the "spirits of just men made perfect," who wish well to you, and long for an
opportunity to welcome and congratulate your safe arrival at the mansions of
joy and glory. But,

LASTLY here, By continuing in your sins, you will probably please some of the
most foolish and abandoned of mankind, both male and female. Such persons as
these, may be in some measure kept in countenance, and perhaps otherwise
gratified, by having you for their companions in folly and wickedness. And, on
the other hand, should you become virtuous and sober, they might be disgusted
thereat; looking upon your reformation and good conduct as a tacit reproach to
themselves for their continued profligacy, and depraved manners. But would it
be any ways proper for you to please such foolish and wicked persons as these,
who do not sincerely wish well to you, whatever they may pretend? Especially,
when by that means you will certainly displease and trouble many wise and
virtuous people; your parents and others, who are unquestionably your friends.
Let me here remind you of a passage in the Proverbs of Solomon, relating to the
enticements of evil companions; not merely because it is directly to the point
in hand, but because I have not any where else, perhaps, so particularly warned
you as to this matter, as would have been proper. My son, says the wise man, if
sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come with us -- Cast in thy
lot among us -- my son, walk not in the way with them; refrain thy foot from
their path: For their feet run to evil -- and they lay wait for their own
blood. Prove. Chapter 1.


THUS you have seen on one hand, whom you will certainly please by being
sober-minded; and on the other hand, whom you will, or may possibly gratify by
the contrary. By it you will please God, your Maker and compassionate Father;
the Lord Jesus Christ, who laid down his life for you; the good spirit of God,
which is striving with you; the holy angels, who are daily ministering unto you;
the noble army of martyrs, and all the saints in heaven, who long to hail your
arrival there; your parents, and many other wise and good men on earth, who
sincerely wish well to you. But then, on the other hand, you will not hereby
gratify, but displease the god of this world, the devil and his angels, who
seek your destruction; and, perhaps, the wicked already in a state of torment;
as well as a few profligate, abandoned rakes of both sexes, on earth; -- some
of the most foolish, wicked and infamous of the human race, who may either
desire you as their associates in vice and folly, or might consider your
repentance and reformation as a tacit reproof of their impiety, impudence, and
profligate lives. This, I think, is summing up the present argument fairly and
impartially: Nor will I call in question the goodness of your understandings so
much, my young brethren, as to suppose it possible for you to doubt in any
degree, whether it becomes you to gratify the former or the latter. One of them
you must needs please, and displease the other: You cannot gratify both. It
therefore only remains for you to make your choice!

XII. IF you should continue in the practice of vice, folly and wickedness, one
principal end of Christ's coming into the world; -- of his teaching, life and
death, will, as to you, be entirely frustrated. The important end which I have
here in view, is your recovery to a sound mind; your deliverance from your
natural darkness and depravity, your lusts, and sinful practices; by being
brought to the knowledge, love and practice of true virtue, godliness, and all
good works. That this was a principal end of Christ's mediation, is very
clearly and forcibly declared in the same chapter with my text, as an argument
for sobriety and good works. For the grace of God that brings salvation to
all men, [so it might be rendered] has appeared; teaching us that, denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present world. And again afterward; Who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. Now what do these expressions imply, either more or less
than this, That one great design of Christ's mediation, and of the grace of God
appearing in the gospel, was, that we might be sober-minded in that
comprehensive sense, in which these terms were explained in some preceding
discourses? The whole evangelical history, wherein we have an account of our
Lord's doctrine, example and precepts; and all the apostolical writings in
general, are a clear, incontestible proof of the same thing. And does it not
from hence as plainly appear, that if you continue to live unsoberly,
unrighteously and ungodly in the world, you will thereby counteract and defeat
one principal end of Christ's manifestation in the flesh? Let me add, that if
this design of his mediation is frustrated as to you, it will be in vain for
you to expect, that the other important ends thereof will be answered; such as,
your being pardoned and justified, and being finally happy in the kingdom of
heaven. For without that repentance and faith, which are the principle and
beginning of a sober, righteous and godly life, there is no forgiveness of
sins, no justification with God, no title to future glory, honor and
immortality.

IF you pay any regard at all to the christian revelation, as I presume you do,
you cannot, surely, but be in some measure concerned, that the design of
Christ's mediation in general, and particularly this essential and important
part thereof, may be answered as to yourselves. One would think, you must be
greatly shocked at the thought of its being frustrated by your persevering in
the ways of vice and folly; as though the Son and grace of God had never
appeared, bringing salvation to all that will thankfully accept of it. What!
did the Son of God, the brightness of his glory, and "in whom dwelt all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily;" did the Son of God, I say, give himself for
you, that he might redeem you from all iniquity, -- from the power, as well as
the guilt of fin; and will you, notwithstanding this, live in the practice of
sin, of ungodliness and worldly lusts! Has such grace appeared, and has the
Lord from heaven preached and died, that he might purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works; and will you still do the works of
darkness, the works of the devil, those evil works which God abhors! I am
astonished, and even tremble, as you may well do, to think of your thus
counteracting the design of the glorious gospel. What the consequence of this
will be, may appear more particularly in my next discourse. In the mean time,
let me exhort you seriously to consider of the matter; and to bear in mind
those words of the apostle, with which I conclude for the present -- Therefore
we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest
at any time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward: How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will? Heb.
II. 1. -- 4.


SERMON VIII.
Young Men exhorted to Sobriety by some other Considerations, viz. (13.) Of an
happy Death, and (14.) Of eternal Life, as the consequence thereof. (15.) Of
the miserable Death of the wicked. And (16.) Of their Punishment in the World
to come. The extreme Folly and Danger of delaying to be sober-minded.
Miscellaneous Counsels and Warnings to young Men: And the whole concluded with
a Prayer more particularly for them and the Author.

TITUS II. 6. YOUNG MEN likewise exhort to be sober-minded.
THE first discourse upon this subject was taken up with some introductory
observations. In the second and third, the nature of christian sobriety was
distinctly explained. In the fourth and fifth, diverse sins, follies and
excesses, which are repugnant thereto, were particularly pointed out. In the
sixth and seventh, I exhorted you to be sober-minded, by several considerations
of great, though not all of equal weight. I shall now, by the will of God,
proceed in this exhortation, my young brethren, by laying before you some other
motives and arguments, if possible, more important in their nature than those
which have been mentioned already: For which reason they have been reserved as
the last. But they are very common arguments; such as are at least hinted at in
almost every chapter of the new testament, and touched upon in almost every
sermon you hear; as arguments of so interesting a nature, and such general use,
ought doubtless to be. Their commonness, however, will at least warrant my
being shorter upon some of them, than would otherwise be convenient. To proceed
then,

XIII. IF you are sober-minded in life, you will die happily, in a state of
favor with God. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
like his; -- was the wish and prayer of that same wicked Balaam, who loved the
wages of unrighteousness; but at a time when he was under the prophetic and
divine afflatus, and thereby carried into futurity. Numb. XXIII. 10.
This is probably, in some sort, the desire of all wicked men in general; at
least, of all who live under the light of the gospel, whenever they think of
death. This they are often obliged to do; and are indeed, many of them, through
fear of death, all their lifetime subject to a miserable bondage. How
differently soever men choose to live; yet all in general would choose to die
alike; to die the death of the righteous; -- in peace and favor with the great
God, and in hope of his glory.

NOW, to be truly wise and virtuous; to live the life of the righteous; or, in
the good words of the same wicked Balaam, "to do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with your God," Micah VI. 8.
is the sure way to die the death of the righteous. But it is impossible in the
nature of the thing, that a wicked, unrighteous man, continuing such, should
die thus. Let me briefly guard against two misconstructions of my meaning here.
First, it is not hereby intended, that what is called, or truly is, a sober,
christian and godly life, is a perfect righteousness, in which to stand
unshaken at God's tribunal, or to meet death with composure, firmness and
triumph, independently of the redemption wrought out by Christ, the gracious
promises of the gospel, or the "righteousness of God by faith." That sobriety
of mind and manners, which is to give you peace and hope in death, is a
christian sobriety: And this supposes repentance of sin, christian faith, an
humble sense of you own unworthiness, and a dependence upon the grace of God in
Christ, for acceptance with him. Your hopes both in life and death, are to be
grounded ultimately upon the free grace of God, as revealed in the gospel; and
upon your own sobriety, in reflecting thereon, only indirectly or mediately,
considered as an evidence of your being in a state of favor with God, as the
required condition of, and a meetness, preparation or qualification for, future
happiness: Or, in other words, as it is characteristical of those persons, who
are entitled to the benefits of Christ's redemption. Secondly, it is not hereby
intended, that none can be saved, according to the terms of the gospel, besides
those who have lived for a number of years, or some considerable time, in that
sober, righteous and godly manner, which the gospel requires. Whenever a sinner
becomes a true penitent and believer, in the sense of scripture, he is
immediately pardoned, justified, and in a state of salvation: Whether he lives
afterward to do works meet for repentance, affects not the safety of his
state, or the certainty of his salvation; though it may be of importance to him
in other respects, particularly as to his peace, comfort and hope in death; or
as an evidence of the genuineness of his repentance, says, and conversion to
God.

WITH these explanations, living a sober and godly life, is on one hand
necessary, and on the other hand, lays a solid foundation for peace and hope in
death. The conciousness of having lived such a life, will exclude a servile
fear of death, and brighten those naturally-gloomy moments. Whoever has light
in the Lord to say with the psalmist -- The Lord is my Shepherd -- He restores
my soul; he leads me in the paths of righteousness; will of course be enabled
to join with him in the words following: Yea, though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: For thou art with me; thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me. Psalm. XXIII.
Or if you can say with the holy apostle, when the time of his departure was at
hand -- I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; you may also triumph with him in the words which immediately follow --
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all
them that love his appearing. 2 Timothy IV. 7, 8.
In a similar manner the same apostle expresses his hope and joy, as resulting
from the witness of a good conscience, in another of his epistles: For our
rejoicing is this, says he, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world -- 2 Cor. I. 12.
Agreeably hereto, it is laid down as a standing, general maxim in scripture,
that "the righteous has hope in his death:" A maxim which has been abundantly
verified in all ages of the world, ever since death by sin entered into it. And
the faithful, in every period of the christian church more especially, have
been able to triumph over death, saying, O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law. But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Cor. XV. 55 --


NOW, my young brethren, since you must unquestionably die sooner or later,
would you not choose to die in such a joyful, triumphant manner; meeting this
last enemy, death, with "hopes full of immortality;" and, though naturally the
"king of terrors," rather as your friendly deliverer from all pain and sorrow,
than with fear and trembling? I know you are desirous of this; you cannot but
wish for such an happy and glorious exit, whenever your appointed time shall
come. In one word then, be sober-minded; for this will make both life and death
happy to you.

XIV. IT will not be unnatural to draw my next argument, from a consideration
of that blessed, glorious and eternal life," which God that cannot lie, has
promised to all them that believe in his Son, and keep his commandments. A
principal design of the gospel, is to proclaim and insure to those who
practically believe it, a glorious resurrection at our Lord's second appearing,
and eternal happiness in the kingdom of God, as his free gift through Christ.
This is the sum of the gospel, expressed in few words. It is unnecessary to
refer to particular passages of scripture, for these gracious promises; the
new testament is full of them. If you are persuaded to be sober-minded, this
felicity, this unfading crown of glory and joy, will as surely be your portion,
as God and his word are true. Your mortal bodies, which are quickly to be sown
in weakness, corruption and dishonor, will in due time be raised in power,
purity and glory, by the all-quickning voice of the Son of God. You shall stand
at his right hand with great boldness, when he sits upon the throne of his
glory, while all the guilty nations are trembling at his left. Then shall your
ears be ravished, your souls transported with those gracious and most joyful
words, from the mouth of him that died for you, and to whom all judgment and
authority are committed -- Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Mat. XXV. 24.
In consequence of which, you, with all the "righteous, shall go away into life
eternal" ver. 46.
; and possess an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away.

CAN you think of these things, my young brethren, without being filled with an
ardent desire to be made partakers of such an happiness, such glory, honor and
immortality? I am sure you cannot, if you really give credit to them. What is
any earthly inheritance which you may have in view, in comparison with that to
which the heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, are entitled in the
heavens! What are all worldly riches, but dross and vanity, in comparison with
the treasure there laid up for the righteous! How does all earthly glory sink?
how is it eclipsed? how does it vanish from the sight, when you look forward to
that, which the Lord of life and glory has promised to them that love him?
Blessed indeed, thrice "blessed are they that do his commandments; that they
may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the
city." -- And "the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his
servants shall serve him. And they shall see his face; and his name shall be in
their foreheads. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle,
neither light of the sun: For the Lord God gives them light, and they shall
reign for ever and ever." Is it not worth while to be sober-minded, virtuous
and obedient, for such an happiness, such glory as this; even though you should
make yourselves wretched thereby, during this transitory life, which is but as
a vapor? Whereas the truth is, that you must needs be miserable even now,
unless you are truly religious; and that, by making sure of eternal life, you
will, beyond all comparison, best provide for your temporal honor and felicity.

XV. CONSIDER, in the next place, that unless you are truly penitent and
sober-minded, the guilt of all your sins will lie upon you, and you will be
wretched in death. There is no forgiveness with God, even through the blood of
Jesus Christ, but in the way of unfeigned repentance toward the former, and
faith toward the latter. Which repentance and faith are implied in christian
sobriety; and are the principle and substance of it, internally considered; as
has been observed in the foregoing discourses. It is therefore just as certain,
that without sobriety of mind, you will remain under guilt and condemnation, as
it is, that repentance and faith are necessary to pardon, according to the
tenor of the gospel: Than which there is no one thing more clearly asserted in
the holy scriptures; though some persons, suppose pardon and justification to be
prior to that repentance and faith, by or through which we are said to be
pardoned and justified. Absurd and preposterous indeed!

BUT not to digress: If you should continue in the practice of sin and folly,
and remain impenitent till death; how dreadful an hour will that be to you! I
mean if you should then have your thoughts and senses about you; and not be
snatched out of the world in a moment, without time for reflection on what is
past, or considering what is to come. -- What horrors of conscience? what
distress and anguish of soul, will probably seize upon you, when you shall come
to lie upon a sick bed? When you shall find your flesh and your heart at once
failing you; and God, not the strength of your heart, nor likely to be your
portion, but your terror, forever! When all your sins are brought to your
remembrance; when you reflect how you have abused the goodness and patience of
God; how you have despised his grace and mercy; how you have scorned his
reproofs and threatenings! When it will no longer be in your power to forget
God, nor to think of him, but with fear and amazement, as that almighty, most
holy and righteous Being, whom you have offended! When the terrors of the last
day, shall be present in imagination, and all the pains of hell that can be
endured on earth, shall "get hold upon you!" This is the state of wicked men
under the gospel, when they come to die; unless they are either self-deluded
hypocrites, or quite stupefied, having their "consciences seared as with an hot
iron." Thus are they driven a way in God's anger, while the righteous have hope
and joy in their death. They are often so overwhelmed with a sense of their
guilt, and have such a sentence of eternal death in themselves, -- in their own
prophetic consciences, as not to have the least heart or courage even to
implore forgiveness; or to say, "God be merciful to me a sinner"! -- Wretched
state indeed; to have such a lively sense of sin, that the need of pardon is
felt in the most excruciating manner; and yet to have all conceptions of God's
mercy, as it were swallowed up and lost in those of his righteous vengeance!
Though by the way, if sinners should implore mercy at such a time, when they are
under the actual arrest of divine justice, it is by no means clear either from
reason or scripture, that they shall obtain it. For they may do so, without
that genuine repentance and faith, which the gospel makes necessary in order to
forgiveness. And there are many passages of scripture, which look quite the
other way; I mean, which imply that the wicked may thus sue for mercy, and yet
be rejected; particularly a passage in the Proverbs of Solomon, with which I
shall close the present argument; and which I exhort you seriously to consider,
lest yourselves should one day be sad examples of the unutterable horrors of
impenitent, dying sinners -- "Because I called, and ye refused -- ye have set
at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at
your calamity; I will mock when your fear comes: When your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and
anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me." Prove. Chapter I.


THERE is nothing so near as the horror and despair of wicked men in the hour
of death, to the actual torments of hell; whether in respect of time, or of
pain and anguish: They are hell already begun in the soul. My last argument
shall therefore be drawn.

XVI. FROM a consideration of the future misery and punishment of the wicked,
as foretold and represented in the sacred oracles. You have already seen what
the sad consequence of sin and folly will be, both in life and in death. It now
remains for you to look beyond life, death and the grave, into the eternal
state; and seriously to consider what the consequence thereof is to be in the
other world; a state, though invisible, yet not imaginary, but as real as the
present.

IF the only consequence of dying in your sins, were, to be excluded from the
kingdom of heaven; to be banished from the society of just men made perfect,
and of the innumerable company of holy angels; from the face of him that once
died to save you, and from the favorable presence of your Creator, your God,
your Father, in whose presence there is fullness of joy: I say, if you were only
to be thus excluded from the regions of the blessed, thus turned off and
discarded, as unworthy of their fellowship; yet how can you endure the thoughts
of this! When God pronounced only the following sentence upon the wicked Cain,
-- Now art thou cursed from the earth -- when thou tillest the ground, it shall
not henceforth yield unto thee her strength: A fugitive and vagabond shall thou
be in the earth; the guilty wretch was so overwhelmed with the thoughts of his
misery and disgrace, that he cried out, My punishment is greater than I can
bear. Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and
from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the
earth. Genesis IV 11 -- 14.
This, surely, was but a light punishment, in comparison of being exiled
hereafter from the everlasting kingdom of Christ. Can you then, (unless you are
more stupefied, more hardened and abandoned than that infamous murderer was)
think, without the utmost grief and anguish of soul, of being excluded from
heaven, and the blessed society thereof? -- Especially, from the favor and
enjoyment of Him, in whose favor is life, and whose loving kindness is better
than life; and to be fugitives and vagabonds in some unknown part of the world?
Is this punishment no greater than you can bear? O dismal exile indeed, though it
were but for a few years or days! O insupportable thought! unutterable woe!
What! banished from heaven, from the face of your God, your Father, your
Savior; as well as from the fellowship of good men, and holy angels! Think of
it but a moment, and make it real to yourselves; and you will find cause for a
far more bitter lamentation than that of Cain! --

BUT perhaps the place, the country, to which the wicked are to be thus
banished and confined, will be an agreeable one; a delightful region in some
yet-undiscovered part of the universe, where they may amuse and enjoy
themselves in a considerable degree; and be consoled, by the pleasurable
situation, in their absence from God, and the company of the blessed in heaven.
Far otherwise! Every place besides heaven, will be an hell, a place of torment,
to the wicked. And that, in which impenitent sinners are to have their abode,
is particularly represented in scripture, as a place of "outer darkness," and a
"lake burning with fire and brimstone," etc. Joyless region indeed!

AND who are to be the companions of your exile, if this should be your own
fate; as it most certainly will, if you should live and die in your sins? The
felicity of creatures that are by nature formed for society, depends very much
upon the dispositions and qualities of those, with whom they converse. But do
you imagine that your companions in the realms of darkness, will be such as you
will be delighted with? -- those, whose society will be a comfort and relief to
you in your banishment from heaven, from saints and angels, from Christ and
God? such as will cause a degree of light and joy, in those gloomy regions?
Vain imagination! Your company will not alleviate, but increase your misery.
For what else can be expected from the society of wicked persons like
yourselves, in a state of punishment; all, full of envy, rage, despair! Or what
else can be expected from the society of those malicious spirits, the devil and
his angels, who shall have deluded you to your destruction; and who are
perhaps, at this very moment tempting you to infidelity; and pleasing
themselves with the hopes, that they shall succeed in their designs against
you! Can you expect to live in peace with, or to have any consolation, any
alleviation of your distress in the regions of woe, from such company as this?
If Job, in the day of his calamity, said very justly even to his friends,
"Miserable comforters are ye all;" what will you say to such comforters as
these? -- damned men and devils! Nor will you hereafter have any that are
better, if you now reject that divine and blessed Comforter, the Spirit of
truth and holiness.

BUT perhaps you flatter yourselves, that the time of this dreadful exile from
God, in such a dismal region, and in company far worse than the most lonely
solitude, will be but short: So that it may be borne by the wicked, at least
with some patience, from the prospect of a speedy release, with liberty to
enter into the mansions of rest and joy. Far otherwise! In the language of
scripture, "they shall be punished with an everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power." And it is said
elsewhere, that "the smoke of their torment ascends up forever and ever; and
they have no rest day nor night." -- The dismal situation waste and wild:
A dungeon horrible, on all sides round,
As one great furnace flamed: yet from those flames
No light; but rather darkness visible,
Served only to discover sights of woe.
Regions of sorrow! doleful shades! where peace
And rest can never dwell! hope never comes,
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge --
Such place eternal justice had prepared --!
Parad. Lost, L. I.


CONSIDER then the time, (for know that the time will come!) when the small and
great, being raised from the dead, shall stand before God -- before the
judgment seat of Christ, appearing in the majesty and glory of the FATHER, to
receive the things done in the body. The time when all the wicked, and
yourselves amongst them if you die impenitent, shall appear, though unwillingly,
reluctant and trembling, before this dreadful tribunal; who a quick and perfect
consciousness of all your sins committed in this life; particularly of your
having despised the riches of God's goodness, forbearance and long-suffering,
and trodden under foot his Son, who once came into the world to save sinners;
and whom you shall then behold as your righteous Judge! The time when the
"books shall be opened," those faithful records of all your past transgressions
in thought, word and deed; (mighty volumes!) to the truth of which in every
tittle, your own consciences shall testify as a thousand witnesses; declaring
to you, with a decisive voice not to be opposed, your just demerits! The time
when, these dismal pages being read before men and angels, and there being no
need of witnesses, that same Jesus who was once crucified through weakness
without the gates of Jerusalem, and whose grace you scorned, shall arise to
pronounce your doom with thunder in his hand, his eyes as a flame of fire, and
a tempest in his face; thousands standing before him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand angels who excel in strength, attending to execute his orders:
When, having before passed sentence on the blessed at his right hand, he shall
turn to those on the left, saying with a voice like the sound of many waters,
"Depart from me" --! -- O amazing, heart-dissolving words! at once too
important ever to be forgotten, and yet too dreadful, almost, to be remembered!
-- Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels. Mat. XXV. 41.
-- "The word of God," says the apostle, "is quick and powerful; and sharper
than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart." You can hardly hear those words of the Lord now uttered,
though by a "man that is a worm" like yourselves, without trembling as the guilty
Faelix did, when the apostle reasoned with him of righteousness, temperance and
judgment to come; and though you probably consider this scene as far remote in
futurity. How then will your hearts endure, when you shall hear the same awful
words in more than thunder, pronounced by Him, "from whose face the earth and
the heavens shall flee away!" At his feet you will doubtless fall as dead; as
St. John once did, when, in the visions of God, he saw him in his majesty and
glory; when "out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and his countenance
was as the sun shining in his strength." But alas! he will not reanimate and
comfort you, as he did the holy apostle on that occasion -- I fell at his feet
as dead, says the apostle; and he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me,
Fear not; I am the first and the last. I am he that lives and was dead; and
behold, I am alive forevermore. Rev. I. 16, 17, 18.
No! you will be raised up and revived, only as condemned malefactors, fainting
under their pain or terrors, sometimes are, to have the just sentence, the
curse of the law punctually executed upon them. It is not cruelty to punish the
wicked according to their demerits, when the ends of government require it; as
in the present case. Mercy having been before scorned, no weak pity or
tenderness will have any place in this day of vengeance. For the Judge himself,
who even now stands at the door, has said that the wicked thus condemned,
"shall go away into everlasting punishment." Mat. XXV. 46.


IT were most ingenuous in you, doubtless, to be led effectually to repentance,
by the grace and goodness of God; as I would hope that some of you, at least,
will be. But if any of you are too far hardened for this, you perceive that
motives of a very different kind are not wanting. "Knowing therefore the terror
of the Lord, we exhort, we persuade men." If the tender mercies of a Father
will not, at least let the righteous vengeance of a God, and the fear of wrath
to come, serve to reclaim you from the error of your ways, that you may at last
be found of him in peace! If you should not be thus found of him, you will
doubtless say, It had been good for you, that you had not been born. You have,
surely, more sense and ingenuity, than to suspect I am become your enemy,
because I thus plainly tell you the truth. It is important, it is salutary
truth; though perhaps irksome to some of you in the hearing, and far from being
the most agreeable to myself in the speaking. If you duly receive and digest
it, and are eventually made wise thereby; you will find it just the reverse, in
one respect, of the written roll or book given to the apostle to eat; -- which
was, in his mouth, at first, sweet as honey, but in his belly, bitter as gall
and wormwood. This, on the contrary, though bitter and unpalatable at first, like
gall, will in the end and digestion, be sweet to you; yea, "sweeter than honey
and the honeycomb." Let me close the present argument with the words of the
wise man, addressed to the young; which words, while they seem to encourage
young men to proceed in their foolish, criminal practices, are, in reality, the
more solemn warning against it. "Rejoice, O young man in thy youth," says he;
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth: and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment. Therefore remove sorrow from thine
heart, and put away evil from thy flesh; for childhood and youth are vanity.
Eccl. XI. 9, 10.


THUS, my beloved young brethren, I have laid before you those arguments and
considerations of various kinds, by which I would, and now do, exhort you to be
sober-minded. It was far from being my intention to say all, or even an
hundredth part, that might be said with propriety upon this most interesting
subject. To allude to the words of the apostle John; if all the reasons for,
and motives to sobriety, were to be written down, "I suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the books that should be written." For the
arguments for sobriety, or true religion, are in a sort infinite, like God the
object thereof: There is no end of them to be found; the subject is
inexhaustible, to any One that duly enters into the nature, spirit and
importance of it. The natural dictates of your own consciences, the holy
scriptures, life and death, heaven, earth and hell, time and eternity; and even
the commonest objects and occurrents, teem with arguments in an endless
succession, in behalf of true religion; clearly and loudly admonishing you to
be wise and sober, if you have but an ear to hear, and an heart to perceive.
This, in general, is the sentiment that Solomon expresses in the rhetorical,
and nobly-sublime manner following. Wisdom cries without; she utters her
voice in the streets: She cries in the chief place of concourse; in the
opening of the gates, in the city she utters her words, saying, How long, ye
simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: Behold I will pour
out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.

I CAN neither distrust the validity of those arguments which have been
particularly proposed to you, nor the goodness of your ununderstandings, so
much as to suppose it necessary to add any others to them, in order to the
convincing your judgments what is the right, the wisest, safest, happiest
course for you to pursue. No! I doubt not, but that this point, a very material
one, is already gained. Would to God, that all your hearts and wills were as
much in the right as to this matter, as I am persuaded your heads are! And,
methinks, you must have sadly depraved and hardened hearts indeed, if even they
are not in some measure touched by so many arguments, all drawn from the word
of God; provided you have so far attended to, as to have a tolerable
understanding of them. And having thus far discharged my own duty, by laying
yours before you; the event must now be left with yourselves, or rather with
Him who has the hearts of all men in his own hand. Without his blessing, even
prophets and apostles may preach in vain; much more, so inconsiderable and
unworthy a preacher of the everlasting gospel, as he that is now speaking to
you.

BUT you will say, perhaps, "We are young; and need not be in any haste to be
sober-minded. It will answer the end as well a number of years hence, when we
have in some measure sated ourselves with the pleasures of sin. How many are
there about us, who, though much older, are not yet any wiser or soberer than
ourselves? Let them set us an example; it will be sufficient for us to follow
our superiors."

UNHAPPY young men! is the love of folly and vice then so deeply rooted in your
hearts, that you cannot bear the thought of parting with them so soon? Do you
think it hard and grievous to be put upon the remembrance of your Creator, your
Father, even now in the days of your youth? If young men need not be
sober-minded, why did the inspired apostle enjoin Titus to exhort them to be
so? Young men, certainly, need not be exhorted to any thing, which is not
expedient for young men to do. So that you must suppose the apostle was under
some mistake here, or else allow that yourselves have some wrong conceptions,
some misapprehensions of the matter, when you think of deferring it to a later
day. This, I suppose, is a common, and often fatal error of the young. They are
destroyed, not so much by any fixed, positive resolution, that they never will
be virtuous and sober, as by procrastination, or putting off the concerns of
religion to a farther, and, as they fondly imagine, more convenient season. I
propose therefore, distinctly and clearly, though briefly, to lay open the
absurdity of such a conduct. This is, in effect, what was mentioned in my first
discourse upon the subject, as the last branch of my general design; viz.

FOURTHLY, TO show you the extreme folly and danger of delaying to be
sober-minded, till you are farther advanced in years. That this is both foolish
and dangerous to the last degree, shall be evinced by a variety of arguments;
though I shall not enlarge upon them Several of the ensuing arguments, which
are here only just touched upon, are largely handled in the author's Sermons on
Psalm CXIX. 59, 60. I thought on my ways -- I made HASTE, etc. Particularly in
the 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th of those Sermons. This is one reason
why they were not more fully treated here.


NOW, it should be observed here, that all those arguments in general, which
have been produced in favor of religion, are as conclusive with respect to the
young, as they are with respect to the old. The force of them does not depend
upon the particular age of people, any more than it does upon their particular
complexion, stature or occupation in life. If you are but reasonable, moral
agents, the posterity of Adam; and amongst those, to redeem and save whom
Christ came into the world, all these arguments stand in full force; whether
you are ten, twenty or fifty years old. You might say with as much truth and
propriety, that it will be time enough for a slender man to be religious, when
he is become corpulent; for a fair One, when he has been burnt a few years
under the equator, or for an Ethiopian, when he has in part changed his skin;
as say, that it will be time enough for you to be sober-minded, when you are
more advanced in years.

BUT to be a little more particular here: If to be truly religious, is in
itself a reasonable thing, as has been shown; then it is so for all men at all
times, in every season of life, even from childhood to old age. You do, in
effect, yourselves acknowledge religion to be founded in nature and reason, by
resolving to practice it hereafter, under the notion of its being right, and
your duty to do so. For, if it be not reasonable, why will you practice it at
all? Why do you not rather set up a bold resolution at once, against all virtue
and sobriety; and determine in your own minds, that you never will fear, love
or serve God? This you dare not, you cannot do; because you know that you ought
in all reason to love him, and keep his commandments. So that every day and
hour of your continuance in sin, you must be self-condemned, as acting a part
that is contrary to your own reason. Deny it if you can.

IF sobriety, or true religion, be honorable at all, it is so at all times; in
youth as well as in age. The world in general, as has been shown, pays respect
to virtue and religion, under the notion of its being in nature fit, proper and
reasonable for mankind in common; not under the notion of its being proper only
for this or that particular person, or persons, of such or such an age. If you
consult your reputation therefore, you must resolve to forsake your vices
without delay, and to be sober-minded from this very day: For all the time of
your delay, you will justly lie under the imputation of folly and wickedness.
And how great a reproach is that!

IF there is any difference, religion is, of the two, more amiable and
honorable in the young than in the old. For it is an indication of a mature
judgment in that season of life, which is so commonly devoted to levity and
folly, to vanity and vice. It seems less praiseworthy in an old man to be wise
and sober, than for a young one: Though, on the other hand, vice and folly may
seem rather more inexcusable and shameful in the aged, than they are in the
young.

IF a virtuous and religious life is, beyond all comparison, the most contented
and happy one; then the earlier you enter upon such a life, the better it will
be for you; the more peace and comfort, the more real satisfaction and pleasure
you will enjoy in life. All the time that you continue strangers to wisdom and
virtue, whether longer or shorter, you are putting a cheat upon, and defrauding
yourselves: You deprive yourselves of that superior and substantial happiness,
which flows from true religion; and subject yourselves to the many vexations,
mischiefs, and uneasy apprehensions, which naturally attend folly and vice.

THE sooner you become wise and virtuous, the more serviceable you will be to
the world; the better you will fill up your stations in life; the better you
will answer the end of your creation, by doing good to your fellow-mortals.
Society will be much more indebted and obliged to you, if you conduct
yourselves properly from your youth up, than if you begin to do so, only as a
kind of ceremony at parting, and taking a final leave of it.

ALL the time you continue in the practice of sin, you are acting a most
ungrateful and disingenuous part toward God, your Father in heaven, and Jesus
Christ who died for you. You are all this time abusing the divine goodness and
patience; and grieving the holy Spirit; good angels above, and good men below:
And also gratifying your worst, your most implacable enemies, the devil and his
angels.

YOU are all this time also, acting a most presumptuous and audacious, as well
as ungrateful part, toward your rightful Sovereign, the mighty God, the great
and only Potentate. For you are all this while in a state of rebellion against
Him, before whose throne the holy angels veil their faces, and prostrate
themselves with the profoundest reverence; and at the very thought of whom,
those apostate spirits who are in exile from heaven, tremble, and are horribly
afraid. -- So that in short, it seems you have neither the filial love and
reverence of the great God, which good angels have; nor so much awe and dread
of his displeasure, as the angels of darkness. How astonishing then, is your
ingratitude on one hand, and your audacity on the other; while you continue
resolved and fearless in the violation of God's commandments!

REPENTANCE and reformation will, in all probability, be attended with more
pain, anxiety and difficulty hereafter, than they would be at present; however
you may flatter yourselves to the contrary. Sin gains strength by habit and
custom; the longer it is continued in, the more is the soul depraved, corrupted
and enslaved thereby. The habits of sin are not so easily broken off, when they
are old and inveterate, as when but newly contracted; as a confirmed tyranny in
any nation, is harder to be broken than a novel and recent one. Agreeably
whereto it is said in scripture, Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
leopard his spots? Then may ye also that are accustomed to do evil, learn to do
well. Which words, though they are not designed to assert the absolute
impossibility of breaking off inveterate evil habits, do yet very strongly
express the great and peculiar difficulty of it.

THE earlier you begin to be wise and virtuous, the more honor will, by your
means, redound to God and religion. God is glorified by them that love and obey
him, and order their conversation aright. The sooner therefore any begin to do
so, the more they will glorify him. And ought you not, in all reason, as far as
possible to honor the great and good God, your heavenly Father, who daily
loadeth you with his benefits?

THE sooner you begin to be sober-minded, the greater progress you will make in
true wisdom, virtue and holiness; and the greater moral perfection you will
have attained to, when your lives shall come to a period. For true religion is
in its nature progressive: It is like the light of the rising sun; which at
first only glimmers faintly in the east; then overspreads the horizon, and
"shines more and more unto the perfect day."

THE sooner you begin to serve God, and your generation according to his will;
and the more perfect you are when you come to die in a good old age, the
greater will be your reward and honor in the world to come. When all the
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father; you will
appear with distinguished luster and glory, proportionably to the degree in
which you excelled others on earth, honored God more, and did more good in the
world.

YOU will observe, my young brethren, that all the arguments here touched upon,
are grounded upon the supposition, not only that you may probably, but
certainly will be sober-minded hereafter, some time or other, though you should
persevere a number of years longer in the practice of sin and folly. They are
all strictly conclusive, even upon this supposition.

BUT I must now remind you, that this supposition is at best a very precarious
one. You may have no more disposition, no more inclination to, no more taste
for, wisdom and virtue in old age, than you have now in your youth. Or rather,
your aversion thereto may probably be increased instead of lessened; though you
seem to take it for granted, that wisdom and sobriety will come of course with
years and age. This is one of the many devices of Satan, of which you ought not
to be ignorant. You will naturally grow more hardened by continuing in sin, as
was intimated before. God may withdraw those restraints, and kind influences of
his Spirit, which you now in some measure enjoy; and give you up entirely to
your own hearts lust. -- How many persons are there who, though they had many
checks of conscience in youth, and a tenderness of heart in some degree; yet,
when they come to middle or old age, appear to be quite hardened and stupefied;
to have lost almost all sense of moral good and evil, and are become profane
scoffers at religion? There are not a few examples of this sort in the world.
You see then, that men do not always grow wiser and better, but often wax worse
and worse, with years. And what evidence? what rational grounds have you to
conclude, that this will not be your own case, should you now in youth stifle
the convictions of your own minds; and resist and quench the good Spirit of
God, which is striving with you? You have no sort of evidence, however
confident you may be, that you shall not be thus left of God; as many others
apparently are.

CONSIDER, in the next place, that while you delay to fear and serve God, you
are continually adding to the number of your sins, much too great already! and
increasing your guilt every day you live. For there is no medium betwixt doing
right and wrong; betwixt serving God, and serving the devil and your lusts. If
you do not the former, you will do the latter. And besides; your sins will not
only become more numerous, but more aggravated, with your years; being
committed against more light and knowledge, than those of your childhood were.

AGAIN: Consider, that if you should die at last in your sins, in a wicked old
age; as is not improbable, if you should live to be old, your future
condemnation will be so much the more aggravated; and your punishment in the
other world proportionably the greater. You are treasuring up wrath to
yourselves, against the day of wrath. And the longer you live, if you should at
last perish in your sins, the worse it will be for you. It is said, not without
a particular emphasis, that "the sinner of an hundred years old, shall be
accursed." In which respect, there have doubtless been many persons who,
instead of having eventually any cause for rejoicing that they lived so long,
have rather had cause to wish that they had been as an hidden untimely birth;
as infants which never saw the light!

YOU will take notice, my young brethren, that every one of the foregoing
arguments proceeds upon the supposition, that you will actually live to be old
men! Even taking that for granted, there is not one of them but what is
absolutely conclusive in favor of being sober-minded in youth. How strong
then, is the practical conclusion which results from them all in conjunction!

BUT I must now remind you, in the last place, that the forementioned
supposition of your living till you are old, is much too favorable for you: It
is a precarious, unsupported hypothesis; such an one as no person of the least
prudence or discretion would build upon, especially when there is such an
interest at stake. Will you boast yourselves of many years to come, or even of
tomorrow, when you "know not what a day may bring forth"? What a strange
infatuation is this, however common! How many millions of millions of persons
younger than you, are already numbered with the dead in the dust of the earth,
not to arise again till these heavens are no more? How many of the companions
of your childhood, of your friends, relations, and perhaps brethren and
sisters, born after, are gone before you? (For in this sense, as well as in
diverse others, "the first are often last, and the last first.") Some of whom
were perhaps taken away by a sudden violent stroke, without previous warning;
and whose lives having been among the unclean, it were needless to say, that
their death was not with the pure and holy, nor their portion with the blessed.
Now, have you any assurance that you shall not yourselves be thus suddenly
snatched out of the world, while you are dreaming about being sober-minded
twenty or thirty, forty or fifty years hence; when you have sufficiently
fatigued yourselves in the service of Satan and your lusts! Has the God of your
lives? -- has He in whose hand your breath is, and whose are all your ways,
ever told you, that dust and worms shall not cover you before gray hairs appear
upon you? You may be in the place of torment many years before the time comes,
which you allot for reformation!

NOT one of you, however healthy, strong and flourishing, though like a green bay
tree in its prime, has any security that he shall not be suddenly cut down. For
behold, even "now the axe is laid to the root of the trees;" and it cannot be
long before "every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the fire." Young and tender sapplings fall more easily than trees
come to maturity, and to a proper consistence of parts: A small stroke may lay
them level with the earth. Yea, they may be mown down as the grass, and the
flower of the field, "which to day is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven:"
Nor are they so green, or full of sap, but that a fire may be found fierce
enough to burn them -- In the language of the book of Job, "Man that is born of
a woman, is of few days -- He comes forth as a flower, and is cut down: He
flees also as a shadow, and continues not." In the language of Moses, we are
"like grass which grows up. In the morning it flourishes, and grows up; in
the evening it is cut down and withers. -- We spend our years as a tale that
is told." In the language of David, "every man at his best estate, is
altogether vanity." In the language of Solomon, "Whatsoever thy hand finds to
do, do it with thy might; for there is no work -- in the grave whither thou
go -- For man also knows not his time; as the fishes that are taken in an
evil net," etc. And again, "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
while the evil days come not." -- In the language of St. Peter, "All flesh is
as grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower of grass: The grass
withers, and the flower thereof falls away; but the word of the Lord
endures forever." And in the words of St. James, well worthy the attention of
all, and particularly of those of you, who are warmly engaged in worldly
business, trafic and merchandise; "Go to now, ye that say, Today or tomorrow,
we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and
get gain: whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. For what is your
life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away."

YOU see then, my young brethren, the infinite importance, not only in general
of being sober-minded, but of being so immediately, without any delay; as for
many other reasons that have been mentioned, so particularly for this, that you
have no security for another day, hour or moment. This being the case, how
extremely foolish and dangerous is it to depend upon living many years! To day
then, as the holy Ghost says, even while it is called to day, harden not your
hearts; lest tomorrow should not be a day of salvation, but of perdition to
you! O that you were all wise; that you understood this, and duly considered
your latter end! If you knew how frail you are, and numbered your days aright,
it would be morally impossible for you, not to apply your hearts to that
salutary wisdom and sobriety, to which you are exhorted.

IT may be useful to you, my young brethren, if I here subjoin some short
counsels and cautions of a mixed nature; though diverse of them may perhaps be
near akin to some that are contained in the foregoing discourses; and others
only prudential. And,

1. BEWARE of irreligious, deistical books and men; lest you should be deluded
by them to your ruin. Some there are in all ages, who, like the old serpent,
though far less subtle, "lie in wait to deceive." There are many, who being
either men of grossly depraved and profligate morals, cannot endure the
restraints of religion; or else men of uncommon pride, affectation and vanity,
set themselves up as champions for infidelity. These latter, not knowing how to
distinguish themselves as their ambition prompts them, by fair and laudable
means, engage warmly in this black cause of impiety; assuming to themselves the
airs and importance of men of uncommon penetration and sagacity, merely on the
credit of affecting to know more than others, and of contradicting what all the
wisest and best men in the world have believed. And how very knowing and
learned must these gentlemen be, who have clearly discovered the errors and
delusions at least, perhaps the knavery, of those persons, who have been in all
ages the most celebrated for wisdom, virtue and piety! What profound geniuses?
what enlightened, clarified and sublime souls must these sages have, who have
so clearly detected the imposture, or the folly and gross ignorance of Moses,
Solomon and the prophets; of JESUS CHRIST and his apostles; of all our Boyles,
Locks, Clerks, Newtons, Butlers, Hoadleys, Chandlers, Sherlocks, etc. etc.?
These must be very sagacious gentlemen indeed! And how benevolent, magnanimous
and glorious their attempts to undeceive mankind, and to deliver the world from
the errors, the superstitions, and monstrous notions about religion, taught by
such persons! -- What an ample field was here for the heroic exploits, and
imaginary triumphs of vanity in a Collins, a Woolston and a Tindal; in a
Shaftsbury and a Morgan, a Chub and a Bolinbroke? -- But it is, in effect, of
such men as these, of their sophistical writings, declamations and documents,
that Solomon counsels you to beware, saying, "Cease, my Son, to hear the
instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge."

2. GIVE your minds and attention chiefly to plain things in religion; to the
obvious doctrines and duties of it; such as are indisputable, and such as
almost all christians are, and ever were agreed in. For these are, without
doubt, of the greatest importance; and on the belief and practice of them, more
especially, does your present and future happiness depend. It cannot be
supposed, that the all-wise, good and merciful God, has made the eternal
salvation of men depend upon niceties; upon abstruse speculations, or things
difficult to be understood. History informs us that Caligula, one of the most
cruel and infamous of the Roman Emperors, commanded his edicts, laws and orders
to be written in such small, obscure characters, and then fixed up so high,
that it was next to impossible for people in general to read and understand
them, that they might know his Majesty's pleasure. This he is said to have
done, on purpose to ensnare his subjects; that he might have an opportunity to
embrue his hands in their blood as malefactors, under color of law and justice.
It is said of Basilides, another infamous tyrant, that he would often impose
the most unreasonable and impracticable commands on his subjects; for example,
that he would require One to bring him a pint, or large quantity of his sweat
in a vessel, on a cold frosty morning; and another, to bring him a great number
of fleas chained together in a particular manner, at a season, or in a country,
wherein no fleas were to be found; and the like: And then put them to death for
disobedience. It is said of Procrustes, an infamous robber and petty tyrant,
that he would, with great apparent kindness, condescension and humanity, invite
people to lodge at his palace, or castle: And then cut off the feet and legs of
some who were too tall, and stretch and torture others who were too short, to
make them just as long as the bed prepared for them. Now, the representations
often given us of God's dealings with men, suppose him to be really no better
than an almighty Caligula, Basilides or Procrustes; or rather, to have all
their particular bad qualities, and peculiar caprices united in himself. Thus
do some, though I hope ignorantly, blaspheme the all-wise, good and merciful God!
Be all such impious conceptions of him far from you, as it is from the Almighty
that he should do wickedly, or pervert justice and judgment! You may be assured
that all of you, who sincerely desire to know and to do his will, in order to
your eternal happiness, may both know and do it, as far as is necessary to that
end, by means of the light, help and grace which he affords to them that seek
him. The truth and will of God, as far as your salvation is concerned in
knowing it, is not obscurely or darkly, but clearly revealed; so that "he that
runs may read:" And the path of life, to an honest mind, is so plain, that "the
wayfaring men, though fools, can hardly err therein." There are however,
doubtless, some things in the word of God, "hard to be understood." Neither,
when I advise you to attend chiefly to those that are plain and easy, do I mean
that you should not, as far as may be, acquaint yourselves with the whole truth
revealed; "that ye may stand perfect, and complete in the will of God."

3. YOU should always interpret the more obscure and difficult parts of
scripture, in consistence with those that are plain. You should rather forever
confess your ignorance of the former, than understand them in a sense repugnant
to the latter; and then torture these plain ones, to make them agree with
obscure ones misunderstood. This has been a very common practice; particularly
in some famous theological controversies that might be mentioned: In which some
zealous champions for unscriptural mysteries, have indeed shown a wonderful
dexterity at "darkening counsel by words without knowledge."

4. IF any of you should have leisure and inclination to acquaint yourselves
with the state of those controversies, which now subsist in the christian
world; whether concerning doctrines, modes of worship, or ecclesiastic order
and polity; you should do it rather with a view to your private information and
satisfaction, and for the regulation of your own conduct, than that you may be
qualified for holding a disputation upon these subjects. At least, if you
should acquire any skill or ability in controversy, which is a kind of fencing,
and sometimes even among the zealous fathers of the church, ended in murderous
thrusts and blood: I say, if you should acquire any skill in this art, you
should rather use it only upon occasion, in your own necessary defense when
attacked, (as honest and peaceable men sometimes do swords) than carry it about
with you to assail, or terrify others. It is seldom that any good, and often
that much mischief, comes of this kind of controversy; whether you call it
playing, fencing or fighting: And, to "show out of a good conversation your
works with meekness of wisdom," will be much more to your honor and advantage,
than the greatest reputation you can possibly obtain in this way.

5. IF you should happen to differ in opinion in some respects, from most of
those among whom you live; a degree of caution and reserve may be prudent,
expedient, and not inconsistent with christian simplicity, or godly sincerity:
Especially if the difference is not very important in its nature. Men in a
private station, and particularly young men, have no call to tell the whole
world their particular opinions; and much less, to make it a business to
dispute about them. By doing so, some have hurt their own interest very
essentially, without doing the least good to others: Especially in times and
places, wherein bigotry, a party-spirit, enthusiasm and censoriousness have
prevailed. You will find this very salutary counsel, if it should hereafter be
your lot to live in any country, where such an abominable, antichristian spirit
in the common people, is rather encouraged than discountenanced by many persons
in authority, and by numbers of the leading clergy; -- by some, through
ignorance, and a zeal not according to knowledge; and by others, from
political, avaritious and worldly motives: Neither of which is an uncommon case
in this evil world -- But it is not the intent of any thing which I have said,
to advise you against ever entering into conversation upon disputed points.
Occasionally to open your minds freely, and to discourse upon them with people
of candor and moderation, whom you know; not in the controversial way, for
vanity or victory, but merely for the sake of receiving or giving information:
This, I say, may be at once very agreeable and edifying to you. But remember,
there are comparatively but few persons, to whom your minds can be thus laid
open, with prudence and safety. And therefore,

6. AT all times avoid, as far as possible, entering into any kind of religious
dispute with a hot enthusiast, or with any of those persons, whose brains are
half turned with systematical divinity; and whose angry passions are apparently
engaged in defending the jargon, either of ancient symbols, or of more modern
confessions of faith; all, of human invention, and some of them antiscriptural.
Would you think either to convince such men, "foaming out their own shame," or
even to allay their intemperate heat, clamor and railing, by reasoning with
them; -- by sober argument! -- At least, first try your talent at reasoning
some other way. For example; try it first on a whirlwind; then on the cataracts
of Niagara, and next on the fiery eruptions of Vesuvius, Stromboli and AEtna.
If the experiment succeeds; if you can suspend the fury and rage of all these,
by the force of your reasoning; you will then have some encouragement to make
trial of it upon such men as the foaming enthusiast, and the flaming bigot;
otherwise it is best for you to leave them to God, and endeavor to be, and
keep sober yourselves.

7. AVOID all ostentation in religion. Do nothing from a spirit of vainglory;
especially nothing that has any relation to religion; but every thing, in
lowliness of mind. Neither affect to appear righteous unto men; but endeavor
to do your duty in all respects, as in the sight of God who tries your hearts.
Be not righteous overmuch; neither make yourselves over-wise: why should you
destroy yourselves? Eccl. VII. 17.
Every thing that is shewy, affected and ostentations in religion; or done with
an apparent design to make people think the doer very scrupulous,
conscientious, and eminently pious, is highly disgustful to persons of true
wisdom and penetration; and, which is far more, highly offensive to God, who
dwells with, and delights in, them that are of a lowly, humble and contrite
spirit.

8. ON the other hand, beware of false shame and modesty; a common vice, and
none of the least. People are often ashamed of their duty; sometimes, only lest
fools should laugh at and deride them for doing it; and sometimes, perhaps,
lest others should think they have not shame and modesty enough. To be ashamed,
in any case, of what is right and fit to be done, and from that principle to
omit it, is real impudence, and of the worst kind; because it is offending God,
through bashfulness with regard to man. To be sure, never be ashamed of your
Savior, "or of his words;" but confess both before men on all proper
occasions; lest he should also be ashamed of you, when he comes in the glory
of his Father, with the holy angels.

9. REST not satisfied with any profession of religion, or in any superficial
reformation of manners: Rest in nothing short of Jesus Christ, through faith that
works by love, and which connotes that new birth, and new creature, spoken of
inscripture. Every thing short of this, will leave you destitute of christian
sobriety; and therefore, in a state of sin, guilt and death. Besides: Unfeigned
faith in Christ as the redeemer of sinners, purity of heart, and a supreme love
to God, are necessary in order to your having any true delight in his service,
and enjoying the comforts of religion, or of the Holy Ghost, in this world.
Religion will be rather a burden, an uneasy restraint to you, than your
happiness and delight, if you have no more of it than the form. She bestows not
her comforts, her divine joys, but on them that sincerely love her, embrace her
with their whole heart, and yield themselves up unreservedly to her heavenly
influence and power. So long as your hearts are divided betwixt God and the
world, they will be miserably torn and tortured; you will be in doubts, in
fears and darkness. But once give up all; once renounce every thing that stands
in competition with God, and resolve to follow the Lamb "whither soever he
goes;" then will you indeed find rest unto your souls. Your eye being thus
single, your whole body shall be full of light; your souls, of heavenly peace,
hope and comfort.

10. KEEP a particular watch and guard upon your own iniquity; upon the sin
that most easily besets you, upon your constitutional, and most beloved lust.
All people in general have, either originally from nature, or from the
circumstances of their education, employment, or station in life, some such
favorite lust or passion; which is to them as a right hand, or a right eye:
They know not how to part with it, till they are born of the Spirit; so dear it
is to them. And even then, it is not always so far conquered as to be upon the
same level with other vices. The dethroned tyrant, that once reigned without
control, loses not all his power at once; but often struggles to regain his
former empire in the heart. In some persons this tyrant is anger, in others
envy, in others avarice, in others vanity or pride, in others uncleanness, in
others intemperance in meat and drink; and so on. And whatever your own
predominant passion is, you are respectively to keep a particular eye upon it.
Till you have in some good measure got the mastery of it, you are not to
imagine yourselves christians: This is your particular trial, and a touchstone
of your sincerity toward God.

BUT to draw near to the conclusion of this discourse and subject together: I
have, in the simplicity of my heart, been taking considerable pains to give you
such instructions, counsels and warnings; and to lay before you such motives to
sobriety, as are agreeable to the word of God; all, with a sincere view to your
temporal and eternal good. I have borne it upon my own mind all along, that I
am accountable to God for whatever I deliver to you as his word and will, and
your duty to believe and practice: And that, if I wilfully or knowingly deliver
to you any thing contrary thereto, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men; I do it at the utmost peril of my own perdition. Let me remind you, on the
other hand, my young brethren, that you are also accountable to God, our common
Sovereign, for the reception which you give to his word and commandments, made
known to you; and, that if you wilfully disregard or neglect them, your peril
will be equally great. I therefore beseech, as well as exhort you, to be
sober-minded. You will, probably, be either the better or the worse in the end,
for my discourses to you upon this subject: Which of them it shall be, depends,
under God, upon yourselves; upon your remembering and observing, or forgetting
and neglecting, what has been said to you agreeably to the holy scriptures.
And, from the general, and apparently serious attention which you have given,
there seems to be more ground to hope the former, than to fear the latter: God
grant, that the event may confirm, and eternally justify these hopes!

BEFORE Him; the great, the all-knowing, impartial and almighty Judge of all,
both you the hearers, and I the speaker, must ever long appear, to give an
account of ourselves respectively. We shall all, at the appointed time, appear
before the tribunal of Jesus Christ: For God has "appointed a day, wherein he
will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained;
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead." I am certain, that in that great day, I shall not be condemned by
him for any wilful perversion of his gospel, either in my discourses on this,
or on any other subject; my own conscience bearing me witness in the Holy
Ghost, that in this respect at least, I am innocent; clear from the blood of
you and all men, whether old or young. See, my beloved brethren, See that you
give such a reception to the real, the undoubted doctrines and precepts of the
gospel, that you may, in respect of your own practice, have the like
comfortable witness of your conscience, and boldness in the day of judgment;
lest, otherwise, you should be condemned with the world. Great will be your
guilt, heavy your condemnation, inexpressible your misery, if you should
persevere in sinning against light, conviction of the truth, and the dictates
of your own consciences! Glorious will be your recompense of reward at last, if
you believe the word of God, and keep it.

YET a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.
Methinks, almost, I already see the heavens which have received him, opening,
and the Son of man descending in great power and glory! the judgment set! the
books opened! the dead raised! the righteous appearing with ineffable joy and
triumph; the wicked with unutterable woe and anguish! both presaging, beyond
the possibility of a doubt, what their sentence will respectively be! -- O, my
young brethren, where will you? -- where shall I be found, when this great day
of the Lord arrives? -- a day so glorious to them that love his appearing; so
dreadful to them that hate him, and disobey his commandments!

LET me conclude with expressing the sentiments and desires of my heart,
respecting both you and myself, in a short prayer to Him that hears prayer;
as follows.

O THOU, of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things; the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named! O, graciously behold these young men before thee; from the womb
ignorant of, and therefore estranged from thee: But yet thy offspring; formed
by thy hand, animated by thy breath, and enlightened with a ray from the
fountain of light in thee; born under the common law of mortality, through the
offense of One, and naturally subject to the bondage of corruption; born to die
in a few days, and yet to live forever; encompassed always with thy presence,
upheld by thy power, and living only in and by thee.

GREAT Creator and Father of all! who despisest not the work of thine own
hands; Thou who did fashion them so wonderfully in the womb, and take them
from it to behold the light! even thou have also nourished them and brought
them up as children, since they first hung upon their mothers breasts. Thou
have delivered them from many evils, and shielded them from unnumber'd dangers,
through the feeble states of infancy and childhood. Thou, on whom all eyes wait,
who hear the young ravens when they cry, and before whom not a sparrow is
forgotten: Thou have supplied their natural wants from thy stores and
treasures, with a bountiful, a paternal hand; and made provision for their
deliverance from sin and death, and for their eternal happiness, even before
thou gave them their being. In the fullness of time, according to thy gracious
promise of old, thou did send forth thy Son, made and born of a woman; who,
by thy grace, has tasted death for every man, to redeem them that were under
the law; and that we sinners of the gentiles might also receive the adoption of
sons. From children they have had an opportunity to know the holy scriptures,
which testify of thy Son, and which are able to make them wise unto salvation,
through faith which is in him.

O RIGHTEOUS Father! they have indeed erred from thy ways; they have sinned,
they have rebelled against thee. O give them now repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness. May they know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, to the obtaining life
eternal. Wherein they have erred from thy righteous paths, forgive, O most
merciful Father! forgive them, through the blood of the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world. Remember not against them the sins of their youth; for
childhood and youth are vanity. Father forgive them; for they knew not what
they did! Thou considerest their frame, thou rememberest that they are dust;
and art not strict to mark iniquity. Thou have said by the mouth of thine holy
apostles, that thou will have all men to be saved; and art not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come unto repentance; that they may receive
the remission of sins, through Him that died for all, the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us to God; and who is able to save them unto the uttermost
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

O HOLY Father! may these young men be sanctified through thy truth; thy word
is truth. Cleanse them thoroughly from their sins, from all unrighteousness,
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, in the pure, the hallowed fountain
which thou have opened. May they be holy, and without blame before thee in
love, being followers of thee as dear children the remainder of their days on
earth; that they may be heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, whom
thou have appointed heir of all things.

O THOU who wast, and art, and art to come; the same from everlasting to
everlasting! behold, thou have made their days as an handbreadth, and their age
is as nothing before thee. Cause them therefore, whose life is as a vapor, as
a flower, as a post that hastes by; O cause them to know their end, and the
measure of their days what it is; that, considering how frail they are, they
may remember thee in the days of their youth; that they may even now apply
their hearts unto wisdom, and for the time to come, be sober-minded according
to thy word.

FATHER of lights, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning; Eternal Source of truth and love! thy unworthy servant has declared
thy love and thy truth unto them, that they might both know and love thee. He
has sown, not perishing or corruptible, but the incorruptible seed; even thy
word, O Lord, which lives and abides forever. Though sown in weakness, may it
be raised in power! Thou alone give the increase, whosoever sows, or
planteth, or waters. O cause this good seed, though so unskilfully sown, to
take deep and effectual root in all their hearts, however hard any of them may
be, through the deceitfulness of sin; that it may spring up speedily, and grow,
first the blade, then the ear, and after that the full corn in the ear, a
goodly and plenteous harvest of the fruit of righteousness, to the glory of thy
great name by Jesus Christ; to their own peace, honor and happiness here, and
to their eternal felicity in thy kingdom which is above.

PERFECT the good work already begun in any of them, unto the day of Christ:
Keep them from falling, that they may in due time appear in thy glorious
presence with exceeding joy. And grant, O heavenly, most holy and most gracious
Father! grant that thy unworthy servant, having preached to others, may not
himself be a castaway! May he with them, though so unworthy of thy favorable
regards, yet through thy unutterable love and grace in Christ Jesus, be found at
last at his right hand, whom thou have made the Lord and Judge of all. With
them, and with thy unworthy, though not wholly unfaithful servant, it is a very
small thing that they should be judged of man's judgment, or have their names
cast out as evil: He that judges them, and all, whose judgment is at once
true, impartial and decisive, is the Lord.

IN that great day, therefore, O my God! when the stars of heaven shall fall to
the earth, even as a fig tree shakes her untimely figs, when she is shaken of
a mighty wind; when the heavens shall depart as a scroll when it is rolled
together, and every mountain and island shall be moved out of their places;
when the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman; when all
who have killed, persecuted, or maliciously condemned the just; when all who
have rejected and disobeyed thy sacred word, or knowingly perverted it, through
the love or fear of this present world, shall hide themselves in the dens, and
in the rocks of the mountains; and shall say to the mountains and rocks, Fall
on us, and hide us from the face of Him that sits upon the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb: In that great day, O my God' may thy most unworthy
servant, may these young men, may all that are here assembled in thy house of
prayer, of whatever age, sex or degree, having believed and obeyed thy truth in
simplicity, the truth as it is in Jesus, have great peace and boldness! May
even the least of them have then no occasion to hide themselves in the dens and
in the rocks of the mountains; or to say to the mountains and rocks, Fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb! O grant that, in that day, the least as well as greatest of
us may lift up our heads with joy; knowing that He who loved us, and whom not
having before seen we loved, together with our complete redemption, is come:
And may, with the general assembly, the church of the first born, and the
innumerable company of angels, with loud, joyful and triumphant voices, ascribe
blessing, and honor, and glory, and power unto Him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb forever and ever. For worthy, O GREATEST and BEST of
Beings! Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, and has redeemed us unto GOD by his
blood, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory and blessing AMEN!

CORRECTIONS.
Page, line, from, read, 24 3 top of the truth. 65 15 top "gather together 81
13 bottom PREACHER 94 8 bottom on the 102 14 bottom Indeed, in any 124 4 top
shall he not hear 128 Margin, last line, before the time of Mose 135 20 bottom
says ver. 7. [ dele and] 142 12 top to hear 146 Margin 6 bottom persecutors 169
9 bottom folly, impudence 172 16 bottom that must be, 220 9 top beasts 237 8
top you see a 252 4 bottom that it is holy 283 15 bottom grateful reception 285
5 top self-destroyed

SOME slips in the spelling and pointing are omitted


