From the Massachusetts-Gazette, THURSDAY, February 2, 1764.
An ACCOUNT of the Fire at Harvard-College, in Cambridge; with the Loss
sustained thereby.
BOSTON: PRINTED BY R. AND S. DRAPER.
CAMBRIDGE, JANUARY 25, 1764.
LAST night HARVARD COLLEGE, suffered the most ruinous loss it ever met with
since its foundation. In the middle of a very tempestuous night, a severe cold
storm of snow attended with high wind, we were awaked by the alarm of fire.
Harvard-Hall, the only one of our ancient buildings which still remained,
Harvard-Hall, 42 feet broad, 96 long, and four stories high, was founded
A.D.1672.
and the repository of our most valuable treasures, the public LIBRARY and
Philosophical APPARATUS, was seen in flames. As it was a time of vacation, in
which the students were all dispersed, not a single person was left in any of
the Colleges, except two or three in that part of Massachusetts most distant
from Harvard, where the fire could not be perceived till the whole surrounding
air began to be illuminated by it: When it was discovered from the town, it had
risen to a degree of violence that defied all opposition. It is conjectured to
have begun in a beam under the hearth in the library, where a fire had been
kept for the use of the General Court, now residing and sitting here, by reason
of the Smallpox at Boston: from thence it burst out into the Library. The
books easily submitted to the fury of the flame, which with a rapid and
irresistible progress made its way into the Apparatus Chamber, and spreading
through the whole building, in a very short time left nothing but the bare walls.
The other Colleges, Stoughton-Hall and Massachusetts-Hall, were in the utmost
hazard of sharing the same fate. The wind driving the flaming cinders directly
upon their roofs, they blazed out several times in different places; nor could
they have been saved by all the help the Town could afford, had it not been for
the assistance of the Gentlemen of the General Court, among whom his Excellency
the Governor was very active; who, notwithstanding the extreme rigor of the
season, exerted themselves in supplying the town Engine with water, which they
were obliged to fetch at last from a distance, two of the College pumps being
then rendered useless. Even the new and beautiful Hollis-Hall, though it was on
the windward side, hardly escaped. It stood so near to Harvard, that the flames
actually seized it, and without immediate help must have carried it. But by the
Blessing of God on the vigorous efforts of the assistants, the ruin was
confined to Harvard-Hall; and there, besides the destruction of the private
property of those who had chambers in it, the public loss is very great;
perhaps, irreparable. The Library and the Apparatus, which for many years had
been growing, and were now judged to be the best furnished in America, are
annihilated. But to give the public a more distinct idea of the loss, we shall
exhibit a summary view of the general contents of each, as far as we can, on a
sudden, recollect them.

Of the LIBRARY.
IT contained -- The Holy Scriptures in almost all languages, with the most
valuable Expositors and Commentators, ancient and modern: -- The whole Library
of the late learned Dr. Lightfoot, which at his death he bequeathed to this
College, and contained the Targums, Talmuds, Rabbis, Polygot, and other
valuable tracts relative to oriental literature, which is taught here: -- The
library of Dr. Theophilus Gale, consisting of -- Volumes: -- All the Fathers,
Greek and Latin, in their best editions. -- A great number of tracts in defense
of revealed Religion, wrote by the most masterly hands, in the last and present
century. -- Sermons of the most celebrated English divines, both of the
established national church and protestant dissenters: -- Tracts upon all the
branches of polemic divinity: -- The donation of the venerable Society for
propagating the Gospel in foreign parts, consisting of a great many volumes of
tracts against Popery, published in the Reigns of Charles II. and James II. the
Boylean lectures, and other the most esteemed English sermons: -- A valuable
collection of modern theological treatises, presented by the Right Rev Dr.
Sherlock, late Ld. Bishop of London, the Rev. Dr. Hales, F.R.S. and Dr. Wilson
of London: -- A vast number of philological tracts, containing the rudiments of
almost all languages, ancient and modern: -- The Hebrew, Greek and Roman
antiquities. -- The Greek and Roman Classics, presented by the late excellent
and catholic-spirited Bishop Berkeley; most of them the best editions: A large
collection of History and biographical tracts ancient and modern. --
Dissertations on various Political subjects. -- The Transactions of the Royal
Society, Academy of Sciences in France, Acta Eruditerum. Miscellanea curiosa,
the works of Boil and Newton, with a great variety of other mathematical and
philosophical treatises: -- A collection of the most approved Medical Authors,
chiefly presented by Mr. James, of the island of Jamaica; to which Dr. Mead and
other Gentlemen have made very considerable additions: Also Anatomical cutts
and two complete Skeletons of different sexes. This Collection would have been
very serviceable to a Professor of Physic and Anatomy, when the revenues of the
College should have been sufficient to subsist a gentleman in this character.
-- A few ancient and valuable Manuscripts in different languages. -- A pa^^ of
excellent new Globe of the largest size presented by Andrew Oliver, jun. Esquire --
A variety of (...) natural and artificial, both of American and foreign
produce. -- A font of Greek types (which, as we had not yet a printing-office,
was reposited in the library) presented by our great benefactor the late worthy
Thomas Hollis, Esquire, of London; whose picture, as large as the life, and
institutions for two professorships and ten scholarships, perished in the
flames.

The Library contained above five thousand volumes, all which were consumed,
except a few books in the hands of the members of the house; and two donations,
one made by our late honorable Lieutenant Governor Dummer, to the value of L50
sterling; the other of 56 volumes, by the present worthy Thomas Hollis, Esquire
F.R.S. of London, to whom we have been annually obliged for valuable additions
to our late library: Which donations, being but lately received, had not the
proper boxes prepared for them; and so escaped the general ruin.

As the library records are burnt, no doubt some valuable benefactions have
been omitted in this account, which was drawn up only by memory.

Of the APPARATUS.
WHEN the late worthy THOMAS HOLLIS, Esquire of London founded a Professorship of
Mathematics and Philosophy in Harvard-College, he sent a fine Apparatus for
Experimental Philosophy in its several Branches.

Under the head of Mechanics, there were machines for experiments of falling
bodies, of the center of gravity, and of centrifugal forces; -- the several
mechanical powers, balances of different sorts, levers, pullies, wedges,
compound engines; with curious models of each in brass.

In Hydrostatics, very nice balances, jars and bottles of various sizes fitted
with brass caps, vessels for proving the grand hydrostatic Paradox, siphons,
glass models of pumps, hydrostatic balance, etc.

In Pneumatics, there was a number of different tubes for the Torricellian
experiment, a large double barrel'd Air-pump, with a great variety of receivers
of different sizes and shapes; syringes, exhausting and condensing; Barometer,
Thermometer; -- with many other articles.

In Optics, there were several sorts of mirrors, concave, unequal, cylindric;
Lenses of different foci; instruments for proving the fundamental law of
refraction; Prisms, with the whole apparatus for the Newtonian theory of light
and colors; the camera obscura, etc.

And a variety of instruments for miscellaneous purposes.

THE following articles were afterward sent us by Mr. Thomas Hollis, Nephew to
that generous Gentleman, viz. an Orrery, an armillary Sphere, and a box of
Microscopes; all of exquisite workmanship.

For Astronomy, we had before been supplied with Telescopes of different
lengths; one of 24 feet; and a brass Quadrant of two feet radius, carrying a
Telescope of a greater length; which formerly belonged to the celebrated Dr.
Halley. We had also the most useful instruments for Dialling; -- and for
Surveying, a brass semicircle, with plain sights and magnetic needle. Also, a
curious Telescope, with a complete apparatus for taking the difference of
Level; lately presented by Christopher Kilby, Esquire

Many very valuable additions have of late years been made to this apparatus by
several generous benefactors, whom it would be ingratitude not to commemorate
here, as no vestiges of their donations remain. We are under obligation to
mention particularly, the late Sir Peter Warren, Knt. Sir Henry Frankland,
Bart. Hon. Jonathan Belcher, Esquire Lt. Governor of Nova Scotia; Thomas Hancock,
Esquire James Bowdoin, Esquire Ezekiel Goldthwait, Esquire John Hancock, A.M. of Boston,
and Mr. Gilbert Harrison of London, Merchant. From these Gentlemen we received
fine reflecting Telescopes of different magnifying powers; and adapted to
different observations; Microscopes of the several sorts now in use; Hadley's
Quadrant fitted in a new manner; a nice Variation Compass, and Dipping needle;
with instruments for the several magnetical and electrical experiments -- all
new, and of excellent workmanship.

ALL DESTROYED!
Cambridge, Jan. 26. 1764. As the General Assembly have this day cheerfully and
unanimously voted to rebuild Harvard-Hall, it encourages us to hope, that the
LIBRARY and APPARATUS will also be repaired by the private munificence of those
who wish well to America, have a regard for New England, and know the
importance of literature to the Church and State.


