THE CONDUCT OF THE PAXTON-MEN, IMPARTIALLY REPRESENTED: WITH ^O REMAR^^ ON THE
NARRATIVE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ANDREW STEUART. MDCCLXIV.

THE CONDUCT OF The PAXTON-MEN, Impartially represented; The DISTRESSES of the
FRONTIERS, and the COMPLAINTS and SUFFERINGS of the PEOPLE fully stated; and
the Methods recommended by the wisest Nations, in such Cases, seriously
considered.

WITH SOME REMARKS upon the NARRATIVE, Of the Indian-Massacre, lately published.

Interspersed with several interesting Anecdotes, relating to the MILITARY
GENIUS, and WARLIKE PRINCIPLES of the People called QUAKERS: Together-with
proper Reflection and Advice upon the whole.

In a LETTER From a GENTLEMAN in one of the Back-Counties, to a FRIEND in
Philadelphia.

-- Si tibi vera videtur,
Deed Manus; et, si falsa est, accingere contra. --.
LUCRET. The impious Man who sells his COUNTRY'S FREEDOM,
Makes all the Guilt of Tyranny his own. --
His are her SLAUGHTERS, her OPPRESSIONS His. --
MARTYN's TIM^^^^ Whoever will pretend to govern a People without regarding
(...) soon repent it. -- Such Feats of Errantry may do perhaps in (...) But in
Countries where the People are FREE, it is Madness to rule them against their
W^lls. -- They will know that Government is appointed for their Sakes, and will
be saucy enough to expect some Regards and some Good from their own DELEGATES.
-- Those Nations who are governed in Spite of themselves, and in a Manner that
bi^^ Defiance to their Opinions, their Interes^s, and their Understandings, --
are either SLAVES, or will soon cease to be SUBJECTS.

CATO's LETTERS. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by A Steuart, and sold by JOHN CREAIG,
Shopkeeper in Lancaster. 1764.

A LETTER from a GENTLEMAN in one of the Frontier-Counties, to his Friend in
Philadelphia, relating to the Paxton-Men.
DEAR SIR,
THE PAXTON RIOT (as it is called) makes so great a Noise, and is so much the
general Topic, that a Man must be but little in Conversation, without having
his Opinion asked concerning this Affair. -- In Truth, Matters are now come to
such a Pass, that some People are of Opinion, that an Endeavor to make them
worse may probably be the Way to make them better. Resentment rages high, and
gathers thick from every Quarter; and where it will stop, I must leave to those
that have more Light within them, than I can boast of, to determine.

For my Part, I am no Ad^pt in Politics, and have but seldom troubled my Head
about that Science, beyond the reading of a common News-Paper. -- It has long
been my unhappy Lot to be a Spectator of the Distresses and Sufferings of my
Fellow Subjects; my Heart has often bled for them; -- and I should still have
continued a secret Mourner for what I had not Power to redress, had not the
unaccoutable Conduct of your City Quakers provoked me to speak my Sentiments,
and unburthen myself to my Friend. -- By my Principles as well as Situation in
Life, you know, my dear Sir, that I have no political Ends to serve; that I
have nothing to hope or fear from Party Connections; and that I can have no
other View in troubling you with this Letter than to rescue the miserable
Frontier People, who lately rose in Arms, from the Infamy and Odium thrown upon
them, by those whose unfeeling Hearts have never suffered them to look beyond
their own private Interest and Party. The Author of this Letter, hopes he will
not be understood as approving of these People's having taken up Arms. Such
violent Steps can never possibly be productive of any thing, but WILD UPROAR
and CONFUSION. Whatever therefore can have a Tendency to promote this; or that
offers the least Insult to the LAWS and GOVERNMENT of his Country, he will ever
think it his Duty to bea^ his Testimony against, and to discountenance by every
Means in his Power.


The INSURGENTS themselves hand about a Kind of Manifesto, which contains the
following Declaration, Grievances, Complaints, etc. -- viz.

That a trifling Dispute, between a few English and French Traders upon the
Ohio, was neglected; the profer'd Mediation and Assistance of the Indians to
end the Quarrel, and the Proprietary-Offer of L. 400, for erecting a small
Fortification there, together with L. 100 yearly, toward the Support of it,
were contemptuously rejected See Governor MORRIS'S Message of November 22, 1755.
till it kindled the Flames of War, which at last spread and raged over half
the Globe. -- That from the Neglect of the Legislative Part of this Province,
and the horrid Doctrines of Non-Resistance at that Time so strenously
maintained, such Calamities ensued, that near one Hundred Miles of as thriving
a Settlement as any in Pennsylvania has been reduced to Desolation; many of the
Inhabitants murdered or carried into Captivity, and the Rest often drove from
their Habitations in the utmost Distress and Want. -- And besides these
particular Effects of this War, some of the best Blood in Christendom has been
spilt in it -- whole Kingdoms have been almost depopulated; and Misery and Ruin
entailed upon Millions of their Fellow Creatures.

That even in the Midst of this Desolation and Carnage, every public Measure
was clogged -- the King's Demands for Men and Money procrastinated --
unnecessary, or at least ill-timed Disputes, about Proprietary Instuctions and
Taxes, were brought upon the Carpet, in Order to divert the Reproach and
Dishonor which the Province, through Quaker Measures, had incurred, and throw
the whose Blame of the War at the Proprietary Doors. See the Speeches and
Messages between the Governer and Assembly, from the Year 1753, to the Year
1760.
And that this villainous Scheme might carry with it a better Face, the late
infamous TEDYUSCUNG was treated with, and employed to charge the Proprietaries
with having defrauded the Indians of some Lands, and to declare that this was
the Occasion of all their Uneasiness and Enmity to the English. -- But infamous
as TEDYUSCUNG was, he owned at last that his Complaints were unjust; publicly
renounced his Claim, and declared in open Treaty that he was urged to act this
base Part, and that he was only the Mouth of some Persons in Philadelphia, whom
he did not choose to name. This ^e declared at the last Treaty at Lancaster.


That they have always manifested, and are still upon every Occasion ready to
manifest their Allegiance and Loyalty to their most gracious Sovereign King
GEORGE, whom they have ever esteemed as the kind and careful Father of his
People.

That though born to Liberty, and all the glorious Rights and Privileges of
BRITISH SUBJECTS, they were denied Protection, at a Time when the Cries of
Murder and Distress might have made the very Stones relent; and though roused to
Vengeance and eager to maintain and defend their Lives and sacred Rights, their
Hands were basely tied up!

They could obtain no proper Law to collect their Strength; nor any Sanction or
Encouragement to pursue the Enemies of their Country!

That they have suffered and bled in the Cause of their Country, and have done
more to protect it from the Violence of a rapacious Enemy than any others in
the Province.

That agreeable to the Command of the Prophet, they have fought for their
Brethren, their Sons, and their Daughters, their Wives and their Houses. --
That in this Contest, many of them have lost their dearest Relatives; their
Houses, their Lands, their all; and from a plentiful independent People have
been reduced to Misery and Want.

That they have been treated as Aliens of the Commonwealth, and denied a just
and proportionable Share in Legislation: For that out of 36 Members which the
eight Counties in the Province send to Assembly, the three Counties of
Philadelphia, Chester and Bucks, where the Quakers are chiefly settled, return
26 of that Number; while the 5 remaining Counties, where these LORDLY RULERS
could have no Chance of getting elected, are suffered to send but the other Ten.

That by this iniquitous Policy, the Inhabitants of these five
Frontier-Counties, although a great Majority, have been rendered unable to act in
Defense of their Lives and Properties; and therefore have lain for above eight
Years at the Mercy of a cruel Savage Enemy and an unrelenting Quaker Faction:
Whereas had they been justy represented in Legislation, instead of presenting
PACIFICK ADDRESSES to the Assembly, telling them that the raising large Sums of
Money, and putting them into Hands of COMMITTEES, who might apply them to
Purposes inconsistent with their PEACEABLE TESTIMONY, was in its Consequences
destructive of RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. See the Quaker-Address to the Assembly,
November 6, 1755.
Instead of doing this, I say, -- the first great Law of Nature, that of
SELF-DEFENCE, would have been administered to the People upon the first Alarm of
Danger, and the Hands of the HARDY and the BRAVE would have been set at
Liberty, til they had taken ample Vengeance of their MURDERERS.

That they have often, in the most suppliant Manner, laid their Grievances
before the Assembly; and instead of being redressed, have been abused,
insulted, and even by some Members of that venerable House, deemed as unworthy
of Protection, as A Pack of insignificant SCOTCH-IRISH, who, if they were all
killed, could well enough be spared. This unchristian and ungenerous Speech was
made by N -- L G -- ^, a Quaker, Member of Assembly for Chester County, and
some others.


That whilst they were thus abused, and thus stripped of their Birthrights, --
ISRAEL and JOSEPH, two petty Fellows, who ought to have no higher Claims than
themselves, were permitted to lord it over the Land; and in Contempt of the
Government, and the express Orders of the Crown, forbiding them to hold private
Treaties with the Indians, exchange Belts of Wampum with them -- make them
Presents -- all this they have done, and in their own Name, without so much as
including the simple MENONISTS, from whom they had extorted large Sums of Money
to Support this Expense. -- Nay, even with the most matchless Impudence,
insinuated to the Indians that they were Rulers and Governors; as plainly
appeared at the late Treaty at LANCASTER, where the Principal CHIEF and SPEAKER
told Mr. H -- N, then Governor, That as he understood there were two GOVERNORS
in the Province, he would be glad to know which of them he was to treat with.
That you may be convinced that such was the Opinion of the Indians, I must
observe to you, that one PATRICK A^NEW, of the Bo^ough of Lancaster,
White-smith, having been duly sworn upon the HOLY EVANGELISTS, before the CHIEF
BUROESS of that Town, has deposed and said* That he, the said Deponent, being
a Constable at the last Indian Treaty at Lancaster, was commanded by the
Gevernor, ^o proclaim, that no Person should sell or give any Kind of
spirituous Liquors to the Indians, on any Pretense whatever; that he proclaimed
his Order through the Town accordingly; and that upon his making Proclamation,
and saying, by Order of the Governor, an Indian named TE^YUSCUNG, cried out D
-- n your G -- r, D -- n your G -- r; ^P^m -- t-n is my Governor, P-m -- t-n is
our Governor, he allows RUM enough; and offered Violence to this Deponent; who
also, upon his Oath, declares that, notwithstanding the Proclamation, the
Indians were privately entertained at a certain Tavern in the Town.


That the Indians were induced to look upon ISRAEL as the first Man, or CHIEF
SACHEM of the Province, from seeing the Haughtiness and Contempt with which he
treated his Fellow Subjects, and (...) insolent and arrogant Behavior to Sir W
-- M ^ -- N at Easton; and to Governor H -- N, at Lancaster: And that this,
among other Things, has been productive of manifold Evils, by weakening our
Credit with Indians, frustrating the good Intention of holding Treaties with
them, and encouraging them, after they returned from us loaded with Money,
Clothes, Arms and Ammunition, to look with Contempt upon us as a pusillanimous
Pack of old Women, divided among ourselves, without SPIRIT or RESOLUTION to
call them to an Account, let them commit what Outrages they pleased upon us. --

That they have been made Tributaries to support the immense Expense of Indian
Treaties; to which they cheerfully submitted, in Hopes that their dear
Relations and Fellow Subjects, who have been long detained in barbarous
Captivity, would have been restored; But that instead of insisting upon the
Promises and Engagements made by the Indians to this End, an extensive and
valuable Trade was opened with these faithless and perfidious Villains; and
their poor unhappy Friends left to spend perhaps the Remainder of their days,
in all the Sorrow and Miseries of Heathenism and Barbarity, and to bow their
Necks to the cruel Slavery of Savages

That at a Time when their ungenerous and merciless Enemies, had again, without
the least provocation, invaded the Province, with the very Arms and Ammunition
which they received at the late Treaties; and when the Frontiers were yet
reeking with the Blood of their slaughtered inhabitants; and the murdered
Ghosts of their Friends and Relatives cried aloud for Vengeance, a Number of
Indians (many of which were concerned in this horrid Butchery) were escorted to
the Metropolis, and there protected, cherished, and maintained in Luxury and
Idleness, whilst they, the poor Sufferers, were abandoned to Misery, and left
to starve, or beg their Bread.

That upon seeing themselves thus abused and thus neglected, and considering
that the Influence of a Quaker Faction was the Source from whence all these
Evils flowed; and that pretended Scruples against War and Fighting were the
Root from whence all their Calamities and heavy Sufferings sprang, and if yet
permitted, might produce worse and more heavy, they were determined to bear no
longer.

That Pennsylvania appeared to them to be really in a dangerous CACHEXY; and
that at such a Crisis they look^d upon it as their Duty to administer such
Remedies (however severe they might be looked upon by some) as might raise her
drooping Head, and restore her to Health and Vigor. -- And should their first
Trial fail of Success, that in that Case they are determined to double the
Potion, By this Expression, I am told, these People mean, that they will renew
their Application and ADDRESSES, with DOUBLE the NUMBER of Signers; and it is
said, they are likely to get TEN to One, that they had before, to ^emonstrate
with them.
which they hope will entirely purge off the peccant Humors, restore the
Solids, and secure her hereafter from the Infection of Quaker Non-Resistance.

Such is the Declaration, and such the Complaints of these People. -- And
indeed nine Tenths of the Inhabitants of the Back-Counties either tacitly, or
openly, approve and support them -- Every cool and well thinking Man, as well
as Men among themselves, are sensibly concerned that they were reduced to the
Necessity of having Recourse to such Methods as might be deemed an Insult to
the Government and Laws of their King and Country.

The Names of RIOTERS, REBELS, MURDERERS, WHITE SAVAGES, etc. See the
NARRATIVE, and a Letter from 'SQUIRE READ, the JER^EY DEMOST^ENES, etc.
have been liberally and indiscriminately bestowed upon them: But all this they
look upon only as the Effects of disappointed Malice, and the Resentment of a
destructive FACTION, who see their darling Power in Danger. -- The Merciful and
the Good however, they trust, will rather pity than condemn them. -- And they
are pleased with the Thoughts that they have been able at last to lay bare the
PHARASAICAL BOSOM of QUAKERISM, by obliging the NON-RESISTING QUALITY to take
up Arms, and to become Proselytes to the first great Law of Nature.

But this Triumph of theirs is founded upon a false Supposition, that Quakers
never used Arms before. -- Whereas, it can be proved that these People have
taken up Arms, and fought well too, upon many other Occasions. -- Whoever will
take the Trouble to read the printed Trials of G. KEITH, will find, that when a
Quaker-Sloop, belonging to this Province, was formerly taken by some PIRATES,
and finding it impossible to save both the Sloop, and their so much-cried-up
Principle, against outward Force, they at last resolved to give up the
Principle, rather than the Sloop! and so opposed Force to Force -- retook their
Vessel, and made some of the Pirates Prisoners!

It is plain that the first Quakers were never against Force of Arms, if they
thought the Quarrel just.

If you will believe their own Writers, they fought well in the Reign of OLIVER
CROMWELL. -- G. Fox, in the Fifth Page of his Letter directed "To the Council
of Officers of the Army, etc." complains, That many Quakers were disbanded out
of the Army, for no other Fault than their being QUAKERS, though they were good
Fighters and good Soldiers. Many valiant Captains, Soldiers and Officers, says
he, have been put out of the Army by Sea and Land, of whom it has been said
among you, that they had rather have had One of Them, than Seven Men, and could
have turned out one of them to seven Men, who, because of their Faithfulness to
the Lord God, and it may be for saying Thou to a particular Person, and for
wearing their Hats, have been turned out from among you.

This same Mr. Fox, in a Book published by him and some others of his Brethren,
entitled, WEST answering to the NORTH, Page 96, 9^, exults in these Words, --
Multitudes of People flocked up to Westminster to complain of their Sufferings
-- which CHARLES STUART called Tumults; and by the Guard one of them was slain,
at the Place of the shedding of whose Blood, CHARLES STUART'S Head was struck
off. -- Thus their Enemies are punished.

In Page ^02 are these Patriotick Expressions, -- The righteous Ends of War's
for Liberty and Laws. -- And in Page 16 they boast -- The Defense of them (the
Laws) have we in the late Wars, vindicated in the Field, with our Blood.

One Bishop, a Quaker Writer, in a Letter of his to the Council of State, in
the Time of the Usurpation, written in the Year 16^9, advises them in these
Words, It concerns you, while ye have Time, to bear down this Enemy, (meaning
the King) and to secure Places necessary for Defense. -- And again he urges
them to kill all that should appear in Favor of the Royal Cause; Do Justice,
says he, on those whom God has given into your Hands, lest out of this
SERPENT'S EGG do come a COCKATRICE, and his Fruit be a fiery flying Serpent. --
And in Page 26 he tells them, There is a Necessity for the continual marching
of your Horse up and down in all Parts, especially where these INSURRECTIONS
have been.

George Fox, in his COUNCIL and ADVICE, a Letter wrote by him to O. Cromwell,
dated the ^1th Month. 16^9, Page 26, 27, etc. tells him, That if he had been
directed by his Advice, The ^^^^ANDERS (says he to him) had been thy Subjects
-- GERMANY had given up to thy Will -- The SPANIARD had quivered like a dry
Leaf -- The King of France should have bowed under thee his Neck -- The POPE
should have withered as in the Winter -- The TURK^ in all his Fatness, should
have smok'd -- Thou should have crumbled Nations to Dust -- Therefore, (says
he) let thy SOLDIERS go forth with a free and willing Heart, that thou may
rock Nations as in a Cradle.

Robert Rich, another Author, informs us, That in the Usurpation, Friends had
such an Interest, that by the Act of Parliament, bearing Date June 2^th, 1659*
for settling the Militia, the Quakers were made Commissioners to form Troops
and Regiments; to nominate the Officers; and to assess Money for buying Horses,
Arms, etc. -- He names Five by their Names, whom he knew, who were of the
Committee for the Militia of Westminster.

But Friends will deny all these Things. -- And if you turn over to the Place,
and show them the very Expressions, they will still endeavor to evade you, and
will s^eer at your Ignorance for taking them in a literal Sense, and tell you
with a very grave Phyz, that they are all to be taken spiritually.

If any Man has a Mind to be imposed upon by such Quibbles, I have no Objection
-- Let him believe that no more is meant here, than spiritual Soldiers --
spiritual Armies -- spiritual Wars -- spiritual Regiments and Militias! -- Let
him believe spiritual Troops, and spiritual Horse too, if he will! -- Si vult
decipi, decipiatur.

Mr. Barclay, the great Apostle of Quakerism, has indeed taken great Pains in
his Apology, to quote the Testimonies of the Fathers against Fighting: -- And
in Page 5^5 lays down this Proposition, That it is not lawful for Christians to
resist Evil, or to make war in any Case.

But did not your Philadelphia Quakers take up Arms, and declare they would
fight in one Case, namely, In Defense of Friend Indians?

Therefore, these Quakers of Philadelphia have surely either committed a Thing
unlawful for Christians; or belied their Apostle, and done Despite to the
Spirit of Barclay. -- Again in Page 558, St. Robert says, Whoever can reconcile
this, resist not Evil, with, resist Violence by Force; Give also thy other
Check, with, Strike again; whoever (says he) can find a Means to reconcile
these Things, may be supposed also to have found out a Way to reconcile God
with the Devil, Christ with Antichrist, Light with Darkness, and Good with Evil.

But did not your Philadelphia Quakers, instead of Resist not Evil, attempt to
Resist Violence by Force: and instead of Give also thy other Cheek, even plant
Cannon (and surely not Spiritual Cannon) in Order to Strike again? They opened
their most noted Meeting House in Philadelphia to the Soldiers; and devoted it
to War and Revenge.

What can we say or think of such People as these? -- I am sure if their
peaceable and meek Apostle could come upon the Earth again, and see his
Esteemed Friends become like other Men, and clashing with the Potsheards of the
Earth. A Phrase made use of by a QUAKER TEACHER, to his Congregation in
Philadelphia, in exhorting them to adhere to their PEACEABLE PRINCIPLES.
-- he would blush and disown them as his Disciples.

In short, it is evident from the late Conduct of Friends, that the Peaceable
Testimony which they have so long born to the World, at the Expense of the
Lives and Properties of Thousands of their Fellow Subjects, is now no more --
and that they have no more Scruple against taking up Arms, and Fighting than
any others -- Nay, that they can go into more violent Measures to Resist Evil
than perhaps were ever heard of in the most Warlike Nations. --

Where do we find or read of an Instance of Trenches being thrown up, and
Cannon planted, to oppose an insignificant Mob? -- And yet this was done by
your Philadelphia Quakers, against a Handful of Freemen and the King's
Subjects, who thought it their Duty to kill a Pack of vil^inous, faithless
Savages, whom they suspected, and had Reason to believe, were Murderers,
Enemies to his Majesty, his Government, and Subjects -- Were such violent
Proceedings consistent with the Principles which Quakers have professed to the
World? Were they consistent with the Lenity and Mercy of an English
Constitution? Surely No. -- Such severe Measures will never do with a free
People, who conceive themselves oppressed. -- Even France and Spain,
notwithstanding the arbitrary Government and severe Laws established in them,
are not without their Insurrections and Tumults -- I hope it will not be
suspected that I am a Favourer or Encourager of Mobs and Riots -- I solemnly
declare I have as great an Aversion to Mobs, and all riotous Proceedings, as
any Man can have, as any Man ought to have See the first Note upon this Letter.
-- But at the same Time, I must own, I shall never be for sacrificing the
Lives and Liberties of a free People to the Caprice and Obstinacy of a
destructive Faction.

Whoever will examine the Proceedings and Debates of Parliament, especially
those in the Year 1737, will find the Sentiments of the wisest and bravest
People under Heaven, concerning Tumults and Riots. -- As these Things were
introduced into the Debates of that Session, I shall trouble you with a few
Extracts of the Speeches on that Occasion.

Lord C -- T declared himself thus -- The People (says he) seldom or never
assemble in any riotous or tumultuous Manner, unless when they are oppressed,
or at least imagine they are oppressed* If the People should be mistaken, and
imagine they are oppressed, when they are not, it is the Duty of the Magistrate
to endeavor first to correct their Mistake by fair Means and just Reasoning;
in common Humanity he is obliged to take this Method, before he has Recourse to
such Methods as may bring Death and Destruction upon a great Number of his
Fellow-Countrymen; and this Method will generally prevail, where they have not
met with any real Oppression: But when this happens to be the Case, it cannot
be expected that they will give Ear to their Oppressor; nor can the severest
Laws, nor the most rigorous Execution of those Laws, always prevent the
People's becoming tumultuous: -- You may shoot them -- You may hang them -- But
till the Oppression is removed or alleviated, they will never be quiet, till
the greatest Part of them are destroyed. The only effectual Method to suppress
Tumults will be, to enquire into the Causes, and to take such Measures as may
be proper for removing those Causes: For in the Body Political, as in the Body
Natural, while the Cause remains, it is impossible to remove the Distemper.

Lord B -- ST spoke to this Effect -- The chief End of a Parliamentary Enquiry
is not to discover or to punish the Persons concerned in any Tumult; it is the
Conduct of the Magistrate that we are principally to enquire into; and if upon
such Enquiry, it should appear, that the Tumult was occasioned by any unjust or
Oppressive Conduct, or by Negligence and Indolence, we ought to censure or to
punish such a Magistrate -- Such an Enquiry, and such an Issue on Enquiry, will
satisfy the People, it will remove the Cause of Tumults, and consequently will
prevent them for the future: Whereas if we employ ourselves solely in
discovering and punishing the Rioters, we do not remove but increase the Cause
of Tumults; -- we shall make the People more discontented than they are -- The
Severity of the Punishment may sear up the Wound for a Time, but it will not be
healed; it will fester, and endanger the total Dissolution of the Political
Body.

By these Kind of Proceedings (says another noble Lord) we may for a While keep
the People quiet, or knock out the Brains of those who shall presume to be
otherwise; but we shall never remove their Discontents, or gain their
Affections; and this must be done, or our Government must be made Arbitrary;
for a free Government cannot be supported but by having the Affections of the
Generality of the People.

Now, Sir, had your Quakers, those Children of Peace, adopted these wise
Sentiments, and pursued these humane just and truly politic Measures, every
Thing might have been easy. But instead of this, they neglected and despised
the Complaints of an injured and oppressed People; refused to redress their
Grievances; they promoted a military Apparatus; fortified (...); Barracks;
planted Cannon, and strutted about in all the Parade of War, as if they chose
rather to have the Province involved in a Civil War, and set the Blood of
perhaps 5 or 600 of his Majesty's Subjects shed, than give up, or banish to
their native Caves and Woods, a Parcel of treacherous, faithless, rascally
Indians, some of which can I be proved to be Murderers. But if they were all
innocent, by what Law are we obliged to maintain 140 idle Vagabonds? Must
Pennsylvania work for murdering Savages as their Lords and Masters?

But in the Name of Wonder! What could be meant by all these warlike
Preparations? Surely the Quakers did not intend to make Use of Musquetry and
Cannon too, in case the Rioters had proceeded! If they did, they must either be
very ignorant or very desperate and cruel -- It has often been declared in
Parliament, That the Liberty of Firing at Random, upon any Multitude of his
Majesty's Subjects, is a Liberty which ought to be most cautiously granted; and
never made use of but in Cases of the most absolute Necessity -- And in this
Way of thinking (says one of the great Speakers upon the Subject) I am
supported by the whole Tenor of the Laws of England -- It is now 2 or 300 Years
since Firearms came in Use amongst Us, yet the Law has never suffered them to
be made Use of by the common Officers of Justice -- Pikes, Halberts,
Battle-Axes, and such like, are the only Weapons that can be made Use of
according to Law by such Officers. -- It it well known that by a late Statute,
which is in Force in Scotland as well as in England; the Power of the Civil
Magistrate, in the Cases of any Mob or riotous Assembly, is fully and
distinctly regulated; yet even by that Law (which I have often heard complained
of as a Law not tolerable in a free Country) there is no express Order given to
the Magistrate or his Assistants, to make Use of Firearms; so cautious was the
Legislature of giving a legal Authority for making use of such Weapons.

I know it will be said that Officers of justice and their Assistants,
especially his Majesty's Troops, when they happen to be called to the
Assistance of the Civil Magistrate, are in a very unlucky Situation, if they
are not allowed to make use of the Arms in their Hands to prevent their being
knocked on the Head -- Their Situation, I shall readily grant, may be unlucky
enough; but we are to consider the Law as it stands; and as the Law stands in
England as well as in Scotland, if a Person suffers Death by firing, the Person
that fired, and he who gave him Orders to fire, might both be prosecuted for
Murder; and I am afraid neither of them would have any Resourse, but in the
King's Mercy. -- The Soldiers may upon such Occasions make Use of their screwed
Bayonets, for dispersing or seizing the Rioters; by so doing they can hurt none
but those that resist them; but I would not advise them to fire, unless they
should find themselves in very great Danger of being overpowered, and perhaps
murdered by the Mob.

Such was the Sense of the greatest Men in England, and such the Caution and
Lenity of a British Parliament.

But what will the World say, or Posterity think of your meek and peaceable
Quakers, who through pretended Scruples against Resistance! through Obstinacy and
Love of worldly Power, which they themselves would neither apply to the Ends
for which it ought to be used, nor resign into the Hands of those that would;
who have so long suffered the Province to bleed beneath the Savage Knife, its
fairest and most fruitful Fields to be deluged in Gore, and laid waste and
desolate by Barbarian Spoilers! when they have been frequently supplicated,
entreated and conjured, by all the ties of brotherly Love, Friendship, Humanity
and Justice, to consider the Misery and Distraction of their Country -- but
could never be prevailed upon to stand up in its Defense, or to use proper
Means to rescue it from these sad Calamities: Yet have lately appeared with
Arms and all the dread Machinery of War, to fight their beggared, ruined,
miserable Fellow Subjects; and to afford that Protection to their cruel Enemies
and Murderers, which their Unhappy Countrymen, in their most deplorable
Circumstances, could never obtain from them? -- O ungenerous, unfeeling Men!
Was this the way to treat a ruined, desparing People? -- Will not Religion,
Reason, Humanity, Justice, Charity, answer No? -- Who was it that reduced them
to the disagreable Necessity of proceeding in the Manner they did? -- From what
Source are they to derive their Misery? and, Who was it that provoked and moved
them to Resentment? Who is it that has made them Rioters, and then Reproaches,
and desires they may be Shot or Hanged for being so? Who is it that has thrown
so many Obstacles in the Way of their Protection and Security? Who is it that
has screened and supported the Enemies of their Country, and pours out
Vengeance and Destruction upon those that attempt to chastise and punish them?
These are Questions which every Body, with a Moments Reflection, may answer.

A mighty Noise and Hubbub has been made about killing a few Indians in
Lancaster-County; and even Philosophers and Legislators have been employed to
raise the Holloo upon those that killed them; and to ransack Tomes and Systems,
Writers ancient and modern, for Proofs of their Guilt and Condemnation! And
what have they proved at last? Why, that the WHITE SAVAGES of Paxton and
Donnegall have violated the Laws of Hospitality! I can sincerely assure the
ingenious and worthy Author of the NARRATIVE, that a Shock of Electricity would
have had a much more sensible Effect upon these People than all the Arguments
and Quotations he has produced.

For my own Part, I utterly abhor and disclaim every Act and Species of
Cruelty, and I do solemnly declare, that I disapprove of the Manner of killing
the Indians in Lancaster, as it was a Kind of Insult to the Civil Magistrates,
and an Encroachment upon the Peace and Quiet of that Town; and I wish that the
Women and little Ones at least, could have been spared. -- But no doubt the
Actors in that Affair, thought with Friend Bishop, whom I quoted before, that
the best Way was, while their Hands were in, to kill all, lest out of the
SERPENT'S EGG, there should come a COCKATRICE, and his Fruit should be a fiery
flying SERPENT.

However, Matters of this Kind will always be told with shocking Aggravations
-- I am persuaded had not Things been misrepresented, some Circumstances in the
Narrative would never have been sent into the WORLD.

The Public have indeed received there a very amiable Character of these
Indians, and have been told that The Universal Concern of the neighboring
white People on hearing of their being killed, cannot well be expressed. Now I
have been frequently informed, for many Years, by sundry of their nearest
Neighbors in the Canestogoe Manor, that they were a drunken, debauched,
insolent, quarrelsome Crew: and that ever since the Commencement of the War,
they have been a Trouble and Terror to all around them -- as for Will S^^ and
his Brother, I am told there are undoubted Proofs of their Guilt and Treachery
-- That they have threatened and drawn their Knives upon People who have
refused to comply with their Demands, is a Fact well known to Hundreds. ABRAHAM
NEWCOMER, of the County of Lancaster, one of the Poeple called Menonists, and
by Trade a Gun-smith, has personally appeared before the Chief-Burgess of
Lancaster, and upon his solemn Affirmation has declared, That diverse Times
within these few Years BILL SOC and INDIAN JOHN, two of the Conestogoe Indians,
threater^^ed to scalp him, for refusing to mend their Tomahawks, and swor^ they
would scalp him, the Affirmant, as soon as they would a D^^
He further affirms, that a ^ew Days before the Indians were ^^led in the
Manner, Bill Soc* aforesaid, brought a Tomahawk to him to be ^^eel'd, which
t^^, Affirmant refusing to do, the said Bill Soc threatened, and said, you will
not you will not^ -- I Will have it m^^ded to your Sorrow. -- From which
Expressions this Affirm^^t has declared, that he apprehended Danger from said
Soc.

Mrs. T -- ^ -- N, a Lady of Character, of the Borough of Lancaster also
personally appeared before the Chief-Burgess, and upon her ^o^em^ Oath on the
Holy Evangelists, has declared, That sometime in the Summer of the Year 1761,
Bill Soc came to her Appartment, and threatened her Life, saying, I kill you,
and all Lancaster cannot catch me; which put her into great Terror. And this
Lady has further de^os'd, that said Bill Soc, added, this Place (meaning
Lancaster) is mine and I will have it yet.

Capt. JOHN HAMBRIGHT, a Gentlemen of Reputation, and an eminent Brewer of the
Borough of Lancaster, personally appeared before ROBERT THOMPSON, Esquire one of
the Justices for the County of Lancaster and made Oath on the Holy Evangelists,
that about August, in the Year One Thousand, Seven Hundred and Fifty-Seven, he,
this Deponent, being an Officer in the Pay and Service of the Province of
Pennsylvania, was sent with a Party from Fort August to Hunter's, for Provision
for that Garrison: That on his way down he halted, under cover of the Bank of
the River Susqu^hanna, to rest and refresh his Men, at M^ Kee's old Place,
having a Centry fixed on the Bank, behind a Tree, to prevent a Surprise: That
the Centry, after some time, informed that those were Indians coming up the
Road; upon which this Deponent crawled up the Bank, and discovered two Indians,
one of which he knew to be Bill Soc (one of the Indians lately killed at
Lancaster:) That he suffered them to come pretty near, and then discovering
himself, called to Bill Soc to come to him, imagining he was going, as usual,
to Fort Augusta, where he had often seen him among the Indians: That the
Indians then immediately halted, and after consulting about a Minute, ran off
with their greatest Speed, which at that Time much surprised this Deponent, as
the said Soc had always pretended Friendship, and no Violence or Threats were
then offered to them, and neither this Deponent or his Party had any intentions
to injure them: That upon this Deponent's proceeding down to Hunter's he was
informed that an old Man had been killed in that Neghbourhood the Day before;
and, as no other Mischief was at that Time done in those Parts, ^^r no Account
of any other Indians being seen or heard of, on that Quarter, at that Time, the
said Bill Soc, and his Companion, a strange Indian, we^e suspected and b^lieved
to be the p^rpetrators of that Murder. That he this Deponent, before this Tim^,
had frequently seen Bill Soc with his Brothers and others of the Conestogoe
Indians, at Fort August^, and often met them on the Communication, carrying up
Kegs of Whisky and other Things, to trade with the other Indians there; but
that after this Murder the said Bill Soc did not appear at that Garrison for
near four Months, and then came there with a Number of other Indians from up
the River above the Fort; at which Time ^e behaved in a different Manner than
usual, not coming into the Fort, nor being so familiar as formerly. And further
this Deponent says not.

Sworn and subscribed, the 28th of) JOHN HAMBRIGHT February 1764, before me)
ROBERT THOMPSON.

CHARLES CUNNINGHAM, of the County of Lancaster aforesaid, personally appeared
before THOMAS FOSTER, Esquire (...) of the Magistrates for said County, and being
duly qualified, according to Law, does depose. and say, That he (the said
Deponent) heard an Indian, named Joshua James, say, since the last War, that he
never killed a white M^^^ his Life; but fix Dutchmen that he killed in the
Minisin^s. And farther says not. Sworn and subscribed before THOMAS FOSTER, by
CHARLES CUNNINGHAM.

N. B. Said Joshua James was one of the Conn^^togo^ Indians.

ALEXANDER STEPHEN, of the County of Lancaster, personally appeared before
THOMAS FOSTER, Esquire one of the Magistrates for said County, and being duly
qualified, according to Law, does depose and say, That an Indian Woman, named
Cannayab Sally, told the said Deponent, since the last War, that the
Connestogo^ Indians killed Jegrea, an Indian Man, because he would not go to
war, with the said Connestog^^ Indians, against the English: And that James
C^tt^^ told the said Deponer^, since the last War, that he was one of the three
that killed old James (or William) Hamilton, on Sherman's Creek, the Beginning
of last War, and another Man, with six or seven of his Family. And further this
Deponent says, that after the late War, said James Cottes demanded of said
Deponent a Canoe, which he had found, or Payment in lieu thereof, which Canoe
the said Murderers had left, as Cottes said, at the Time said Murder was
committed. And farther says not^

Sworn and subscribed before THOMAS FOSTER, by ALEXANDER STEPHEN.

N. B. Jegrea was am old Indian that had formerly been a Warrior, but had now
quit going to War, and was threatening the Connest^ga^ Indians, if they would go
to War against the white People, and dissuading and commanding them from it.

ANN-MARY LEROY, of the Town of Lancaster, appeared likewise before the
Chief-Burgess, and being sworn on the Holy Evangelists of Almighty GOD, did
depose and say, That in the Year 1755, when her Father, JOHN JACOB LEROY, and
many others were murdered by the Indians, at the Great Moh^nn^y, she, this
Deponent, her Brother, and some others were made Prisoners, and taken to the
Kittaning Town, and that during her four Years Captivity, the French Officers
were furnished weekly, or once in two Weeks, with the Pennsylvania Gazette.
That she saw strange Indian Messengers c^^^ frequently, whom the French
Officers and interpreters told this Deponent, were the Canestogoe Indians --
and that at the same Time they aff^^'d this Deponent, that the ENGLISH had not
one Indian in their Interest, except ISAAC; and that the Canestogoe Indians
were willing to take up the Hatchet against the ENGLISH, whenever the French
would request them to do it" -- This Woman has moreover declared on her Oath,
that since her Return from Captivity, BILL SOC's reputed Mother came to her,
this Deponent, at Lancaster, and after same Enquiry about the Indian Family,
with which she was a Prisoners this Deponent asked said SOC's Mother, if she
had ever been o^^ in the Rack-Parts? who replied, she had not; but that her Son
BILL had been out often, and would again^ and that he was good for Nothing; or
Words to that Effect. [THERE are many more Depositions (I am told) to the same
Purpose, which I have not seen. But surely these are sufficient to "satisfy the
Published" that not only Will Soc, but the whole Tribe^ were really Guilty of
those Offenses against us, which were laid to his Charge. And that the Makers
and (...) of their Accusation can produce that Evidence which the Author of the
NARRATIVE has so publicly called for.

The foregoing are (...) Co^^^^ of the Affidavits passed.

The Public are also informed, that The Magistrates of Lancaster sent to
collect the remaining Indians, -- brought them into the Town, comforted and
promised them Protection. --

If they did this, they must be very silly indeed -- For how was it possible
for Men destitute of a MILITIA, without Men, Arms, or Ammunition to protect
them? -- But I am credibly informed that the Truth of the Matter was, That
these Magistrates being apprehensive of the Danger of the Indians, were very
desirous to have them removed immediately to Philadelphia, as a Place of much
greater Security -- through which Neglect to remove thither they must have lost
their Lives, and not through any Misconduct of the Magistrates -- For it seems
the Affair was accomplished so unexpectedly and suddenly, that not one Half of
the Magistrates knew any Thing of the Matter till they were all killed; and
those that did, could do nothing, unless it was to go at the Peril of their
Lives, among an enraged and armed Multitude, and attack them with Stones and
Brickbats.

I have indeed heard it alleged against those Magistrates, that there were
some Soldiers in the Place, which they might have called to their Assistance --
But I have heard it positively declared, by many of the Inhabitants of that
Town, who were Eyewitnesses of the whole Transaction, that if there were Ten
Thousand Soldiers dispersed and strolling about in the Manner that these were
at the Time, it would have been impossible to have got them to their Arms, and
properly drawn up, before the Indians were killed; so dextrous and expeditious
were the PAXTONIANS in executing their Purpose.

The Author of the Narrative proceeds with all the Path^s of Language and
Expression, and tells us, That when the poor Wretches saw that they had no
Protection nigh, they divided into their little Families, the Children clinging
to their Parents; -- They fell on their Knees, protected their Innocence,
declared their Love to the English, and that in their whole Lives, they never
had done them any Injury; and in this Posture they all received the Hatchet^
Men, Women and little Children! -- This was cruel indeed, if it was so -- But I
would be glad to know who could give this Gentleman so very particular an
Account -- I have been told, that not a single Circumstance happened which
could have given rise to it; and that the above Story was picked up from among
a Parcel of old Papers in a Hop-Garden or a Hemp-field (I forget which) upon
Susquehanna. -- And indeed this seems most likely to have been the Case: -- For
who could possibly tell what passed, or how these Indians behaved in the short
Interval between their being attacked and all killed, which is said not to have
been above Two Minutes: It is confidently said, that the PA^TONIANS were not
above twelve Minutes altogether in the Town, and not above two Minutes in
dispatching the Indians.
No one had any Kind or Intercourse with them, nor even saw them during that
Time, except those that killed them, and they declare, that not one of them
appeared in that Posture, not spoke a Word; and that if they had, it would have
been impossible to have heard them for the Noise of the shouting of the
Multitude.

It is also asserted in the Narrative, That the Bodies of the murdered were
brought out and exposed in the Street. -- This appears likewise to have been
misrepresentation -- I have been informed by some of the most reputable
Inhabitants of Lancaster, that they were never removed out of the Workhouse
and Work-house-yard, where they were shot, till they were brought out to be
carried to their Graves.

The next Charge ushered in by the Narrative to blacken these unhappy People,
is, That with the Scriptures in their Hands and Mouths, they can set at naught
that express Command, Thou shall do no Murder; and justify their Wickedness by
the Command given to Joshua, to destroy the Heathen. -- And then follows a
dreadful Exclamation in these Words, -- Horrid Perversion of Scripture and of
Religion! I am really amazed that the Philosophi^ Writer of this Paper should
suffer himself to be so much imposed upon, and influenced by the malevolent
TITTLE TATTLE of every lying Sycophant. Every Body knows that this Aspersion is
the reputed Offspring of the Curled Lock Lawyer, who wrote the Dialogue between
Andrew, etc. -- A Creature, who by his Debaucheries, and immoral Life, has done
more Dishonor to the Scriptures and Religion, than all these Men put together;
and who has been endeavoring for a Series of Years to sow the Seeds of Discord
and Dissension among his Fellow Subjects, and has even in print propagated
groundless and wicked Insinuations among the Germans, that the English intended
to reduce them to a State of Vassalage and Slavery. (...) some Papers published
by him in the German Language, and dispersed through Berks County.
-- ^urely the ex part^ Relations of this poor drunken Fellow should have been
below the Notice of the worthy Author of the Narrative. But it seemthis
Gentleman was determined to avail himself of any Thing that he thought might
bring Infamy and Odium upon the Paxton People; and for this End he has not
scrupled to call the killing the Indians MURDER! -- I should be glad to know,
Who appointed him a Judge or Jury upon this (...) fair? Does he find that the
Government has called it Murder in either of the Proclamations he has quoted? I
have already declared, that I disapprove of the Manner of killing these
Indians; and yet I am persuaded this Writer, with all His Ingenuity, will find
it too hard a Task to prove it Murder.

The Faith of Government, we are told, was pledged to these Indians -- No doubt
of it: -- And so it is to every Robber and Villain before he becomes such:
Notwithstanding the solemn Engagements and Articles of Agreement into which
these Indians had entered with WILLIAM PENN, they often broke through them, even
in his Time. -- In Governor KEITH'S Time, about the Year 1719, these Indians
were accused by one JOHN CARTLIDGE, of many Misdemeanors, and among the rest of
having furnished our Enemies with Ammunition, which obliged Mr. KEITH to write
to them, and threaten them, it they did not behave better. These are Facts well
known to many now living.
But will any Man suppose thus a Robber and Villain should rely upon that
Faith, when he has forfeited it; and claim Protection from the Gallows or the
Gibbet, or from being shot down it he cannot be brought to Punishment any other
Way? Now whatever might have been the Behavior of these Indians to the first
Settlers of Pennsylvnia, it is notorious that their Conduct of late has been
such, as could give them no Manner of Claim to the Faith, Friendship, or
Protection of this Government -- That they have been Spies upon all our Actions
-- have treacherously held a Correspondence with our avowed Enemies -- and have
often lent a helping Hand to bring Ruin and Desolation upon the Province -- and
yet to such Wretches as these, it seems we owed Protection^ -- and it was
Murder to put them to Death! The Author of CATO'S Letters very justly observes,
that It is a most wicked and abs^rd Position, to say, that a People can ever be
in such a Situation, as not to have a Right to oppose a Tyrant, a Robber, or a
Traitor, who, by Violence, Treachery, Rapine, infinite Murders and
D^vastations, has deprived them of Safety and Protection.

It was a known Maxim of Liberty amongst the great, the wise, the free
Ancients, that a Tyrant, or a Traitor, was a Beast of Prey, which might be
killed by a Spear as well as by a fair Chase; in his Court as well as in his
Camp; that every Man had a Right to destroy One, who would destroy all Men;
that no Law ought to protect him who took away all Law; and, that like
Hercules's Monsters, it was glorious to rid the World of him, whenever, and by
what M^^^s soever, it could be done.

If we read the Stories of the most celebrated Heroes of Antiquity, (Men of
whom the present World is not worthy) and consider the Actions that gained them
their highest Reverence and Renown, and recommended their Names to Posterity
with the most Advantage, we shall find those in the first Rank of Glory, who
have resisted, destroyed or expelled Traitors and Tyrants, the Pests, the
Burdens, and the Batche^s of Mankind. -- And indeed such an Action could never
have been censured in the World, if there had not lived in all Ages, abject
Flatterers, and servile Creatures of Power, always prepared to sanctify and
abet the most enormous Wickedness, if it were gainful: And these are they who
have often misled good Men in the worst Prejudices.

TIMOL^ON, one of the wisest and most virtuous Men that ever blessed the Earth,
spent a long and glorious Life in destroying Tyrants: He killed, or caused to
be killed, his own Brother, in order to save his Country.

Did not the Roman Senators kill Julius Caesar, even in the (...) House, in
order to free their Country of a Tyrant and (...) O^pres;sor? Did not Brutus,
the Elder, put his own Sons ^o Death for a Conspiracy to restore Tarqui^? Did
not Mu^ur S^^^^^la gain immortal Honor for an Attempt to kill (...) by
Surprise, who was a foreign Enemy, making unjust War upon Rome? Did not L.
Quint^s Ci^^innatur, a brave and virtuous Dictator of Rome, order Sparius M^^la
to be s^^i^, though there was no Law subsisting, by which he could be put to
Death; and though imploring the public Faith, to which he had been a Traitor
and sworn Enemy.

Have we not read of Men who have killed themselves, rather than become a Prey
to a merciless Enemy -- Brutus and Cassius, the Decii, Otho, Celanus, Cato, and
many others, have done this, prefering Death to Slavery. -- Most strange then!
that the killing of a few treacherous Savages, who by their Perfidy, had
forfeited their Lives, should be esteemed so enormous a Crime! -- But we are
told that this Action was a Breach of the Rites of Hospitality, which,
Heathens, Turks, Saracens, Moors, Negroes and Indians, have held more sacred
than the PAXTONIANS. The Author here prostitutes his own good Sense, and
contrary to the known Rules of Logic and sound Reason, draws an universal
Conclusion from particular Premises: As well might he argue that Goliath was a
Giant, and so were all the Soldiers in the Army of the Philistines; or David
spared Saul asleep in the Cave, and therefore he spared all his Enemies.

Would the Limits I have prescribed to myself in this Letter allow me, I could
easily show you, that every one of those Nations have, in a Thousand Instances,
violated the Laws of Hospitality, and Faith too, in a much higher Degree than
these People could possibly have been guilty of. -- But without carrying you
through Homer, old Legends, and fabulous Travels and Voyages -- if you look
into your Bible, you will find a very notable instance, which will set this
Matter right. -- We read in the 4th Chapter of Judges, that when Israel was
sold into the Hands of Jabin, King of Canaan, the Captain of whose Army was
Sisera, who had nine hundred Chariots of Iron, and had mightily oppressed the
Children of Israel for 20 Years; the Lord at last, by his Instruments Deborah
and Barak, delivered Israel from Jabin and Sisera. -- And the Lord discomfited
Sisera, and all his Chariots, and all his Host with the Edge of the Sword,
before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off his Chariot, and fled away on his
Feet, to the Tent of Jael, the Wife of Heber the Kenite: For there was Peace
between Jabin the King of Hazor, and the House of Heber the Kenite.

And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my Lord, turn
into me, fear not: And when he had turned in unto her into the Tent, she
covered him with a Mantle, (or Blanket, as you find it expressed in the Margin.)

And he said unto her, give me, I pray thee, a little Water to drink, for I am
thirsty; and she opened a Bottle of Mil^, and gave him Drink, and covered him.

Again he said unto her, stand in the Door of the Tent, and it shall be when
any Man does come and enquire of thee and say, Is there any Man here? that thou
shall say, No.

Then Jael, Heber's Wife, took a Nail of the Tent, and took an Hammer in her
Hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the Nail in his Temples, and fastened
it into the Ground; (for he was fast asleep and weary) so he died.

Now was this Action (which has every Appearance of Cruelty in it) deemed a
Breach of Faith, or a Violation of the Rites of Hospitality? No. -- In the 5th
Chapter we find the Angel of the Lord pronouncing a Blessing upon her; no doubt
for ridding the World of an Oppressor, and a cruel V^^lain -- Blessed above
Women shall Jael the Wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above
Women in the Tent.

He asked Water, and she gave him Milk, she brought forth Butter in lordly Dish.

She put her Hand to the Nail, and her right Hand to the Workman's Hammer; and
with the Hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his Head, when she had pierced
and stri^ken through his Temples.

At her Feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down, there he lay down dead.

In the Apocrypha, we have another Instance no less remarkable than the above
-- We find that Judith killed Holofernes even deceitfully, when it could be
done no other Way. -- Holofernes was the chief Captain of the Army of Assure,
who made War against Israel; and when he was going out against them, he
threatened in these Words; -- I will go forth in my Wrath, and will cover the
whole Earth with the Feet of my Army, and I will give them for a Spoil unto
them: -- So that their Slain shall fill their Valleys and Brooks, and the River
shall be filled with their Dead, till it overflow -- And I will lead them
Captives to the utmost Parts of the Earth.

But Judith, a Widow, of whom it was said -- There was none that gave her an
ill Word; for she feared GOD greatly -- I say, this good Woman, having humbled
herself, and prayed to God to prosper her Purpose, went over to the Camp of the
Enemy; and being taken by the Watch and conducted to Holofernes, she declared
to him that she had fled from her own Nation -- Now therefore, my Lord, (says
she) I will remain with thee, and thy Servant will go out by Night into the
Valley, and I will pray unto God, and he will tell me when they have committed
their Sins.

And I will come and show it unto thee: Then thou shall go forth with all thine
Army, and there shall be none of them that shall resist thee.

And I will lead thee through the Midst of Judea, until thou come before
Jerusalem, and I will set thy Throne in the Midst thereof, and thou shall drive
them as Sheep that have no Shepherd, and a Dog shall not so much as open his
Mouth at thee.

Yet notwithstanding these Declarations we find that when she was left alone in
the Tent, and found Holofernes drunk, and lying upon his Bed -- She came to the
Pillar of the Bed which was at Holofernes' Head, and took down his Faulchion
from thence, and approached to his Bed, and took hold of the Hair of his Head,
and said, Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, this Day. And she smote twice
upon his Neck with all her Might, and she took away his Head from him.

Upon which Ozias said unto her, O Daughter, blessed art thou of the most high
God, above all the Women upon the Earth; and blessed be the Lord God, which
has created the Heavens and the Earth, which has directed thee to the cutting
off the Head of the Chief of our Enemies.

And God turn these Things to thee for a perpetual Praise, to visit thee in
good Things, because thou have not spared thy Life for the Affiliction of our
Nation, but have revenged our Ruin, walking a straight Way before our God. And
all the People said, So be it, So be it.

But no doubt it will be objected here, that these were not Christians -- And
perhaps I might be challenged to produce an Example from any "civilized Nation
in Europe" -- Left you should be prevailed upon to believe that it was not in
my Power to answer such a Challenge, I shall give you an Instance of the horrid
Cruelty and Inhumanity of a civilized Nation, whose Honor and Hospitality the
Author of the Narrative has taken great Pains to applaud and extol; and I am
induced to point out this Fact in particular^ at it happened in our own Time,
and in our own Country.

In the Year 1746, or 1747, a Spanish Privateer entered the River Delaware, and
proceeded almost up to Newcastle: The Crew went on Shore, and plundered two or
more Plantations -- On their Return they met with, and attacked, an English
Ship commanded by Captain Brown, who gallantly defended himself, till being
overpowered, he was obliged at last to strike and submit; but the Spanish
Officers were so exasperated at the gallant and brave Defense he made, for
which a generous and merciful Enemy would have esteem^d and honored him, that
they barbarously stabbed and murdered him, though an humble Suppliant on his
Knees, begging Quarter, and praying them to spare his Life!

What need I adduce any further Instances than these? If killing the Indians in
Lancaster County, was a Violation of the Laws of Faith and Hospitality, I must
then declare it, as my Opinion, that every Nation under Heaven, have been
guilty of this Crime in a much higher Degree than the Paxton People, and with
les^ Provocation.

The Author of the Narrative tells us, that ONE HUNDRED and FORTY Indians yet
remain (he should have said are yet maintained, caressed and cherish^d) in this
Government.

I do not pretend to know the Motives of the Government for so doing; they
perhaps knew little of the true Character of these Savages; perhaps they were
hurried into it by the Importunities of a Faction; but this we firmly believe,
that no other Colony on this Continent would choose to follow their Example. The
Province of New York, with great good Sense and Policy, and with a proper
Spirit of of Indignation against such perfidious Wretches, refused them even a
Passage through their Territories. -- But the humane, the merciful, the
charitable Pennsylvania, can receive these Villains and Murderers into her
Bosom, It is well known to some of the Officers now in Philadelphia, that many
of those Indians were engaged against Colonel Bouquet and his brave Men. -- The
Murderer of St^^ton, has been visited and comforted; a warm Bed and Stove have
been set up for him, while many of our Fellow Christians, less criminal th^n
him, have been neglected; and left to struggle with their Misery and Cha^ns, in
the Dungeon. -- That the Moravian Indians have been Traitors to us, is proved
by one (...) of one Thomas Moore, who being sworn on the H^ly Evange^^^^s,
before the chief Burgess of Lancaster, has declared, that during his four Years
Captivity with the Indians, they had frequent Intelligence and Advice of the
Motions of the English, from the Bethleh^m Indians, who came constantly among
them, and kept up a Correspondence with them.
disoblige three Fourths of her own Children, rather than part with them --
make them Tributaries to support their Enemies in Luxury and Extravagance,
whilst they themselves have scarce Bread to eat -- and threaten to knock them
on the Head, if they should offer to strike these Darlings, or even murmur at
their hard Fate. -- Surely this is no aggravated Representation, but a
melancholy Fact!

Is it any Wonder then if the unhappy Frontier People were really mad with
Rage, (as they express themselves) under such cruel Treatment? -- Shall
Heathens, shall Traitors, shall Rebels and Murderers be protected, clothed and
fed? Shall they be invited from House to House, and riot at Feasts and
Entertainments? It is said that ISRAEL, that great Patron tad Friend of
Indians, has kept his House and Stable open for these Wretches and their
Horses, whilst the beggared Frontier-People have been drove from his Door,
without Pity or Relief.

It it well known that the Indians in this War, have cruelty massacred our
Traders, and seized their Goods; and is it any Wonder, when they are
represented by the Heads of a Faction (who inflamed the Indians at these
Treaties against the Traders) as Rogues that cheated them out of their Skins.

The following Anecdote was extracted from the DIARY of Con^ad Weiser, Esquire
written in his own Hand.

July 3d, 1760.
These two Indians told me that the French Indian (so they called him) that was
last Winter in Philadelphia, pretending to be a Messenger from the Ohio
Indians, reported on his Return, That the Quakers in Philadelphia gave him a
Rod for the Indians on Ohio, to chastise the People settling on the Indian's
Lands on the other Side the Ap^^^^^n Mountains; and to take Courage, the
Majority of the People of Pennsylvania was on the Indian Side of the Question*
and d^disapprove of the Proceedings of Onas in settlings the Indian Country.


Shall they be supported in Ea^e and Indolence, and provided with Physicians
and Medicines whenever they complain? -- And shall the free born Subjects of
Britain, the brave and industrious Sons of Pennsylvania, be left naked and
defenseless -- abandoned to Misery and Want -- to beg their Bread from the cold
Hand of Charity -- and for want of Medicine or Relief from a Surgeon or
Physician, to linger out a miserable Life, and perish at last under the Wounds
received perhaps from there very Villains' -- My Soul rises with Indignation at
the Thought! -- This is a Consideration that must give Bitterness to every
humane Spirit, though it should suffer no other Way than by Sympathy! What good
Man is there, whose Heart does not bleed, when he sees a Set of Men amongst us
embracing BARBARIANS, with more Tenderness and Hospitality than ever they
showed to their distressed Countrymen and Fellow subject's? -- When he hears
them express more Sorrow and Compassion for the Death of a few Savage Traitors,
than they ever expressed for the Calamities of their Country, and the Murders
of their Fellow Christians? -- When he sees them take up Arms to protect these
cruel Monsters, which they would never do to protect their own Neighbors and
the King's Subjects, from the most inhuman Butcheries? -- When a Waggon-Load of
the scalped and mangled Bodies of their Countrymen were brought to Philadelphia
and laid at the State-House Door, and another Waggon-Load brought into the Town
of Lancaster, did they rouse to Arms to avenge the Cause of their murdered
Friends? -- ^id we hear any of those Lamentations that are now so plentifully
poured forth for the Conestogo^ Indian? -- O my dear Friends! must I answer --
No? The Dutch and Irish are murdered without Pity.

I am no Stranger to your Fellow feeling and Humanity: -- I well know that you
have a Tear for I ^^tress, and a Sigh for Misery -- And if it were not
criminal, I should envy you your happy Lot, in being placed by Providence at
some Distance from the Scenes of Destruction and Desolation, of which, I and my
Neighbors have been melancholy Eye. Witnesses -- To use the Words of the Poet;

-- If we could recount
Our baleful News, and at each Word's Deliverance
Stab Poinards in our Flesh, till all were told.
The Words would add more Anguish than the Wounds.
SHAKESPEARE. The Miseries of the back Inhabitants are really beyond the Power
of Description -- Nor are the dreadful Barbarities committed upon such of our
unhappy Brethren at fell into the Paws of the Enemy, to be equalled in all the
Volumes of History. Figure to yourself some Thousands of Families, seated in
Ease and Plenty, enjoying every Necessary of Life, which hard Labor and
Industry had procured for them; without a Moment's Warning, and in the Shades
of Night, driven from their Habitations; and obliged to ^^e through a lonely
tractless Wilderness, without so much as knowing whither they directed their
trembling Steps -- When the Morning arrives -- O what a Scene does it discover
-- The Husband lamenting his murdered faithful Wi^e -- The Wife tearing her
Hair in all the Horror of Distress, shrieking, and calling upon her breathless
Husband to hasten to her Relief! -- Rachael weeping for her dear Children, who
are now no more! -- Here lies the provident Father welt'ring in his own Blood,
hit Scalp tore off, his Body ripped up, his Bowels dragged out, and his private
Parts stuffed into his Mouth! These are no aggravated Scenes, in order to raise
the Commisseration of the Reader; they are shocking Matters of Fact: It was
done in the GREAT COVE.
-- There the virtuous tender Mother lies stretched on her Bed, dreadfully
mangled, with her newborn Infant scalp'd and placed under her Head for a
Pillow, and a Stake drove into her -- Modesty forbids me to say more! This was
near Shippensburg.
-- On this Side lie the Bodies of a numerous Family, half devoured by Wolves
and Swine! In Sheerman's Valley; (...) in Cumberland County.
-- On that Side lie the mangled Limbs of Men, Women, Children, and Brute
Beasts, promisc^ously scattered upon the Earth, James Smith, Son of Robert
Smith, late of Chester County, who was a Captive four Years and an half among
the Indians, reports, that he at sundry Times saw the Remains of mangled Bodies
in the Woods, that were burnt by the Indians; and that the Captives told him
they were Witnesses to these horrid Cruelties exercised toward their Fellow
Captives, sometimes only for attempting to escape; and that this was done even
by the Tawawaas, the gentlest of the Savages.
scarce to be distinguished from one another -- Or perhaps the Bodies of these
unhappy People, with their Horses, their Cattle, their Houses and their Grain,
all burnt to Ashes in one general Flame! This was the dismal Fate of
G^adenhutten, a Mor^vian Village, in Northampton.


Who, my dear Sir, that sees these Things, but must be filled with Grief and
Horror -- Or,

I may well cry out in the Language of the NARRATIVE, Unhappy People! -- to
have lived in such Times, and by such Neighbors* -- If the Characters of the
several Nation, with which the Author of this Piece has furnished us, be just
-- I am sure these unhappy Frontier-People would have been safer and better
protected in any of those Nations, than they have been in a Quaker Government
-- "They would have been safer among the ancient Heathens," by whom, it seems,
they would have been considered as Guests of the Public, and the Religion of
the Country would have operated in their Favor -- They would have been safer,
if they had submitted to TURKS, or had come under their Protection -- They
would have been safer among ^ARAC^NS, if they had once drank Water with them --
They would have been safer among the MOORS of SPAIN, it Faith had once been
pledged to them, and a Promise of Protection given -- They would have been
safer among POPISH SPANIARDS, if they had been in Distress -- They would have
been safer among the N^ORO^S of AFRICA, where at least one manly Soul would
have been found, with Sense, Spirit, and Humanity enough to stand in their
Defense -- In short, it appears that they would have been safe in any Part of
the known World -- except in the Neighborhood of the RELENTLESS and OBSTINATE
QUAKERS of PENNSYLVANIA!

But Complainings (you will say) cannot mend the Matter. -- What then is to be
done -- Have there been any Remedies provided against future Misfortunes? --
Must these unhappy People still crouch beneath their Sufferings? -- Or will not
the Government go into any Measures to redress them? -- It would be cruel as
well as absurd, to suppose it will not. -- To stifle the Notions of Revenge, it
prudent and religious in private Persons -- And I hope these People will never
again be reduced to the disagreeable Necessity of proceeding as they did -- The
executive Part of the Government, at least, deserves their Esteem and
Affection. I trust therefore, they will never do any Thing that may bring their
Obedience and Regards to the LAWS and MA^ISTRACY of their Country in Question.
-- But at the same Time, it is undoubtedly true, that a proper Spirit of
JEALOUSY, and REVENGE too, in a People who are oppressed and injured, is a
politic and commendable Virtue; without which they will never be valued or
respected. -- Upon such Occasions, I think they should ^ouse the Spirit of a
(...) PEOPLE, and make it appear by all lawful and loyal Methods, that they
scorn to be any longer the Property of a Faction -- And that they have a Right
to demand, and to receive Protection.

Salus Populi suprema Lex esto; i^ a Sentence that deserves to be written in
Letters of Gold -- It is a Sentence that should be the MOTTO of every
Government, where LIBERTY and FREEDOM have any Existence.

We are told that in the wise, the free Cities of ATHENS and ROME, The awful
Authority of the PEOPLE, the sacred Privileges of the PEOPLE, the inviolable
Majesty of the PEOPLE, (...) unappealable Judgment of the PEOPLE, were common
Phrases.

But it seems that there are ^en in PENNSYLVANIA, who (to us^ the Words of the
great LO^^NO^ SIDNEY) look upon the People like Asses and Mas^iff D^gs, who
ought to work and to fight, to be oppressed and killed for them. -- And that
they have neither Privileg^ or Authority to complain of their Sufferings, or
remonstrate their Grievances.

However, I would have such Men know, that (whatever contracted Sentiments they
may entertain) as a Patriot Writer justly observes, "It is the undoubted Right
of the People, and acknowledged to be so in the Bill of Rights passed in the
Reign of King CHARLES I. and since by the Act of Settlement of the CROW^ at the
REVOLUTION, to represent their public Grievances, and to petition for Redress
to th^^e whose Duty it is to right them, or to see them righted: And it is
certain, that in all Countries, the People's Misfortunes are greater or less,
in Proportion as this Right is encouraged or checked."

It is indeed the best and only just Way that they can take to breathe their
Grievances; and whenever this Way has been taken even KINGS have always
accepted their Application. -- The PARLIAMENTS of GREAT BRITAIN too, who are
the grand Barriers of our LIBERTY, have always shown themselves ready and
willing to receive the Complaints of their Principals, and to apply quick
Remedies to the Grievances contained in them. -- It has, indeed, been always
thought highly imprudent, not to say dangerous, to resist the Groans of the
People, uttered in this Manner.

This has been a Method, which has always had great Weight with good Men, and
has always been a great Terror to Bad. -- It has therefore always been
encouraged or discouraged, according to the Innocence or Guilt of Men in Power.

TITUS and TRAJAN, conscious of their own virtuous Administration and worthy
Purposes, encouraged Addresses and Informations of this Kind, from their
People: -- They wisely knew, that if the ROMAN People had free Leave to speak,
they would not take Leave to act; -- and that whilst they could have Redress,
"they would not seek Revenge."

I shall now conclude, Sir, with this Request to you, that you will advise your
visionary QUAKERS and DON QUIXOTES, to consider these Things -- And, that
instead of yoking themselves to CANNON, and dragging them along to defend
BARRACKS, and fight WIND-MILLS, they will suffer the Complaints of the People
to be heard, their Grievances redressed, and their Country rescued from total
Ruin. -- That they will immediately remove the INDIANS, or whatever else may
create their Jealousy, and give them Cause to murmur. -- and then we may expect
to feel the happy Effects resul^ing from LIBERTY and LAW -- to see the Quiet of
the Province restored -- and the Harmony and good Order of Government
reestablished amongst us.

I am, etc.
Dated from my FARM-HOUSE, March 17th, 1764. -- A Day dedicated to LIBERTY and
ST. PATRICK.
FINIS.

