Cool Thoughts ON THE PRESENT SITUATION OF OUR PUBLIC AFFAIRS. IN A LETTER TO A
FRIEND IN THE COUNTRY.

PHILADELPHIA: PIRNTED BY A. STEUART, AT THE BIBLE-IN-HEART. M, DCC, LXIV.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND in the COUNTRY.
Philadelphia, April 12, 1764. SIR,
YOUR Apology was unnecessary. It will be no Trouble, but a Pleasure, if I can
give you the Satisfaction you desire. I shall therefore immediately communicate
to you my Motives for approving the Proposal of endeavoring to obtain a Royal
Government, in Exchange for this of the Proprietaries; with such Answers to the
Objections you mention, as, in my Opinion, fully obviate them.

I do not purpose entering into the Merits of the Disputes between the
Proprietaries and the People: I only observe it as a Fact known to us all, that
such Disputes there are, and that they have long subsisted, greatly to the
Prejudice of the Province, clogging and embarrassing all the Wheels of
Government, and exceedingly obstructing the public Defense, and the Measures
wisely concerted by our Gracious Sovereign, for the common Security of the
Colonies. I may add it as another Fact, that we are all heartily tired of these
Disputes.

It is very remarkable, that Disputes of the same Kind have arisen in ALL
Proprietary Governments, and subsisted till their Dissolution; All were made
unhappy by them, and found no Relief but in recurring finally to the immediate
Government of the Crown. Pennsylvania and Maryland, are the only Two of the
Kind remaining, and both at this Instant agitated by the same Contentions
between Proprietary Interest and Power, and Popular Liberty. Through these
Contentions the good People of that Province are rendered equally unhappy with
our selves, and their Proprietary, perhaps, more so than our's; for he has no
Quakers in his Assembly to saddle with the Blame of those Contentions, nor can
he justify himself with the Pretense, that turning to the Church has made his
People his Enemies.

Pennsylvania had scarce been settled Twenty Years, when these Disputes began
between the first Proprietor and the original Settlers; they continued, with
some Intermissions, during his whole Life; -- his Widow took them up, and
continued them after his Death. Her Sons resumed them very early, See their
Message to the Assembly, in which the Right of sitting on their own
Adjournments is denied.
and they still subsist. -- Mischievous and distressing as they have been found
to both Proprietors and People, it does not appear that there is any Prospect
of their being extinguished, till either the Proprietary Purse is unable to
support them, or the Spirit of the People so broken, that they shall be willing
to submit to any Thing, rather than continue them. The first is not very likely
to happen, as that immense Estate goes on increasing.

Considering all Circumstances, I am at length inclined to think, that the
Cause of these miserable Contentions is not to be sought for merely in the
Depravity and Selfishness of human Minds. For though it is not unlikely that in
these, as well as in other Disputes, there are Faults on both Sides, every
glowing Coal being apt to inflame its Opposite; yet I see no Reason to suppose
that all Proprietary Rulers are worse Men than other Rulers, nor that all
People in Proprietary Governments are worse People than those in other
Governments. I suspect therefore, that the Cause is radical, interwoven in the
Constitution, and so become of the very Nature, of Proprietary Governments; and
will therefore produce its Effects, as long as such Governments continue. --
And, as some Physicians say, every Animal Body brings into the World among its
original Stamina, the Seeds of that Disease that shall finally produce its
Dissolution; so the Political Body of a Proprietary Government, contains those
convulsive Principles that will at length destroy it.

I may not be Philosopher enough to develop those Principles, nor would this
Letter afford me Room, if I had Abilities, for such a Discussion. The Fact
seems sufficient for our Purpose, and the Fact is notorious, that such
Contentions have been in all Proprietary Governments, and have brought, or are
now bringing, them all to a Conclusion. -- I will only mention one Particular
common to them all. Proprietaries must have a Multitude of private Accounts and
Dealings with almost all the People of their Provinces, either for
Purchase-money or Quit-rents. Dealings often occasion Differences, and
Differences produce mutual Opinions of Injustice. If Proprietaries do not
insist on small Rights, they must on the Whole lose large Sums; and if they do
insist on small Rights, they seem to descend, their Dignity suffers in the
Opinion of the People, and with it the Respect necessary to keep up the
Authority of Government. -- The People, who think themselves injured in Point
of Property, are discontented with the Government, and grow turbulent; and the
Proprietaries using their Powers of Government to procure for themselves what
they think Justice in their Points of Property, renders those Powers odious. --
I suspect this has had no small Share in producing the Confusions incident to
those Governments. -- They appear, however, to be, of all others, the most
unhappy.

At present we are in a wretched Situation. The Government that ought to keep
all in Order is itself weak, and has scarce Authority enough to keep the common
Peace. Mobs assemble and kill (we scarce dare say murder) Numbers of innocent
People in cold Blood, who were under the Protection of the Government.
Proclamations are issued to bring the Rioters to Justice. Those Proclamations
are treated with the utmost Indignity and Contempt. Not a Magistrate dares wag
a Finger toward discovering or apprehending, the Delinquents, (we must not
call them Murderers). They assemble again, and with Arms in their Hands,
approach the Capital. -- The Government truckles, condescends to cajole them,
and drops all Prosecution of their Crimes; whilst honest Citizens, threatened
in their Lives and Fortunes, fly the Province, as having no Confidence in the
Public Protection. We are daily threatened with more of these Tumults; and the
Government, which in its Distress called aloud on the sober Inhabitants to come
with Arms to its Assistance, now sees those who afforded that Assistance daily
libelled, abused, and menaced by its Partisans for so doing; whence it has
little Reason to expect such Assistance on another Occasion: -- In this
Situation, what is to be done? By what Means is that Harmony between the two
Branches of Government to be obtained, without which the internal Peace of the
Province can not be well secured? One Project is, to turn all Quakers out of
the Assembly; or, by obtaining more Members for the Back Counties, to get a
Majority in, who are not Quakers. -- This, perhaps, is not very difficult to
do; and more Members for those Counties may, on other Accounts, be proper; but
I much question if it would answer this End, as I see among the Members, that
those who are not Quakers, and even those from the Back Counties, are as hearty
and unanimous in opposing what they think Proprietary Injustice, as the Quakers
themselves, if not more so. -- Religion has happily nothing to do with our
present Differences, though great Pains is taken to lug it into the Squabble. --
And even were the Quakers extirpated, I doubt whether the Proprietaries, while
they pursue the same Measures, would be a Whit more at their Ease. -- Another
Project is, to choose none for Assembly-men but such as are Friends to the
Proprietaries. -- The Number of Members is not so great, but that I believe
this Scheme may be practicable, if you look for Representatives among
Proprietary Officers and Dependants. Undoubtedly it would produce great Harmony
between Governor and Assembly: But how would both of them agree with the
People? Their Principles and Conduct must greatly change, if they would be
elected a second Year. But that might be needless. Six Parts in Seven agreeing
with the Governor, could make the House perpetual. This, however, would not
probably establish Peace in the Province. The Quarrel the People now have with
the Proprietaries, would then be with both the Proprietaries and Assembly. --
There seems to remain then but one Remedy for our Evils, a Remedy approved by
Experience, and which has been tried with Success by other Provinces; I mean
that of an immediate ROYAL GOVERNMENT, without the Intervention of Proprietary
Powers, which, like unnecessary Springs and Movements in a Machine, are so apt
to produce Disorder.

It is not to be expected that the Proposal of a Change like this, should meet
with no Objections. -- Those you have mentioned to me concerning Liberty of
Conscience and the Privileges of Dissenters, are, however, not difficult to
answer; as they seem to arise merely from want of Information, or Acquaintance
with the State of other Colonies, before and after such Changes had been made
in their Government. Carolina and the Jerseys, were formerly Proprietary
Governments, but now immediately under the Crown; and their Cases had many
Circumstances similar to ours. -- Of the First we are told,

There was a natural Infirmity in the Policy of their Charter, which was the
Source of many of the Misfortunes of the Colony, without any Imputation on the
noble Families concerned. For the Grantees, [the Proprietors] being eight in
Number, and not incorporated, and no Provision being made to conclude the whole
Number by the Voices of the Majority, there could not be timely Measures always
agreed on, which were proper or necessary for the good Government of the
Plantation. In the mean Time the Inhabitants grew unruly and quarrelled about
Religion and Politics, and while there was a mere Anarchy among them, they
were exposed to the Attacks and Insults of their Spanish and Indian Neighbors,
whom they had imprudently provoked and injured; -- and as if they had conspired
against the Growth of the Colony, they repealed their Laws for Liberty of
Conscience, though the Majority of the People were Dissenters, and had resorted
thither under the public Faith for a complete Indulgence, which they
considered as Part of their Magna Charta. -- Within these four Years an End was
put to their Sorrows; for about that Time, the Lords Proprietors and the
Planters, (who had long been heartily tired of each other) were, by the
Interposition of the Legislature, fairly divorced for ever, and the Property of
the Whole vested in the Crown New and accurate Account of Carolina, p. 14.
Printed at London, 1733.
And the abovementioned injudicious and unjust Act, against the Privileges of
Dissenters, was repealed by the King in Council.

Another Historian tells us, Their intestine Distractions, and their foreign
Wars, kept the Colony so low, that an Act of Parliament, if possible to prevent
the last ruinous Consequences of these Divisions, put the Province under the
immediate Care and Inspection of the Crown. Account of the British Settlements
in America. Page 23 concerning Carolina.


And Governor JOHNSON, at his first meeting the Assembly there, after the
Change, tells them,

His Majesty, out of his great Goodness and Fatherly Care of you, and at the
earnest Request and Solicitation of your selves, has been graciously pleased,
at a great Expense, to purchase seven Eighths of the late Lords Proprietaries
Charter, whereby you are become under his immediate Government; a BLESSING and
SECURITY we have been long praying for, and solicitous of; the good Effects of
which we daily experience by the Safety we enjoy, as well in our Trade, by the
Protection of his Ships of War, as by Land, by an Independent Company
maintained purely for our Safety and Encouragement. The taking off the
Enumeration of Rice, is a peculiar Favor, etc. HISTORICAL REGISTER, No. 63,
for 173.


By these Accounts we learn, that the People of that Province, far from losing
by the Change, obtained internal Security and external Protection, both by Sea
and Land; the Dissenters a Restoration and Establishment of their Privileges,
which the Proprietary Government attempted to deprive them of; and the whole
Province, Favors in point of Trade with respect to their grand Staple
Commodity, which from that Time they were allowed to carry directly to foreign
Ports, without being obliged, as before, to enter in England.

With regard to the neighboring Province of New Jersey, we find, in a
Representation from the Board of Trade to the Crown, dated Whitehall, Oct. 2*
1701. the following Account of it, viz. That the Inhabitants in a Petition to
his Majesty the last Year, complained of several Grievances they lay under by
the Neglect or Mismanagement of the Proprietors of that Province, or their
Agents; -- unto which they also added, that during the whole Time the said
Proprietors have governed, or pretended to govern, that Province, they have
never taken care to preserve or defend the same from the Indians, or other
Enemies, by sending or providing any Arms, Ammunition or Stores, as they ought
to have done; and the said Inhabitants thereupon humbly prayed, his Majesty
would be pleased to commissionate some fit Person, to be Governor over them. --
That it has been represented to us by several Letters, Memorials, and other
Papers, as well from the Inhabitants as Proprietors, that they are at present
in Confusion and Anarchy, and that it is much to be apprehended, lest by the
Heats of the Parties that are amongst them, they should fall into such
Violences, may endanger the Lives of many Persons and destroy the Colony.
Grants and Concessions, and original Constitutions of New Jersey, printed at
Philadelphia by W. Bradford. p. 606.


In Consequence of these Disorders, and Pe(...)tions from the People, the
Proprietors we(...) obliged to surrender that Government to t(...) Crown; Queen
Anne then reigning; who of a our Crowned Heads since the Revolution, w(...) by
far the least favorable to Dissenters; yet h(...) Instructions to Lord
Cornbury, her first Gove(...)nor, were express and full in their Favor,
vi(...) INSTR. 51. You are to permit a Liberty (...) Conscience to all Persons,
(except Papists) (...) that they may be contented with a quiet a(...) peaceable
Enjoyment of the same, not givin(...) Offense or Scandal to the Government.

INSTR. 52. And whereas we have been in formed that diverse of our good Subjects
in habiting those Parts, do make a religion Scruple of Swearing, and by reason
of their refusing to take an Oath in any Court of Justice and other Places, are
or may be liable to many Inconveniences, our Will and Pleasure is, that in
Order to their Ease in what they conceive to be Matter of Conscience, so far as
may be consistent with good Order and Government, you take Care that an Act be
passed in the General Assembly of our said Province, to the like Effect as that
passed here in the Seventh and Eighth Years of his late Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An ACT that the solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People
called Quakers, shall be accepted instead of an Oath in the usual Form; and
that the same be transmitted to us, and to our Commissioners for Trade and
Plantations, as before directed.

INSTR. 53. And whereas we have been farther informed, that in the Settlement
of the Government of our said Province, it may so happen, that the Number of
Inhabitants fitly qualified to serve in our Council, in the General Assembly,
and in other Places of Trust and Profit there, will be but small; it is
therefore our Will and Pleasure, that such of the said People called Quakers,
as shall be found capable of any of those Places and Employments, and
accordingly be elected or appointed to serve therein, may, upon their taking
and signing the Declaration of Allegiance to us, in the Form used by the same
People here in England, together with a solemn Declaration for the true
Discharge of their respective Trusts, be admitted by you into any of the said
Places or Employments, etc. Grants and Concessions, etc. page 633.


And the same Privileges have been, and still are, fully enjoyed in that
Province by Dissenters of all Kinds; the Council, Assembly, and Mag(...)stracy,
being filled with Episcopalians, Presbyteria(...) and Quakers, promiscuously,
without the (...) Distinction or Exclusion of any. We may (...)there remark, on
the above Report of the (...) of Trade, That the Defense of a Proprie(...)
Province was originally looked upon as the (...) of the Proprietaries, who
received the Quit-rent and had the Emoluments of Government whence it was, that
in former Wars, (...) Arms, Ammunition, Cannon, and Military Stor(...) of all
Kinds, have been sent by the Crown to a(...) the Colonies under its immediate
Government whose Situation and Circumstances required it nothing of the Kind
has been sent to Proprieta(...) Governments. And to this Day, neither
Pen(...)sylvania nor Maryland have received any such A(...)sistance from the
Crown; nor did Carolina, t(...) it became a King's Government.

Massachusetts Bay, in New England, lost i(...) Charter in the latter End of
King CHARLES Reign, when the Charters of London, and all the Corporations in
England, were seized. At the Revolution the Crown gave them a better
Constitution, which they enjoy to this Day: No Advantages were taken against
the Privileges of the People, though then universally Dissenters. The same
Privileges are enjoyd by the Dissenters in New Hampshire, which has been a
Royal Government ever since 1679, when the Freeholder and Inhabitants
petitioned to be taken under the immediate Protection of the Crown. -- Nor is
there existing in any of the American Colonies, any Test imposed by
Great Britain, to exclude Dissenters from Offices. In some Colonies, indeed,
where the Episcopalians and in others the Dissenters, have been predominant,
they have made partial Laws in favor of their respective Sects, and laid some
Difficulties on the others; but those Laws have been, generally, on Complaint,
repealed at home.

It is farther objected, you tell me, that if we have a Royal Government, we
must have with it a Bishop, and a Spiritual Court, and must pay Tithes to
support an Episcopal Clergy. A Bishop for America has been long talked of in
England, and probably from the apparent Necessity of the Thing, will sooner or
later be appointed; because a Voyage to England for Ordination is extremely
inconvenient and expensive to the young Clergy educated in America; and the
Episcopal Churches and Clergy in these Colonies cannot so conveniently be
governed and regulated by a Bishop residing in England, as by one residing
among these committed to his Care. But this Event will happen neither sooner
nor later for our being, or not being, under a Royal Government. And the
Spiritual Court, if the Bishop should hold one, can have Authority only with
his own People, if with them, since it is not likely that any Law of this
Province will ever be made to submit the Inhabitants to it, or oblige them to
pay Tithes; and without such Law, Tithes can no more be demanded here than they
are in any other Colony; and there is not a single Instance of Tithes demanded
or paid in any Part of America. A Maintenance has, indeed, been established in
some Colonies, for the Episcopal Clergy; as in Virginia, a Royal Government;
and in Maryland, a Proprietary Government: But this was done by Acts of their
own, which they were not obliged to make if they did not choose it.

That we shall have a standing Army to maintain, is another Bugbear raised to
terrify us from endeavoring to obtain a King's Government. It is very possible
that the Crown may think it necessary to keep Troops in America henceforward,
to maintain its Conquests, and defend the Colonies; and that the Parliament may
establish some Revenue arising out of the American Trade to be applied toward
supporting those Troops. It is possible too, that we may, after a few Years
Experience, be generally very well satisfied with that Measure, from the steady
Protection it will afford us against Foreign Enemies, and the Security of
internal Peace among ourselves without the Expense or Trouble of a Militia. But
assure yourself, my Friend, that whether we like it or not, our continuing
under a Proprietary Government will not prevent it, nor our coming under a
Royal Government promote and forward it, any more than they would prevent or
procure Rain or Sunshine.

The other Objections you have communicated to me, are, that in case of a
Change of Proprietary for Royal Government, our Judges and other Officers will
be appointed and sent us from England; we must have a Legislative Council; our
Assembly will lose the Right of Sitting on their own Adjournments, we shall
lose the Right of choosing Sheriffs, and annual Assemblies, and of voting by
Ballot. I shall not enter into the Question, whether Judges from England would
probably be of Advantage or Disadvantage to our Law Proceedings. It is
needless, as the Power of appointing them is given to the Governor here, by a
Law that has received the Royal Assent, the Act for establishing Courts. The
King's Governor only comes in Place of a Proprietary Governor; he must (if the
Change is made) take the Government as he finds it. He can alter nothing. The
same Answer serves for all the subsequent Objections. A Legislative Council
under proper Regulations might perhaps be an Amendment of our Constitution, but
it cannot take Place without our Consent, as our Constitution is otherwise
established; nor can our Assembly lose the Right of Sitting on their own
Adjournments; nor the People that of choosing Sheriffs, and annual Assemblies,
or of Voting by Ballot. These Rights being all confirmed by Acts of Assembly
assented to by the Crown. I mean the Acts entitled An Act to ascertain the
Number of Members of Assembly and to regulate the Elections; and An Act for
Regulating the Elections of Sheriffs and Coron^^ both past in the 4th of Queen
Anne. I know it has been asserted, to intimidate us, that those Acts, so far
from being approved by the Crown, were never presented. But I can assure you,
from good Authority, that they, with forty-eight others. (all passed at the
same Time by Governor Evans,) were duly laid before the Queen in Council; who
on the 28th of April 1709 referred the same to the Board of Trade. The Board on
the 8th of September 1709, reported upon the said Fifty Acts, that they had
considered the same, and had taken the Opinion of the Attorney General upon
several of them in point of Law; and they represented against Six of them, as
unfit to be continued in force; but as to the other forty-four, the Titles of
which are given at large, and among them the two material Acts above mentioned,
they had no Objection to the same. Whereupon there issued two Orders of the
Queen in Council both dated at the Court at Windsor, the 24th of October 1709,
one repealing the Six Laws objected to; and the other, approving the remaining
Forty-four. This is a Fact that you may depend upon. There is therefore nothing
now that can deprive us of those Privileges but an Act of Parliament; and we
may rely on the united Justice of King, Lords, and Commons, that no such Act
will ever pass, while we continue loyal and dutiful Subjects. An Act of
Assembly, indeed may give them up; but I trust, urgent as they are for
Admission, we shall never see Proprietary Friends enough in the House, to make
that detestable Sacrifice.

In fine, it does not appear to me, that this Change of Government can possibly
hurt us; and I see many Advantages that may flow from it. The Expression,
Change of Government, seems, indeed, to be too extensive; and is apt to give
the Idea of a general and total Change of our Laws and Constitution. It is
rather and only a Change of Governor, that is, instead of self-interested
Proprietaries, a gracious King! His Majesty who has no Views but for the Good
of the People will thenceforth appoint the Governor, who, unshackled by
Proprietary Instructions, will be at Liberty to join with the Assembly in
enacting wholesome Laws. At present, when the King requires Supplies of his
faithful Subjects, and they are willing and desirous to grant them, the
Proprietaries intervene and say, unless our private Interests in certain
Particulars are served, NOTHING SHALL BE DONE. This insolent Tribunitial VETO,
has long encumbered all our Public Affairs, and been productive of many
Mischiefs. By the Measure proposed, not even the Proprietaries can justly
complain of any Injury. The being obliged to fulfill a fair Contract is no
Injury. The Crown will be under no Difficulty in completing the old Contract
made with their Father, as there needs no Application to Parliament for the
necessary Sum, since half the Quit-Rents of the Lower Counties belongs to the
King, and the many Years Arrears in the Proprietaries Hands, who are the
Collectors, must vastly exceed what they have a Right to demand, or any Reason
to expect. In 1722 the Arrears then in their Hands were computed at L 18,000
Sterling.


On the whole, I cannot but think, the more the Proposal is considered, of an
humble Petition to the KING, to take this Province under his Majesty's
immediate Protection and Government, the more unanimously we shall go into it.
We are chiefly People of three Countries: British Spirits can no longer bear
the Treatment they have received, nor will they put on the Chains prepared for
them by a Fellow Subject. And the Irish and Germans have felt too severely the
Oppressions of hard-hearted Landlords and arbitrary Princes, to wish to see, in
the Proprietaries of Pennsylvania, both the one and the other united.

I am, with much Respect, Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant. A. B.


