A DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE Of the distressed and bleeding Frontier
Inhabitants Of the Province of Pennsylvania, Presented by them to the
Honorable the GOVERNOR and ASSEMBLY of the Province, Showing the CAUSES Of
their late Discontent and Uneasiness and the GRIEVANCES under which they have
labored, and which they humbly pray to have redressed.

Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXIV.

A Declaration etc.
INasmuch as the killing those Indians at Conestogo Manor and Lancaster, has
been, and may be the Subject of much Conversation; and by invidious
Representations of it, which some, we doubt not, will industriously spread,
many, unacquainted with the true State of Affairs, may be led to pass a severer
Censure on the Authors of those Facts, and any others of those like Nature,
which may hereafter happen, than we are persuaded they would if matters were
duly understood and deliberated: We think it therefore proper thus openly to
declare ourselves, and render some brief Hints of the Reasons of our Conduct;
which we must, and frankly do confess nothing but Necessity itself could induce
us to, or justify us in; as it bears an Appearance of flying in the Face of
Authority, and is attended with much Labor, Fatigue and Expense.

OURSELVES then, to a Man, we profess loyal Subjects to the best of Kings, our
rightful Sovereign GEORGE the THIRD, firmly attached to his Royal Person,
Interest and Government: And of Consequence equally opposite to the Enemies of
his Throne and Dignity, whether openly avowed or more dangerously concealed
under a Mask of falsely pretended Friendship, and cheerfully willing to offer
our Substance and Lives in his Cause.

THESE Indians known to be firmly connected in Friendship with our openly
avowed imbittered Enemies; and some of whom have, by several Oaths, been proved
to be Murderers; and, who, by their better Acquaintance with the Situation and
State of our Frontiers, were more capable of doing us Mischief, we saw with
Indignation cherished and caressed as dearest Friends -- But this alas! is but
a Part, a small Part of that excessive Regard manifested to Indians beyond his
Majesty's loyal Subjects, whereof we complain: And which together with various
other Greivances have not only enflamed with Resentment the Breasts of a
Number, and urged them to the disagreable Evidence of it, they have been
constrained to give, but have heavily displeased, by far, the greatest part of
the good Inhabitants of this Province.

SHOULD we here reflect to former Treaties, the exorbitant Presents, and great
Servility therein paid to Indians, have long been oppressive Grievances we have
groaned under. And when at the last Indian Treaty held at Lancaster, not only
was the Blood of our many murdered Brethren tamely covered, but our poor
unhappy captivated Friends abandoned to Slavery among the Savages, by
concluding a Friendship with the Indians and allowing them a plenteous Trade of
all kinds of Commodities, without those being restored, although a spirited
Requisition was made of them; how general Dissatisfaction those Measures gave,
the Murmers of all good People (loud as they dare to utter them) to this Day
declare: And had here, infatuated Steps of Conduct and a manifest Partialtity
in favor of Indians made a final Pause, happy had it been; we perhaps had
grieved in silence for our abandoned, enslaved Brethren among the Heathens. But
matters of a later Date are still more flagrant Reasons of Complaint. When last
Summer his Majesty's Forces under the Command of Col. BOUQUET marched through
this Province and a Demand was made by His Excellency Genesis AMHERST of
Assistance to escort Provisions etc. to relieve that important Post, Fort Pit,
yet not one Man was granted, although never any Thing appeared more reasonable or
necessary, as the Interest of the Province lay so much at stake and the
Standing of the Frontier Settlements in any manner, evidently depended, under
God, on the almost despaired of Success of his Majesty's little Army, whose
Valor the whole Frontiers with Gratitude acknowledge as the happy Means of
having saved from ruin great part of the Province. But when a Number of Indians
falsely pretended Friends, and having among them, some proved on Oath to have
been guilty of Murder, since this War begun, when they together with others
known to be his Majesty's Enemies and who had been in the Battle against Col.
BOUQUET, reduced to Distress by the Destruction of their Corn at the Great
Island, and up the East Branch of Susquehanna, pretend themselves Friends, and
desire a Subsistence they are openly caressed, and the Public, that could not
be indulged the Liberty of contributing to his Majesty's Assistance, obliged,
as Tributaries to Savages, to support those Villains, those Enemies to our King
and our Country. Nor only so, but the Hands that were closely shut, nor would
grant his Majesty's General one single Farthing against a Savage Foe, have been
liberally opened, and the public Money lavishly prostituted to hire, at an
exorbitant Rate, a mercenary Guard, to protect his Majesty's worst of Enemies,
those falsely pretended Indian Friends, while at the same Time hundreds of poor
distressed Families of his Majesty's Subjects, obliged to abandon their
Possessions, and flee for their Lives at least, except a small Relief, at
first, in the most distressing Circumstances, were left to starve neglected,
save what the friendly Hand of private Donations has contributed to their
Support; wherein they, who are most profuse toward Savages, have carefully
avoided having any Part. When last Summer the Troops raised for Defense of the
Province, were limited to certain Bounds, nor suffered to attempt annoying our
Enemies in their Habitations, and a Number of brave Volunteers, equipped at
their own Expense, marched in September up the Susquehanna, met and defeated
their Enemy with the loss of some of their Number, and having others
dangerously wounded, not the least Thanks or Acknowledgment was made them from
the Legislature for the confessed Service they had done, nor any the least
Notice or Care taken of their wounded. Whereas, when a Seneca Indian, who, by
the information of many, as well as by his own Confession, had been through the
last War an inveterate Enemy had got a Cut in his Head last Summer, in a
Quarrel he had with his own Cousin, and it was reported in Philadelphia that
his Wound was dangerous; a Doctor was immediately employed and sent to Fort
Augusta to take care of him and cure him if possible. To these may be added,
that though it was impossible to obtain through the Summer or even yet any
Premium for Indian Scalps or Encouragement to excite Volunteers to go forth
against them, yet when a few of them known to be the fast Friends of our
Enemies, and some of them Murderers themselves; when these have been struck by
a distressed, bereft, injured Frontier, a liberal Reward is offered for
apprehending the Perpetrators of that horrible Crime of killing his Majesty's
cloaked Enemies: And their Conduct painted in the most atrocious Colors, while
the horrid Ravages, cruel Murders and most shocking Barbarities committed by
Indians on His Majesty's Subjects are covered over and excused under the
charitable Term of this being their Method of making War.

BUT to recount the many repeated Grievances whereof we might justly complain,
and Instances of a most violent Attachment to Indians, were tedious beyond the
Patience of a Job to endure. Nor can better be expected nor need we be
surprised at Indian Insolence and Villainy when it is considered, and which can
be proved from the public Records in a certain County, That some time before
Conrad Weiser died, some Indians belonging to the Great Island or Wyaloosing
assured him that -- (an ancient Leader of that Faction, which for so long a
Time have found Means to enslave the Province to Indians) together with others
of the Friends, had given them a Rod to scourge the white People that were
settled on the purchased Lands; for that ONAS had cheated them out of a great
deal of Land, or had not given near sufficient price for what he had bought.
And that the Traders ought also to be scourged; for that they defrauded the
Indians by selling Goods to them at too dear a Rate, and that this Relation is
matter of fact, can easily be proved in the County of Berks. Such is our
unhappy Situation, under the Villainy, Infatuation and Influence of a certain
Faction that have got the political Reigns in their Hand and tamely tyrannize
over the other good Subjects of the Province! And can it be thought strange,
that a Scene of such Treatment as this, and the now adding in this critical
Juncture to all our former Distresses, that disagreeable Burden of supporting,
in the very Heart of the Province, at so great an Expense, between One and Two
Hundred Savages, to the great Disquietude of the Majority of the good
Inhabitants of this Province, should awaken the Resentment of a People grossly
abused, unrighteously burdened, and made Dupes and Slaves to Indians? And must
not all well disposed People entertain a charitable Sentiment of those, who at
their own great Expense and Trouble, have attempted, or shall attempt rescuing
a laboring Land from a Weight so oppressive, unreasonable and unjust? It is
this we Design, it is this we are resolved to prosecute, though it is with great
Reluctance we are obliged to adopt a Measure, not so agreeable as could be
desired, and to which Extremity alone compels.

GOD Save the KING.
February, 1764.
To the Honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire, Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex, on Delaware;
and to the Representatives of the Freemen of said Province, in Assembly met.
WE Matthew Smith, and James Gibson, in behalf of ourselves, and his Majesty's
faithful and loyal Subjects, the Inhabitants of the Frontier Counties of
Lancaster, York, Cumberland, Berks, and Northampton, humbly beg Leave to
remonstrate, and to lay before you, the following Grievances, which we submit
to your Wisdom for Redress.

1st. WE apprehend, that as Freemen and English Subjects, we have an
indisputable Title to the same Privileges and Immunities with his Majesty's
other Subjects, who reside in the interior Counties of Philadelphia, Chester
and Bucks, and therefore ought not to be excluded from an equal Share with them
in the very important Privilege of Legislation. Nevertheless, contrary to the
Proprietors Charter, and the acknowledged principles of Common Justice and
Equity, our five Counties are restrained from electing more than ten
Representatives, viz. Four for Lancaster, Two for York, Two for Cumberland, One
for Berks, and One for Northampton; while the Three Counties (and City) of
Philadelphia, Chester, and Bucks, elect Twenty-six; this we humbly conceive is
oppressive, unequal and unjust, the Cause of many of our Grievances, and an
infringement of our natural Privileges of Freedom and Equality, wherefore we
humbly pray, that we may be no longer deprived of an equal Number with the
Three aforesaid Counties, to represent us in Assembly.

2dly. WE understand that a Bill is now before the House of Assembly, wherein
it is Provided, that such Persons as shall be charged with killing any Indians
in Lancaster County, shall not be tried in the County where the Fact was
committed, but in the Counties of Philadelphia, Chester, or Bucks. This is
manifestly to deprive British Subjects of their known Privileges, to cast an
eternal Reproach upon whole Counties, as if they were unfit to serve their
Country in the Quality of Jurymen, and to contradict the well known Laws of
the British Nation; in a point whereon Life, Liberty, and Security essentially
depend: Namely, that of being tried by their Equals in the Neighborhood where
their own, their Accusers, and the Witnesses Character and Credit, with the
Circumstances of the Fact are best known, and instead thereof, putting their
Lives in the Hands of Strangers, who may as justly be suspected of Partiality
to, as the Frontier Counties can be of Prejudices against Indians; and this too
in favor of Indians only, against his Majesty's faithful and loyal Subjects.
Besides it is well known that the Design of it is to comprehend a Fact
committed before such a Law was thought of. And if such Practices were
tolerated, no man could be secure in his most invaluable Interests. We are
also informed to our great Surprise, that this Bill has actually received the
Assent of a Majority of the House, which we are persuaded could not have been
the Case, had our Frontier Counties been equally represented in Assembly:
However, we hope, that the Legislator of this Province will never enact a Law
of so dangerous a tendency, or take away from his Majesty's good Subjects, a
Privilege so long esteemed sacred by English Men.

3dly. DURING the late and present Indian Wars, the Frontiers of this Province
have been repeatedly attacked and ravaged by Skulking parties of the Indians,
who have with the most savage Cruelty, murdered Men, Women and Children,
without distinction; and have reduced near a Thousand Families to the most
extreme Distress. It grieves us to the very Heart, to see such of our Frontier
Inhabitants as have escaped from savage Fury, with the loss of their Parents,
their Children, their Husbands, Wives, or Relatives, left destitute by the
Public, and exposed to the most cruel Poverty and Wretchedness; while upwards
of One Hundred and Twenty of the Savages, who are with great Reason suspected
of being guilty of these horrid Barbarities, under the Mask of Friendship, have
procured themselves to be taken under the Protection of the Government, with a
view to elude the Fury of the brave Relatives of the Murdered; and are now
maintained at the public Expense: Some of these Indians now in the Barracks of
Philadelphia, are confessedly a part of the Wyalusing Indians, which Tribe is
now at War with us; and the others are the Moravian Indians, who living amongst
us under the Cloak of Friendship, carried on a Correspondence with our known
Enemies on the Great-Island. We cannot but observe with Sorrow and Indignation,
that some Persons in this Province are at pains to extenuate the barbarous
Cruelties practiced by these savages on our Murdered Brethren and Relatives,
which are shocking to human Nature, and must pierce every Heart but those of
the hardened Perpetrators or their Abettors. Nor is it less Distressing to hear
others pleading, that although the Wyalusing Tribe is at War with us, yet that
part of it which is under the Protection of the Government may be friendly to
the English; and Innocent. In what Nation under the Sun was it ever the Custom,
that when a neighboring Nation took up Arms, not an individual of the Nation
should be touched, but only the Persons that offered Hostilities? Who ever
proclaimed War with a part of a Nation, and not with the Whole? Had these
Indians disapproved of the Perfidy of their Tribe, and been willing to
cultivate and preserve Friendship with us, why did they not give Notice of the
War before it happened, as it is known to be the Result of long Deliberations,
and a preconcerted Combination amongst them? Why did they not leave their Tribe
immediately, and come amongst us before there was ground to suspect them, or
War was actually waged with the Tribe? No, they stayed amongst them, were privy
to their Murders and Ravages, until we had destroyed their Provisions, and
when they could no longer subsist at Home, they came, not as Deserters, but as
Friends, to be maintained through the Winter, that they may be able to scalp and
butcher us in the Spring.

AND as to the Moravian Indians, there are strong grounds, at least to suspect
their Friendship, as it is known that they carried on a Correspondence with our
Enemies, on the Great Island. We killed three Indians going from Bethelem to
the Great-Island, with Blankets, Ammunition and Provisions; which is an
undeniable Proof, that, the Moravian Indians were in confederacy with our open
Enemies. And we cannot but be filled with Indignation, to hear this Action of
ours, painted in the most odious and detestable Colors, as if we had inhumanly
murdered our Guides, who preserved us from perishing in the Woods; when we only
killed three of our known Enemies, who attempted to shoot us when we surprised
them. And besides all this, we understand that one of these very Indians is
proved by the Oath of Stenton's Widow to be the very Person that murdered her
Husband. How then comes it to pass, that he alone of all the Moravian Indians
should join with the Enemy to murder that Family? Or can it be supposed that
any Enemy Indians contrary to their known Custom of making War, should
penetrate into the Heart of a settled Country, to burn, plunder and murder the
Inhabitants, and not molest any Houses on their Return, or ever be seen or
heard of? Or how can we account for it that no Ravages have been committed in
Northampton County since the Removal of the Moravian Indians, when the Great
Cove has been struck since? These things put it beyond doubt with us, that the
Indians now at Philadelphia, are His Majesty's perfidious Enemies, and
therefore to protect and maintain them at the public Expense, while our
suffering Brethren on the Frontiers are almost destitute of the Necessaries of
Life and are neglected by the Public, is sufficient to make us mad with Rage,
and tempt us to do what nothing but the most violent Necessity can vindicate.
We humbly and earnestly pray therefore that these Enemies of his Majesty may be
removed as soon as possible out of the Province.

4thly. WE humbly conceive that it is contrary to the Maxims of good Policy and
extremely dangerous to our Frontiers, to suffer any Indians of what Tribe
soever, to live within the inhabited Parts of this Province, while we are
engaged in an Indian War; as Experience has taught us that they are all
Perfidious, and their Claim to Freedom and Independency puts it in their Power
to act as Spies, to entertain and give Intelligence to our Enemies, and to
furnish them with Provisions and warlike Stores. To this fatal Intercourse
between our pretended Friends and open Enemies we must ascribe the greatest
Part of the Ravages and Murders that have been committed in the Course of this
and the last Indian War. We therefore pray that this Greivance be taken under
consideration and remedied.

5th. WE cannot help lamenting that no Provision has been hitherto made, that
such of our Frontier Inhabitants as have been wounded in defense of the
Province, their Lives and Liberties, may be taken care of and cured of their
Wounds at the public Expense. We therefore pray that this Grievance may be
redressed.

6thly. IN the late Indian War this Province, with others of his Majesty's
Colonies gave rewards for Indian Scalps, to encourage the seeking them in their
own Country, as the most likely Means of destroying or reducing them to reason.
But no such Encouragement has been given in this War, which has damped the
Spirits of many brave Men, who are willing to venture their Lives in Parties
against the Enemy. We therefore pray that public Rewards may be proposed for
Indian Scalps, which may be adequate to the Dangers attending Enterprises of
this Nature.

7th. WE daily lament that Numbers of our nearest and dearest Relatives are
still in Captivity amongst the savage Heathen, to be trained up in all their
Ignorance and Barbarity, or be tortured to death with all the Contrivances of
Indian cruelty, for attempting to make their Escape from Bondage. We see they
pay no regard to the many solemn Promises which they have made to restore our
Friends, who are in Bondage amongst them; we therefore earnestly pray that no
Trade may hereafter be permitted to be carried on with them, until our
Brethren and Relatives are brought home to us.

8thly. WE complain that a certain Society of People in this Province in the
late Indian War and at several Treaties held by the Kings Representatives,
openly loaded the Indians with Presents and that -- a Leader of the said
Society, in defiance of all Government not only abetted our Indian Enemies, but
kept up a private Intelligence with them, and publicly received from them a
Belt of Wampum, as if he had been our Governor or authorized by the King to
treat with his Enemies. By this Means the Indians have been taught to despise
us as a weak and disunited People and from this fatal Source have arose many of
our Calamities under which we groan. We humbly pray therefore this Grievance
may be redressed and that no private Subject be hereafter permitted to treat
with or carry on a Correspondence with our Enemies.

9thly. WE cannot but observe with sorrrow that Fort Augusta which has been
very expensive to this Province, has afforded us but little assistance, during
this or the last War. The Men that were stationed at that Place neither helped
our distressed Inhabitants to save their Crops, nor did they attack our Enemies
in their Towns, or patrole on our Frontiers. We humbly request, that proper
Measures may be taken to make that Garrison more serviceable to us in our
Distress, if it can be done.

N. B. WE are far from intending any Reflection against the Commanding Officer
stationed at Augusta, as we presume his Conduct was always directed by those
from whom he received his Orders.

SIGNED on Behalf of ourselves, and by Appointment of a Great Number of the
Frontier Inhabitants. MATTHEW SMITH. JAMES GIBSON.
February 15th, 1764.
FINIS.

