REASONS WHY The BRITISH COLONIES, IN AMERICA, SHOULD NOT BE CHARGED WITH
INTERNAL TAXES, BY AUTHORITY OF PARLIAMENT; HUMBLY OFFERED, For CONSIDERATION,
In Behalf of the COLONY of CONNECTICUT.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by B. MECOM. M,DCC,LXIV.

REASONS, etc.
BY the Constitution, Government and Laws of Great Britain, the English are a
Free People. Their Freedom consists principally, if not wholly, in this general
Privilege, that "NO LAWS CAN BE MADE OR ABROGATED, WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT, BY
THEIR REPRESENTATIVES IN PARLIAMENT."

By the Common Law of England, every Commoner has a Right not to be subjected
to Laws made without his Consent, and because such Consent (by Reason of the
great Inconvenience and Confusion attending Numbers, in such Transactions)
cannot be given by every individual Man in Person, therefore is the Power of
rendering such Consent, lodged in the Hands of Representatives, by them elected
and chosen, for that Purpose. Their Subjection, then, to their Laws, is not
forced, but voluntary.

As the chief Excellency of the British Constitution consists in the Subject's
being bound only by such Laws to which they themselves Consent, as aforesaid;
and as, in order to their enjoying that Right, they are (agreeable to the
Constitution) necessarily vested with the Power of electing their
Representatives; so this Right or Power is a fundamental Privilege, and so
essential a Part of the Constitution, that, without it, the Subject cannot be
said to be free: Therefore, if he be hindered from voting in such Election, or
obstructed in the lawful Use of that real Right or Privilege, a Suit will lie
for him at Common Law.

None of the Privileges included in those general Rights (which, in an especial
Manner, denominate the British Subjects a free People) is maintained with
greater Care and Circumspection, and of which they are more jealous, than this
particular, known, approved and fixed one, that No Tax, Loan or Benevolence can
be imposed on them, but with their own Consent, by their Representatives in
Parliament. This Privilege is of ancient Date, and whenever it has been
encroached upon, has been claimed, struggled for, and recovered, as being
essential for the Preservation of the Liberty, Property, and Freedom of the
Subject: For if the Privilege of not being taxed without their Consent, be once
taken from them, Liberty and Freedom are certainly gone with it. That Power
which can tax as it shall think proper, may govern as it pleases; and those
subjected to such Taxations and Government, must be far, very far from being a
free People: They cannot, indeed, be said to enjoy even so much as the Shadow
of English Liberties.

Upon these general and fundamental Principles, it is conceived that the
Parliament (although it has a general Authority, a supreme Jurisdiction over all
His Majesty's Subjects; yet, as it is also the high and safe Guardian of their
Liberties) does not extend its Taxations to such Parts of the British
Dominions, as are not represented in that grand Legislature of the Nation; nor
is it to be presumed that this wise and vigilant Body will permit such an
essential Right, which is as the very Basis of the Constitution, in any
Instance, ever to be violated. And upon the same Principles (as is apprehended)
those subordinate Jurisdictions or Governments, which, by Distance, are so
separated from Great Britain, that they are not and cannot be represented in
Parliament, have always been permitted to have and enjoy Privileges similar to
those of their Fellow Subjects in the Mother Country, that is, of being
subjected only to Taxations laid by the particular Legislatures, wherein they
are or may be represented by Persons, by them elected for that Purpose, and,
consequently of not being taxed without their Consent. Thus, in Ireland, Taxes
are laid by the Parliament of that Kingdom; and, in the Colonies or Plantations
in America, by the several Assemblies or Legislatures therein.

These being the essential Rights and Privileges of the British Constitution,
founded on the Principles of the common Law, tho, in diverse Respects,
particularly regulated by sundry Statutes, The King's Subjects in the
Plantations, claim a general Right to the Substance and Constitutional Part of
them, as their BirthRight and Inheritance. This claim is founded on such
Considerations as follow, viz.

1st. The People in the Colonies and Plantations in America, are really, truly,
and in every Respect, as much the King's Subjects, as those born and living in
Great Britain are. "All Persons born in any Part of the King's Dominions, and
within his Protection, are his Subjects; as all those born in Ireland,
Scotland, Wales, the King's Plantations, or on the English Seas; who, by their
Birth, owe such an inseparable Allegiance to the King, that they cannot, by any
Act of theirs, renounce or transfer their Subjection to any foreign Prince." 4
BAC. 166.

2dly. All the King's Subjects, both in Great Britain and in the Colonies and
Plantations in America, have Right to the same general and essential Privileges
of the British Constitution, or those Privileges which denominate them to be a
free People.

As Protection necessarily demands and binds to Subjection and Obedience to
that Authority and those Laws whereby a People are protected; so Subjection and
Obedience as necessarily and justly Entitle to Protection: These mutually
imply, require, and support each other. The King, as political Head of his
Subjects, stands equally related to them, in that Capacity, and is as really
obligated to protect one Subject as well as another; and as he has an Interest
in all his Subjects, so they have an Interest in him, regulated according to
the political Constitution. Though the particular and formal Parts of the
Governments of the Colonies may be various one from another, and diverse from
that of Great Britain, and such Diversity of Forms or Establishments
necessarily arise from their different Situations and Circumstances; yet both
Law and Equity agree, in this general Principle that All the King's Subjects
ought to be supported and protected in their Rights and Liberties, and
especially in such as are fundamental and essential to their Freedom. The
Subjects in Great Britain are under no greater or stronger Obligations of
Submission and Obedience to the Crown, than those in the Colonies are; and
surely, if the Colonists are under the same Obligations to Submission and
Obedience with other their Fellow Subjects, it will not be easy to show, that
they have not the same Right to be protected and secured in the Enjoyment of
every just and legal Privilege.

Though the Subjects, in the Colonies, are situate at a great Distance from
their Mother Country, and, for that Reason, cannot participate in the general
Legislature of the Nation, nor enjoy some particular formal Immunities
possessed by those at Home; yet, as they settled, at this Distance, by Royal
License and under national Encouragements, and thereby enlarged the British
Dominions and Commerce, which add Riches and Strength to the Nation; and as
they brought with them, and constantly claimed, the general Principles, those
fundamental Principles, which contain the Essence and Spirit of the common Law
of the Nation; it may not be justly said they have lost their Birthright, by
such their Removal into America; for to suppose that those Settlements, that
the Performance of such important and public Services, should be prejudicial to
the Claim of the Colonies to the general Privileges of British Subjects, would
be inconsistent both with Law and Reason, would naturally lead to unjust and
absurd Conclusions, inasmuch as those public national Advantages would not have
been promoted, unless some of the King's Subjects had planted, settled and
dwelt in his Colonies abroad: And yet, that such planting, settling and living,
should subject the Inhabitants to the Loss of their essential Rights as
Englishmen, would be to reward great, public and meritorious Services with
great and unspeakable Losses and Disadvantages: And how inconsistent such
Measures and Principles are with the Honor and Justice of the British Crown
and Government, may well deserve Consideration. It therefore seems apparent
that the King's Subjects in the Plantations have a Right, and that it is for
the Honor of the Crown and the Law, that they should have a Right, to the
general and essential Privileges of the British Constitution, as well as the
Rest of their Fellow Subjects. And with Regard to the Colony of Connecticut, in
particular, there can be on Question of its having such Right, as these general
Privileges and Immunities are fully and explicitly granted and declared to
belong to them, by the Royal Charter of Incorporation given to the said Colony
by King Charles the Second, in the fourteenth Year of his Reign, in which is
contained this Paragraph, viz. And further Our Will and Pleasure is, and We Do,
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Ordain, Declare and Grant, unto the said
Governor and Company, and their Successors, that all and every the Subjects of
Us, Our Heirs or Successors, which shall go to inhabit within the said Colony;
and every of their Children which shall happen to be born there, or on the Seas
in going thither or returning from thence, shall have and enjoy all Liberties
and Immunities of free and natural Subjects, within any of the Dominions of Us,
Our Heirs or Successors, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever,
as if they, and every of them, were born within the Realm of England. Now,
whether these Words are to be understood only as declarative of the Principles
of the ancient Common Law of England, and of the common Rights of Englishmen,
settled by Royal License, and under the Protection of the Crown, in a Colony or
Plantation abroad, and so evidential of the Rights and Immunities belonging to
all the King's Subjects in America; or whether they are to be considered as a
Grant and Confirmation of such Privileges and Immunities to His Majesty's
Subjects of the Colony of Connecticut in particular, they equally evince (as
far as a Royal Declaration and Grant can operate to that Purpose) the Truth of
what is here pleaded for, so far as respects the People of the said Colony.
Indeed these Words (on the general Principles of the Common Law) ought (as is
apprehend) to be construed as containing a full Declaration of the Rights of
the Subject, and in order to remove all Doubts about the same, a Confirmation
of them is annexed to or joined, therewith. It may also be further observed,
that by this Paragraph cannot be meant or intended that the King's Subjects,
within all his Dominions, should have or be governed by the same particular and
formal Laws or Regulations, because their Situations are in distant Parts of
the World, and their Circumstances are so widely different, that the same
particular Establishments and formal Regulations, which in one Place might be
good and wholesome for the People, in another would be unwholesome,
prejudicial, and by no Means answer the End of Laws: But this Declaration and
Confirmation denotes and imports (as is conceived) that all those general and
essential Rights which the free and natural Subjects in the Mother Country are
possessed of, and vested with, by Virtue of the main, leading, and fundamental
Principles of the Common Law of Constitution of the Realm, the King's Subjects,
in the said Colony of Connecticut, shall have and enjoy, to all Intents,
Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, that is, in such Plenitude as always to
be, and ever to be treated as, free and natural Subjects.

3dly. In order that the King's Subjects in the Colonies and Plantations in
America, might have and enjoy the like Liberties and Immunities as other their
Fellow Subjects are favored with, it was and is necessary the Colonies should
be vested with the Authority and Power of Legislation; and this they have
accordingly assumed and exercised, from their first regular Settlement, down to
this Time, and have been constantly owned and acknowledged therein, treated as
having such Authority, and protected in the same by the Crown and the supreme
Legislature of the Nation. Those Corporations, which, by their Situation and
Circumstances, are privileged with the Right of electing their Representatives
to bear a proportionable Part in the general Legislature of the Nation, although
they may be vested with Authority to make By Laws and Regulations, within their
own Jurisdictions, agreeable to the Bounds and Limits of the Charters which
institute and give them Existence, indeed are, and ought to be, immediately
subject to the Laws, Orders, and Taxes of such general Legislature, as well as
others, and that even without being expressly named, for this obvious and solid
Reason, because they are legally represented therein: But with Regard to those
Corporations or Governments, which, by their Distance and Situation, have no
possible Opportunity of such a Representation, the Case is far otherwise.
Whenever, therefore, Acts are formed by the supreme Legislature, that are, in
any Respect, to extend to the Governments abroad, they are made to be so
extended by express Words; and even such as are so extended to Subjects who are
not admitted a Representation, or to bear a Part in the Legislation, may not
improperly be said to be sovereign Acts, or Acts supported by the sovereign
Dominion of the Makers of them. And as the Exercise of such sovereign Authority
may be said (as is humbly conceived) to be, in some Measure an Exception from
the general Rule by which British Subjects (according to the Constitution) are
governed, it is most justly to be presumed and relied upon that the supreme
Guardians of the Liberties of the Subjects, will never extend that Authority
further than may be done without depriving any of the King's Subjects of those
Privileges which are essential to their Liberty and Freedom, or leave them in
Possession of such Rights and Liberties. It is a clear Point that the Colonies
may not, they cannot, be represented in Parliament; and if they are not vested
with legislative Authority within themselves, where they may be represented by
Persons of their own electing, it is plain they will not be represented in any
Legislature at all, and, consequently, if they are subjected to any Laws, it
must be to such as they have never consented to either by themselves or any
Representatives, which will be directly contrary to that beforementioned
fundamental Principle of the British Constitution, that "NO LAWS CAN BE MADE Or
ABROGATED, WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE PEOPLE, BY THEIR REPRESENTATIVES." It
therefore appears that for the Crown to govern the Colonies and Plantations
abroad, by and with the Consent of the People represented in Assemblies or
legislative Bodies, is properly and truly to govern them agreeable to the
British Constitution of Government; and although this may not, in every Form and
Manner, be exactly similar to the Government at Home, yet, as near as the
different Situation and Circumstances admit will it agree with the fundamental
Principles thereof. That the Colony of Connecticut (agreeable to these general
Principles) is vested with such a legislative Authority, appears by their
Charter, full to that Effect. By this Charter the Colony are empowered to meet
in a general Assembly, consisting of a Governor or Deputy Governor, Assistants
and Deputies, annually to be chosen by the Freemen: And such Assembly is vested
with Authority, from Time to Time, to make, ordain and establish all Manner of
wholesome and reasonable Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, Directions and
Instructions, not contrary to the Laws of the Realm of England; and every
Officer, appointed for putting such Laws, Ordinances, etc. from Time to Time,
into due Execution, is sufficiently warranted and discharged against the King's
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by a special Clause, in the same Charter,
express to that Purpose. By this Royal Patent it is therefore evident, that a
full Power of Legislation is granted to the Colony, limited with a Restriction
that they conform, or are not to act contrary to the general Principles of the
Laws of the Nation, and consequently, as when they exceed the Bounds and
Limits, prescribed in the Charter, their Acts will be void, so, when they
conform and regulate their Acts agreeable to the Intent and Meaning of it,
their Acts may properly be said to have the Royal Approbation and Assent. And
these Powers, Rights and Privileges the Colony has been in Possession of for
more than a Century past. This Power of Legislation necessarily includes in it,
an Authority to impose Taxes or Duties upon the People for the Support of
Government and for the Protection and Defense of the Inhabitants; as, without
such Authority, the general Right of Legislation would be of no Avail to them.
These Privileges and Immunities, these Powers and Authorities, the Colony
claims, not only in Virtue of their Right to the general Principles of the
British Constitution, and by Force of the Royal Declaration and Grant in their
Favor, but also as having been in the Possession, Enjoyment and Exercise, of
them for so long a Time, and constantly owned, acknowledged and allowed to be
just in the Claim and Use thereof, by the Crown, the Ministry, and the
Parliament; as may evidently be shown by Royal Instructions, many Letters and
Acts of Parliament, all supposing and being predicated upon the Colony's having
and justly exercising these Privileges, Powers and Authorities: And what better
Foundation for, or greater Evidence of, such Rights can be demanded or
produced, is certainly difficult to be imagined.

These Points being thus rendered so clear and evident, may it not thence be
very justly inferred,

4thly. That charging Stamp Duties, or other internal Taxes, on the Colonies,
in America, by parliamentary Authority, will be an Infringment of the
formentioned Rights and Privileges, and deprive the Colonists of their Freedom
and Inheritance, so far as such Taxations extend? The charging a Tax on any
particular Part of the Subject's Estates in the Plantations, by Authority of
Parliament, will doubtless be found Nothing less than taking from them a Part
of their Estates on the sole Consideration of their being able to bear it, or
of having a Sufficiency left notwithstanding. It must certainly be admitted
that the People thus charged, do not consent, nor have any Opportunity so to
do. An express Consent, either by themselves or Representatives, can by no
Means be pretended, neither can their Consent be argued from Implication, as
their Subjection and Allegiance to the Crown, are supposed to be according to
the Tenor of the Laws of the Nation, for although the King is styled the Head of
the Common Wealth, Supreme Governor, Parens Patriae, etc. yet is he still to
make the Law of the Land the Rule of his Government, that being the Measure as
well of his Power as of the Subjects Obedience; for as the Law asserts,
maintains and provides for the Safety of the King's Royal Person, Crown and
Dignity, and all his just Rights, Revenues, Powers and Prerogatives, so it
likewise declares and asserts the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. [4 Bac.
149.] Therefore, in this Case, as there can be no other implied Consent than
what the general Principles of the Law or Constitution implies, or what is
included in the Obligations to Submission and Obedience to Laws. And as the
general, fundamental Principles of the British Constitution or Laws, which the
Americans claim the Privilege of, are quite the Reverse of such Implications,
and really imply and suppose the Contrary, it follows that charging such Taxes
will be to take Part of their Estates from the People without their Consent,
either expressed or implied; it cannot be said such Charging would be founded on
Contract, as it might be where the Subjects are represented in the Legislature;
neither may it be founded on a Forfeiture, as there is no Pretense of that Kind
in these Cases; surely, then, there can be no Right either to demand or receive
a Man's Estate, where both these are wanting.

If these internal Taxations take Place, and the Principles upon which they
must be founded, are adopted and carried into Execution, the Colonies will have
no more than a Show of Legislation left, nor the King's Subjects in them, any
more than the Shadow of true English Liberty; for the same Principles which
will justify such a Tax of a Penny, will warrant a Tax of a Pound, an hundred,
or a thousand Pounds, and so on without Limitation; and if they will warrant a
Tax on one Article, they will support one on as many Particulars as shall be
thought necessary to raise any Sum proposed. And all such Subjections,
Burdens, and Deprivations, if they take Place with Respect to the King's
Subjects abroad, will be without their Consent, without their having
Opportunity to be represented, or to show their Ability, Disability, or
Circumstances. They will no longer enjoy that fundamental Privilege of
Englishmen, whereby, in special, they are denominated a free People. The
legislative Authority of the Colonies, will, in Part, actually be cut off, a
Part of the same will be taken out of their own Assemblies, even such Part as
they have enjoyed so long, and esteem most dear; nay, may it not be truly said,
in this Case, that the Assemblies in the Colonies will have left no other Power
or Authority, and the People no other Freedom, Estates, or Privileges, than
what may be called a Tenancy at Will? that they have exchanged, or rather lost,
those Privileges and Rights, which, according to the national Constitution,
were their Birthright and Inheritance, for such a disagreeable Tenancy? Will
not such Determinations amount to plain Declarations, to the Colonies, that
although they have enjoyed those Immunities and Privileges heretofore, and been
acknowledged and encouraged in the Possession and Use of them, yet now they
must expect, for Reasons of State, for some public Utility, to part with them,
and be brought under a Kind of Subjection not far from the very Reverse of that
Freedom they justly claim and so highly value? May it not be enquired what
Reasons are or may be assigned for so different Treatment of the Subjects of
the same Most Gracious King, of the same general State or Community? May it
not, upon the whole, be concluded, that charging Stamp Duties, or other
internal Duties, by Authority of Parliament, as has been mentioned, will be
such an Infringment of the Rights, Privileges and Authorities of the Colonies,
that it may be humbly and firmly trusted, and even relied upon, that the
supreme Guardians of the Liberties of the Subject, will not suffer the same to
be done, and will not only protect them in the Enjoyment of their just Rights,
but treat them with great Tenderness, Indulgence and Favor?

OBJECTION.
Perhaps it may be here objected, that these Principles, if allowed, will prove
too much, as the Parliament, by its supreme Dominion, has a Superintendancy
over all the Colonies and Plantations abroad, and Right to govern and control
them as shall be thought best, and most conducive to the general Good of the
Whole; and, accordingly has passed diverse Acts for regulating their Trade and
Navigation, and, in other Respects, directed their Conduct, limited the
Exercise of their Authorities, etc.

ANSWER.
To Objections and Observations of this Kind, it may be answered, that as the
Parliament of Great Britain is most certainly vested with the supreme Authority
of the Nation, and its Jurisdiction and Power most capacious and transcendent,
the Colonies will be far, very far from urging or even attempting any Thing in
Derogation of the Power or Authority of that august Assembly, or pretending to
prescribe Bounds or Limits to the Exercise of their Dominion; nothing in the
foregoing Observations besure, is intended, by way of Objection, but that the
Crown by its Prerogative, or the Parliament by its supreme and general
Jurisdiction, may justly order and do some Things, which may affect the
Property of the American Subjects, in a Way which, in some Sense, may be said
to be independent upon or without the Will or Consent of the People, as by
Regulations of Trade and Commerce and the like; and by general Orders relative
to and Restrictions of their Conduct for the Good of the Whole: For as the
Colonies are so many Governments independent on each other, or not subjected
the one to the other, they can only establish Regulations within and for
themselves respectively; and as they are all subordinate to and dependent upon
the Mother Country, and Propriety, Convenience and even Necessity require that
they should be subject to some General Superintendancy and Control, in order
that the general Course of their Trade and Business should be so uniform as to
center in some general national Interest, it becomes plainly expedient that
there should be some supreme Director over all His Majesty's Dominions; and
this Character and Authority, all Men must acknowledge and allow, properly
belong to the British Parliament. Against the Exercise of such general
Jurisdiction, for the common Interest and Advantage of the Mother Country and
of the Plantations, collectively taken, the before mentioned Observations are
in no Measure intended; for it is humbly conceived, that the Subjects in the
Colonies, may enjoy their Rights, Privileges and Properties, as Englishmen, and
yet, for political Reasons, be restrained from some particular Correspondence
or Branches of Trade and Commerce, or may be subjected therein to such Duties,
Charges and Regulations, as the supreme Power may judge proper to establish as
so many Conditions of enjoying such Trade. Reasons of State may render it
expedient to prohibit some Branches of Trade and to burden others as aforesaid.
And as such Regulations will doubtless appear, upon Examination, rather to be a
preventing the Subject from acquiring Property, than taking it from him, after
it is legally become his own, the Objections relative to such Establishment,
ought to be only against those that may be supposed unequal, unprofitable, or
not expedient, the Determination of which must nevertheless be left to the
supreme Authority of the Nation. What therefore is designed to be urged from
these general Principles of the British Constitution, is, that the Legislatures
of the Colonies ought to be left entire, and that His Majesty's good Subjects
in them should be permitted the continued Enjoyment of their essential Rights,
Immunities and Privileges, which will not, as is supposed, by any Means be the
Case, if the internal Taxations before mentioned should take Place. But if
Restrictions on Navigation, Commerce, or other external Regulations only are
established, the internal Government, Powers of taxing for its Support, an
Exemption from being taxed without Consent, and other Immunities, which legally
belong to the Subjects of each Colony, agreeable to their own particular
Constitutions, will be and continue in the Substance of them whole and entire;
Life, Liberty and Property, in the true Use of the Terms, will then remain
secure and untouched.

OBJECTION.
On this Distinction it may perhaps be further said, by Way of Objection, that
a Stamp Duty differs from a Tax, as it will oblige the Subjects only to pay for
Paper, Parchment, and c. which they are at Liberty to use or not to use, at
Pleasure; and so, if they choose to make use of it, they voluntarily submit to
the Charge, and cannot be said to be taxed without their Consent.

ANSWER.
This by no Means will obviate the Arguments; for a Regulation which
necessarily obliges a Man to part with any certain Portion of his Estate,
amounts to the same Thing as the actual taking such Portion from him. It must
be supposed that the People in America will buy and fell their Lands, nay, in a
Multitude of Instances, they would not know how to subsist without such
Dispositions: They will also be necessitated to give and take Obligations, and
to use Paper for various other Purposes, or there will be of Course, so great a
Stagnation of Business as almost to bring on a Dissolution of their civil and
political Existence. These Things will be found as necessary as the Use of
Agriculture itself. They will therefore be as certainly taxed by a Duty charged
on the Transfer of their Lands, as by a Tax laid directly on the Land itself.
If Lands were to be taxed, it might as well be said, People are not obliged to
have Lands (and indeed some have none) so that such as do acquire them,
voluntarily submit to the Charge, which is really saying Nothing to the
Purpose, for the Use and Improvement of Lands Barter, and Transmutation of
Property are as necessary in civilized Countries, as Food and Raiment are to
the Body natural. Indeed the Supposition of the Necessity and certain Use of
the Articles to be charged, can be the only Foundation to render a Revenue
arising therefrom worthy of Notice, as otherwise the Effect would be altogether
precarious.

5thly. Another Reason offered as an Objection against charging Stamp Duties,
and c. in the Colonies, may be drawn from the Consequence of such a Measure, as
it is most probable, if not certain, it will, in the Event, prove prejudicial
to Great Britain itself. The Colonies and Plantations in America are, indeed,
of great Importance to their Mother Country and an Interest worthy of her most
tender Regard: The more they prosper and increase in Number, Riches and
Commerce, the greater will be the Advantage not only to them but also to the
Nation at Home. In the Colonies there is a Vent for and a Consumption of almost
all Sorts of British Manufactures, and of many and various Kinds of Goods of
the Produce of other Countries, first imported into Britain and from thence
brought into the Plantations, whereby the Revenue of the Crown and Wealth of
the Nation are much increased, at the Expense of the Colonies; for these Goods
the Colonies make Remittances with what Moneys they are able to collect, in a
Variety of their own Produce, and by circular Trade; and taking the whole Trade
together, it amounts, to a very great Sum, the Profits of which in general
center in Great Britain. If the Plantations are encouraged and prosper, this
will be an increasing Interest and become more and more of Importance; but if
Measures should be taken, which, in Regard to them, would have a natural
Tendency to abate their Vigor, Spirit and Industry, or to turn them into some
other Channel, to supply the Necessaries of Life, what can be expected but a
Decrease of the Colonies Wealth and Prosperity, and consequently a Decay of an
important national Interest. And as, on the one Hand, depriving the Colonies of
Part of their Powers and Privileges and rendering the Tenures of them and of
their Liberties and Properties precarious, as by charging Stamp Duties or other
internal Taxes upon them by Act of Parliament, etc. will naturally produce that
unhappy Effect of causing the Colonies to languish and decrease; so, on the
other Hand, upholding and continuing the Freedom of their Governments,
maintaining their Authority, their Laws, securing their Properties, considering
and treating their Privileges and Immunities as Matters too sacred to be
violated, will naturally tend to invigorate, enliven and encourage the People,
and keep up in them a Spirit of Industry in all Kinds of Dealing and Business,
and of Emulation in the Service of their Mother Country, whereby they will
become more able and zealous to promote the national Interest. This will
doubtless be found almost universally to be the Case of a People where they
enjoy Liberty, and their Lives, Properties and Privileges are secure, and the
Reverse of it as generally to be the Consequence of a contrary Treatment; for
what Encouragement has the Merchant to expose his Interest to Chances and
Dangers, the Farmer, the Mechanic and the common Labourer to weary themselves
in their fatiguing toilsome Employments, if, after all, Part of their Estates
(and how great a Part is to them altogether uncertain) may be taken from them,
and in such Ways and Manner as they have heretofore been led to think are
inconsistent with their essential Rights and Liberties? Surely then, if
subjecting the Colonies to Burdens which will discourage and abate their
Industry, will eventually prove disadvantageous to the Mother Country, and the
charging of Stamp Duties or other internal Taxes on them, will, in the End,
have that Effect (as has been endeavored to be shown and evinced) the taking
such a Measure must be inconsistent with good Policy and the true Interest of
the Nation.

6thly. Furthermore to enforce the Objections against Stamp Duties or other
internal Taxations, it is conceived that a summary Representation of the
Settlement, special Services and Circumstances of the Colony of Connecticut,
may be here, with great Propriety adduced, from whence very cogent Reasons may
be drawn in their Favor.

The first Settlers of the Colony, who were derived from England, their native
Country, planted here in the Year 1636, and having purchased their Lands, or
rather a Right of Pre-emption of the Crown, or the King's Patentees, they were
obliged to Purchase the greatest Part of them again of the native Claimers,
Possessors, and Proprietors of the Country, and some other Part was obtained at
a much dearer Rate, which was by Conquest; for the People of these new
Settlements, scarce of one Year's Date, and very small, were forced, for the
Defense of their Lives and those Settlements, which in a fair and equitable
Manner they had made, to enter into a War with the principal Tribe of Indians,
then in this Part of the Country, who rose with all their barbarous, insiduous,
crafty Force and Cruelty to rout these new Settlers out of the Country, as the
first Effort of their set and declared Design to break up and prevent the
Settlement of New England. Against this numerous and powerful Tribe, enraged
with Jealousy at the English, these Planters, who were able to raise but about
fourscore Men, took up Arms, and, by the Smiles of Heaven, in sundry severe
Conflicts, overthrew, conquered and effectually subdued these their crafty,
bloody and inveterate Enemies. And as this was the first Indian War in
New England, and issued so Successfully on the Part of the English, whose
Courage, Force and Conduct in War now became the Dread and Terror of the
Natives throughout the Land, it laid a Foundation for Tranquillity in general
for almost forty Years after, which gave a most favorable Opportunity for the
Settlements in the Country to multiply and increase in Strength and Vigor.

The Plantation and Settlement of the Colony, by the Year 1661, being
considerably increased, they made Application to the Crown for a Charter of
Incorporation, with Powers of Government, founded on the general Principles of
the English, now British Constitution, that is to say, that they might be
governed with the Consent of the People represented in an Assembly composed of
Members elected for that Purpose; and, in Consequence of such Application, King
Charles the Second, in the 14th Year of his Reign, granted his Royal Charter to
the said Colony, the Preamble of which is worthy of special Notice, as in it
are these Words. viz.

"Whereas, by the several Navigations, Discoveries; and successful Plantations,
diverse of our loving Subjects of this our Realm of England, several Lands,
Islands, Places, Colonies, and Plantations have been obtained and settled in
that Part of the Continent of America Called New England, and thereby the Trade
and Commerce there has been of late Years much increased: And whereas we have
been informed, by the humble Petition of our trusty and well-beloved John
Winthrop, John Mason, etc. being Persons principally interested in our Colony
or Plantation of Connecticut in New England, that the same Colony, or the
greatest Part thereof, was purchased and obtained for great and valuable
Considerations, and some other Part thereof gained by Conquest and with much
Difficulty and at the only Endeavors, Expense and Charges of them and their
Associates and those under whom they claim, subdued and improved, and thereby
become a considerable Enlargement and Addition to our Dominions and Interest
there: Now, know ye, that IN CONSIDERATION THEREOF," etc.

Hereby it appears that this Charter was granted upon valuable Considerations,
which adds Weight and Strength to the Title on which the Claim of the Colony to
the Rights, Immunities, and Franchises therein granted and confirmed are
founded, for here are the Considerations of large Sums of Money advanced,
Conquest made at the Expense of the Blood and Treasure of the Planters, eminent
public national Services performed and to be performed, and all to the
Enlargement of the King's Dominions and for the Increase of the national
Commerce, which the Charter is a clear and full Evidence of. The Powers and
Privileges granted by this Charter were properly the Purchase of the People,
and the grantting was an Instance of Royal Justice to them, tho the Grace and
Favor of the Crown assuredly ought to be and has been at all Times humbly and
gratefully acknowledged therein. Therefore as there really were valuable
Considerations which were proper Foundations for such a Grant, it was doubtless
judged to be for the Honor of the Crown to grant the Powers of Government with
such ample and beneficial Immunities and Privileges as are allowed and given in
and by the Charter aforesaid; and these the People indeed look upon as the
Purchase of their Ancestors, as a gracious and royal Reward of the Merit and
Services of their Forefathers, and as one of the best Inheritances they left to
their Children; whether therefore it can be consistent with Law of Equity they
should be deprived of such an Inheritance, or any Part thereof, may be worthy
of serious Consideration: For if the Right of a single Person to vote in the
Election of a Member of Parliament be so sacred in the Eye of the Law, that to
deprive him of it, entitles to an Action at Common Law for his Damages and the
Violation of his Privileges, as was adjudged in the House of Lords, in the Case
of Ashby and White, how sacred then ought the Powers, Privileges and Immunities
of a whole Colony of loyal People, of all the Freemen in it, to be looked upon
and considered? And of what Importance is it they should be defended and
protected therein? As the Enjoyment of such Privileges and Liberties, of such a
free Constitution of Government naturally tends to promote Loyalty and
Obedience in a People, so the Inhabitants of the Colony of Connecticut (without
arrogating) may, with the strictest Veracity, say and insist, that none of the
Colonies in the British Dominions, have approved themselves more loyal and
obedient to the King's Majesty, or more forward and zealous for promoting his
Service, then they have constantly done. These Principles of Loyalty and Zeal,
the natural Result of Liberty and Freedom, have influenced the Colony to exert
itself with a becoming vigorous Spirit and Resolution in public and benevolent
Services, whenever they have been called upon or applied to for that Purpose.
It has not only defended itself in its infant State against the violent
Insurrections of the Indians who formerly lived near or dwelt among them, and
at all Times down to the present Day, against all its Enemies, but also, as it
increased in Numbers and Strength, has from Time to Time, afforded Aid,
Succor and Relief to the neighboring Colonies. It is found, by ancient,
Memorials, that the Colony of Connecticut united with, and at large Expense and
to most remarkable Effect, assisted the other Colonies in carrying on the
famous Indian War called the Narraganset War, which raged about the Year 1675,
when (after a shocking Destruction of the English People, their infant Towns
and Settlements) those Barbarians were totally subdued, and the distressed
Country thereby saved from impending Ruin.

From the Year 1688 to about 1695, Connecticut, at sundry Times and as
Occasions required, furnished expeditious Aid and Succor to the Province of
New York, for the Defense and Protection of Albany and other Places, then
exposed to frequent Irruptions of the French and Indians; in which Service, at
the several Times of their Distress, were employed about five Hundred Men, at
the Charge and Expense of the Colony, the Amount whereof appears to be about
five Thousand Pounds. Within the same Times, Help and Relief were repeatedly
raised and sent forward, with great Expedition, for the Defense of the
Frontiers in the County of Hampshire, in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
which often happily tended to the Safety, Encouragement and Support of the
People there, and was gratefully acknowledged and certified by some of the
principle Men in those Parts. The Expense of these Services to the Colony of
Connecticut (besides the Loss of Lives in several Encounters) amounted to near
two Thousand Pounds.

It appears also that the Colony of Connecticut, in the Years 1703, 4, 5, and
6, on repeated Alarms, Occasioned by Irruptions of the Enemy, on the Frontier
Towns and Places in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, raised and sent
Numbers of Men for the Relief, Succor and Defense of the Inhabitants in those
Parts. These Men were generally sent on Horseback for the Sake of Expedition,
the Occasions being urgent, tho at some Times on Foot. And as those Alarms were
frequent, the Succors were sent in about twenty several Parties succeeding one
another. The Number of Men employed in those Services was about seventeen
Hundred and of Horse near nine Hundred. And the total Expense occasioned
thereby to the Colony (as may be still shown by the Accounts thereof) amounted
to near eleven Thousand Pounds. The Currency in those Times was about
three-fourths the Value of Sterling Money. All these Services were voluntarily
performed by the small Colony of Connecticut, for the Relief and Protection of
their Fellow Subjects in the other Colonies (one of which in particular was
under the immediate Government of the Crown) without receiving either Money or
any other Aid from the Crown, or from the neighboring Provinces.

In the Expedition in 1710 against Port Royal, now Annapolis, when it was taken
from the French, and the costly disastrous Expeditions set on Foot against
Canada in 1709 and 1711, the Colony of Connecticut bore a full Proportion of
Expense and sustained a very great Loss of Men. And the Colony failed not
likewise of bearing a large Share in that memorable Expedition formed by the
New England Governments against Cape-Breton, in 1745, when it was reduced to
the Obedience of the British Crown. This was a seasonable an important
Conquest, and will not be forgotten, while the principal Articles which served
as a Basis for restoring the Peace to Europe that followed it, are had in
Remembrance.

But the more recent Instances of the Loyalty, Zeal and Serviceableness of the
Colony of Connecticut are such as follow.

In the Year 1755, when Forces were raised by the Northern Colonies for
removing Encroachments made on His Majesty's Territories in America, by the
French, Connecticut raised a Thousand Men for that Service, and also two
Thousand more the same Year to reinforce the Army at Lake George, then
apprehended too weak to withstand the Enemy. This Number was two or three Times
the Proportion of Connecticut compared with some other Colonies concerned in
that Expedition. In 1756 it raised two Thousand five Hundred Men, which was
double the Number proposed by the King's Commander in Chief for the Colony's
Proportion in the Service of that Year. This was done by the Colony as it was
supposed the southern Colonies would fail of the Proportion allotted for them
to raise; and left the Service should suffer, it exerted itself in such
duplicate Proportion. In 1757, the Proportion demanded by His Majesty's
Commander in Chief, for the Service of that Year, being fourteen Hundred Men,
the Colony not only raised that Number, but also, on Intelligence of the Attack
on Fort William Henry, speedily sent forward about five Thousand of the
Militia, for the Relief of that Fortress and Protection of the Country, then in
great Consternation in those Parts. And in 1758 an Expedition was set on Foot
for the Reduction of Canada, and the Colonies being called upon by the Crown,
to raise as many Men as the Number of their Inhabitants would admit of; and as
it was apprehended that in Case of Success, an End would be put to the War in
these Parts by that Year's Campaign, Connecticut exerted itself beyond all
former Efforts, in Hopes of its being the finishing Stroke, and accordingly
agreed to raise five Thousand Men, and actually had but few short of that
Number in the Field. But as this important Design failed of Accomplishment at
that Time, the Colony, by Royal Direction, was called upon strenuously to exert
itself in the like Service, in 1759, and even until the End of the War. And as
what has been done by the Colonies, on that extraordinary Occasion, in 1758,
seemed constantly to be made the Rule of Demand upon them afterward, the
annual Requisition of the Crown proved exceeding heavy upon the Colony of
Connecticut, for it had indeed exerted itself vastly beyond its Ability, and
any just Proportion in that Year; yet nevertheless they agreed to raise the
Number demanded in every succeeding Year of the War, being spirited, as far as
possible to yield the strictest Obedience to the King's Commands, and
determined to persevere in his Service with the utmost Efforts. And in the
present Year 1764, the Colony has raised upwards of two Hundred and fifty Men
for the Annoyance of the Indians and Protection of His Majesty's Subjects in
other Governments. These Troops are now out on Service at the Direction of the
King's Commander in Chief in North America.

In these Services, from the Year 1755 to the Year 1762 inclusive, the Expenses
of the Colony, over and above the parliamentary Grants (which have been
received with the most sensible and humble Gratitude) amounts to upwards of
four hundred thousand Pounds; the large Arrears of which Sum will remain a
heavy distressing Burden upon the People for many Years to come. Moreover
several Thousands of the hardiest and most able young Men, the Hope and
Strength of the Farmers, have been destroyed, lost, and enervated in the many
distant arduous Campaigns, during the Course of this terrible War. The
Husbandary of the Country (its only Resource) has suffered and still suffers
extremely hereby; and the Colony will not recover itself from these
Disadvantages in a long Tract of Time. And although, by the Success of the
military Operations in America, large, extensive and most valuable Acquisitions
have been made to the British Dominions, yet the Colony of Connecticut gains
Nothing thereby, further than as it may be said to be concerned in the Common
Cause and general Interest of the Whole. It had no Lands to recover or even to
secure from the Enemy, as some other Governments had; it has no immediate
Trade with the Indians, nor will its Situation admit of any but what may, by
some Individuals, be carried on through and so subject to the Control of other
Colonies. The Profits of this Trade have ever been mostly in the Hands of those
whose Proimity gave them peculiar Advantages for it. Nay, instead of receiving
particular Benefit by these Events, the Colony will rather suffer Disadvantage
thereby, in the Emigration of its Inhabitants, already thinned, for Settlement
of the vacant Lands in other Provinces, which are now secure from the Enemy who
formerly annoyed them. Therefore Principles of Loyalty and Zeal for the King's
Service, Principles of Benevolence, Humanity and Compassion for their
Fellow Subjects in Danger and Distress and the agreeable Prospect, a laudable
Desire of enjoying Quiet and Peace, in Consequence of a general Tranquillity in
the Land, must be considered as the genuine Motives and Springs inducing the
Colony of Connecticut, to exert itself in the Manner and to the Degrees before
mentioned.

And now, when all these Things are duly considered and viewed in a proper
Light, will it not be thought that the Colony has good Reason to hope and
expect, in Return for and in Consequence of such Services, if not to be
indulged with greater and more extensive Favors from the Crown and Nation, at
least to be protected and secured in the full Enjoyment of the Rights and
Privileges essential to the Freedom of Englishmen, instead of having those
Rights curtailed or infringed, by charging on them a Stamp Duty, as proposed,
or any other the like new and unprecedented Taxation.

OBJECTION.
Perhaps, after all that has been offered, it will be objected by some that
America ought, and is able to bear a just Proportion of the American Expense;
and that as the Duty already charged will, they suppose, not be sufficient to
defray that Expense, it becomes necessary to make Additions to the Duties
already laid.

ANSWER.
1st. In order to obviate and answer this Objection it may be necessary to
enter a little into a Consideration of the Occasion and Nature of those Charges
which, by some are denominated American Expenses. That Expense which is
occasioned merely for the Defense and Protection of the new Governments and
Acquisitions, it is conceived ought not to be charged upon the Colonies in
general, as it is truly no other than a national Interest, or an Interest of
the particular new Governments or Acquisitions, and consequently ought, where
it is not purely national, to be laid on those whose immediate Profit is
advanced thereby. The old Colonies, especially New England, were at the sole
Charge of settling and defending themselves, and that they should now be
compelled to contribute toward settling others, under much better Advantages
in that Regard than they were, will not fail of being esteemed hard and
injurious. If the Expense arises in defending and securing the Fur Trade and
the Out-Posts requisite for carrying on the same, to oblige these Colonies
which receive no immediate Advantage by it, to bear a proportionable Part of
the Burden, will also be hard and unequal, and especially if that Trade is
sufficiently profitable to support itself, if otherwise, why is there so much
Care and mighty Attention constantly exercised toward it. If the Expense
occurs in holding and protecting the new and large Acquisitions, wherefore
should the Colonies bear that, when they have no Interest in them? they do
indeed properly belong to the Crown, and will finally be disposed of and
settled for the Benefit of the Crown and the Nation in general, and not for the
Advantage of the Colonies in particular. But,

2dly. What America's proportionable Part in the American Expense will be, is
somewhat uncertain and difficult to determine: And in order to form any
tolerable Judgment in the Case, it will be necessary to consider the Wealth of
the Colonies, compared with the Mother Country, their Number of Inhabitants,
compared with the Extent of their own Country; the Nature of their Climates, in
some of which the cold Seasons are of such long Continuance, as to occasion a
Consumption of the greatest Part of their Produce, their Trade and Commerce,
the Profits of which in general center in Great Britain; their Business,
Advantages and Disadvantages and other Circumstances, such as their being, in a
general Way, obliged to spend so great a Proportion of their Labor in
clearing, fencing and preparing their Lands for Improvement; and that the
Surplus of their Labor, in many Instances, is but very little and in some
Nothing at all. The clear Profits therefore to the Colonies being so very
inconsiderable, it must surely be found, on a just and reasonable Computation,
that their Proportion of any general national Expense, if any Thing, will be
very small. But,

3dly. If, notwithstanding, it shall be judged necessary (which is even a
difficult Supposition) to make an Addition to the Charges on America, yet is it
humbly conceived, for the Reasons already offered, it will not by any Means
ever be thought proper or just in order to effect that Purpose, it should be
done in a Way that shall be an Infringement on the Constitutions of the
Colonies, or that will deprive the Subjects in them of some of those important
Liberties and Privileges, which, as Englishmen and Freemen they so justly
value, and have a legal and equitable Right to, as well as the Rest of their
Fellow Subjects. Revenues are never raised in Great Britain by a Violation of
the Consitution or any Part of it, but the Liberties and Privileges of the
Subjects are always saved and maintained in those Cases; and why the Americans
should not value their Privileges at as high a Rate as their Fellow Subjects in
Great Britain do theirs, and wherefore the same Justice is not due to the one
as to the other, what sufficient Reasons can possibly be assigned? Therefore
whatever may be done in this Matter, it is humbly trusted will surely be
effected in such Manner as to leave the Legislatures of the Colonies entire,
and the People in the full Possession and Enjoyment of their just Rights and
Immunities. This, it is conceived, might be effected by a Duty (if thought
necessary and proper) on the Importation of Negroes, and on the Fur Trade, etc.
for although that on Slaves may and doubtless will fall with most Weight where the
greatest Numbers are imported, yet will none be charged thereby but such as
voluntarily submit to it, and was such Importation lessened, which might indeed
be some Disadvantage to a few Individuals, yet probably it would be attended
with many salutary Effects, both with Respect to Great Britain and her Colonies
in general. And as a principle Article of the Expense in America must be for
protecting and securing the Fur Trade, what good Reasons can be adduced
wherefore that Trade should not be so charged as to support itself? for (as
has been already hinted) if it will not bear this Charge, why is it still held
and maintained at such great Expense?

Having thus shown that the English are a free People; that their Freedom
consists in these general Privileges, that No Laws can be made or abrogated
without their Consent by Representatives, and for that Purpose have Right to
elect their Representatives; that the American Colonists are as really the
King's Subjects, as loyal, and have as much Right to the general and
fundamental Privileges of the British Constitution, and to Protection in the
Enjoyment thereof, as the Rest of their Fellow Subjects in the Mother Country;
that, in Consequence hereof the Colonies and Plantations in America, according
to the general Principles of the national Constitution, are vested with
Authority of Legislation, and have Right to be represented in their Assemblies,
in whom that Authority is lodged, and with whose Consent they are to be
governed by the Crown; that for the Crown to govern these Colonies and
Plantations by and with the Consent of the People in such legislative
Assemblies, is properly and truly to govern them agreeable to the national
Constitution, or that it is as conformable to the fundamental Principles of the
British Government that the Subjects in the Colonies should be represented in
Assemblies or legislative Bodies, as that the Subjects in Great Britain should
be represented in Parliament or the supreme Legislature of the Nation, and that
the Government of the Subjects, with the Consent of their respective
Representatives, is founded on the same general and essential Principles of
Liberty: That charging Stamp Duties, or internal Taxes on the Colony, by
Authority of Parliament will be inconsistent with those Authorities and
Privileges which the Colonies, and the People in them legally enjoy, and have,
with the Approbation of the Supreme Power of the Nation, been in the Use and
Possession of for a long Course of Years; as also the Probability that such
Measures will, in the Event, prove prejudicial to the national Interest as well
as hurtful to the Colonies, together with some Matters and Circumstances more
directly and peculiarly in Favor of the Colony of Connecticut, and the
especial public and benevolent Services performed by it on many Occasions,
which may justly merit some favorable Considerations; and answered such
Objections as might probably be made against the Tenor of the Reasonings and
Representations herein offered and laid down; it is now concluded, that on the
Account of these and such other weighty Reasons as may occur, a British
Parliament whose Design is to keep up that Constitution, Support the Honor and
Prerogative of the Crown, and maintain the Privileges of the People, will have
a tender Regard for the Rights and Immunities of the King's Subjects in the
American Colonies, and charge no internal Taxations upon them without their
Consent.


