AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT, of the late DISTURBANCE, between the INHABITANTS OF THE
BACK SETTLEMENTS; OF PENNSYLVANIA, and the PHILADELPHIANS, etc. Impartially
related by a well Wisher.

The Second Edition, may be called a PIRACY. I said Printed at Rome: I meant
nothing but Printed in Second-Street, by Andrew Steuars-Stockfish.

Printed by Anthony Armbruster, in Moravian-Alley.

GENTLEMEN;
THE following Relation might be acceptable to many of my Readers, being
intended impartially as near the Truth as it has come to my Knowledge. At
Philadelphia on the third Day of the Second Month 1764. GEORGE the THIRD then
happily Reigning. John Penn, Esquire Governor of Pennsylvania. Tidings came from
the North of a great Number of Men, who had assembled themselves in Arms, and
were actually on their March for the said City, in order to take their Revenge
on a Number of poor wretched Savages, then in the Barracks of said City, under
the Protection of the Government, however, just their Cause might have been in
Pointing out such of them as were actually Murderers (who would have been tried
by Law, and received their Destiny) yet to fly in the Face of Government
whereon very Individual and in short our All depends, must be productive of
very dangerous and fatal Consequences.

HWOBEIT, Philadelphia at this Time proved not to be the Lancaster; expresses
daily and hourly arriving of their nearer Approach, Orders were sent to all the
Ferrys on the River Schuylkil, to stop them by cutting away the Ropes and
sinking their Boats, which greatly impeded their March, and about Four Hundred
crossed the River about fourteen Miles North of the City at a Place called the
Swedes Ford. Upon which being the Second Day of the Week, and the Sixth of the
same Month, a Number of the Inhabitants of the City and others appeared under
Arms, the Barracks and Streets lined with Cannon, and nothing was expected but
the doleful Scene of War. Among the rest were the People called Friends,
prepared with Arms like Spartans brave, striding forth with Gigantic Pace to
defend their Laws and Liberty, more precious than Life, let it be Recorded in
the Anals of after Ages in LETTERS of GOLD.

ON the Seventh Day of the same Month an Express arrives, informing that the
Advanced Guard, amounting to near two Hundred Men, had come into Germantown,
whereon a Council was held, in which it was determined, that they should be met
in Order to know their Demands, and why they came Armed in such a Manner that
they might drop their Intention by being informed of our Strength and
Resolution to Defend our Rights to the last.

HOWEVER on the eighth Day of the same they were visited at Germantown;
whereupon after some Communication with the Recorder and his Associates;
attended by a great Number of the Inhabitants, Gentlemen of the City, etc. and
they were found a selected Band of Gentlemen, Decendants of the Noble
Eniskillers, who were the great Means of setting that great and never to be
forgotten Prince King William on the Throne. Their Demands were too reasonable
to be rejected, they were Gentle and easy, not farther then Pointing out to the
Government such of these Savages as had been guilty of Murder, and a praying
likewise that the Government would take notice, and try them by the Laws of the
Place accordingly; they had no Intent in the least to molest Man, Woman or
Child. Their Grievance as it is said were yet somewhat farther; they had paid
for Lands, paid also their Taxes, served his Majesty, and all were in a Manner
taken from them; indeed some went so far as to say, that it was given to Savage
Indians, who were at this Time rioting in all the Plenty that so great and
Fertile a Province could afford; notwithstanding their Perfideous Outrages, on
the Poor back Inhabitants, their Wives and defenseless Children. Their
Grievances by Information is at length to be laid before the Honorable
Governor, and House of Representatives, and undoubtedly from so just a
Constitution will receive the just Merits of their Cause, which we hope in due
Time will be made Manifest and openly published.

THESE Things are the Effects of succouring a Savage Nation, who Wolf-like for
these many Years have been Murdering and Destroying Poor defenseless People;
and all they had through out our Frontiers, and when driven to Extremity for want
of Clothing or Victuals, they then propose a Treaty with our People, who
generously complies with almost every Things they say and want, then the next
Step will be, give them some Thousands of Pounds in Clothing, Arms,
Ammunition, and in short every Thing they can say that they have need of, and
when the Renderzvous is over, and the Indians have well Eaten and Drank, they
return to their own Country, killing whether Man or Beast they meet in their
Way, this is the Retaliation the Government who must pay all Sums thus expended
get in return, some may say it is a necessary Scourge for our Evil; others that
it is not a Welcome One, and full of Ingratitude and Deceit.

MAY the GOD of all Nature direct us as Christians to Humility, walk humbly
before him, and to love our Neighbors as ourselves, and then undoubtedly will
cease all this Tumultuous Factions: He will say to the Fomenting Sea, whose
Winds are Outrageous, be thou still as the fine gliding Brook, whose purling
Streams are harmonious to the Hearers Ears, is the earnest Prayer of your true
and affectionate Lover of King and Country.

P. S. It would be well in this Critical juncture of Things, as the White
People most in General, hates any Thing that Savours of the Name of an Indian;
that they were removed to their own Country and there set down in the most
Peaceable terms we could make with them, in hopes for the Future they would
rest satisfied, and in their Way, endeavor for an honest Living by Hunting,
etc. which Trade with us in my Opinion, for their Skins and Furrs, would be
valuable; and the Heart scald that now subsists among People; chiefly on their
Account, would wear away; on the other Hand if they should misbehave; there
are Men enough here, and more will be very soon here, and be able to follow
them into their Towns, and undoubtedly take full Satisfaction, for any Insults
they dare commit. If we rightly informed, our Mother Country had always some
Jealousy of our behavior one Day or other, and in this Situation of Things,
there is a beginning made. SOLOMON says; A rod for the Fools hack, and we shall
have it, a standing Army to maintain.

From a True COUNTRYMAN


