Mr. Conant's SERMON Occasioned by the Execution of BRISTOL, a Negro Boy, For
the Murder of Miss McKinstry.

The Blood of ABEL, and the Blood of JESUS considered and improved, in A SERMON
Delivered at Taunton, December the First, 1763. Upon the Day of the Execution
of BRISTOL, A Negro Boy of about Sixteen Years old, FOR The Murder of Miss
Elizabeth McKinstry.

By SYLVANUS CONANT, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Middleborough.

-- The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries unto me from the Ground.

The Almighty GOD. Come now, and let us slay him, and cast him into some Pit.

JOSEPH'S Brethren. Whose sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed.

Genesis ix.6. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street,
M,DCC,LXIV.

A SERMON, etc.
HEB. XII.24. -- And to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better Things
than that of ABEL.


IT is well known to this numerous Audience, that the sad and melancholy
Occasion of our assembling this Day, is, to see the Execution of Justice upon
the condemned Criminal here present: And, as our Design in coming into the
House of GOD this Morning, is, to give Him one more Opportunity of hearing a
Message from the Oracles of GOD, and so from the Throne of Grace; as also to
present our united Supplications to the ALMIGHTY in his Behalf, and to hear
what GOD the LORD has to say unto us upon this solemn and affecting Occasion,

I shall therefore address myself immediately to the Consideration of some
Things, suitable, both to employ the Thoughts of the Criminal, (whose immortal
Soul, before Night, will be required of him) and also to assist the
Meditations, and animate the Devotion of us all.

But, who of us can think of the guilty Cause of this general Concourse,
without feeling our Heart struck, and deeply too, with the different Sensations
of severe Indignation, and tender Compassion? Indignation, at the black and
horrid Crime; but Compassion to the abandoned Criminal? For we ought to pity
his Person, though he is justly condemned to Death; and to pray for the Salvation
of his immortal Soul, though we greatly abhor his Action.

However; all our Pity, our Prayers and best Endeavors to recover him to a
thoro' Repentance, and to the Mercy and Favor of GOD, would be absolutely vain
and without the least Hopes of Success, were it not for the Consideration of,
The BLOOD of SPRINKLING, that speaks better Things than the BLOOD of ABEL.
Here is the Encouragement we have, to persevere in using Means with Him, or
indeed with any other Transgressor: And since it has pleased the infinitely
merciful GOD to provide this sovereign and powerful Remedy, for the Salvation
of Sinners that have destroyed themselves; therefore, as long as Life and
Breath last, and as long as the Gospel sounds in our Ears, we should be
striving, using Means, etc. Because, so long as we are favored with Life,
Reason, and the Gospel, we have the rich Blessings of Pardon and Redemption
held forth to us all, and freely offered to our Acceptance, through the virtuous
Blood of Christ. Nevertheless; our Malady is to be set before us, antecedent to
our Remedy; for the whole need not a Phisician, but they that are sick; and the
Words of Scripture I have now read to you, as they refer to the Blood of Abel
and the Blood of Jesus, (in which Light I consider them) do furnish us with
suitable Matter, to answer both these Ends in general, and to answer the
present Occasion in particular; for,

I think, we can hardly mention, or hear mentioned, the Blood of ABEL, without
bringing afresh to our Minds, the horrible Murder that was perpetrated upon him
by his Brother Cain; which Murder of Abel, as it was committed entirely without
a great many of those external Causes, Provocations, and Motives, that have
oftentimes emboldened, and hurried on other audacious Sinners to the like
guilty Act; on this Account, it seems nearly related, and a good deal similar
to the Murder we now deplore, and for which the Murderer is soon to be executed.

Among the various Kinds, or Denominations of Homicide or Man-killing, I can
think of but three Things that will free the Agent from the Guilt of innocent
Blood in such Instances, viz. either profound Ignorance, or what is called
Accident, or Self-Defence; in all which Cases, it is supposed that the Actor
may be innocent, and accordingly Provision is made for his Safety, both in the
Law of GOD and Man. These Cases excepted, there is no Excuse for the Murderer;
he must die, or the Guilt of Blood will lay upon the Community.

As for Suicide (or Self-Murder) which is the worst of all; nothing but
Ignorance, or Accident leave us any Ground to hope favorably of the
Self-Destroyer. But as this is not the Crime under Consideration, I shall say
nothing about it: Neither shall I insist or enlarge upon the Evidences, which
prove, that Murder is a Sin of the most enormous Size that we can commit
against our Fellow Creatures, since the Evidences hereof are so deeply stamped,
in the Laws of Nature, of GOD, and of Man.

What I have mainly in my View, at the present, is, to make some Representation
of the Horribleness of the Crime of Murder, and also of the only Remedy
provided by GOD for the Salvation of the penitent Criminal; both of which Cases
will be touched upon, if we attend to what is referred to in the Text: And
accordingly I propose, with Brevity, to consider the two following Things, viz.

1. What the Things were, that the Blood of ABEL spoke. 2dly. What the better
Things are, that the Blood of JESUS speaks: Which done, the Way will be open,
3dly. For a pointed Address to the Criminal in particular. And 4thly. A Word of
Admonition and Exhortation to all in general. And may the SPIRIT of GOD be with
us, to assist the Speaker and the Hearers; by whose gracious Influence also,
may we all be thoro'ly convinced of Sin, and have that Blood of Sprinkling
applied to us, which speaks better Things than that of ABEL.

I. We are to consider what the Things were, that the Blood of ABEL spoke: In
doing which, we shall naturally be led back to view the tragic Scene that
opened to the World, the first Instance of Murder; From that Time Virtue dates
her Persecution from Vice. Bishop of Meaux's Uni. Hist. Vol. I.
and also the Process of Justice against the audacious Criminal.

You well remember the affecting History, by which we are informed that the
Blood of Abel was shed by the Hand of his own, and only Brother Cain, with whom
he was bro't up and lived in Peace; against whom he had no Quarrel, and to whom
he gave no Cause of Offense. Cain was the abandoned Wretch, who (instigated by
Satan, and led on by the Envy, Malice, and Hatred of his own Heart) sought, and
found an Opportunity to vent the Rage and Malice of his Heart in the Murder of
his Brother: Cursed be his Anger for it was fierce, and his Wrath for it was
cruel; cruel to the last Degree, for nothing could allay the groundless Anger
of his guilty Heart, or calm the raging Storm of unprovoked Wrath and Envy in
his troubled Breast, but the Death of his loving and harmless Brother.
Unnatural Cain! to point his deadly Hatred and Fury against his pious Brother.
But this he did, and his furious Passion rose, and flamed higher and higher,
'till it burst forth, and impetuously drove him on to commit the horrid Deed.
He rose up against his Brother -- all of a sudden and in a Rage he smote him --
the Blow was fatal -- instantly the Blood gushes forth, and runs from his
wounded Body, and his Life transpires with his Blood -- Abel is dead -- the
Deed is done, and it can neither be recalled or cancelled; for though Abel
himself could not speak, yet his Blood spoke, and spoke with a Voice so loud,
that it piere'd Heaven, and entered into the Ears of that holy LORD GOD to whom
Vengeance belongs. And,

Inasmuch as there were no Courts of Judicature in the World then, as there are
now; GOD himself, the righteous Judge, in some more immediate Way and Manner
than now he does, appeared to make Inquision for Blood, and to prosecute the
Criminal: Accordingly Cain was arraigned before GOD; he was examined,
convicted, and condemned: An Account of which Process we have recorded in
Genesis, Chap. the 4 th.

What a Hell of inward Anguish, Horror and Guilt must the Murderer feel in his
Breast, when he came under the immediate Eye, and Examination, and Sentence of
GOD! and yet he was so far from Repentance, and so incorrigible in his
Wickedness, that even when the omniscient JUDGE asked him the Question, Where
is Abel thy Brother? The vile Miscreant had not only the Confidence, to tell a
down right Lie, and say I know not, but also he had the Impudence, by Way of
Reflection and Insult, to ask his Maker that impertinent Question, Am I my
Brother's Keeper? As if he had a Mind to controvert the Point, and maintain his
guilty Cause, against the great Searcher of Hearts. And alas! is it not too
common a Thing in our Day, for those Persons who have committed an high Crime,
to endeavor to cover and secret it with a Lie, and to insult those that
examine them too, and even to persevere in their Falsehood, 'till the Witness of
their Crime is called and heard? Thus obstinate was Cain, 'till the Witness of
his Murder (i. e. the Blood of Abel) was referred to and mentioned, as it was by
the Mouth of GOD himself. But O how must it pierce his guilty Heart to hear the
Almighty pronounce, with a Tone awfully majestic, and full of holy Resentment,
and say, pointing his Address to Cain, The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries
unto me from the Ground? As if the Almighty had said to him,

See -- there runs the Blood of thy innocent Brother, shed by thy guilty Hand
-- Behold it thrilling from his wounded Body, and soaking into the softened
Earth, which has opened her Mouth to receive his Blood from thy Hand. Know
thou, that though he is dead, yet his Blood speaks and cries to me from the
Ground: This is the Witness of thy Murder; the Earth also testifies against
thee* and thy guilty Conscience echoes to the Cry of both; and now hear the
righteous, but terrible Sentence from the Mouth of thy Judge -- Thou art cursed
from the Earth --

We see that the Blood of Murder speaks loud; it has a Voice that pierces Earth
and Heaven; it reaches the Seat of Justice and the Throne of God: The Blood of
Abel did so; and though there was no other human Eye that was a living Witness to
the Murder, but the Eye of Cain; yet as an ancient Writer says, Cornelius a
Lap: Com: in Pent:
The Earth was a Witness, and the Heavens too, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
etc. And GOD himself being the Judge, He well understood the Testimony that
these Witnesses gave.

But more immediately to the Point in Hand. The Blood of Abel spoke many Things
plain and easy to be understood; particularly, it spoke not only who his
Murderer was, pointing to his Brother against whom his Blood cried: It spoke
not only the enormous Guilt and Cruelty of his Brother, who, in committing the
black Crime, laid aside, and suppressed the acting of all the Principles of
Humanity, brotherly Affection, and every generous Sentiment; and abandoned
himself to the contrary Principles of gnawing Envy, deadly Malice, and cruel
Hatred; the Influence of which he followed, 'till he violently broke through all
the Laws of Relation, Connection, Humanity, Justice, and of GOD himself; and
made a bloody Victim of his innocent Brother: I say, the Blood of Abel not only
spoke this, but also,

It spoke for Judgment, and a perfect Sentence against the Murderer, without
the least Variation from strict Justice and the established Law of Heaven.

Also, it spoke for Vengeance to be executed to the full, without the least
Mercy or Mitigation: And there was the highest Reason that the Voice of his
Blood should be heard and answered, for the Criminal had violated all the Laws
of Nature, and of Nature's GOD.

These Things spoke the Blood of Abel: And, the Blood of Murder speaks the same
Things for Substance now, and has spoke the same Things through all Ages of the
World, that the Blood of Abel did: Nor has the Earth been a Stranger to the
Repetition of the like Crime, and the like Cry; for she has, from Time to Time,
opened her Mouth to receive the Blood of Murder from the Hands of wicked Men.

But though the Sin of Murder is a Sin that wears the Color of Scarlet and
Crimson, and brings the most aggravated Guilt upon the Criminal; still, the
Greatness of this Sin don't lessen the evil Nature and Consequence of other
Sins; for every Sin (though not so aggravated as this, yet) is really wounding
and destructive to the Soul as this is; because every Sin is a Violation of the
same perfect Law of GOD, and renders the Sinner obnoxious to the Malediction of
the Law; for the Law being unalterably just and good, it must, as it does,
speak aloud for Judgment and Vengeance against the Transgressor; and the Author
of the Law pronounces, (let us hear the Sentence and lay it to Heart) The Soul
that sins shall die; nor will the Almighty alter a Tittle of his Law, or do
any Thing that will stain his glorious Throne, for the Sake of saving a guilty
Creature from deserved Death and Destruction: And if this is the Case, all of
us have Reason to be alarmed; for, who of us can say we are without Sin, or
that we have not transgressed the perfect Law of God in Thought, Word, or Deed,
Times without Number? Indeed, through the restraining Goodness of GOD, we may be
kept back from those flagrant Acts of Wickedness, which expose us to the
Observation and Punishment of human Laws: But we must remember that our eternal
JUDGE is not limited to those Laws in proceeding with us -- far from it -- he
is limited only by his own perfect and eternal Law, to which he strictly
attends in dealing with us: And this Law is so pure, spiritual, and extensive,
that it reaches the Tho'ts and Motions of the Heart, as well as the Actions of
the Life: Accordingly we find that it declares us Murderers for hating our
Brother, as well as for taking away his mortal Life; and so of every other Sin;
the Law condemns us for the in-dwelling, as well as for the out-breaking of it.
And,

If there was no Provision made for our Pardon and Redemption, but what is
revealed in the pure and perfect Law of GOD; not only the Criminal here
present, but also every Soul of us must be condemned and damned to all
Eternity; for we being Transgressors of the Law, it calls as loud for Vengeance
against us, as the Blood of Abel did for Vengeance against Cain; Cursed is
every one that continues not in all Things written in the Book of the Law to
do them; instead of continuing in all Things, we have failed in all Things, nor
is it possible for us, by any Offerings we can make, or Works of Righteousness
that we can do, either to atone for our Offenses, or to escape the Vengeance of
GOD, to which we are condemned by his holy Law.

The Cry of the Blood of Abel against Cain, represents the Spirit and the
Language of the Law against the Transgressor; so that if we Sinners, think to
obtain the Favor of GOD our Judge, by the Deeds of the Law, we shall meet with
the most amazing Disappointment; for instead of hearing any Thing in our
Favor, we shall hear the Law denounce against us, Death and Damnation, and the
glorious Author of the Law will ratify the Sentence.

But, through the tender Mercies of our GOD, (blessed be his Name) we hear a
different Voice from the Gospel, and a different Cry from the Blood of HIM who
offered himself a Sacrifice for our Sins; who was wounded for our
Transgressions; who bled to wash us from our Guilt and moral Pollution; who
died that we might live for ever. The Scene now changes from Darkness to
Light; and O! that the Light of the Glory of GOD, in the Face of JESUS CHRIST,
may shine into our Hearts, and raise us up to the lively Hope of Pardon and
eternal Life! We are now called from a particular Attention to those Things
that the Blood of Abel spoke, and we are invited,

II. To consider the better Things that the Blood of JESUS speaks.

I take the Blood of Sprinkling, which is here set in Contrast with the Blood
of Abel, to intend the Blood of Jesus; to the Voice of which, let our Ears and
Hearts be open and attentive.

If we consider what we are to understand by the Blood of Jesus; why it is
called the Blood of Sprinkling; and, what the Things are that it speaks; we
shall see how much better Things it speaks than the Blood of Abel.

The Subject is very copious, and affords Matter of the strongest Consolation
to Sinners, whose Consciences are stung with a Sense of Guilt, and with the
Fear of deserved Vengeance from the almighty GOD: But the present Circumstances
oblige me to as much Brevity as is consistent with Perspicuity. Here then,

1st. By the Blood of Jesus, we are to understand, not merely the material
Blood that ran from his wounded Side, or any other Part of his wounded Body:
but rather, the whole of those Actions and Sufferings of His, which, as a a
Surety, and Mediator between GOD and Man, he passed through in his Humiliation
State, for the Redemption of Sinners to God: The Merit or Virtue of those
Actions and Sufferings are signified by his Blood: Hence the whole Redemption
of those that are finally saved, is ascribed to his Blood; so their grateful
Song runs, Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to GOD by thy Blood: Whence it
is plain, that the virtuous Cause of our Pardon and Cleansing; as also of our
Justification, and full Redemption, is to be found in his Blood. To this
Purpose are those Passages of Scripture, Ephesians. 1.7. -- We have Redemption though
his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins. -- 1 John 1.7. -- The Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all Sin. Christ the Son of GOD, being himself truly GOD, and
truly Man in one Person, his Blood is of sufficient Virtue to cleanse us from
the Guilt and Turpitude of all Sins, the greatest as well as the least, and
also to render us righteous and holy in the Sight of God: And inasmuch as his
Blood answers these great Ends, it must intend the Value, Virtue, or Merit of
all that he acted and suffered for the Salvation of Sinners, in his
Humiliation-State.

2dly. It is called the Blood of Sprinkling, from those ceremonial Practices in
the Hebrew Worship, which had Reference to the Blood of Christ, and the Use of
it.

You are sensible that the Sprinkling of the Blood of Sacrifices in old Times,
had a different Meaning and Signification, according to the different Objects
that were sprinkled. For Instance, when the Blood was sprinkled upon the
Mercy-Seat and before it; upon the Altar, and upon the Book of the Law, it
signified Atonement. Levit. 16.15 -- 19.
When it was sprinkled on the Persons who had committed any Fault, it signified
Pardon and Purification. Exodus 24 8. Heb. 9.19 -- 22.
In Answer to these Shadows, the Blood of Jesus, which, as our Surety he shed,
has sprinkled the Throne of GOD, the Altar of Justice, and the Book of the
divine Law; by the sprinkling of which, our Sins are atoned for; the Law of GOD
is magnified; his Justice is satisfied; his Wrath is appeased; and through this
Medium the Throne of GOD is a Throne of Grace, to which we are invited. And
furthermore; the same Blood being sprinkled upon us, or applied to our Persons
and Consciences, effectually removes our Guilt, and renders our Persons
righteous in the Eye of GOD; also it purges our Hearts from moral Defilement,
and renders our Natures holy; so the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews
argues: If the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer,
sprinkling the Unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh; how much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself
without Spot to GOD, purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the
living GOD!

3dly. The Things that the Blood of Jesus speaks are many, and very
comfortable. The Import of what it speaks is; that the full Price of our
Redemption from Sin, Wrath and Ruin, is paid down; and that the Way to GOD and
Glory is laid open, by Virtue of it. Also it speaks the Language of Pardon,
Mercy, and Grace, to the most guilty and miserable Sinner; for his Blood speaks
the same Language that dropped from his sacred Mouth when he hung upon the Cross,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. This he spoke in Favor of
his cruel Murderers, while they were perpetrating the horrid Act. O Love!
beyond all Degrees of Comparison, to cry for Pardon to be given to his
Crucifiers, even in his Crucifixion-Pangs! For the like Blessing, his Blood
speaks now; it cries for pardoning Mercy for the greatest Criminals, and pleads
for their Admission to the Favor of GOD: "When Justice calls for Sinners
Blood, the Savior shows his own" through the Virtue of which, the believing
Sinner is accepted of GOD, and justified from all Things, from which he could
not be justified by the Law of Moses. Furthermore; the Import of what it
speaks, abundantly assures us, that it is an effectual Means, being applied to
cleanse us from the deepest Stains that Sin has fixed in our Souls: Sprinkled
with his Blood, the Eyes of our Understandings are opened to behold the Glory
of GOD in the Face of Christ, our Hearts too are softened into evangelic
Repentance; our Consciences are purged from dead Works; our Passions are
renewed, and our whole Souls begin to shine in moral Purity. In a Word; his
Blood speaks, healing to the brokenhearted -- Deliverance to Captives -- the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound, and Salvation, with eternal Glory
to them that deserve Damnation and eternal Misery. His Blood speaks and pleads
with GOD, for Mercy to be granted to Sinners; and it speaks and pleads with
Sinners, to come and wash in the healing Fountain of it; and to look unto Him
for Salvation; promising them an Admission into the Kingdom of Grace here, and
into the Kingdom of Glory hereafter.

These are some of the comfortable Things that the Blood of Jesus speaks; and
O! how much better are they, than the Things that the Blood of Abel, or the
Blood of Murder, or the violated Law of GOD speak to the Transgressor. These
latter speak for the Judgment of Condemnation against the guilty; but the Blood
of Jesus speaks for Pardon, Acquittance, and eternal Life: These, speak for
Vengance, without Mercy, to be poured upon the Criminals; but the Blood of
Jesus pleads the contrary; it cries with an interceeding Voice before the
Throne of GOD; Spare the Rebels -- forgive the Transgressors -- receive them to
Favor and immortal Bliss; Here is Blood to atone for their Offenses -- to
magnify the violated Law -- and to satisfy the Justice of Heaven; Her is Blood
to wash their spotted Souls, and to cause them to shine in all the Beauties of
Holiness.

What a sovereign Remedy is here, for the most threatening Maladies and Miseries
of a guilty Soul! and, blessed be GOD* to this same Blood of Sprinkling, we are
all invited, by the soft and alluring Voice of the Gospel; the general Import
of which is, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World! And
now; having endeavored briefly to make Representation of the Things that the
Blood of Abel spoke; and the better Things that the Blood of Jesus speaks, the
Way is open,

III. To Address myself to the Criminal here present, who is justly condemned
to Death, for a bloody Crime that speaks against him the same Language that the
Blood of Abel did against his cruel Murderer.

But, how shall I speak to the poor Malefactor, who is pressed under the Weight,
both of his own Guilt, and the Sentence of Death -- just going into Eternity,
and never more to hear a public Address from the Oracles of GOD? There is a
Sensibility in human Nature -- if we don't feel for him, we are stupid -- if he
don't feel for himself, he is more so.

May GOD of his infinite Mercy touch all our Hearts with a suitable Concern for
him! May the Holy Spirit assist me in addressing him, and give to him a
composed, attentive and believing Mind, that he may hear, so as that his Soul
shall live!

Poor unhappy Bristol! The Day of your Death is now come, and you have but a
very few Hours more to live. The Laws of the Land and the Laws of GOD, call for
the Destruction of your mortal Life; Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall
his Blood be shed Genesis 9.6.
: This is the Decree of Heaven, and it is to be executed by Man, nor have you
the least Ray of Hope that you shall escape; for the Sentence is past, not to
be revoked -- the Day of Execution is come -- the Guard is about you -- the
Instruments of Death are made ready -- your Coffin and your Grave are open --

Alas! to what a wretched and forlorn Condition has your own extravagant Folly
and Wickedness bro't you? And with what severe Reflections and bitter
Repentance ought you, once more, to survey your vile Heart, your bloody Crime,
and the Aggravations of it? That, self-condemned, you may prostrate your guilty
Soul at the Foot of the Cross of Christ, and plead for the Application of his
Blood, which, alone, can save you from everlasting Death, and the Vengeance of
an angry GOD.

You are not to imagine, that you are treated with any greater Severity merely
because you are a black Boy, and bro't from your native Country among us, for
you are not: If any of us had done such a horrid Thing as you have, we should
be treated as you are: Your being of a different Color from us, makes no Odds
in this Matter. You have not only an immortal Soul as we have, but you are of
the same Kind of Flesh and Blood that we are; for GOD has made of one Blood,
all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the Face of the Earth: Acts 17.26.
Hence you are under the same general Laws of GOD and of Man that we are; Men
by Nature are equal, being composed of the same essential Parts: Whence, every
one ought to treat every other as equally a Man with himself. This was known
among the Pagans. Alexander Severus was so delighted with this Maxim, Do not to
others what you would not have done to yourself. That he ordered it to be
proclaimed aloud by a public Crier, when he was about to correct or animadvert
upon any Person. Also he ordered it to be inscribed every where in his Palace,
and on all his public Works. -- Turnbull's Notes on Heinec's Uni. Law, Vol: 1.
Chap. 7. Sect. 177.
both of which Laws you have broken, in the most daring and unmerciful Manner.

You have done a most wicked Thing, and your Crime is of the blackest Nature;
for, without Provocation, you have shed innocent Blood: Nor had you any
Compassion upon the poor unfortunate young Lady, against whom your deadly
Hatred was vented; for in a Fit of Malice you suddenly destroyed her Life,
without giving her a Moment's Time to prepare for Eternity. How differently
have you been treated by your kind Master and Mistress, and by the Civil
Authority; who, out of Charity, lengthened out your Life; and by Numbers of
others, who have taken much Pains to instruct, and prepare you for Death? I
say, how differently have you been treated, from your Treatment of the unhappy
Victim of your cruel Rage and Passion. She had not Time to cry to Heaven for
Mercy: But though she is dead, yet her Blood cries for Vengeance against you: And
O! what Horror and amazing Anguish will seize you, if you meet and hear that
Blood cry against you at the Bar of God, where you will will presently appear!

You cannot plead Ignorance; for not only your own Conscience told you it was a
great Sin, but your Education told you the same; for you had the Privilege of
being cast into Families of Reputation and Religion, from whom, we doubt not,
but you was well instructed and cautioned; particularly, I have good Assurance,
that the last worthy and virtuous Family in which you served, took Pains to
make you sensible of the Evil of Sin, how hateful it is to GOD, and how hurtful
to you, and also to recommend to you a religious and virtuous Life; so that you
are wholly without Excuse: And not only without Excuse, But,

Your Crime is attended with the most aggravating Circumstances; and you have
Reason to fear an aggravated Punishment. Your Sin points every Way, and calls
for Vengeance from every Quarter. You have sinned against the holy GOD before
whose awful Bar you must appear and be judged: You have sinned against the
Light of your Conscience -- against the Light of Instruction, and against your
own Soul; and you must unavoidably suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire, unless
you have Repentance and Redemption through the Blood of Christ: You have sinned
against the Laws of Man, that are founded on the divine Law: You have sinned
most sensibly against your Master and Mistress, and filled them with
inexpressible Grief and Sorrow; though you cannot but own that they have treated
you with Christian Care and Tnderness: In a Word, you have sinned against all
Mankind; and against all the Laws of Nature; and your Iniquity has found you
out, nor can you hide any of the Circumstances of it from the all-seeing Eye of
your great Judge.

Now you find, by painful Experience, that the Blood of Murder cries with a
loud Voice, and that it is heard afar off as well as near: It pursued you
swiftly when you fled, and called you back to Prison, and laid you in Chains:
It followed you to the Bar of Justice, and there cried for Judgment against
you; and your own Confession implicitly called for the same: Accordingly, the
solemn Sentence was pronounced by the just, though tenderhearted Judge; and now
there is nothing remains, but the still more gloomy and dreadful Scene of
Execution; to prepare you for which, you have no where to look but to the GOD
whose Anger you have provoked, and whose Vengeance you deserve.

But notwithstanding the Greatness of your Sin, which calls aloud for the
Destruction of your mortal Life, and of your immortal Soul too; yet (blessed be
God) there is a sweet and sovereign Voice sounding in your Ears from the Throne
of Grace, through the Gospel of our Salvation, proclaiming Pardon, Peace, and
eternal Redemption to Sinners, and even to you, through the precious Blood of
Christ, which is of sufficient Virtue and Power to atone for this and all your
Sins -- to wash your Heart from Wickedness, and to present you with Acceptance
before the Presence of your final Judge.

The infinitely merciful GOD earnestly calls and encourages you to Repentance:
Hearken, and you will hear him speak from his holy Oracles, As I live, says
the LORD, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked
turn from his Way and live; turn ye, etc.

Again, the Savior of the World invites you to run into his Name, and under
the Wings of his Righteousness, for Protection; and to his virtuous Blood for
Pardon and Cleansing: O, turn to this strong Hold, thou Prisoner of Hope! And
once more; we beseech you to give up your Soul to the only Redeemer; we beseech
you by the Mercies of God -- by the gracious Encouragements of the Gospel -- by
the Terrors of the Law -- by the Solemnities of the Judgment Seat, to which you
are going -- by the Worth of your immortal Soul, that must be filled with
inexpressible Pleasure or Pain for ever -- by the Horrors of Hell, and by the
Joys and Happiness of Heaven; by all these important Considerations, we beseech
you to be reconciled to GOD, by a hearty and speedy Embracement of Jesus
Christ: He yet waits to be gracious, and yet calls for Admission into your
Heart; Behold I stand at the Door and knock, etc. O! that he would make a
triumphant Entrance into your Heart, and enable you humbly and joyfully to
receive him, and to make a faithful Surrender of your forfeited Life, and your
guilty Soul, into his almighty and merciful Hands!

You have not a Moment to loose; for your Feet stand upon a slippery Place --
tottering on the outmost Verge of Time, and over the amazing Gulf of an
unbounded Eternity, into which you must plunge in a few Moments. O dangerous
Situation! your Soul is the only Thing you have to care for, and Christ is the
only Savior that can befriend you in this important Point. Now, in an eminent
Manner, is the accepted Time with you -- Now is the Hour of Salvation: And, to
encourage and persuade you to believe on Christ with all your Heart, He not
only invites you to come to him, but promises to receive you graciously, to
forgive you freely, to wash you thoro'ly, and to save you eternally: Come now
and let us reason together, says the LORD, though your Sins be as Scarlet, they
shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.
Here, guilty Bristol! is a Fountain of Grace open, to wash you from the Guilt
and Stain of your scarlet and crimson Sins; and the LORD himself bids you
welcome, for to you he calls, with the soft Voice of Invitation, Come unto me,
hear, and your Soul shall live!

Wherefore, now collect all your Thoughts -- rouse all the Powers of your Soul,
and, without Delay, center your Faith, Hope and Confidence entirely in Christ:
Rest upon his unbounded Merits and almighty Power to remove your Guilt; to
renew your Nature; to support you through the gloomy Scene of Death; and to
present you with Acceptance before the glorious Presence of the eternal God: to
whose infinite Grace we commend you, and in his sovereign Hands we leave you;
earnestly beseeching him to ransom your Soul from Destruction, and receive you
to his everlasting Mercy.

IV. I shall close, with a few Words, by Way of Admonition and Exhortation to
this whole Assembly; every Individual of which, is as certainly appointed to
Death, by the Determination of GOD, as the Criminal before us is, by the just
Determination of Man.

May GOD impress our Hearts with the solemn Instructions and Warnings that are
suggested to us, by this Instance of Murder that is fresh in our Minds, and by
the wretched Condition of the Murderer!

If I have been rightly informed; this Negro Boy is the first Instance, of a
Criminal, that has been convicted, and condemned to Death for Murder in this
County, since This was made a Shire-Town, and for a great Number of Years
before; would to GOD it may be the last! Within this Province also, this is the
first Instance of a capital Offender that has been executed for more than six
Years past. But unless the Workers of Iniquity and bold Transgressors do
receive some Check, and are reduced to more Caution and better Behavior, we
have Reason to fear that it will not be the last for six Years to come; for
wicked and extravagant Men are apt to grow worse and worse, till they are
violently seized by the high Hand of Justice.

The present affecting Instance of Justice, upon a capital Offender, is like a
flaming Beacon, set up before our Eyes, solemnly warning us to see, and hear,
and fear, and not do so wickedly as he has done; for although this Instance of
Wickedness and Punishment seems to speak, in a particular Manner, to you that
are Servants and Slaves, (as it really does, and loudly warns you to oppose
every Temptation or Inticement to do a wicked Thing; to guard against sudden
Fits of Passion; against secret Envy, Malice, Hatred and a revengeful Spirit;
and against open Violence: to be faithful, attentive, and dutiful to those whom
you serve, and to behave in a modest and peaceable Manner to every Body,) yet
this Instance speaks an Admonition to us all, as well as to Servants; and
therefore,

1. Let us all take Warning, and strictly guard against the out-breaking of any
of the vile and violent Passions: Neither let us think, that the Warning is
needless; for we have the same vicious Seeds of Enmity, Prejudice, Wrath,
Malice, Envy, Hatred, and the like in our Hearts, that were the guilty Cause of
the Murder we now lament; and if we give License to these Principles, they will
lead us on to the Commission of some enormous Wickedness, that will destroy
either our Name, or mortal life, or immortal Soul, or destroy them all
together: for, from within, out of the Heart, proceed evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False-Witness, Blasphemies: And it is
dangerous giving Way to these evil Habits, and following their Dictates; for
they will involve us in Destruction and Perdition. It is for these and the like
Things that the Wrath or GOD comes down on the Children of Disobedience. And I
must tell you, my Hearers! that if you will not feel, nor yield Attention to
the Force of wholesome Instructions, Counsels and Warnings, you must feel the
Force of executive Justice, and deserved Punishment; for he that bring often
reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
Remedy.

If those of you who live a profane, intemperate, debauched, irreligious and
vicious Life* or that indulge an envious, angry, and revengeful Temper against
any Body, imagine that you shall come off with Impunity, you are very greatly
mistaken; for if through your cunning Craftiness, you do happen to escape
deserved Punishment from Men, yet the LORD our GOD will not suffer you to
escape his righteous Judgments. -- If you are not arraigned before the
Judgment Seat of Man, to answer for your Faults, you must be arraigned before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, from whose Eye you can hide none of your evil
Purposes or Practices; and from whose almighty Power you cannot escape the just
Punishment of your vicious and irreligious Life. Wherefore,

Cease to do Evil, and learn to do well: Let the Examples of revenging Justice,
from the civil Authority, upon bold Transgressors, deter you from open
Wickedness; and let the infinitely heavier Vengeance of GOD, upon the
incorrigible Sinner, deter you from the Indulgence of any Sin in Heart or in
Life. Guard against every Temptation to Sin, and crush the first Motions of
Envy, Malice, and every evil Disposition; and that you may succeed in your
Attempts to purge your Heart and your Life from these moral Evils, apply to
Christ our Prince and Savior; through Faith in whose Blood, and in no other Way,
you can obtain the Forgiveness of Sins, Victory over Temptations, and Strength
to crucify the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts.

2. Let us remember, that although (through the good Hand of our GOD upon us) we
have been preserved from capital Offenses against the Laws of Men, yet we have
transgressed the infinitely higher Law of GOD, by which we shall be judged at
the last. And since it is plain, that GOD will not vary, in the least, from his
perfect Law, in proceeding with us: Since also it is true in Fact, that we have
transgressed his Law in numberless Instances, and are justly condemned to Death
by the Sentence of it; we have Reason therefore, to be greatly alarmed, and the
more so, because we can neither atone for any of our Sins, nor wrench ourselves
out of the almighty Hand of the sovereign and sin-revenging GOD, who, out of
Christ, is a consuming Fire to the Transgressor.

You see and hear what terrible Things the Blood of Murder, and the Laws of Men
speak against the Criminal, and you ought to be affected therewith, though they
don't speak directly against you: But though they don't, yet, against every one
of you, who have not come by a living Faith to Jesus Christ, nor been sprinkled
with the Merits of his precious Blood, which alone can take away Sin; against
you, the holy Law of GOD speaks, and denounces as terrible Things as ever the
Blood of Abel did against Cain; for you being a Transgressor of the Law, it
breathes out nothing but Woes, Curses, Condemnation and eternal Death against
you; and the Sentence of the Law is ratified by GOD himself, who declares, The
Soul that sins shall die: And had it not been for the Death of Christ, our
Surety, there would be no Hope for us. But since, by his Obedience to the
Death, he has fully atoned for our Sins, answered the Demands of the divine
Law, and opened, for us, a Door of Hope,

Therefore,

3. Sensible that we are Transgressors of the Law of GOD, and that we have
guilty and polluted Hearts, Let us come to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and rely entirely upon the Power and Virtue of his Blood, for the
Pardon of our Sins, for Reconciliation with GOD, and for the cleansing of our
rational Nature from moral Defilement; that so we may be holy in Heart, and for
the future, may walk in Newness of Life, and always exercise ourselves to keep
a Conscience void of Offense toward GOD and toward Man: Thus living, we shall
neither come to an untimely and violent End through overmuch Wickedness, nor have
Cause to fear with any Amazement when the Time of our Departure from this
mortal Life shall come; but shall die in Peace -- fall asleep in Jesus, and
enter into everlasting Rest.

And now in Behalf of the Criminal, let me call upon you all, not to cease
praying for him, 'till he ceases to be a Subject of Prayer: Though he is a bloody
Malefactor, yet it is cruel and unchristian to deny him your Prayers in the last
Moments of Life. O, send up your fervent and incessant Supplications to the
Throne of Grace, for Mercy on him, 'till his mortal Life transpires, and his
immortal Soul returns to GOD who gave it.

Finally; Let us all in a religious Manner, humbly deplore this awful Judgment
of GOD, in suffering such a horrible Murder to be committed among us; and let
it alarm us all to stand in Awe and not sin. In a special Manner, let me
earnestly warn and admonish you all, to watch and guard against all
Indecencies, Rudeness, Vanity, and unbecoming Behavior; which, upon this
solemn Occasion, will be most highly provoking to the holy GOD, a faint
Resemblance of whose revenging Justice upon the incorrigible Sinner, is set
before us this Day. Therefore be exhorted to behave soberly and decently, and
to be earnest in your Prayers to almighty GOD, that he would keep you now, and
at all Times, hereafter, from every wicked Thing. In a Word, let us live as the
Grace of GOD teaches -- let us lay aside Anger, Wrath, Malice, and every Sin
that most easily besets us; and let us live soberly, righteously, and godly,
looking for the blessed Hope, and glorious Appearing of the great GOD and our
Savior Jesus Christ, that when he shall appear, we may see him with Joy, and
be admitted to dwell in his immediate Presence and heavenly Kingdom for
evermore.

AMEN.
APPENDIX.
THE bloody Murder of Miss Elizabeth McKinstry, on June the 4th, 1763, which
gave Occasion for the preaching of the foregoing Discourse, may truly be placed
among the astonishing Events of Providence, and the alarming Frailties of human
Nature: One cannot call to Mind the particular Circumstances of this tragic
Scene, without the deepest Emotions of Horror, Pity and Indignation.

The Negro Boy who perpetrated this lamentable Crime, was born in Africa, and
at the Age of about eight Years was brought into New England, where he lived
about five Years in the same Family with Miss McKinstry, at Windsor; his Master
then dying, he was purchased by her Brother Doctor McKinstry of Taunton, where
he had lived three Years when the Murder was committed, the deceased having
been also about two Years in the same Family; so that from his Childhood
(excepting one Year) he had lived in the same Family with her; and during this
Time he was treated with all the Tenderness and Instruction that could be
desired. He always appeared happy in his Situation, and showed an uncommon
Readiness to do his Business, and Faithfulness to perform what he undertook,
without the least Appearance of Sullenness or Malice. After he had done the
Fact, he rode to Newport, never showing the least Concern 'till he was
apprehended; he then made some artful Excuses 'till he had been committed about
twelve Hours, when he confessed the whole Fact, the Substance of which was,
"That early in the Morning Miss McKinstry, a little Girl, and himself, being
the only Persons of the Family that were up; and the little Girl being gone up
Stairs, as Miss McKinstry was stooping over the Fire, he caught up a Flat-Iron
that stood on the Hearth, struck her on the Head, and knocked her into the
Fire, which burnt her Face; he then gave her another Blow, and immediately
dragged her down the Cellar Stairs, where finding an old Ax, he struck her with
it on the Head, and made off as fast as he could."

After his Commitment, he appeared very penitent, and expressed his Sorrow for
the Crime: Particularly for the Grief he had brought on his Master's Family; in
speaking of which, he always seemed the most affected. He declared constantly,
during the whole of his Imprisonment to his last Moment, that he never had any
Anger against the deceased, nor any of the Family; and that he had never
received any Treatment that deserved it: And though he always appeared free to
answer any Questions that were asked him, yet he never gave any Reason for
committing the Crime, but that he was prompted to it by a Negro Boy of his
Acquaintance, who threatened to kill him if he did not do it; this he persisted
in to his dying Moment.

At his Trial he pleaded Guilty; but showed no Emotion at the pronouncing
Sentence of Death, nor at the public Worship, where in his Hearing, several
Sermons beside this were preached on the Occasion; nor even at the Place of
Execution: This would naturally be construed as Stupidity or Sullenness, had
not his Discourse plainly shown that he had a true Sense of his Crime, and
right Notions of a future State.

At the Gallows he made a long Speech to the Spectators, particularly to those
of his own Color, which for Substance was pertinent and important; he
expressed great Concern for his Master's Family; was very particular in
thanking every Body that had taken Notice of him while in Prison; he
acknowledged his Condemnation just; he expressed his Sense of his Guilt, and
the Hopes he had of Forgiveness and future Happiness, through the Mercy of God in
Christ; and then, after repeating the Lord's Prayer distinctly, he was turned
off.

The deceased, who was the unhappy Object of this unaccountable Malice, was a
Daughter of the Pev'd. Mr. John McKinstry, late of Windsor; a young Lady of a
cheerful Disposition, an even generous Temper, and every Way of a worthy
Character: After tarrying with her Brother, she was preparing to return to her
Mother at Windsor, when in a Moment that she though it not of, she was hurried in
this cruel Manner to her long Home.

These Circumstances are more particularly mentioned, as they are such
Peculiarities of this dark Affair, as naturally fill us with more Astonishment
and Indignation, than if the same had happened after repeated Resentments,
settled Malice, or sudden Provocation; for it seems difficult to conceive how
one, who never showed ill nature on any Occasion, and who always appeared
cheerful and contented, should of a sudden, without Provocation, commit the
most barbarous Cruelty on one who never offended him, and whose Behavior had
gained the Esteem of all who knew her: Surely then it is a stricking Instance
of the Weakness of human Nature, the horrid Effects of our ungoverned Passions,
and of the Baseness and Danger of mere silly good Nature, without natural
Tenderness, or virtuous Principles. It naturally calls upon those who have the
Care of Negroes to be very vigilant in removing the Prejudices of their
barbarous Disposition by Instruction, and to instill into their Minds such
Christian Principles as may influence their Actions when absent from the Eye of
their Masters; and particularly to inspect their companying together, that
grand Source of all the Evils that have arisen so frequently from this Nation,
when in their Conspirings they cry out, Let us lay wait for Blood, let us lurk
privily for the Innocent without a Cause.

The sudden Manner in which Miss McKinstry came to her End, is an alarming
Lecture on the Uncertainty of human Life, and shows us the surprising Attacks
of the King of Terrors, whose Snares continually surround us, and whose
Executioners walk in the dark: Surely in the Midst of Life we are in Death; and
the Hand that we expected to administer to our Comfort, may deal the fatal Blow.

And now Lorenzo do thou wrap thy Soul
In soft Security, because unknown
Which Moment is commissioned to destroy?
In Death's Uncertainty thy Danger lies.
Is Death uncertain? therefore Thou be fixed;
Fixed as a Centinal, all Eye, all Ear,
All Expectation of the coming Foe.
Rouse stand in Arms, nor lean against thy Spear;
Lest Slumber steal one Moment over thy Soul,
And Fate surprise thee nodding. Watch, be strong;
Thus give each Day the Merit and Renown
Of dying well; though doomed but once to die.
Nor let Life's Period hidden (as from most)
Hide too from Thee the precious Use of Life.
NIGHT THOUGHTS.
