THE QUAKER unmasked; OR, PLAIN TRUTH: Humbly addressed to the Consideration of
all the FREEMEN of PENNSYLVANIA.

When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice: But when the Wicked
Rule, the People mourn.

PROVE. XXIX. 2^ When Vice prevails and impious Men bear Sway, The Post of
Honor is a private Station.

ADDISON'S CATO. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED in the Year of our LORD, M, DCC, LXIV.

PLAIN TRUTH, Addressed to the PUBLIC.
AT a Time when we seem to be rent in Pieces by PARTY SPIRIT and PARTY RAGE, I
think it a Duty incumbent on every good Subject to make diligent Search, in
order to find out the Agressors, and then to inform the Public how he has found
Matters to stand; that so common Opinions may be confirmed or refuted, and the
Saddle at last be put on the right Horse, and Peace again restored among us.

FIRST THEN, Let us consider the Paxton Volunteers, and others, against whom
some make such an Outcry: -- Shall we attempt to vindicate their killing
Indians under the Protection of the Government? By no Means. The Fact is to be
condemned as unlawful; but though we would not vindicate their Conduct in every
Respect, is it not the Duty of every good Man impartially to consider what have
been the Circumstances of those People, and what they suffered to provoke them
to this desperate and unlawful Act?

Would not this Course discover more of that meek and christian Spirit, which
some People so much profess and so little exercise? Nay, do not Candor, Piety,
and Justice require that we should admit of every alleviating Circumstance in
their Favor, rather than take so much Pains (as many do) to aggravate their
Crime, and make bad appear worse?

THESE Incendiaries are not only enraged themselves, at their dear Friends, the
Indians, being slain, but would have all the Rest of the World of their Temper;
-- To obtain which End, they have wrote and published several inflamatory
Pamphlets, asserting many falsehoods, with a Design to enrage the Populace
against these poor distressed, though rash People. -- Go but into the House of
a Quaker, and before you have Time to discover what you came for, he will ask
you, with an affected Meekness, "Have thee seen the Massacre of the Indians at
Lancaster?" -- A Pamphlet well known to be wrote by one of their zealous
Friends, in Order to swell the Current of Prejudices against the aforesaid
People.

I should be glad to see the Massacre of the Back Inhabitants drawn by the same
able Hand, provided he would do it with the same Zeal in their Favor, and
against the Savage Indian Butchers, as I Am confident he could have a much more
affecting Subject to handle, and fill every Imagination with Horror. -- None of
those killed at Lancaster were by Design kept one Moment in Torment; whereas
many of our Frontier Inhabitants have been wantonly kept whole Days and Nights
in exquisite Tortures, prolonged and heightened with all the Contrivances
infernal Malice could suggest before those Savages (whose Cause and Interest
Quakers so warmly espouse) would vouchsafe to give the merciful finishing Blow!

TERRIBLE! indeed beyond Description, are the Cruelties daily practiced by
those Savages on our Fellow Subjects, while Prisoners amongst them! But where
are the Quakers who have taken up Arms to defend them? Where are the Quakers
who have sympathized with them, or pitied their Distresses? Let their Christian
Conduct since the Commencement of the War declare. --

WHEN the Indian Incursions last Summer laid waste a considerable Part of our
Frontier, by which near a thousand Families were drove from their Places,
reduced to the utmost Poverty, and thrown upon the Public-Charity for the
Support of their miserable Lives. -- How did these (...) merciful,
compassionate Quakers (who would seem to monopolize Christian Charity, and all
the Tenderness of human Nature amongst themselves) behave on so melancholy an
Occasion? -- To their immortal Infamy be it known, that when every other
religious Society in the City, even the Roman Catholics, whom they so much
despise, (though saddled at the Time with the heavy Expense of building a Chapel)
were sensibly affected with the Distresses of the poor unhappy Sufferers, and
promoted very generous and liberal Contributions for their Relief and Support,
These compassionate and merciful Christians, so easily affected with Pity for
Indians, would not grant a single Farthing (as a Society) for the Relief of
their Fellow Subjects. Though Justice requires we should exempt from this Odium a
few worthy Individuals in the City, who contributed on the Occasion; as also a
few others in the Town and Neighborhood of Lancaster, who raised about Thirty
Pounds for the same Purpose.

WHEREAS when their Good Brethren the Indians (some of whom were well known by
Officers now in the City, to have been in the Battle against Col. BOQUET; and
others at the Siege of Fort Pit, during the Summer) seemed to be in Danger of
receiving their just Deserts from the Hands of a bereft and injured People, no
Toils or Fatigues by Night or Day are thought too great, nor no Expense too
much to protect these Bosom Friends. Nay, their very fundamental Principles of
Non-Resistance, which would never before bend in Defense of King or Country,
are cheerfully sacrificed on the interesting. Occasion, as a Compliment to
perfidious Savages.

THE PAXTON PEOPLE'S coming down armed, in a seemingly hostile Manner, is also
justly to be condemned, -- But whilst we condemn particular Facts, let us not
misrepresent the general Characters of these People.

LET it be considered, that they had, long before, sent several Petitions to
the Governor and Assembly, which, its supposed, have been concealed by some ill
designing persons: And though his Honor never received these Remonstrances, yet
the distressed People believed he had, and looked upon themselves as utterly
neglected and their sufferings despised by the Government.

Now let any candid Person consider this Circumstance, added to their
numberless other Distresses, and he will certainly admit such an Apology for
their Extravagancies as the wise SOLOMON suggests, that "Oppression will make a
wise Man mad." -- And have not all Nations and Generations found it so, that
when People have been driven to Desperation by Oppression, they have broken
through all Obstacles to right themselves, if at all in their Power: -- Nay, is
not the happy and glorious REVOLUTION, by which our civil and religious Rights,
as ENGLISHMEN and PROTESTANTS, were secured on their present Footing, a
striking Instance of this known truth?

WHAT these People intended by their coming down armed let themselves declare.
I only observe, that the Manner of their Behavior when they came, did them
Honor; as it showed them to be brave, loyal and discreet.

THEY sent in a Memorial to the Governor, which was delivered by a Member of
the Assembly (though it has since been falsely asserted, that they never had a
Notion of Remostrating, till they saw how Things stood when they came to
Germantown) setting forth their Grievances, and begging Redress; at the same
Time giving Assurance that they did not intend to do the least Injury to any of
their fellow Subjects. And that they were sincere in this Declaration their
Conduct has sufficiently proved. They let his Honor know that by such a Time
they would be at Germantown, and there halt till he was pleased to give them an
Answer. -- It was then proposed, by Gentlemen of Candor and Humanity, to send
out Delegates to treat with those People: But this was warmly opposed by some
of the People called Quakers, who spoke to this Effect. That they had Force
sufficient to kill the whole, and though some of the Citizens should lose their
Lives, it was better so than condescend to treat with such a Banditti.

NEVERTHELESS the Gentlemen's Opinion, who were more averse to shedding the
Blood of their fellow Subjects than the meek, peaceful, inspired Quakers, did
prevail; and the Day following some Gentlemen of unexceptionable Character,
went to Germantown, and had a Meeting with Delegates from the Paxton
Volunteers. But instead of finding them a senseless rude and lawless Banditti,
they found them a well behaved and orderly People who avowed (and I believe
very sincerely) the greatest Loyalty to his Majesty, and Love to their Country.
They were willing to disperse and return to their respective Homes, provided
their Grievances might have a fair Hearing, which was accordingly agreed to.
Persons were appointed by them to attend for that purpose, and they accordingly
dispersed without doing any the least Mischief. They have indeed charged the
People called Quakers with gross partiality to Indians, and their being unfit
for Government: Nay they ascribe the greatest part of their sufferings to them
alone. And that Quakers have been partial, and shown more real Affection for
Enemy Savages than for their fellow Subjects, of certain Denominations, is so
well known in this Province, and has on the present Occasion been so fully
demonstrated to the World, that I should deem it Loss of Time to say any more
on so recent and glaring a Fact: Whether the Affection which some Principals of
that Sect have shown to Indians, and the great Care they are now taking of them
can possibly be owing to the Charms of their Squaws, to any particular
Advantages that may arise from their Trade, or perhaps rather from the Use they
have made of them to asperse the Proprietaries and oppose their Interests, may
be considered as a vain Question, which I will not undertake to determine. But
this is certain, that there is not the least Probability that any of these
Indians will ever stand as Candidates for Seats in the Assembly, and it is
probable some of the Paxton Volunteers may, if such as bid fairest should not
be murdered by some of the Savages now in our Custody. Therefore it might seem
Policy, agreeable to some Quakers, not to afford them that Protection, nor show
them that Regard they at this Time show the Savages.

LET us impartially next consider Quakers with Respect to Government: -- Can it
be consistent that a Person who declares that his Conscience by divine
Inspiration forbids him to have any Hand in shedding Blood, should be entrusted
as a Representative for People who look on themselves to be obliged by the Laws
of God, the Laws of Nature and the Laws of their King and Country to take up
Arms to defend themselves, and punish those who would deprive them of Life or
Property? Nay, is it not an inexpressible Absurdity that a warlike People
should be governed by Persons of Quaker Principles, and especially in Time of
War. -- Yet that great Numbers of such have long been Members of our Assembly
is too true, and that they have often spent their Time in debating, whilst our
poor Frontier Inhabitants, have been Suffering is also Truth. And though they
have at last voted Men and Money for warlike Uses, it was not until they found
they could no longer keep their Places of Honor and Trust without doing so.
But at the same Time they have done every Thing in their Power to prevent any
of their own Sect taking up Arms in Defense of their Country; and if at any
Time any of their young Men took up Arms against our common Enemy, they were
sure to be excommunicated, which they call reading out of Meeting. -- And is it
not certain, that when their King and Country call them to Arms, they plead
Conscience, and will tell thee, with a pious Air, and meek Countenance, "they
would rather perish by the Sword than use it against the Enemies of the State.
-- But if any of their Fellow Subjects become obnoxious to their mild and
peaceful Rage, by opposing any of their arbitrary Measures, we then see the
Quaker unmasked, with his Gun upon his Shoulder, and other warlike Habiliments,
eagerly desiring the Combat, and thirsting for the Blood of those his Opponents.

AND here let me observe, that the very People whom the Quakers took up Arms to
destroy, were those who protected their Lives and Properties, whilst these
ungrateful People sat unmolested in their Houses, and were preserved from
feeling the Severities and Contrivances of Indian Cruelty.

IT IS owing to the brave Stand which these unrequited Volunteers have made
against the Inroads of Savages, that the Quakers are now able to treat their
Protectors with such Ingratitude. -- No Excommunications now for taking up
Arms! -- Behold the Meeting House converted into a Place of Arms! -- No
Preaching nor Praying heard there, but the beating of Drums, and confused
clashing of Arms, by Men who knew not how to use them. Whilst some of their
Preachers are busied in procuring Powder and Shot, others are employed in
refreshing the Spirit of their brave Soldiers with Wine and other Liquors. --
And are these the People who are taught by immediate Inspiration that it is a
heinous Crime to fight? What amazing Hypocrisy appears in their Profession!
They must either confess that they have hitherto resisted the Holy Spirit, or
impiously assert that the Spirit has changed his Mind, and now directs them to
War and Blood, contradictory to his former Inspirations. -- But this is to
blaspheme God and belie the Holy Ghost, yet such is their Conduct!

BUT one of these pious Quakers might here say, Thee art mistaken Friend; -- It
is true, we profess to have an Aversion to War: But this, with most of us, is
from Policy rather than Principle. Nay we secretly rejoice when we hear of
whole Settlements murdered and destroyed. And don't thee consider that the
Destruction of the Back Inhabitants lessens a growing Party against us; whilst
we are prospering and thriving on the Fat of the Land: And though our Malice at
present is openly pointed only at the Presbyterians; yet to be plain with thee,
we are as much in our Hearts again all who differ from us in Opinion: And can
thee blame us for seeking the Overthrow of all that oppose the good Schemes of
the faithful? But thee knows it would be impolitic to discover our Resentment
to too many Sects at once, for by so doing we might endanger ourselves and our
Affairs. I think there can be only one Objection to such a Declaration from a
Man called a Quaker, and that is, it would be acting with more Openness and
Honesty than is generally found amongst them.

BUT it may be asked, Why all this Clamor against Quakers! Surely they don't
solely govern. True, Thank God they do not: But if a few artful bad Men in the
Administration may be very detrimental, what may we apprehend where so many
Quakers are entrusted, who have lately proved their very Religion to be a
political Engine, to which they themselves pay no conscientious Regard, but as
it suits their crafty Purposes.

IT was the Observation of Constantius, Father to Constantine the great, that,
"they who were false to their "God, would never be true to their Prince." Upon
which he discarded the Pagans whom he had proved to be ready to embrace any
Religion indifferently, and employed the Christians, who firmly adhered to
their Profession.

LET us look round and see who are those who enjoy the Places of Profit and
Trust in this Province; (a very few excepted) are they not Quakers or Quaker's
Creatures and was it not from Policy more than Justice, I doubt not they would
long ever now have monopoliz'd the whole to themselves.

IT has been argued, if the Indians are guilty, let their Accusers appear, and
not put them to Death without a fair Trial. -- Indeed it is a hard Matter to
prove an Indian guilty, unless he was taken in the Fact; for to Day they are
painted red, Tomorrow blue, and the next Day any other Color that they think
will best prevent their being known; But though hard, it is not impossible with
Respect to some. -- It is certified that a Dutch Woman, now in the Jerseys, and
her little Daughter, seeing the Gang of Indians now in our Barracks, passing
through that Province, knew the very Persons with whom they were Prisoners. --
But it has been proved, by a very circumstantial Oath of a young Man, (who has
since very unaccountably disappeared) that the Quakers, or Persons who appeared
to be such, have conveyed off and concealed those that were most suspected. --
If this be true, are not they the People who despise the Laws of their Country,
and fly in the Face of Government, by stopping the Course of public Justice?
Believe me my Countrymen, those who will shelter and conceal a Murderer, would
perpetrate a Murder, and suborn or suppress an Evidence.

FROM what has been said, I hope my Countrymen will coolly consider whether
Quakers are fit to be their Representatives or not, after such glaring and
positive Proofs of their Insincerity; and whether we ought to continue to
entrust them with our Lives and Liberties: But I do not speak of them all, nor
condemn the Lump; I do not doubt but there are good Men amongst them, Men who
would not hold the least Part in Government for all the Wealth in the Province.
-- To govern, is absolutely repugnant to the avowed Principles of Quakers:
Therefore if they are conscientious Men, they will not undertake it, and if
they are not so, surely we should not trust them. -- Can any Man of Sense
believe that a conscientious Quaker will lay hold of any Part of the Reins that
govern a People engaged in Wars, and at the same Time declare, that from
Conscience he can have no Hand in War? It is true, every man has Liberty to
profess his Belief, nor should any be forced to act contrary to it; I only
contend for People's adhereing strictly to what they Profess, and that those
who do not should be looked upon as Deceivers of Men, and therefore not fit to
be entrusted.

THAT Peace and Truth may be promoted, that Justice may be practiced, and that
the Hypocrite reign not, least the People be ensnared, is the Desire of

PHILOPATRIUS.
Second-street, Philadelphia, February 18, 1764.
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE I wrote the foregoing, I have had the Pleasure of seeing in print the
DECLARATION and REMONSTRANCE of the Frontier-Counties. From thence it is
evident, That the People have long suffered great Hardships, and with as much
Patience as any of their Neighbors would have done, the Quakers by no Means
excepted; who have, on every Occasion, manifested much greater Impatience, and
less Fortitude of Spirit, if only their political Schemes have been vigorously
opposed.

IT will appear that the Frontier Inhabitants have been both loyal and
peaceable Members of Society, and do not now plead for Favors, but Justice;
nor strive for Pre-eminence, but their essential Rights, and a moderate
Equality.

AND I presume it will be obvious, that whoever endeavors to oppress and
deprive them of their Rights, act partially, and maliciously, and aim to drive
them to Extremities, then accuse them of what they, in a Manner, forced them to
do, and, it would seem, desired they might do. -- Let but real Grievances, such
as none can pretend to deny, be removed; and let plain Justice be done, and the
People will be quiet and peaceable Members of the Community as heretofore.

IN a Word, let but all just Causes of complaint be taken away, and then let
them be punished if they make a Noise without Cause; and all sensible Men will
approve the Severity. -- But -- to provoke, and then punish them, as it were
for that Provocation, raises Compassion for them even in the Midst of their
Extravagancies, and Resentment against the wilful Oppressors.

TO talk against Presbyterians as such, on this Occasion, is the Effect either
of Malice and Party Spirit, or Nonsense; for though they happened to be generally
Presbyterians who were so abused and injured, yet Principles of BRITISH LIBERTY
and the Sense or Sentiments of Nature alone, not of Presbyterinism, or any
other Denomination, breath in their Remonstrance and Petition. -- Let any cool
Judges, before they pass Sentence, imagine themselves to be in the very same
Circumstances, and then think how they would feel? and let such as observe how
a just Resentment is apt to transport their own Minds, and cause them, on less
Occasions, to go beyond proper Rules -- at least excuse, though not approve some
unguarded Actions of an injured People.


