A LETTER To the REVEREND Mr. BENJAMIN LORD, Of NORWICH; Occasioned by some
harsh Things which he has lately published against Those who have dissented
from his Sentiments about the MINISTRY, the CHURCH, and BAPTISM.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST, in Middleborough.

Great men are not always wise. -- I said I will also answer my part, I also
will show mine opinion.

JOB xxxii. 9, 17. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they
call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are
written in the law and the prophets.

ACTS xxiv. 14. PROVIDENCE, in NEW ENGLAND: Printed and sold by WILLIAM
GODDARD. MDCCLXIV.

A LETTER to Mr. BENJAMIN LORD, of NORWICH.
Reverend and Honored SIR,
TO do to others as we would have them do to us, must be allowed to be the
universal rule of equity; yet, alas! how far is it from being universally
practiced? and I have thought that it is often as little regarded in the
management of disputes about religion, as in almost any affair at all: a view
of which has caused in my mind, these many years, a great cautiousness of
engaging in any warm debates: though where the cause of truth really calls for
it, no doubt there is warrant still to appear in it is defense. Such a call
seems now to present itself to my view; for as you, Sir, have lately exerted
yourself considerably, to support the cause of the churches and ministry that
are established by law in our land, so you have not failed to represent the
characters and sentiments of those who have lately dissented therefrom, in very
odious, and I believe, in very unjust colors. In your sermon at Mr. Hart's
ordination at Preston, 1762, you assert, that no just cause of withdrawment
from your assemblies can be produced, and ask, what means this conduct? which
seems to require an answer; though you immediately say, I only put the question,
and leave it to CHRIST and conscience for a decision. Page 28. -- But if it was
left there then, yet you, Sir, and six of your neighboring brethren, have so
far taken the case into your own hands since, as that, in a preface which you
have added to a new edition of Mr. Dickinson's dialogue about infant baptism,
just published, after mentioning the direction to ministers, to blow the
trumpet in Zion, and sound the alarm in the holy mountain, and then just
touching upon some other evils, which now expose us to GOD'S judgments, you go
on to say, very especially, the error and iniquity of going in the way of Cain,
and following the example of the gainsaying of Core, in departing from GOD'S
institutions, and without any scriptural warrant, setting up separately
themselves. Page 4. And in page 7, you proceed in sounding the alarm, thus, Do
not the late separations, and one separation from another, already discover
their nature by their fruits? in that some have by this time apostatised even
from all religion: while some others are renouncing infant baptism, and going
fast to the like dreadful apostasy. -- It is hid from them, that evil men and
seducers wax worse and worse: it is hid from them, or rather, they will not see
that they have fell into the way of Cain, and are in danger of perishing in the
gainsaying of Core. Thus Sir, you and your brethren have decided the case with
a witness, and if there was no appeal from your judgment, in your own cause,
our case would be sad indeed. I say in your own cause; for the whole procedure
evidently goes upon this supposition, that your ministers are as certainly
right, as those were that Core appeared against, and that your churches in
their present order, are as certainly right as those which evil men and
seducers departed from in Paul's time: and if so, then pray who is it that are
in their own esteem, holier and better than others. Page 7.

NOW as I happen to be one against whom this dreadful indictment is laid, for
leaving your church, and since that infant baptism, the law of self-defence
will warrant a criminal to speak, before he is condemned; but the nobler
principle of regard to the honor of GOD and good of souls, even demand a reply,
when truth and reformation are represented by men of note, as error and
apostasy, which I believe in my heart is the case here. Therefore, without any
further apology, I shall make a few remarks upon some passages in your late
writings, and then give some of the scripture grounds and reasons of my
sentiments and conduct, in the points which you condemn me for; and so leave it
to every conscience to judge, whether that is justly called the way of apostasy
or no.

THE first remark that I shall make, is upon page 18 of Mr. Hart's ordination
sermon, where you say of CHRIST, He was sent as well as furnished, (see Luke
iv. 18, 19) and so must we be; else the disciple covets to be above his master;
which is the case with those that imagine the fullness of the spirit (or
singular gifts) which they think they possess, does warrant their assuming the
character, and entering on the work of ministers of CHRIST. In this, I suppose,
you have some reference to what I have said on that point in my discourse on an
internal call to preach the gospel; but I am sorry you had not stated it more
fairly. We don't argue that persons have a warrant to enter into the ministry,
merely from their having singular gifts; but we are of opinion, that those to
whom GOD has given grace and singular gifts, he commands to improve them: his
command is very express, As every man has received the gift, even so minister
the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, etc. 1
Pet. iv. 10, 11. Romans xii. 6 -- 8. And we believe that the spirit of GOD, by
light and truth, must make that clear to the soul, in order for their going
forth; and that his teachings and call, gives warrant sufficient to go upon and
improve the gifts which he has given, and that will open the way for their
being introduced and ordained in the church of CHRIST. You go on to say, And
what great confusion does this tend unto? would it not tend to throw the STATE
into confusion if any man that would, might set up for a civil magistrate, who
thought himself fit, and could find a party to encourage and follow him? and
why should it not tend to make the same mischief in the church? But would Mr.
Lord have us understand that he claims the same power in the church, for
himself and brethren, as rulers have in the state, to give commissions to such
only as they please? If ministers have such power given them, why did Zion's
king reprove his disciples for assuming the power of forbidding one to act in
his name, because he followed not them? and why did he tell them, when at
strife about who should be greatest, that it should not be so among them, as it
was in the civil state? Mark ix. 38, 39. Matt. xx. 25, 26. Luke xxii. 24 -- 26.
No doubt but his instructions made Paul and Peter, so very cautious against
dominion and lordship in the church of CHRIST. 2 Cor. i. 24. 1 Pet. v. 3. We
hold to ordination of church officers as well as you; but one main dispute is
about where the right of ordination lies: you, Sir, show a great dislike
against the arguments of some, as if reason were to govern in that affair,
(page 23) though I think that you have several far-fetched reasonings about it in
that sermon. In general you hold forth, that CHRIST received his commission
from his Father, and that he sent forth the apostles, and that they ordained
Timothy and others, who were to commit the things which they had heard to
faithful men, which carries it down to the ministry which should continue to
the end. Page. 20, 21. And by all your arguing, you plainly endeavor to
represent, that the common ministers of our land, have their authority in a
line of succession thus down from the apostles. -- Yet since them has been the
apostasy of the church of Rome, and then the breaking off from that in the
reformation; and in our nation, we are told by one of the best informed
historians that this country ever bred, that after the nation had been
overspread with popery and cruelty in Mary's days, and queen Elizabeth was
advanced in her stead, that on December 15, 1559, Dr. Parker was consecrated
archbishop of Canterbury, by three deprived bishops: then they consecrate the
rest. Mr. Prince's New-England's Chronology, page 98. From those deprived
bishops then, the church of England ministers derive their succession; and they
afterward used their power so as to silence and deprive many of the best
ministers in the nation, for not conforming to their corrupt ways. Numbers of
these came over and settled this country: and as censures and deprivations
plainly take away all the authority which was given by them that lay on the
censure; so it seems that our fathers did not pretend to act by any power
derived from the bishops; but the first ministers in Salem, Boston, and many
other places, were ordained by their churches. See Prince's Chronology, page
189, and Vol. II. page 73. Yea, we have often been told (and I believe truly*)
that Mr. Fitch, the first minister of that church which you* Sir, now stand
pastor of, was ordained by the church; the two deacons being appointed by them
to perform that work. And the Cambridge platform, and other writings, so
plainly express it, that I cannot think you will deny that they held the right
of ordination to be in the church. And if it is now supposed that they erred
therein, yet which way will they that derive their succession from them, make
out a whole line clear back to the apostles? if you don't like that reason
should govern in this case, would you have us throw reason away so much, as to
believe gross absurdities to be consistent truths? But if this is not enough,
the truths which are given into in Mr. Hart's ordination sermon, are quite
sufficient to show the inconsistency of imagining that ministerial authority is
derived by an external line of an uninterrupted succession of regular
ordinations down from the apostles. For (1.) you observe, that the scriptures
determine that bishops and presbyters, or elders, are the same. Page 20. Well
then, surely the lord bishops, which claim so much superiority over the
presbyters, and act single in ordinations, are beside the scripture line, and
therefore cannot transmit that line down to others.

(2.) YOU observe of ministers, that In the discharge of this ministry given to
them, they must use the very word of reconciliation committed to them. -- An
ambassador sent by a prince, must keep to his orders, speak the very mind of
his employer, and not go a step beside his will; for, then he is beside his
business, acts out of character, and without commission. So here, CHRIST'S
ambassadors derive their commission from him, not from the church; not from the
ordainers, but from CHRIST only. Page 24, 25.

THIS, Sir, is right; this puts the succession where it ought to be, in the
line of divine truth, and every one that is of the truth hears Christ's
voice. Joh. xviii. 37. But all that are out of that line, act out of character,
and without commission, let them pretend to a descent from Peter or Paul, as
much as they will. The ancient commission to teach and baptize, is plainly
limited there, viz. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you: and lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the world.
Amen. Matt. xxviii. 20. JESUS never promised his presence with any who turn
aside from the line of truth, let them be ordained how they will: Yea, so far
from it, that if Paul, or an angel from heaven, should thus turn aside, the
curse and not the promise would be the consequence. Gal. i. 8. And where is the
protestant in the world, that will pretend that there has been an uninterrupted
succession of ordained ministers clear down from the apostles, who have none of
them grossly perverted the gospel of Christ?

HAVING thus given some brief touches concerning the ministry, I shall nextly
make a few remarks upon what you have said about baptism. In your late
discourse on Sober-mindedness, page 16, in warning young people against
erroneous persons, you say, Some few, I perceive, begin already to follow such,
and to hearken unto corrupt doctrines, which tend to their renouncing of their
infant baptism, -- which you may be assured, is a dangerous road, and often
issues fatally; to which purpose might be recited, facts of ancient date in
foreign countries, and in our own, enough to make both ears to tingle. And in
the next page, you refer to the annabaptists in Germany, 240 years ago, whom
Mr. Dickinson calls "the madmen of Munster:" But pray, Sir, why are we so often
referred to them, in this controversy about baptism? when we have in no respect
a whit more, if so much relation to them, as you have to the pope of Rome. Were
they annabaptists? -- so is he a paedobaptist. Did they use violence to support
their cause? -- so does he, even imprisonment and death, to maintain his: --
and let every conscience judge which party has the greatest resemblance to such
methods now. You know, Sir, that there have been numerous instances of late
years, among us, of imprisonments and confiscations of goods, for no greater
crime than refusing to conform to, and support that worship which you are
pleading for. I know it is pretended that those people at Munster, were the
first that appeared against infant baptism; but that is sufficiently proved by
many to be a groundless pretense. Mr. Crosby, in the preface to the first
volume of his history of the English baptists, has produced authorities from
paedobaptist writers, of no less than seven other different periods of time,
which they assign for the original of this opinion. Dr. Gill has done the like,
in his answer to Mr. Dickinson's dialogue; by which, compared with Mr. Peter
Clark's defense thereof against him, it appears, not only that many, both of
ministers and people, in various parts of Germany and Switzerland, suffered
death for denying infant baptism, sundry years before that affair in Munster;
but also, that at several different times, witnesses have appeared against that
practice, clear back to the third century; and that is the earliest express
mention thereof, that Mr. Clark, with the help of Dr. Wall's famous history of
infant baptism, has been able to bring. Near the beginning of that century,
Origin appeared for infant baptism, and said that it takes away the pollution
of our birth; Clark's defense, page 111.
but Tertullian appeared against it. So that we have as early account of that
practice being opposed, as we have of its being expressly mentioned: And no
wonder it was opposed; for they called baptism regeneration, thinking, it
seems, that being born of water, intends baptism: and it so, then that infants
must be baptized, or they could not be saved.

PERMIT me therefore, here to insert the words of Dr. Barlow, afterward bishop
of Lincoln: -- he, after much search into these things, in a letter to Mr.
Tombs, frankly owns thus, viz. Crosby's history, preface, page 56.
The truth is, I do believe, paedobaptism, how or by whom I know not, came into
the world in the second century, and in the third and fourth began to be
practiced, though not generally; and defended, as lawful, from the text grossly
misunderstood, Joh. iii. 5. Upon the like gross mistake of John vi. 53, they
did, for many centuries, both in the Greek and Latin church, communicate
infants, and give them the Lord's supper; and I do confess, says he, they might
do both, as well as either.

AND as there is no truth in representing that the first baptists began at
Munster; so, on a careful search, I find, that their character has been
exceeding falsely represented in our own nation. The chief accounts that the
public have had of them, have been from their adversaries, till about
twenty-five years ago, Mr. Thomas Crosby, of London, published a history of
them, in four volumes. Therein he has shown, that about the time of the long
parliament, Mr. John Tombs, Mr. Henry Jessey, Mr. Hanserd Knollys, Mr. Vavasor
Powel, and many others, who had been educated at the universities in England,
and were as pious and successful as almost any preachers in their day, embraced
the baptist principles, and suffered a great deal therefore too, with a courage
and patience equal to any of the witnesses for CHRIST in that day. And a great
part of what they suffered was from the Presbyterians, who when they had got
the power into their own hands, wrote and acted smartly against tolerating
other sects: to which Dr. Watts evidently refers, when he says, Orthodoxy and
Charity, page 229.
It Is a pain and shame to our eyes to look backward upon other times, and to
behold pamphlets written against toleration, by such as are ministers of the
gospel of peace, that perfect law of liberty. 'Twas their opinion then, (and
they told the world so in print) that sectaries ought to be silenced by the
civil power. Now sectary is a name of broad dimensions, and has a terrible
stretch with it; the long scourge would in time reach all those who differ from
the hand that manages that weapon of chastisement: none must be authorized to
preach in any form, but by the solemnity of imposing hands, by a company of
authorized men. I wish our country was clear of such a temper in these days.
But to proceed; -- those experimental writers Bunyan and Keach, Mr. Keach, one
hundred years ago this very year, was imprisoned, set twice in the pillory, and
fined twenty pounds, sterling, for writing and publishing a little book; and
the two chief points which they condemned in it, were the same that we hold
about the subjects of baptism, and an internal call to preach the gospel.
Crosby.
whose works have been greatly esteemed by our pious fathers, were of this
denomination; and the author of that masterly piece, Delaulne's plea for the
nonconformists, was a member of Mr. Keach's church, in London. Mr. Thomas
Wilcox, who wrote the choice drop of honey from the rock CHRIST, which has been
much esteemed in New England, was pastor of a baptist church also in that city.

BUT time would fail to speak of many other noble witnesses and sufferers, or
this persuasion, in that land; therefore I will come to the settlers in
New England; -- and I find, that of the two churches which first separated in
England, and then moved into Holland, before they came here, one of them, (
viz. Mr. Smith's church) mainly embraced the baptist principles, and numbers of
them afterward moved back to London, and promoted the same there; Crosby's
history, vol. I. page 91, 272.
though their dissenting brethren treated them very roughly therefore; which
divisions among themselves were improved then as an argument against all the
separation from the national church, Crosby's history, vol. I. page 93.
Let us, (said an author then) look among the separated congregations, and
consider their manifold divisions, both in judgment and practice; and there we
cannot but see a babel of confusion, separating each from other, etc. just as
you argue against us now. Dr. Cotton Mather observes, Eccl. hist. New England,
lib. VII. p. 26.
that the most eminent reformers, in their writings, used to represent the
annabaptists to be, an inordinate kind of men, stirred up by the devil, to the
destruction of the gospel, etc. -- Nevertheless, (says he) it is well known,
that of later time, there have been a great many antipaedobaptists, who have
never deserved so hard a character among the churches of GOD. Infant baptism
has been scrupled by multitudes in our days, who have been in other points,
most worthy christians, and as holy, watchful, fruitful and heavenly people, as
perhaps any in the world. Some few of these people have been among the planters
of New England, from the beginning. But after they proceeded to form a distinct
church of that persuasion, at Boston, on May 28, 1665, he observes, that the
court enacted some laws against them: though he elsewhere says of Plymouth
colony, which had one such church among them (i. e. at Swanzey) that Lib. I. p.
14. vide Crosby's hist. vol. I. p. 112, 113, 120.
there being many good men among those, -- I do not know that they have been
persecuted with any harder means, than kind conferences to reclaim them. And in
a late piece, I find, that colony, never made any capital laws against the
Quakers, as others did. Account of Plymouth church, at the end of Mr. Robbins's
ordination sermon, 1760, page 15.
Here remark; Plymouth settlers left the national church, and suffered for it
in their native land; but the Massachusetts settlers chiefly shunned that
cross, till they had gotten on this side the ocean; Prince's Chronology, page
237.
and they were most forward to persecute all that dissented from them here. --
And so it generally has proved, that those who have suffered for conscience
sake themselves, are not so forward to crowd upon the consciences of their
neighbors, as others are.

NOW to come to later times, by "facts enough to make both ears to tingle," I
presume, Sir, you don't mean the large donations of Thomas Hollis, Esquire of
London, to Harvard College; nor the liberal gifts of Mr. Isaac Hollis, toward
the gospelizing the Indians at Stockbridge, whom Dr. Colman calls a pious
baptist minister near London. Christian history, for 1743, page 150, etc.
As to the former of these, when the news of his death came over, Dr. Colman,
preached a funeral sermon for him, before the General Court in Boston, on April
1, 1731, which was printed by their order. Dr. Wigglesworth, and Mr. Greenwood,
the two professors in the college which bore his name, printed each of them a
discourse on the same occasion; to which president Wadsworth, wrote a preface.
In these, Mr. Wadsworth, after mentioning of other benefactions, says, But the
late Thomas Hollis, Esquire of London, merchant, now gone to his everlasting rest,
did in his donations to our college, far exceed any other of its benefactors.
Mr. Greenwood calls him, "that unpararelled benefactor to this society:" and
Dr. Wigglesworth says, that by his frequent and ample benefactions, for the
encouragement of theological, as well as human knowledge among us, who are
christians of a different denomination from himself, he has set such an
example, of a generous, catholic, and christian spirit, as has never before
fallen within my observation, nor so far as I now remember, within my reading.
Dr. Coleman says, That which is singular in the piety and benefits of Mr.
Hollis, unto these churches, was, that though he was not strictly of our way, nor
in judgment with us in the point of infant baptism, yet his heart and hand was
the same to us, as if we had been one in opinion and practice with him. And in
this let him stand a teaching pattern and example to us, of a noble, christian,
catholic, apostolic spirit of love; which makes those that differ in lesser
matters, to receive one another to the glory of GOD, and a shining testimony
against a narrow party spirit, which is so much the disgrace and detriment of
the protestant interest; and which so early began among the disciples of JESUS,
and was rebuked by him, even in John himself, that apostle of love and charity
afterward, who once said to CHRIST, in a fret of zeal, Master, we saw one
casting out devils in thy name, and he follows not us, and we forbid him,
because he follows not us. But Jesus said forbid him not.

THE doctor goes on to show what it was that fixed and enlarged that generous
heart to do these things: Says he, It was some account Mr. Hollis received from
us, of the free and catholic air we breathe at our Cambridge, -- that took his
generous heart, etc. See Crosby's history, vol. IV. page 217, 218, 222, 226,
229.
But where is this free and catholic air gone now, when those who embrace Mr.
Hollis's sentiments about baptism, are stigmatized with the most odious
characters and names, that scripture or history can furnish? and that by those
who are esteemed fathers of their country.

THAT there have been bad men in this and other countries, that were called
baptists, I don't scruple; and I have as little thought that you, Sir, will
pretend any other concerning your own denomination. If some of our persuasion
formerly left family prayer, and a regard to the christian sabbath, etc. which
you mention; -- so many on your side persecuted them with imprisonment and
banishment: And the late Mr. Cooper, of Boston, declares, that the religion
that allows of, and directs to the persecution of those that dissent from it,
wears the mark and brand of a false religion. Sermon on Josh. xxiv. 15. page 22.
And I have great reason to think that those persecutions had a great influence
in driving many from the observance of many things which were right, that the
opposite party held. Antipathy has a strange influence on the mind; and to my
knowledge, many of the present generation have made use of those hard dealings,
as an argument against family worship; just as others would of their loose
behavior against believers baptism: but truth ought to be received for it is
own sake, let who will own, or deny it.

YOU, Sir, profess a great zeal for the religion of our fathers, and represent
us as going in the way of apostasy therefrom. Bear with me then, while we a
little further consider this charge.

THEY held, that every particular church of CHRIST is only to consist of such
as appear to believe in, and obey him. New England Chronology, page 91.
And in admitting members, their custom was, to confess with the mouth, or
verbally to declare what GOD had done for their souls. Plymouth church altered
from this custom, to writing relations, in 1705. Account at the end of Mr.
Robbins's sermon, page 31.
Some others, I suppose, did sooner; and from that, many have got to drop the
giving of any relation at all. And as to baptism, our fathers held, that none
should bring their children thereto, but church members; but when another
generation was coming on to have children, and yet many of them had not faith
to bring their offspring, this occasioned great struggles about the subjects of
baptism, to remove which, a synod was called twenty-seven years after Boston
was first settled; but that did not do it: therefore another was convened in
Boston, in 1662, which advised to the receiving of persons to own the covenant,
or what is vulgarly called the half way members; which was readily acceded to
by many, though Plymouth church did not consent to it till 1731. Account
aforesaid, page 24.
From that, many have got the other half way now: and what less, Sir, are you
and your brethren a doing, when you assert, Appendix to Mr. Dickinson's
dialogue, page 1, 2, 3.
that the covenant with Abraham and his seed, is the same now, in the form and
manner of it, as it was under the old dispensation? I suppose all allow that
the church then was national. Further you assert, that CHRIST esteemed those
little ones as believers, visibly so. And now is it Christ-like to cast them
off, as if not belonging to the visible church? -- Alas! what are those people
a doing, who are excluding infants from the visible church? And after
mentioning that text, Matt. xvi. 18. Upon this rock I will build my church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, you add, these powers of hell,
will by various engines attempt it; and one of them may be endeavoring to
exclude infants from the visible church and baptism. And paraphrasing a little
further, you say, And is not this promise, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, connected with the covenant made with Abraham and his seed,
to all generations, securing among the rest, this part of the visible church,
viz. the infant seed of his people? If this don't favor strongly of a national
church, I desire to know what does? All are infants before they are adult; and
if all the infants of professors are visible believers, "belong to the visible
church," and are part of the visible church, which are secured upon the rock by
CHRIST'S promise, then how mistasten were our fathers, in so often declaring
that the gospel church is not national! Indeed, they were not aware, that
infant baptism laid the foundation of a national church, as now it is fully
proved that it did: -- here therefore we part; -- we retain the old sentiments
about the church, and the manner of admitting members into it, and drop that
point which is of a contrary nature: that point you take, and build quite
another church than our fathers had any thought of.

LET it be further observed, that the baptists are often represented to be
unsound in the doctrines of grace, and you represent, that their sentiments
about baptism have a dangerous tendency: -- but what tendency has it to tell
children that they are born in covenant with GOD, and that they are secured
upon the rock by CHRIST'S promise? Nay, Mr. Dickinson, in his dialogue, page
30, in order finally to convince his neighbor that our infants are in covenant
with GOD, says thus, The covenant of works included the children of Adam, --
now then, if Adam's posterity were taken into, and considered as in the
covenant of works, can you think GOD leaves out the children of his people from
the covenant of grace? What! are our natural offspring born in the covenant of
grace, as Adam's were in the covenant of works? -- where then is the need of
being born again?

ONCE more: You, Sir, tell young people that erroneous persons make it their
business, by some means, to get their affections first, that they might more
easily blind their judgment, or flatter their pride, inflame their prejudice,
etc. Sober-mindedness, page 16.
But I desire to know what you are doing in many of these passages? In some of
them, while you are expressing your affection for children, it seems as if you
would liken us to savages that murder families of little ones: as for instance,
where you say, are they not taking some direct course to destroy the church, by
plucking up the seed of it? like as destroying a nursery, is committing a waste
on the orchard. Appendix, page 2. Now destroying a nursery, and killing of it,
I suppose are the same. Let the comparison then be examined. -- David was born
of religious parents; yet he says, he was conceived in sin; and elsewhere he
compares sinners to thorns: Psalm. li. 5. 2 Samuel xxiii. 6.
well, I presume, no prudent husbandman will think his orchard injured, by
refusing to transplant a nursery of thorns into it, 'till they are graffted, or
changed into apple trees. The application is easy. While therefore you, Sir,
speak against others blending the judgment, by inflaming the passions, pray
don't do the same thing. I once knew what it was to have my mind held long in
suspense about these things, and one great means of it, was such injurious
representations as I have mentioned, which caused me to enlarge more upon them:
but I will now give you positively a brief summary of the scripture grounds of
my present principles and practice about baptism.

AND as to Abraham's covenant, in Genesis xvii. where all the controversy centers,
let it be called by what name it well; yet, this I find is certain, that it
included all his household, and that every male therein, whether born in his
house, or bought with money, were ordered to be circumcised. Accordingly he
circumcised himself, his son, and all the men of his house; which, I conceive,
constituted the old testament church. Well, in Jacob's time, this church went
into Egypt, where they endured a long season of bondage, 'till by an almighty
hand they were delivered; and then the passover was instituted, and the rules
concerning it were very express, that no uncircumcised person should eat
thereof: but every man's servant that was bought for money, when he was
circumcised, then should he eat thereof: all the congregation of Israel should
keep it. Exodus xii. 43 -- 48. Here the limits of the church appear to be the
same that was given to Abraham, and that what qualified for circumcision, did
also for the passover; and no room is left to dispute, but that the church was
national. This church I followed on to mount Sinai, where many other
institutions and rules were given to them, and among the rest, a great deal is
said about the flesh of persons being defiled, and made unclean, and concerning
the means and manner of cleansing: and one particular is, that, If a woman have
conceived seed, and borne a man-child, then she shall be unclean seven days --
and in the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. Lev.
xii. 2, 3. In this, I conceive, is discovered the plain reason why Abraham was
directed to circumcise his seed at eight days old, and not before; even because
he who knew all his works and designs from the beginning, knew what precepts
and directions he designed to give to that church, to show who were clean, and
who not: and therefore he ordered it so, that none might be circumcised till
they were clean. And the apostle shows, that those cleansing of the flesh, were
typical of moral and spiritual cleansings of the soul: for, says he, if the
blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Heb. ix.
13, 14. And surely, to be clean in this sense, is as necessary a qualification
for special ordinances in the gospel church, as the other was in the Jewish
church. As to that text, in 1 Cor. vii. 14. of children's being called holy,
which is often brought in this controversy, it appears, that the apostle is
there answering a case of conscience which they wrote to him about, ( ver. 1.)
which was doubtless occasioned by their reading in Ezra, x. 3, that the Jews
were obliged to put away all the wives, and such as were born of them, which
they had taken of other nations, that were not of their religion. This might
naturally cause the enquiry, whether they must do so now or not? The answer is,
no: -- for the unbelieving companion is sanctified, and the children holy. So
the same apostle elsewhere says, of various creatures, which in Moses's law
were called unclean, they are sanctified by the word of GOD and prayer. 1 Timothy
iv. 5. i. e. They are, by the law of Christ, made warrantable for to be
thankfully received and improved now by his saints; so in this case, I
conceive, he held forth, that if the unbeliever is pleased to dwell with the
believer, that family privileges may be warrantably enjoyed, and family duties
acceptably performed, by believing souls: else, if their companions must be put
away, then their children, as unclean things, must be put away too. This I take
to be the plain sense of the words: for by comparing the various places in
scripture, where these terms are used, I find, that the sense of the word
sanctified, is ever full as strict as the word holy: therefore, if the one does
here entitle the children to baptism, the other must give the unbelieving
companion as good a right thereto; which, I presume, will hardly be allowed by
any.
This will further appear if we observe, that when the iniquity of the Jews was
got to such a height, as to bring upon them the Babylonish captivity, that GOD
did then, by the prophet Jeremiah, not only promise their return from thence,
but also declares, that, Behold, the days come, says the LORD, that I will
make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: NOT
ACCORDING to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took
them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt; (which my covenant
they brake, although I was an husband unto them, says the LORD) -- but this is
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; -- after those days,
says the LORD, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts; and will be their GOD, and they shall be my people: and they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know
the LORD: for they shall all know me, from the least of them, to the greatest
of them, says the LORD: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sin no more. Jer. xxxi. 31 -- 34.

THIS prophecy is expressly applied to CHRIST'S abolishing the constitution and
ordinances of the Hebrew church, and introducing a better covenant, established
upon better promises. Heb. viii. 6 -- 13. That covenant when they came out of
Egypt, was made with literal, this with spiritual Israel: that was made with
Abraham's natural seed; this with his spiritual children. And I really think,
that the chief controversies among GOD'S people, about the subjects of gospel
ordinances, are principles caused by their not duly distinguishing between type
and antitype, and between the natural and spiritual seed of Abraham, which
Paul takes so much pains to keep distinct. See Romans ii. 28, 29, and ix. 6 --
13. Phil. iii. 3. And as the covenant here spoken of, which constitutes the
gospel church, is declared to be not according to that which was made with the
church of Israel, when they came out of Egypt, but a better one, may we take a
little view of the difference? Some of the excellencies of this above that,
are, -- that was outward in their flesh; this is written in the heart. Many
that were in that covenant, had not eyes to see, nor ears to hear: Deuteronomy. xxix.
4.
while all that are in this, know the Lord, from the least to the greatest.
Great numbers of that church brake GOD'S covenant, and he regarded them not:
but of these, he says, I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no
more. And let it be particularly noted, that one principal advantage which they
had by circumcision, was that, Romans iii. 2.
unto them were committed the oracles of God; and many means were used for the
conversion of members within the church: whereas now, the gospel is freely
preached to all nations, and the lively stones, which are the materials for
this spiritual house, 1 Pet. ii. 5.
which is the antitype of Solomon's temple, are prepared without, Prove. xxiv.
27.
before they are builded together, for an habitation of God, through the spirit.
Ephesians. ii. 22.
And I believe this is the plain design of those words, that they shall teach
no more every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; even because they shall
all know him, from the least to the greatest: which surely cannot be intended
to prohibit public or private teachings, in gospel times; but that all that are
truly in this covenant, do know GOD, and have not that to learn now; and
therefore evidences of persons being in such a state, should ever be carefully
looked after, in order for admission into the church.

EXACTLY agreeable hereto, is the language of the messenger that came to
prepare the way of our LORD; for when he saw many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who
has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits
meet for repentance. And think not to say within yourselves, we have Abraham to
our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. Matt. iii. 7 -- 9. How plainly does this show, that
henceforth Abraham's children are to be reckoned not in a natural, but in a
spiritual line, even that they are only such as GOD has raised up to him, by
his creating power? and that fruits meet for repentance, are necessary to
prepare any person for baptism. And through all the accounts that we have of his
administrations of that ordinance, no intimations appear of any children's
being brought thereto on their parents right.

WELL, if he gave no such intimations, yet you say his master did, when he
said, suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come to me, for of such
is the kingdom of heaven. Though upon a careful search into this affair, I can
find no account who those children's parents were, nor the least hint that this
liberty and invitation to come to him, was limited only to the children of
believers. No, -- but without any such limitation, he says, suffer little
children to come to me; and when we have evidence that any, let them be as
little as they will, have really come to Christ, it is readily granted that they
belong to his kingdom, and have a right to the ordinances thereof. And as that
call to come to him is not limited to believers children, so neither does he
say, all such, but of such is the kingdom of heaven; which, I believe,
comprehends these two things, viz. 1. That the chief of them that ever do come
to him, and so belong to the kingdom of grace here, and of glory hereafter,
come in their early days. David, speaking of the conquests of this glorious
king, and of his people's being willing in the day of his power, says, from the
womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy youth. Psalm. cx. 3.2. That none
belong to that kingdom but little children, in a spiritual sense: hence, it is
immediately added in Mark x. 15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.

THIS is further confirmed by Matt. xviii. where you say, "CHRIST esteemed
those little ones as believers, visibly so;" as if all the little children of
professors were esteemed believers: though what the evangelist says, is, that
Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst, etc. -- and he
said, Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as THIS little child, the same
is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Ver. 2, 4. Which shows that this little
child was a real saint. And that he was so, is further evidenced by two things;
one is, that CHRIST says the same of receiving of him, as he does elsewhere of
receiving the apostles, viz. Whosoever shall receive one SUCH little child,
receives me. Ver. 5. Matt. x. 40. The other is, that JESUS says of these
little ones which believe in him, that, in heaven their angels do always behold
the face of my father. Ver. 10. Now the angels are sent forth to minister for
the heirs of salvation. All which proves plain enough, that we ought earnestly
to labor, to show to children the necessity of believing in CHRIST, and that
many little ones do believe in him: but it is so far from proving that CHRIST
esteemed all the natural offspring of his people to be believers, that I really
think such a notion is both false and dangerous.

AND if we come to the commission, in Matt. xxviii. 19. our translation says,
Go, teach all nations, baptizing them. Mr. Dickinson renders it, disciple all
nations, and Dr. Dodderidge, proselyte all nations; either of which plainly
carries in it, that there is a work to be done to the subjects, before they are
baptized: namely, that they are first to be taught, to be made disciples, or
proselytes; (see Joh. iv. 1.) which is abundantly confirmed by the evangelist
Mark, chap. xvi. 15, 16. Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to
every creature: he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. What can be
plainer than this is? that CHRIST'S orders are to preach the gospel to all
nations, and that he that believes it, and so becomes his disciple, is to be
baptized: but not the least word of direction to baptize any other. And as
little warrant (I believe) can be found from the apostles practice: for when
the three thousand were pricked in their hearts, and cried, What shall we do?
Peter said unto them, repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost: for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Acts ii. 37 -- 39.

HERE let it be observed, that what is promised, is the remission of sins, and
the gift of the Holy Ghost. -- No, says Mr. Dickinson, "it was the promise made
to Abraham." Well, let it be so; but what is that promise? why, says Paul,
CHRIST has redeemed us from the curse of the law, -- that the blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ; that we might receive
the promise of the spirit through faith. Gal. iii. 13, 14. And now, how much
difference is there between Peter and Paul? both speak of the promises; and the
blessings which both point out, are pardon, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost:
likewise, both speak of them, not as things which belong to any by nature; but
as that which is to be received as a gift: and one says, repent and ye shall
receive this gift; the other speaks of receiving it through faith. All which
bespeak, that none are heirs of that promise, but repenting and believing
souls; and it is limited in Peter's words, to even as many as God shall call.
If it be asked, why then did he say, to you and your children? I reply, that
they had imprecated the guilt of CHRIST'S blood on themselves and their
children, Matt. xxvii. 25.
which now lay heavy on their consciences; therefore he holds forth a remedy
equal to their misery, even that the gifts of pardoning and renewing grace are
in the promise freely proclaimed to them, and to their children, and to all
that are afar off; and as many as come at the call of GOD, shall receive these
great blessings: and so we read, in ver. 41, that they that gladly received his
word, were baptized; but no hint is given, that any others were baptized but
such. The same might be observed in the other accounts that we have in that
book; yea, and that in the very households which Mr. Dickinson mentions; for
when Paul and Silas went out of prison, they visited the house of Lydia, and
those which they found there are called brethren, and they comforted them, and
departed. Acts xvi. 40. Concerning the jailor's house, the word all is used
three times; they spoke the word to all that were in his house; -- all were
baptized; and he rejoiced, believing in GOD with all his house. Acts xvi. 32 --
34. And why that word should include more in the middle, than in the beginning
and end of the account, I can see no reason at all. -- And the household of
Stephanus are called, the first fruit of Achaia, and had addicted themselves to
the ministry of the saints, 1 Cor. xvi. 15. A pious household indeed! and it
must be proved, that there were some in these families that were baptized when
they were not pious, before they can justly be brought for proof that we should
baptize any others now.

I know it is said, that though we have no express mention of any others being
baptized but believers; yet, from Abraham's covenant we have reason to think
their infants were brought in afterward, and the demand is often made thus, --
"Children were once in covenant, and where were they cut off?" To which I
answer, when Israel came out of Egypt, one direction which was given to them
was, that when a stranger would join with them, all his males should be
circumcised; Exodus xii. 48.
which shows what was the plan of the covenant when they came out of Egypt: but
since, GOD declares, the new covenant is not according to that; and the special
difference is, that all who are in this new, or gospel covenant, know him, from
the least to the greatest. Heb. viii. 11.
I wonder that any will still persist in that demand. -- And since they do, I
will add one text more, which I was lately pointed to by a friend; to wit, the
testimony of the apostle James, and the elders with him at Jerusalem. When Paul
returned, and had given them an account of his success among the Gentiles, they
glorified GOD, and then told him of a complaint that the zealous Jews had heard
of him, which was, That thou teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles
to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children,
neither to walk after the customs. As touching the Gentiles which believe, say
they, we have written and concluded that they observe NO SUCH THINGS. Acts xxi.
21 -- 25.

NOT only that they should not observe the custom of circumcising their
children, but no such things: nothing that bore any resemblance to bringing
children into the church on their parents right.

NOW, Sir, since CHRIST'S forerunner warned the Jews against thinking to come
to baptism on Abraham's right, and told them they must bring forth fruits meet
for repentance; since CHRIST himself, called little children to come to him;
but says not a word of their being brought to baptism before they do come to
him; yea, instead of that, he in the commission orders that all nations be
taught and believe before they are baptized: and since, his ministers, in
obedience thereto, baptized those that gladly received the word at Jerusalem;
they that believed Philip's preaching at Samaria; Acts viii. 12.
and such as heard and believed at Corinth, Acts xviii. 8.
etc. but no account of their baptizing any but such: -- And on the other hand,
since GOD declares that the new covenant is not according to that which he made
with Israel, when he brought them out of Egypt; and that one special difference
is, that all who are in this covenant know him, and have his law written in
their hearts; and since no custom like circumcising children on their parents
account, was to be observed among the believing Gentiles, I dare not follow the
multitude in bringing children to the initiating ordinance of the gospel church
on their parents faith, let there be as great or good men as there will that do
it; knowing that I have but one master in all these things, to whom I must give
account. And I believe his orders are, that none should be admitted into the
ministry but faithful men, or men full of faith and the Holy Ghost; and that
none ought to be received into the church but real believers.

THOUGH when things are brought up to this point, many start off and say, "we
cannot know who are such, and who not." And if it is replied, that CHRIST says,
you shall know them. The question is presently put, "What! are you infallible?"
and after putting the word satisfactory on one side, and infallible on the
other, hot disputes have followed, which have often been carried to extremes on
both sides, in our days. Yet, after all this noise, CHRIST'S word stands good
still; Give not that which is holy unto dogs; and, beware of false prophets. Ye
shall know them by their fruits. Matt. vii. 6, 15, 16. Aye, say some, if men
live scandalous lives, we may know them to be bad men; but if they are moral,
we must have charity for them. But I believe that our LORD has given the best
explanation of this rule himself: For, says he, every tree is known by his own
fruit: -- a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is good; and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings
forth that which is evil: for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth
speaks. Luke vi. 44, 45. This shows, that by fruit, he means that which is
brought forth out of the heart, particularly by speaking; which surely
comprehends a person's principles, experiences, and conversation. And though by
sheep's clothing or a plausible show of religion, some may impose upon GOD'S
people at first; yet he holds forth, that out of the abundance of the heart,
they will discover themselves.

AND, dear Sir, if you had closely adhered to this rule, I hardly think you
would have told the public as you do, that, the FIRST inquiry should be, are
they ministers of CHRIST'S sending? and have they good right to act in the
capacity of public teachers, Discourse on Sober-mindedness, page 37.
before we hear them? neither, I presume, would you have signified (as you
largely do) that a principal mark of deceivers, is, their pretending to greater
sanctity and concern for souls, than the regular or standing ministers. Ibid,
page 17, note.
As if CHRIST and his apostles, and multitudes of reformers since, did not
profess greater sanctity and concern for souls than those who called themselves
the regular and standing ministers of their day. Nay, a plea of being the
regular and standing ministry, has often been one main pretense by which
corrupt men have supported themselves against the power of Godliness. Witness
the Pharisees, who plead that they were Abraham's children, and Moses's
disciples; and the Pope that claims a succession from Peter, etc. whereas, all
ought to be tried by this divine standard; and those that are found by their
fruits to be good trees, should be owned as such; and all that are found by
their fruits to be corrupt trees, we ought to beware of, let them have been
introduced how they will.

HERE again, it is said, "you must not judge." -- Permit me then to add a word
about that also. And I find that a judging according to rule is required in
church government and discipline; 1 Cor. v. 12. and so it is about what we read
or hear. Paul tells the Corinthians, to judge what he said. 1 Cor. x. 15. And
no man ought to be judged before we hear him. Joh. vii. 51. But, to judge after
the flesh, and according to outward appearance; to judge others for their
motes, while a beam is in our own eyes, and for the same things that we do
ourselves, are dreadful evils. Matt. vii. 1 -- 5. John vii. 24, and viii. 15.
Romans ii. 1. And so are the speaking evil, and judging of persons behind their
backs. Psalm. l. 20. Jam. iv. 11. And speaking evil of things which they know
not, nor understand the nature of. Jude x. And a great branch of this evil, is
judging pious persons, because they differ from us in some external points,
which men may have different sentiments about, and yet be received of GOD. Romans
xiv. Col. ii. 16. It Is exceeding natural for us to think that all who hold
sentiments different from ours, are influenced by bad motives: but this we are
cautioned against, because none but GOD can make manifest the counsels of the
heart. 1 Cor. iv. v. And all breaches of these rules, I desire to condemn and
renounce in myself and all others.

AND I would entreat you, Sir, to review your censure against us, and see if
they can stand with these rules. Particularly, that charge, that we are going
in the way of Cain and Core, in departing from GOD'S institutions, and without
any scriptural warrant, setting up separately ourselves. Now in order for a
just view of the case, it may be needful to give a brief narrative of facts
relating to this affair.

LET it then be remembered, that before that blessed revival of religion, which
happened about twenty-three years ago, it was generally allowed there had been
a great declension in the churches of New England. Well, in that revival, great
numbers flocked into the churches; of which I was one, though not without great
struggles of mind, because I thought the gospel rules about admitting and
disciplining of church members, were not so strictly observed as they ought to
have been; yet, as I saw no other way to enjoy the precious ordinance of the
LORD'S supper, I joined with your church; where I continued more than two
years, hoping for a reformation; but instead of that, the custom was continued
of letting such as did not pretend to be converted, bring their children to
baptism; and of receiving members upon written relations of experiences into
the church, which I ever thought to be an unscriptural way; 'till from that,
you obtained a vote to admit persons without any relation at all, if they did
not see cause to give any. And the church, which was a garden enclosed, 2 Cant.
iv. 12.
seemed to be laid as an open field; and when a reformation was urged, many
would bring the parable of the tares against it. And that field, which CHRIST
says is the world, was often declared to be the church, and that the good seed
and the tares must grow together therein till harvest. Mr. John Cotton,
preached a sermon at Attleborough, in January 1747, against the separation, and
printed it; throughout which, he improves the parable in that line.
I may here observe, it was after the good seed and tares both appeared by
their fruit, that the servants were forbidden to gather up the tares: so that
if the field was the church, then those that appeared by their fruit to be
children of the wicked one, must be let alone therein, till the end of the
world. Matt. xiii. 26, 29, 38, 39. Another thing I Will mention here, and that
is, that though liberty for christians to improve their gifts, was allowed for a
while, and it was owned that much good was done thereby; yet afterward an
outcry was made of their invading the ministerial office, and the pulpits
sounded with warnings against lay exhorters, (as they were pleased to call
them) and sundry ministers who had been greatly engaged in the work of GOD,
turned and joined with others that had called it a delusion of the Devil, and
united all their force to crush these exhorters: and the public were cautioned
against admitting any into the ministry, but such as man had taught for that
purpose from their youth; yea, though they might be better qualified than others
that were then ordained. See Mr. Edward's thoughts on that work, in five parts,
1742, page 264, etc. -- And my discourse on an internal call, page 82, 83.
While there was hardly a person in the land that man had taught for that
purpose, but what might be admitted into the ministry if they would: and it was
often declared, that the call of the people, with the laying on the hands of
the presbytery, was the call of GOD. But if any others, from any inward
teachings and influence, adventured to preach without that, they were called
disturbers, deluded pretenders to an extraordinary call, etc. (though they did
not pretend to any higher call than what they believed every minister ought to
have) and when that did not stop them, the secular arm was called in, and
several were imprisoned for no greater crime than preaching the gospel without
the ministers license. One of which was Mr. Thomas Marsh, who had, for many
years, been a deacon in good esteem, in the second church in Windham. -- He was
confined in Windham goal, from January to June, 1746. I visited him there, and
found him confined in close prison, and not allowed the liberty of the yard,
though sufficient security was offered for him; while one Dr. Holloway who was
put in for murder, in the room over his head, was allowed, with an officer to
attend him, to visit the sick, in several parts of the town. This would
naturally put one in mind of Barabas and Jesus.
And many have said, both then, and since, that "if it was not for the defense
and support of the civil authority, all our churches and ministers would soon
be broke up." A great deal of force, 1 Samuel ii. 16.
has also been used for ministers support.

THESE, Sir, were certain facts; and most of them known to yourself: -- and
though I am far from justifying every step of our conduct, in the manner of our
withdrawing, or since; yet the principal grounds of our withdraw, I believe,
were just. The way of Cain, according to your own explanation, was a departing
from GOD'S institution, and devising one of his own, which he offered without
faith. Well, here was our very difficulty, you would admit those to offer their
children to baptism, that did not pretend to have Abel's faith, and opened a
door for others to come to the LORD'S table, without giving the church any
account that they had that faith, and in these, and some other things, you had
warped off from the origininal constitution of the church; therefore we
withdrew from you, holding near or quite to it is first principles: and to this
day, I may boldly say, that our societies in general, hold as fully to the
doctrinal articles of your church, as any in the land; and the only reason of
my leaving infant baptism since, was because I found it wanted "the stamp of
divine institution upon it." And I might say the same, as to the mode of
sprinkling: for the numerous and plain accounts we have of their baptizing in
rivers, and where there was much water, and of their going into, and coming out
of the water, together with it is being twice called a burial, fully satisfied
me that CHRIST and his apostles were baptized by immersion: and the arguments
of some to the contrary, appeared to me but weak; and so they have to many
paedobaptist writers too. Dr. Wall, who took great pains to prove infants to be
subjects; yet, as to the ancient mode, says, History of infant baptism, vol.
II. page 291. Vide Crosby's history, vol. I. preface, page 6.
Their general and ordinary way was, to baptize by immersion, or dipping the
person, whether it were infant, or grown man or woman, into the water. This,
adds he, is so plain and clear, by an infinite number of passages, that as one
cannot but pity the weak endeavors of such paedobaptists as would maintain the
negative of it; so also we ought to disown, and show a dislike of the profane
scoffs which some people give to the English antipaedobaptists, merely for
their using dipping. It Is one thing to maintain, that that circumstance is not
absolutely necessary to the essence of baptism; and another to go about to
represent it as ridiculous and foolish, or as shameful and indecent; when it
was in all probability the way by which our blessed Savior, and for certain
was the most usual and ordinary way by which the ancient christians did receive
their baptism. So that the way it seems he has to support sprinkling, is by
supposing it not absolutely necessary to keep to the ancient mode in that
ordinance. But though after Israel had got fine houses to dwell in, they likely
thought they could keep the feast of tabernacles well enough in them, and not
take the pains to build booths; yet, when their houses had lain desolate
seventy years, those which returned from captivity found it duty to return to
the ancient pattern. ( Lev. xxiii. 42. Nehem. viii. 14 -- 18.) And so I believe
GOD'S people will in this case, sooner or later. But to return from this
digression.

INSTEAD of our departing from GOD'S institutions, the very cause of our
departing from you, was because of your holding these things, which we could
not find the stamp of his institution upon: from whence I leave others to
judge, who most resemble Cain, in treating their brethren as he did his
brother. Concerning Core's company, we read, that they were famous in the
congregation, men of renown: and they gainsayed Moses and Aaron, whom GOD had
called to teach and lead his Israel, and they said, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them -- wherefore then lift
you up yourselves, etc. Numb. xvi. 2, 3. Now, who are they in our day that say,
all the congregation are holy, and that their voice in calling ministers, is
the voice of GOD? So far are those who espouse an internal call by the divine
spirit, from lifting themselves up in this matter, that, I presume, they could
freely say as Moses did before this, Would God that all the Lord's people were
prophets, and that he would put his spirit upon them. Numb. xi. 29.
But we dare not say, that being taught and called of men, without that spirit,
can make them true ministers of CHRIST. Let it also be observed, that Core
raised a mob against Moses and Aaron; but we allow of no such thing, but only
desire peaceably to worship GOD according to our consciences, among ourselves;
believing that CHRIST'S church is founded in the truth, and supported by it,
John xviii. 37.
against all the powers of earth and hell. And those that still go on in those
churches, which rulers, ministers and people have often declared, would not
stand if it were not for the support of the civil authority, we leave in the
hand of GOD, praying that he would in his own time, destroy the face of
covering cast over all people; Isa. xxv. 7.
and cause his light and truth to prevail every where.

AND to conclude; -- what I aimed at in this letter, was, not a dispute upon
every branch of these controversies; that has been often done already: but to
endeavor to show the injustice of the reproaches which you have cast upon us,
and upon the truth, through us; and to open a little of the true state of the
case between us; and through the whole, to show all proper respect to men's
persons, and yet to speak the truth plainly, according to the best of my
understanding. How far I have accomplished what I aimed at, others must judge:
and if you, Sir, or any others, can convince me, in a friendly way, of any
mistake, I hope I shall take it kindly; though I am not to be frighted out of
truth by hard names. So desiring you calmly and seriously to review your
treatment of us, and of our principles, -- and wishing you the best of
blessings, I rest, dear Sir, Yours, etc.

ISAAC BACKUS.
Middleborough, April 9, 1764.
Postscript.
SINCE I finished the foregoing letter, I have thought so much of one thing,
that I concluded to add a little upon it here; and that is, your saying, Do not
the late separations already discover their nature by their fruits; in that
some have by this time apostatized even from all religion: -- while some others
are renouncing infant baptism, and going fast to the like dreadful apostasy?
Now, Sir, unless you could have shown, that renouncing the notion of bringing
persons into the church and into the ministry, by natural generation, and human
instruction and influence; and holding to the necessity of regeneration, and
divine teachings and influence in order thereto; (which are the central points
of the controversy) I say, unless you could have shown that these principles
had a natural tendency to apostasy, there is not a whit more of justice in this
censure, because of the unhappy conduct of some that have been among us, than
there would be for a person that was prejudiced against your denomination, to
say, Do not these ministers discover what they are by their fruits; in that
some of them have already been proved to be whore-mongers and drunkards, and
others are going fast in the same way? But where is the person or people under
heaven that would be willing to be judged by such a rule? surely there is none.
And whether we believe it or no, yet all will be made to know, sooner or later,
that, with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again. Matt. vii. 2. Which words, if rightly
viewed, would be enough to deter every one from condemning any for their
neighbors evils, which they abhor.

THE truth is, that notwitstanding our many mistakes and wanderings, (for which
we have great cause to be humbled before GOD) yet, instead of apostasy, there
has been a great revival of religion within these two or three years, among
these people that you bear so hard against, in many parts of the land. I know
that two years ago, after such a revival in the northeast part of your town,
one that joins with you in ranking such instruments as were used in that work,
with Core and his company, declared there, publicly, that, In times of general
security, Satan finds it to his advantage to stir up persons to false zeal, and
seeming religion, and that he can and does often affright many, filling them
with terror and fears of hell. Mr. Whitaker's sermon on the Trial of the
Spirits, preached March 17, 1762, page 4. -- N. B. When souls are awakened,
Satan often fills them with fears that heaven will not receive them, and so
would drive them to hell; but that he stirs up the secure, and fills them with
fears of hell, I believe is far from being true.
And when he comes to lay down marks to try the spirits by, he says, I shall
confine myself to such marks and characters, which, as I apprehend, best suit
with those appearances of Satan in the garb of an angel of light, which of late
years he has assumed. Page 14.
Which plainly insinuates that the work which had then been among the
separatists in that place, was a delusion of Satan: yet after all his
insinuations, take the very marks which he lays down, according to the plain
language of scripture, without turning them into allegory, (as he says many do)
viz. That the true spirit first brings light to the understanding, showing to
persons by the truths revealed in the word, the moral evil of their hearts and
lives, and the abominable nature of sin as committed against GOD, till they
find themselves utterly unable to obey the law aright in one point or tittle.
And that it leads men to trust in CHRIST as he is exhibited in the word, and to
rest upon him there. That it empties men, and makes them become as little
children, teachable and humble, yea, and charitable also to others. And lastly,
that the true spirit teaches us, that religion consists chiefly in practice,
i. e. in holy actions, arising from holy tempers, and divine exercises of the
heart. I say, according to these marks which he lays down, there is abundant
reason to believe that there has been a glorious reformation, and several
hundred souls turned from sin to GOD, in many parts of New England, within
these two or three years; and a very great part of it among those which you
represent as going in the way of apostasy. Yea, and such a glorious work is now
going on in your own place, which I hope will be a means to convince you, Sir,
and others, of their wrong charges against us.

FINIS.
ERRATA. -- In page 21, line 15. for cleansing read cleansings. Page 31, line
17. for plead read pleaded. Page 32, line 17, for censure read censures. --
These errors, and such others as may have escaped unobserved, the candid reader
is requested to rectify with his pen.

With this Letter may be had of Philip Freeman, Bookseller, in Union-Street,
Boston;
THE Divine Right of Infant Baptism, examined and disproved: -- Being an Answer
to Mr. Dickinson's Dialogue on that Subject. By JOHN GILL, D. D.

And also his Reply to Mr. Clark's defense thereof.


