A REPLY To a PIECE called THE SPEECH Of JOSEPH GALLOWAY, Esquire.

BY JOHN DICKINSON.

"YES, the last pen for freedom let me draw,
When truth stands trembling on the edge of law;
Here, last of Britons! Let your names be read;
Are none, none living? Let me praise the dead,
And FOR THAT CAUSE which made your fathers shine,
Fall by the votes of their unhappy line."
POPE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, At his BOOK-STORE,
in Market-street, adjoining the LONDON COFFEE-HOUSE, M,DCC,LXIV.

THE Pamphlet called "The Speech of Joseph Galloway, Esquire" was published on
Saturday the 11th of August. -- The next day I left Town to attend the Courts
in the Lower Counties, and did not return till the 26th. -- The following Reply
was written in the small Intervals I could spare from the Hurry of the Courts
at Dover and New Castle, and these frequently interrupted. -- The Court for
Chester County began the 28th, and held till the 31st of August; and
Philadelphia County Court began yesterday, so that it has been impossible for
me to prepare this Piece for the Public, in the Manner I wished to do.

I hope the Reader will therefore be so kind, as to excuse any Inaccuracies
that may be discovered; which I should have carefully endeavored to correct,
if my Business had not prevented me.

Philadelphia, September 4th, 1764.
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION Page 1, 2. General state of the case Page 3, 4. The first
argument for a change of government, relating to the time, considered Page 5,
6. Second argument relating to the time, considered Page 7, 8, 9. Third
argument relating to the time, considered Page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Conclusion of the arguments relating to the time Page 15, 16. A general
objection against the author's reasoning considered Page 16, 17. General
observations on the manner in which the change is now attempted Page 18. The
first objection against the manner, etc. with the answer and reply Page 19, 20.
The second objection -- with the answer and reply Page 21, 22, 23, 24. The
third objection -- with the answer and reply Page 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
Conclusion of the arguments relating to the manner, etc. Page 29, 30. The
arguments concerning the powers of representatives to change a government,
recapitulated Page 31. The arguments concerning a military establishment,
recapitulated Page 31, 32. Personal charges against the author considered Page
32. The first charge with the answer Page 33, 34, 35, 36. The second charge
with the answer Page 37, 38, 39, 40. The third charge with the answer Page 41,
42. The fourth charge with the answer Page 43, 44. The conclusion Page 45.
A REPLY, etc.
TWO reasons induce me to address the public at present. The one is, to clear a
few plain arguments on a matter of the utmost consequence, from the objections
lately made against them, in a piece called "The Speech of Joseph Galloway, Esquire
etc." The other is, to answer the unjust accusations contained in that piece.

To act honestly, and to be traduced, has been the fate of many men. To bear
slanders with temper, and to entertain a proper pity or contempt, for their
weak or wicked authors, has been the lot of few. I will endeavor to imitate
their example: and by proposing it to myself, I hope I shall be able so far to
suppress the resentment naturally arising from a sense of unprovoked injuries,
that my vindication may be presented not unacceptably, nor uselessly, to candid
minds.

COULD I be convinced, that men of sense or virtue, would be persuaded or
pleased, by wild declamation or illiberal reflections, I might perhaps be
induced to defend myself, in the same shattered style and abusive language,
with which I have been attacked: but as these must always offend the wise and
good, whose approbation only is worth wishing for, to Mr. Galloway I resign the
undisputed glory of excelling in his favorite arts -- of writing confusedly,
and railing insolently.

Presumptuous indeed must I appear, should I venture into these lists, against
a person who wields the weapons of wordy war -- the only weapons he dares to
wield -- with so peculiar a dexterity in his exercise, as to feel no kind of
restraint either from sense or truth; the regularity of whose sober discipline
would prove, I presume, too great a confinement to this advocate of freedom.

WHEN I perceived, that Mr. Galloway was hardy enough to obtrude on the public
a pretended speech, of which he never spoke one sentence in the House, I was
not surprised to find, that a person who treated his own character with such
license, should not be unsparing of others. But -- why he should engage in this
preposterous project -- why he should so industriously endeavor to exhibit me
as a villain to my country, for speaking my sentiments in that place where my
country had commanded me to speak them -- why he has wantonly wounded a man,
who never designed or wished him an injury; but has always, as far as his power
extended, rendered him all the offices of civility -- for what reasons, I say,
he has thus violated the laws of humanity and decency, his own heart is best
able to decide -- The public, with which he endeavors to establish his
character, by destroying that of another, may perhaps be able to guess the
secret causes, by which he has been transported into such unjustifiable
excesses of rage and rancour against me -- For my part, I shall avoid an
enquiry, that would only lead me, I fear, to a painful discovery of the
depravity, to which the human mind is subject.

LEAVING then to the impartial world the judgment to be passed on Mr.
Galloway's conduct -- Leaving to him the enjoyment of the solid satisfaction,
that must arise from the meritorious exploit of stabbing publicly a reputation,
which has hitherto escaped his insidious attempts, I shall endeavor to perform
the task imposed on me by his cruelty, and to defend myself from those darts,
which with unfriendly hands he has aimed at my heart.

WHEN the change of our government, after the adjournment of the assembly in
March last, came to be the general subject of conversation, the importance of
the measure filled my mind with the greatest anxiety. A severe fit of sickness
had prevented my attendance when the resolves were past: but I considered that
at the next meeting of the House, the duties of the post which my country had
assigned me, would call upon me to act a part of more consequence, than perhaps
would ever fall to my share again, in the whole course of my life. Mindful of
the trust committed to me, I endeavored to understand a matter on which so
much depended.

I SOON perceived, that if a change took place, there were two things to be
wished for, which there appeared to me no probability of obtaining. The first
was, that the point on which we lately differed with the governor, and some
others which have been earnestly urged by former assemblies, should be
determined in our favor. The second was, that our privileges should be
perfectly secured.

BUT insurmountable obstructions seemed to present themselves, at this time,
against these attempts. Speech Page 6.
What reasonable hopes of success can we entertain, of having these points
decided in our favor, while those ministers who so repeatedly and warmly have
approved of the proprietors insisting on them, are still in power? Our danger
not only is, that these points will not be decided for us; but, if the
proprietors, tired and incensed, should think proper to surrender the
government and make their own terms with the crown, is it not highly probable,
that they have interest enough to make the change in such a manner as will fix
upon us forever, those demands which appear so extremely just to the present
ministers? Add to this, the deplorable misfortune under which we now labor, of
having incurred the displeasure of his majesty and his ministers. These
reflections induced me to think and to say -- that this is not the proper time
to attempt a change of our government.

MR. Galloway, by way of prelude to his answer to these observations,
endeavors to show that I have contradicted myself: but this supposed
contradiction is founded on a supposed concession, which I never made -- "of
the necessity of a change". My approbation of a change, if we can enjoy all the
advantages we now do, is called, "a confession that a change is necessary". But
certainly it would have been more natural to construe it as it was intended,
and as the sense requires -- "that, if we are to lose nothing by the change, I
am as willing to be under the immediate government of the crown, as of the
proprietors."

AFTER this unsuccessful attempt to raise a contradiction, Mr. Galloway takes
the trouble of attacking the "inapposite instance", as he calls it, relating to
the duke of Monmouth. This instance was mentioned to confirm a preceding
observation; and Mr. Galloway, in attempting to answer it, unluckily for
himself, points out and enforces the very truth for which it was adduced. He
says, "the duke failed; and no wonder; for he landed at a time when the king
was supported in the warmest manner by the parliament, and no one circumstance
to promise him success. Thus, I say, -- our attempt is made at a time when the
proprietors are supported in the warmest manner by the crown, and its
ministers; and no one circumstance to promise us success". -- But, suppose the
duke had waited till the parliament did no longer support the King; but, when
they and the whole nation, in the utmost dread of popery and arbitrary power,
were looking round with impatient terror for a deliverer; and when many
circumstances promised that nobleman success; is it evident that he would not
then have succeeded, or that he would have been taken and put to death? Or, if
king William had made his attempt, before the nation was properly alarmed, is
it certain that the revolution would have been accomplished with such amazing
facility? Rashness ruined the one. Caution crowned the other. This is all, I
intended to prove.

MR. Galloway then proceeds, and supposes that all the determinations of the
ministry, were mistakes occasioned by proprietary misrepresentations. He then
supposes that these determinations were solely owing to the influence of two
friends of the proprietors, lately deceased: And lastly he supposes that now
there will be a total alteration in ministerial resolutions.

THESE suppositions, I acknowledge, are as good securities as any we have, that
the grand points controverted between us and the proprietors, will, in case of
a change, be decided in our favor, or that our privileges will be preserved.
But still they seem to be too sanguine. Let us remember with what unanimity the
ministry at different times have expressed their resentment of our conduct;
and, that it is only guess-work to imagine, their resolutions were dictated by
two men.

OF one thing we are sure -- that we are in the utmost discredit with the king
and his ministers. The late resolves prove it. Mr. Galloway however flatters
himself, that the prejudices against us are not so ineradicably fixed, but they
may be easily overcome, and the province restored to her former credit. Happy
should I be, if I could perceive the least prospect of so great a blessing. By
what means these prejudices are to be overcome, we are not informed; nor can I
conceive. Men of great abilities, and of the most perfect acquaintance with our
public affairs, have been employed to remove the force of these
misrepresentations, as they are called. Mr. Franklin and Mr. Charles, our
Agents spent several years in combating these prejudices; and, even Mr.
Galloway himself, as I have been told, elucidated the justice of our cause with
his usual perspicuity, in reams of writing. Yet after all these great labors,
his majesty and his ministers still retained their former sentiments. Hence, I
fear, that any future efforts for this purpose, Pretended Speech, -- page 30.
will be swallowed up, and sacrificed (as Mr. Galloway most elegantly expresses
it) AT the shrine of proprietary instructions, and the measures of power. In
short, that they will be but Qu. What Idea can be formed of an "ideal shadow?"
and what may be the meaning "of the shrine of the measures of power?"
"ideal shadows," and chimerical "notions."

IN confident expectation of these improbabilities, Mr. Galloway is willing to
risque the perpetuating those demands, which have been constantly made by the
proprietors -- at a time, when we are certain that the crown and its ministers
look on these demands as highly just and reasonable.

ONE of his arguments for our riding post in this affair is -- that there are
many new colonies to be settled now, and that it would discourage these
settlements, if our privileges were to be taken away.

IT IS true it will convince the emigrants, they are not to have such privileges
as were granted to us; or, if they have, and shall hereafter petition for a
change, that they will be taken from them.

BUT this information, I imagine, will be no discouragement. -- There is not
the same America was then so little known, that it was thought the severest
kind of banishment to send people over to the colonies.
reason to grant, nor to wish for privileges now, that existed in the
persecuting days of Charles the second. Grants of land on small quit-rents --
furnishing the necessaries of life for the first outset -- bounties on labor
-- and immunities from taxes for some years -- with the common liberties of
other English subjects -- will do the business, without the privileges of
Pennsylvania.

MR. Galloway, before he quits Pretended Speech -- page 21.
"this wise policy of settling the extensive newly acquired dominions" as he
expresses himself, takes the opportunity of making an historical flourish --
but unfortunately furnishes " Id. pa. 26.
irrefragable demonstrations" that he is utterly unacquainted with the subject,
on which he speaks.

MR. FRANKLIN read in the House, a short extract from Lord Clarendon's life,
relating to Barbados. Mr. Galloway catched it as it fell from the learned
member, and now confidently asserts -- "that the colony of Barbados had, in the
opinion of the ablest council, forfeited her charter privileges -- And yet upon
this policy only, her privileges were preserved."

HE referrs to Lord Clarendon's life, for this curious anecdote. What then must
a man think of Mr. Galloway, who looks into the book, and finds -- that the
colony of Barbados did not forfeit any right -- that such an opinion was never
given -- and that there is not a word relating to her charter privileges. Yet
this is the truth.

THE fact was this. Charles the first granted the island of Barbados by patent
to the earl of Carlisle -- he died -- his son leased it to lord Willoughby for
twenty-one years; appointing him governor, and reserving a moiety of the
profits to himself -- the civil war broke out -- ended -- Charles the second
was restored -- there being eight or nine years of lord Willoughby's lease to
come, he prayed the king to give him a commission to be governor for that time
-- But the island was now much changed -- it was completely settled during the
troubles -- and chiefly by officers of the king's army -- so that now it was of
another consideration and value than it had been -- the king's customs yearly
amounted to a very large sum -- The planters were greatly alarmed at the
thought of Lord Clarendon's Life -- vol. III. pa. (...)
depending on the earl of Carlisle and lord Willoughby for the enjoyment of
their estates, which they had hitherto looked upon as their own. They applied
to the king, Idem. 934.
praying that they might not be oppressed by those two lords. They pleaded, that
they were the king's subjects; that they had repaired thither as to a desolate
place, and had by their industry obtained a livelihood there, when they could
not with a good conscience stay in England. That if they should be now left to
those lords to ransom themselves and compound for their estates, they must
leave the country; and the plantation would be destroyed, which yielded his
majesty so good a revenue.

THEY further Idem 937.
positively insisted, that the charter granted to the earl of Carlisle was void
in point of law; and prayed that his majesty would give them leave to prosecute
in his name in the exchequer, and at their own charge, to repeal that grant; by
which they should be freed from the arbitrary power and oppression which would
be exercised upon them under the color of that charter; and his majesty might
receive a great benefit to himself, by taking the sovereignty into his own
hands, to which it belonged -- and in that case, they offered to make as great
an imposition of taxes as the plantation would bear; for the support of the
king's governor, and such other uses, as his majesty should think fit to direct.

UPON this, the king Lord Clarendon's Life, III vol. pa. 938.
"referred the consideration of the validity and legality of the patent, to his
council at law; who upon full deliberation, after the hearing of all parties,
returned their opinion, that this patent was void, and that his majesty might
take the same into his own power;" not that the "colony had forfeited their
charter privileges."

ON this report, the determination was formed in the king's council. And what
does this case prove -- but that the crown would not deprive the proprietors of
Barbados of their charter, though the people earnestly requested it -- though that
people were faithful subjects, who had distinguished their loyalty by suffering
in the royal cause -- though a very great benefit would accrue to the crown --
though a large salary was to be settled on the king's governor -- and lastly,
though the patent was absolutely illegal and void.

IF in such a case, the needy and unprincipled Charles would not seize upon the
interests of the proprietors of Barbados, can it be conceived that his present
majesty will snatch from the proprietors of Pennsylvania without their consent,
the charter that was granted in consideration of the services performed by
their brave and loyal ancestor.

I THINK every man in the province except Mr. Galloway, will immediately
discover whether the case he has quoted, will strengthen his reasoning or mine.

ANOTHER of Mr. Galloway's arguments is -- that the proprietary estate is daily
increasing, and thus their influence will increase; and therefore they will be
more likely in future, to oppose with success any measures that may be taken
against their oppression.

TO finish this argument, he closes it with an imaginary contradiction of mine,
in my saving, "This is not the proper time for a change," and afterward
declaring, that we are not to expect more success, because the proprietaries
will have more dignity, more power; and, as they will think, more law on their
side.

MR. Galloway certainly takes delight in mistakes, or he would never have
committed so gross an error as he has done here. I said -- it could not be
expected, that our success would be greater when our opponents become more
numerous, and will have more dignity, more power, and, as they will think, more
law on their side. This was intended to prove, that we might find it more
difficult after a change, to contend for the preservation of our privileges,
with the crown and the clergy, (the opponents here meant) than with the
proprietors. But Mr. Galloway, with great address, by changing the word
opponents for proprietaries, creates a contradiction for his own diversion, and
the deception of his readers.

HOWEVER -- let it be supposed, "that the proprietary estate and influence will
greatly increase, and that they become the richest subjects in England." I most
sincerely wish they may, since the Pretended Speech pa. 14.15.17.

Mr. Galloway endeavors to show, that the conduct of the proprietors has not
been constantly approved by the crown and ministry, because five of the
thirteen acts opposed by the proprietors, were confirmed. --

But this opposition, even by Mr. Galloway's acknowledgment, did not proceed
from any private interest of the proprietors that was affected by these Bills.
They were opposed, says he, id. pa. 7.
"as inconsistent with the royal prerogative" -- And surely such an opposition
could not be much disapproved of by the crown, as the ministry have declared
id. pa. 25.
"that his majesty's royal prerogatives were not to be trusted to the feeble
hands of private individuals; who were ever ready to sacrifice them to their
private emolument.".


increase of their wealth must arise from the increase of the wealth and
prosperity of Pennsylvania. These, I presume, are not things to be dreaded. Our
power and influence must increase with their power and influence -- and
therefore, it seems, we shall always be as able to cope with them, as we are
now -- especially if it be considered, that a family is more liable to
accidents, than a people.

BUT granting that the riches of the proprietary family shall increase in a
greater proportion than the riches of this province -- can it be imagined, that
they will obtain any undue influence over the crown and it is ministers? can it
be believed, that the king and parliament will suffer two or three subjects to
tyrannise over a dependant colony, in whose welfare Great Britain is so much
interested? To reduce us to the most abject state of slavery?

THE supposition is too monstrous to be admitted -- and I should be surprised
to hear such language from any person, but one who thinks and writes in Mr.
Galloway's shambling way. He Pretended Speech pa. 23.
shudders at my saying the parliament may perhaps be induced to place us in the
same state with the royal governments -- and yet he supposes, they will tamely
tolerate our being made slaves.

IF our proprietors are to become such great and dreadful men -- if their
influence is to grow superior to justice and reason -- I cannot conceive how
the king's appointment of governors can secure us from them, any more than his
approbation.

IF that influence shall ever be so exorbitant as it has been described, will
it not prevail in the nomination of governors? Or in determining their conduct?
Can even Mr. Galloway think that the king's appointment will protect us against
this influence? If he does, I will answer him in his own words -- and if they
do not convince him, surely he will not be so unreasonable as to expect, that
they should convince any one else.

Pretended Speech, page 10.
Let us but consider that the experience of ages fully demonstrates wealth to
be the parent of power, and the nurse of influence, and that an increase of
wealth will as naturally beget an increase of power and influence, as an
increase of velocity in the falling stone will produce more certain death.

Let us but take a view of the proprietary estate, what it was fifty, what
twenty years ago, and what it is now, and we must be convinced that nothing can
prevent their being the richest subjects in the English nation: and therefore
subjects of the greatest influence and power, and more likely in future to
oppose with success any measures that may be taken against their oppression.
Are we to expect the same cause will not produce the same effect, and that
wealth by some MAGIC CHARM in future, will, instead of producing power and
influence, bring forth its contraries? As vain and chimerical as the
expectation of a future Messiah to the deluded Jews.

IF there is any force in these arguments of Mr. Galloway -- if property, from
natural causes produces power, and can not fail of having this effect -- how
vain and ridiculous is it to request the crown -- to Pretended Speech page 8.
-- et alibi.
"separate power from property?" Yet this forsooth! is all Mr. Galloway, or the
assembly according to his explanation, desires of his majesty.

CERTAINLY the meaning cannot be, that the king should take away their estates
from the proprietors -- this would be too glaringly unjust. What then can Mr.
Galloway mean, when he desires "that the king may separate power and property,"
which he declares -- and, with prodigious labor, strives to prove --
"inseparable?" If he means any thing, I imagine, I have discovered his meaning
-- and, though Mr. Galloway has, in his performance, said many things that have
surprised me -- yet this is so superlatively extraordinary, that I would not
admit the following construction, unless his intention was too evident to allow
of any doubt. I did not think him capable of such designs. I entertained a
better opinion of his loyalty. In short, he plainly means -- as he has declared
it cannot be done any other way -- that his Majesty shall turn MAGICIAN -- and
contrive Pretended Speech pa. 11.
some MAGIC CHARM, whereby wealth instead of producing power and influence
shall bring forth its contraries -- their contraries I suppose it should be.

THIS dread of future injuries being removed -- or at least the vanity of
attempting their removal, on Mr. Galloway's own principles being proved -- I
return to the present situation of affairs.

IT is universally believed, that the present ministry are desirous of vesting
the government of this province advantageously in the crown. Mr. Franklin has
frequently said it. If this be the case, how fair an opportunity is presented
to the proprietors of gratifying their resentment, if they entertain any
against the province, and securing their interest at the same time, by entering
into a contract with the crown, and fixing, by an act of parliament, those
points, in which the ministry have constantly supported them -- upon all
succeeding ages?

MANY words are unnecessary in so clear a case as this is. Mr. Galloway allows,
the proprietors have some sense, and that they understand their own interest.
The sentiments of the ministry have been declared in their favor. From thence I
think it may be taken for granted, that the proprietors either will not consent
to a change -- or that their consent will be founded on a perfect security
given them for their demands, which appear so just to the king and ministry.
What may facilitate this measure is, the proposal of the assembly -- Pretended
Speech pa. 5.
" that a full equivalent be made to "the proprietors" upon their parting with
the government. How far these words may be construed to extend, will appear
from this consideration. With the approbation of the crown the proprietors now
insist on certain points which, in their opinion, tend to promote their
interests. This, the authority vested in them at present, enables them to do.
If they are divested of this authority, without any stipulations for securing
their interests hereafter, as well as they are at this time, it will be said
that a full equivalent is not made for the power they resign. This security
will therefore without doubt, be required -- and that requisition may not
appear so unreasonable in Great Britain as it does here.

THIS full equivalent comprehends something more than the settlement of these
points. The government of itself is very valuable -- and surely we shall not
desire the king to pay the equivalent out of his own pocket. If the change
therefore is made, I don't question but it will be thought highly reasonable --
that we should pay for the blessing, which we so earnestly request.

The situation of our affairs being such as has been described, I could not
perceive any necessity "impelling" us to seize this unhappy period, to plunge
this province into convulsions, that might while she was thus disordered, be
attended with the worst consequences. A gentler remedy appeared to me a
properer remedy.

BUT here Mr. Galloway exclaims -- Shall we patiently wait until proprietary
influence shall be at an end? Shall we submit to proprietary demands? By no
means! What I desire, is, vigorously to oppose those demands; and to try the
force of that influence, WITHOUT RISQUING TOO MUCH IN THE CONTEST.

I THEREFORE made a proposal to the House, of a very moderate nature, which I
had the pleasure of finding highly approved by a The late speaker.
gentleman, whose acknowledged integrity, patriotism, abilities, and experience
will always give weight to his sentiments with every impartial person. The
proposal was -- "that we should desire his majesty's judgment, on the point
that occasioned the late unhappy difference between the two branches of the
legislature." By taking this st;ep, we should have discovered the sense of the
ministry on our late disputes -- on other important points which have been
controverted with our governors -- and respecting our privileges.

THUS we should have known what success would attend us in any future attempt
to effect a change -- and what method would be most agreeable to his majesty.
But in the present mode of proceeding, we have acted with great zeal, I grant
-- but we are quite ignorant what the event will be, and whether the censures
bestowed on the proprietors, may not be thought in Great Britain to be aimed
through them, at the king. In short, we embark in an enterprise of the highest
importance; and then look about us to see how it may be carried on. Instead of
wandering through a storm in the dark, with so sacred a charge in our custody --
I thought it would have been better to have waited, 'till the tempest was a
little abated -- or, at least, to have procured some light to guide us through
the surrounding dangers.

I SHALL now consider the manner in which the present attempt to change our
government is made.

MR. Galloway makes this general objection with great warmth to my arguments,
"that they are conjectural and suppositious."

His resentment was to be expected. How absurd must the language of diffidence
appear to one, who never doubted -- the force of his own sagacity? To one who,
castigated, but not convinced, by a discovery of his repeated errors, still
dares to decide positively in things he does not understand -- and drives
boldly through public affairs, like a magnanimous bug, "Yet let me flap this
bug with mealy wings." POPE.
through the blaze that has so often scorcht its wings -- how contemptible in
his eyes, must be the man, who modestly pursues a train of enquiry, on the
unformed events of futurity -- and in his researches after truth, admits a
possibility of her escaping him?

MR. Galloway, with a spirit of divination, unassisted by the common modes of
reasoning -- penetrates into the region of contingencies -- and fixes with
infallible confidence, the uncertainties of the times to come. -- Far different
was the method, which the humble subject of his wrath and reproaches found it
proper to pursue. Filled with anxious fears for the welfare of his country --
hesitating and apprehensive, -- it was his endeavor to form a IT is somewhat
remarkable, that Mr. Galloway should with anger make an objection to my
arguments, that must in the opinion of every person but himself, operate with
equal force against his own. Are not his arguments "conjectural and
suppositious?" What proof is there, that any thing will be determined,
according to his presumptions and guesses?
judgment of things that may hereafter happen, from an attentive consideration
of present circumstances and past transactions -- the only methods to be
practiced by those whose disquisitions are not aided by such " Pretended
speech, pa. 44.
active blood" as Mr. Galloway's; to whom hesitation appears ridiculous, and
apprehension absurd! And no wonder -- for if any mistake is committed, all the
injury that follows, is -- only the trifling loss of the PRIVILEGES OF
PENNSYLVANIA.

BUT though Mr. Galloway pierces through futurity with such superior intuition,
yet he is subject to a mere mortal frailty in considering present things. Hence
he confounds those arguments I used with respect to the manner of attempting a
change of our government, with the arguments I offered concerning the time, and
does not seem sensible of his mistake.

BY way of explanation and introduction to what I said on the manner of this
attempt, it was premised -- that some event, arising from the circumstances of
the proprietary family, or an act of the crown, might hereafter present us with
a more happy method of vindicating our rights and privileges than the present.
Upon this Mr. Galloway very gravely runs into a calculation of the lives of the
proprietors and their families -- and proves to his own satisfaction, that
their descendents Pretended speech, pa. 15, line 18. "They and every of them" a
strong and beautiful expression frequently occurring in Jacob's law dictionary,
and in any book of precedents.
"even they, and every of them" will always be wicked and cunning. One virtue
however he must allow them, to take off the force of my observation -- and that
is -- a most uncommon harmony among themselves. Yet, after spending four pages
on this curious digression, Mr. Galloway himself must grant -- that some act of
the crown, or a multitude of proprietors (as it happened in Carolina) or a
dissension between them though few, will be such a circumstance, as will produce
the conjuncture I mentioned. But I will waive these probabilities. I will
indulge Mr. Galloway so far as to suppose, they are too uncertain or remote to
be expected or regarded. What will this concession prove? That none of those
occurrences will afford a favorable mode of making the attempt. But does it
prove the present mode to be a good one? or that any necessity is so urgent as
to force us, to make use of it, though a bad one. By no means! If I should see a
man about to pass a broad, deep Pretended speech, pa. 14.
river, over which I had reason to think he could not swim, would it be an
unwise or an unkind act in me, to advise him to walk along the bank, and
endeavor to find a bridge, or a narrower or shallower place -- though I had no
certainty that there was such a bridge or such a place? Or would this be
acknowledging that he was under a necessity of passing the river? My advice
would at least have a chance of saving him, and could do him no harm -- for,
after being disappointed in his search, he might return to the spot where I
found him -- and would be at liberty to drown himself at last.

MR. Galloway mixes all points so confusedly together, that he not only leads
himself into a variety of errors, but renders it very difficult for another, in
answering, to reduce into any order what he has so loosely scattered about.
This I shall however endeavor to do.

HAD he attended to the objections against the manner of the present attempt,
he might have perceived that they were three. The first was -- that the
circumstances attending this proceeding, might cause others to attribute it to
such passions, as are always disgraceful to public councils, and destructive to
the honor and welfare of a people. It certainly will be admitted, that all
reproaches or this kind ought to be carefully guarded against -- especially by
a dependent colony, whose conduct has been frequently and severely reprehended.

MR. Galloway however usurps in his private room, among his chairs and tables,
the absurd license of railing at me on this occasion, for speaking my
sentiments with freedom -- though I spoke in a public council -- as the
representative of a free people -- on a subject in which their reputation and
happiness were intimately concerned. Any man who thinks, will instantly
perceive -- that it was my duty to mention every thing, that I apprehended
would tend to secure these blessings. When the assembly was deliberating on a
step that seemed to me likely to bring discredit and loss upon us, would it
have become me to have suppressed my opinion? No! But it would have pleased Mr.
Galloway and some others --

Great reward for having been a villain!

I SAID -- Our messages to the governor, and our resolves would discover the
true cause of the present, attempt -- Mr. Galloway grants it; and appeals to,
those resolves for my confusion. How is this charge supported? Why, the
resolves mention -- "public houses -- commissions to judges during pleasure --
and the great danger of a military force in a proprietary government" -- as
grievances. In like manner they mention the point lately controverted. Very
well! The contents of the resolves are now proved. -- But there still remains
one point slipped over in silence -- Why were these resolves now made? The
increase of public houses had frequently been complained of before. --
Commissions during good behavior have always been wished for. -- The
establishment of a military force has been often attempted in the midst of war,
when it was vastly more necessary than at this time. -- But never 'till now has
there been an attempt to change the government. More observations I think
unnecessary. Impartial persons who read the messages and resolves -- and
consider some other circumstances generally known -- will be able to discover
the TRUE CAUSE of the present attempt -- and to judge, whether it may be justly
attributed to passion of any kind. It his majesty and his ministers, whose
present opinion of us is allowed to be extremely unfavorable, should be induced
by our late behavior, to think us a rash, turbulent people -- it will be a
misfortune to be deplored by all lovers of their country.

THE second objection against the manner of proceeding, was the inconsistency
in which we should be involved. This inconsistency is twofold. In the first
place, our dissension with the governor, and this extraordinary attempt in
consequence of it, may be thought by the king and the ministry to have arisen
on a matter already determined by the crown. Hence our unwillingness to comply
with the royal pleasure, signified to us on this head, may be called a very
improper foundation of a request to be more immediately subjected to the royal
pleasure. But this objection is easily obviated by supposing that the king and
ministry will exactly agree with the assembly in construing the controverted
stipulation. I sincerely hope they may; as our construction appears to me
extremely reasonable and equitable. But, of this agreement in sentiments I
desired to have some proof before we proceeded any further. We have frequently
been disappointed in our warmest expectations. In public as well as in private
life, he that never doubts, will often be wrong.

IN the second place -- there appeared to me an inconsistency, in requesting a
change of government from the king -- and yet insisting on the preservation of
privileges derogatory of the royal rights.

WE certainly prefer in our minds one of these things to the other. -- Either
to continue as we are -- or to change, though we lose our privileges. If his
majesty will not accept of the government in the same state, in which it has
been held by the proprietors, what shall be our choice? I don't imagine, that
even Mr. Galloway, though he ventures to say " Pretended Speech pa. 21.
We have no cause to dread a change if all "my fears should prove realities,"
will dare to propose a direct renunciation of our rights. Trifling as he seems
to think them -- willing as he is to expose them to hazard on guesses and
surmises -- they are yet held in too much veneration by the good people of
Pennsylvania -- for him to declare his contempt of them. If then his majesty
shall be so "unreasonable" as to insist upon exercising his authority, in case
of a change, as fully in this province, as in any other under his immediate
government -- and we insist that he shall not; the bargain breaks off -- "and
the worst consequence is (according to Mr. Galloway) that we must then remain
(as I would have us remain) in our present situation." A much worse consequence
in my opinion will follow. May we not again be reproached with double dealing
and deceit? -- The assembly's petition to the crown draws a high colored
picture of our present distresses. -- But let me suppose Mr. Galloway deputed
to plead the public cause -- an office which I have some reason to think,
would, by no means, be disagreeable to him! -- A beautiful and striking
repetition in the pretended speech pa. 11.
If the royal ear is not deaf -- if it will hear -- these are the pleasing --
the descriptive -- and convincing strains, in which "that Ear" will be
addressed.

MOST gracious sovereign! The rights of the people of Pennsylvania -- id. pa.
19. at the bottom. -- This expression is strictly agreeable to Mr. Galloway's
argument. -- For if the corruption of the people in this province, is one
reason of his desiring a change, he must say, we are more corrupt than his
majesty's subjects in the rest of his dominions; otherwise we request a
government under which the people are as bad as ourselves; and therefore the
change can be of no service to us.
the most scandalous and corrupt of all your subjects -- Pretended speech pa.
4. line 4.
are fading and expiring under the baleful influence of proprietary ambition
and power -- id. pa. 41. 6 lines from the bottom.
our liberties are daily consuming before them -- id. pa. 30. line 6.
our privileges are swallowed up and sacrificed AT the shrine of proprietary
instructions, and the measures of power -- id.
they are now but ideal shadows and chimerical notions -- id. pa. 19. line 11.
and pa. 18. line 5.
indeed our liberties are lost -- and id. pa. 19. and 29.
we shall soon be reduced to the servile condition of the parliament of Paris;
or of the worst of slaves of the most absolute monarch. -- id. pa. 44. passim.
The fever of ambition and arbitrary power is raging with unremitting violence
in the soul and active blood, WITH MANY OTHER PARTS of our political
institution, so that its conduct and behavior Pretended speech pa. 43. line 12
from the bottom -- id. pa. 29. last line.
IS not animated and directed, as THEY ought to be. The effect thereof has
nearly destroyed the powers of life and living motion, and nature is no longer
capable of struggling for relief. We therefore pray your majesty, that you and
the id. pa. 8.
virtuous minister on whom you much rely, will make id. pa. 43. throughout --
and two lines of pa. 44.
WEAPONS out of the old contract between the crown and our first proprietor --
out of the opinion of some very great men, your servants -- and out of the quit
rents in the lower counties, to be used for the restoration of our liberties --
under id. pa. 43. 3d line from the bottom.
which circumstances, it will be the highest presumption to oppose the
resumption of the nomination of the governor of this province, which is all the
change, we intend you shall make. -- Proprietary instructions, with which your
majesty is well acquainted, and private interest have imposed id. pa. 44. line
4.
thraldom and bondage upon us. " id. ib. passim.
The stream of justice is not only become turbid but thick, so that it can no
longer discharge its duty. Security of life and estate is become an empty name,
and the spirit of liberty, distressed, and worn out by ineffectual efforts for
her preservation, is verging fast to a dissolution. Nothing, but a medicine
administered to this spirit by your royal hands, can possibly revive or restore
her. This medicine we now attempt to obtain, before the MIDNIGHT GLOOM
approaches, and FATAL DEATH puts an end to our struggles. When his majesty
shall be so happy as to hear this eloquent address, how much must his pity be
excited! If he understands it; and shall be pleased to express his willingness
to take us under his immediate care and protection, in the same manner with the
rest of his subjects. -- how must he be surprised at our refusing, or even
hesitating to accept that which we have so warmly requested -- unless,
particular points are granted to us? How must he be astonished, to find that we
are more afraid of being placed upon a footing with other Englishmen under his
dominion, than of the Quaere -- What Mr. Galloway means by "midnight gloom?"
And what is a "death not fatal?" -- As he makes a distinction between "fatal
death" and some other "death." --
MIDNIGHT GLOOM and FATAL DEATH which are hastening to overtake us? With what
justice may his gracious majesty tell us, "that we have endeavored to impose
on him, by representing ourselves as an oppressed, miserable people, standing
on the brink of destruction; when, upon his hearing our cries for assistance
and safety -- mercifully stretching out his hand to relieve us, and offering us
to partake of the same happiness enjoyed by the rest of his subjects, we reject
his implored protection -- and thereby prove the falsehood and absurdity of our
pretenses?"

THUS, by requesting a change, we lay ourselves under the inevitable necessity,
either of quietly giving up our rights and privileges, in order to maintain a
consistency in our conduct; or, of incurring the severe censure above mentioned
-- unless the king will be so good natured, in consideration of the infinite
pains we have taken to recommend ourselves to his favor -- as to be contented
with the same share of power in this province; which his two subjects Thomas
and Richard Penn now have.

MY third objection against the manner of the present attempt to alter our
government was -- that it might be deemed in Great Britain a surrender of our
charter -- or at least a sufficient foundation for the parliament's proceeding
to form a new constitution for us. --

NO person can surrender what he has not. This term, therefore, when applied to
the people of Pennsylvania, means a giving up of the peculiar rights derived to
them, under their charter.

THEY can not surrender what belongs to others -- and therefore their act can
not take away the rights of the proprietors. But should the proprietors,
enraged at our behavior, and fatigued with disputes, make their own terms with
the crown, and give up the royal charter -- then the surrender may be said to
be completed.

MR. Galloway says, -- the petitions can not be thought in any manner to
surrender our privileges -- because "they request the enjoyment of those
privileges." But, if it be considered, that to procure peace and safety, is the
design of forming societies, and of establishing governments -- and that these
petitions expressly declare -- Pretended speech pa. 18, 36, et alibi.
there is no peace and safety among us, and that we have no hopes of either
being restored but by the change for which we pray. -- Certainly, if we are
thought to be in our senses, it will be concluded that we intend to surrender
entirely a government, which does not answer the ends of government -- even
though we should be deprived of some agreeable things tacked to it. -- For who
but a Bedlamite would shiver in a thin silk coat, in the midst of winter, only
because it had a fine lace upon it? --

IT may seem therefore a reasonable construction of these petitions to
understand them in this sense -- "that the petitioners will be much obliged to
his majesty, if he will be so good as to put the lace on warmer coats for them
-- but, if he will not condescend to do that, he may keep the lace for his
trouble -- provided he will furnish them with coats of good English broad
cloth."

LET it however be supposed -- that our petitions, with a resignation of the
charter by the proprietors can not be called a surrender of our privileges, in
strictness of law -- and that the matter comes to be settled by the parliament.

HERE Mr. Galloway launches out on a flood of words. -- Here he overwhelms me
with his irrefragable demonstrations. -- Pretended speech -- pa. 23.
Will the king, lords and commons (says he) be the dupes of the ministry; and,
without consideration -- id. pa, 24.
without the least reason, in an instant pass a law -- to blast our liberties
-- to id. pa. 22. 7th line from the bottom.
take away our rights, and id. pa. 21. 4th line from the bottom.
deprive an affectionate people of a few privileges? id. pa. 25.
Will they act so black -- so base -- so unjust a part?

INCONSISTENCY! that would be astonishing in any man, but him who is the author
of it!

HOW can the king and parliament be unjust, in saving us from midnight gloom
and fatal death? How can they blast those liberties "which are id. pa. 19. line
11. pa. 18. line 5.
already lost?" -- Take away our rights when id. pa. 44.
"security of life and estate is now become an empty name among us?" Or deprive
us of our privileges, id. pa. 30.
"which are long since swallowed up and sacrificed at the shrine of proprietary
instructions, and the measures of power, and so turned into "ideal shadows"?

Cunning and cruel king! to strip thy subjects of that which they have not. A
fine expression in pretended speech pa. 9. line 1.
"Look history through", it cannot furnish an instance of such royal craft and
unkindness, except that recorded by Sir Richard Blackmore, of an ancestor of
prince Voltiger, A painted vest prince Voltiger had on,
Which from a naked Pict, his grandsire won.
I will not pursue this point any farther. I will suppose in Mr. Galloway's
favor, that what he calls his speech was so long, and took so much time in
making, that he forgot in forming one part; what he had written in another.

To attend him still farther in his political rambles, for some respect is due,
to be sure, to " Pretended speech pa. 27.
one of the happy instruments of relieving his country," and its " d. pa. 2.
Quare, If this term is applicable to Mr. Galloway, who is a short man?
long supporter," I will grant out of complaisance to him, in order to give his
argument its fullest force, that he has told a great many falsehoods -- that we
are not in the deplorable condition he has represented us -- and that our
liberties, rights and privileges which he has taken so much pains to blast, are
still fresh and flourishing.

WHY then (says he) it will be unjust in the king and parliament to deprive us
of them; and we have id. pa. 26.
"irrefragable proofs" of the justice of the house of commons, because in the
years 1718 and 1748, they would not pass an act to give royal instructions the
force of laws in America."

THUS he concludes, that because the house of commons would not make the king
absolute monarch of North America, which would have been injurious to the
rights of Great Britain -- THEREFORE they will not allow him to exercise in one
province that authority, which he exercises in every other part of his
dominions. -- Truly, an uncommon, but not a very syllogistical method, of
arguing!

LET Mr. Galloway, when he shall be employed in "supporting the expiring
liberties of his country," step into the British senate -- and endeavor to
convince them of this injustice.

WHEN he has made a speech for this purpose, suppose some unconverted member
should thus address him -- "Sir, we are perfectly satisfied in what rank we are
to place your abilities -- the "proofs are irrefragable" -- but as to the point
you have insisted on, you do not seem to express yourself with clearness. You
speak of an "impelling necessity to come under the king's immediate
government," -- and yet you say it will be "unjust to bring you under it, on
the same conditions with his other subjects." I should therefore be glad to
have a short, plain answer to this question -- Are the inhabitants of
Pennsylvania more or less happy than the inhabitants of the royal governments?"

HOW will our deputy extricate himself from this dilemma? If we are more happy,
why do we desire a change -- or why does Mr. Galloway talk of the "expiring
liberties of his country?" If we are less happy -- why do we dread it? Why are
we unwilling to become in every respect like those who are happier than
ourselves? Or where is the injustice of placing us in the same situation?

BEFORE I quit this point, I must make one observation more, to show by Mr.
Galloway's contradiction of himself (though I am almost tired with taking
notice of his contradictions) that notwithstanding the rage with which he has
asserted the contrary -- he really thinks our privileges will be endangered, if
the parliament should take the change of our government into their
consideration.

HE employs many pages to prove there is no danger, though the affair should come
before the parliament. -- Yet, speaking of a change in the case of an infant
proprietor, he says -- Pretended speech pa. 16.
"Is it to be by a parliamentary enquiry, and an act of the British
legislature, in consequence of such enquiry? If it is, the rights of the people
may be involved in the enquiry, which the mode intended by the house is
calculated to avoid. Hence it appears, that this period of all others, will be
attended with most difficulty to the crown, and danger to out privileges."

THUS he acknowledges, that the house of assembly, in making the present
attempt, have endeavored to avoid a parliamentary enquiry, because the rights
of the people would be involved in it, to the danger of our privileges. --

UPON the whole that has been said with regard to a change -- and the safety or
the danger of the measure -- I thus conclude.

IF it cannot be accomplished -- the manner in which it has been attempted will
load this province with new disgrace. If it is accomplished, we are utterly
ignorant how it will be. The fate of our privileges, and the great points
controverted between us and the proprietors, are now to be everlastingly
determined. Many unhappy circumstances attend us in the enterprise.

HERE then I fix the argument. On this point I rely. Whatsoever may be the
force of the reasonings on either side -- however probable or improbable the
success may be -- yet after placing every thing in the strongest light against
myself -- it must be granted -- that the event is undoubtedly uncertain -- and
that the persons desiring a change know no more, what will be the consequences
-- than they know what will be the figure of next year's clouds.

A MEASURE in which the happiness of so many thousands is involved, ought not
therefore to have been pursued in so hasty and unguarded a manner. Precautions
should have been taken. Securities should have been obtained. This was -- this
is -- my firm opinion -- and should a change be happily obtained, without
injuring a single privilege, or settling a single point against us -- should
the conduct of the assembly and the people in this affair be entirely approved
by his majesty and his ministers -- I shall always rejoice -- that I was not
concerned in exposing the inestimable interests of my country to HAZARD.

I PROCEED to other points. Mr. Galloway takes great pains to prove, that the
"It can never be thought, that the people entrust any representatives with
their capital privileges, farther than to use their best skill to secure and
maintain them. They never so delegated or empowered any men, that de jure they
could deprive them of that qualification; and a facto ad jus non valet
argumentum: For the question is not, what may be done? But what ought to be
done? Overseers and stewards are empowered, not to alienate, but preserve and
improve other men's inheritances. No owners deliver their ship and goods into
any man's hands to give them away, or run upon a rock; neither do they consign
their affairs to agents or factors without limitation: All trusts suppose such
a fundamental right in them that give them, and for whom the trusts are, as is
altogether indissolvable by the trustees. The trust is, the liberty and
property of the people; the limitation is, that it should not be invaded, but
be inviolably preserved, according to the law of the land."

WILLIAM PENN's works. I vol. pa. 682, etc. WHEN Henry the Fourth of France and
his minister the duke of Sully formed the glorious and benevolent scheme of
giving peace and happiness to Europe by reducing it into a kind of great
commonwealth, which was to be effected by changing the government of several
states; such was their regard to the first principles of justice, and the
rights of mankind, that it was determined, that no step should be taken,
without carefully and deliberately consulting the people of the several
nations, who would be affected by their measures.

SULLY's Memoirs. V vol.
"representatives of a people have a right to change the constitution, without
the consent of the people"; because "almost every government in the civilized
world, has been changed" -- by force and injustice: Because "the revolution was
brought about" -- with such universal consent, that king William was
established on the British throne, without fighting a battle: Because "the
first frame of our government was altered" -- being found impracticable, and
that its Pretended speech pa. 33.
"privileges could scarcely be exercised or enjoyed": Because "six parts in
seven of the assembly, have a right to alter the charter," -- by a law with the
Governors assent: Because he dignifies himself and those who join with him,
with the title of "long supporters, and lovers of their country" -- and charges
with great truth, to be sure, all who differ in opinion from them, "with being
the friends of arbitrary power?"

IN the same striking method of arguing, he attempts to prove -- that the
petition for a change ought not to alarm a free people, because, "though it
calls for a military establishment among us," yet this is only showing our
desire, that a military force may be fixed, which, "already is fixed:" Or in
other words, "it is only discovering our hearty approbation of a disagreeable
measure" -- that " Pretended speech pa. 40. line 7, 8.
a military establishment is already established" (to use his own words)
because there are some soldiers in garrison at our advanced forts -- for these
he certainly means by the "military establishment already established," or
nothing -- that a military force in a dependant colony, lodged in the hands of
the king, is less dangerous to liberty, than in the hands of a subject -- that
it is the strongest evidence of the prudence and public spirit of such a
colony, to represent themselves as a set of ruffians amongst whom there is no
safety for men of virtue, nor any respect for government, but all things are
involved in anarchy -- and therefore humbly to pray, that his majesty will be
pleased to send over some regiments to instruct them in the gentle lessons of
duty and obedience -- that this will not furnish a pretense to send over more
regiments, than are desired -- nor to make us pay for these blessings of swords
and bayonets, which we have requested -- or if these inconveniences should
follow, -- that they will be greatly overballanced by the advantages of the
civil war that would probably ensue, if these troops should be employed, as Mr.
Galloway would wish them to be.

THESE are his arguments, and the tendency of them, on these points. Arguments!
-- Yielding such ample room for the entertainment of the public, that I hope
some gentleman who has more leisure than I have, will divert the world with the
strictures upon them they deserve. I pass on to matters, in which I am more
particularly concerned -- I mean to answer those charges, which Mr. Galloway
has made against me.

THE first of these, is, "that my late conduct has been influenced by a
restless thirst after promotion; a fondness to serve the purposes of power,
from an expectation of being rewarded with posts of honor and profit."

IN answering such a charge as this, Mr. Galloway might perhaps have some
advantage over me.

IT IS true, I cannot boast of being That is, in Mr. Galloway's sense of this
expression.
a "long supporter of the rights of the people;" since it is but lately, that
my youth has been favored with any public marks of their approbation. I have
not heated the minds of men with inflamatory harangues -- and while they have
been weakly wondering at my public spirit, found myself rewarded in gold, for
the breath I have wasted. I have not every year since I have been a
representative, given myself an office of profit -- so far from it that I have
not taken even a single farthing for my wages, during the whole time I have
been in the Assembly, nor in my whole life touched a mite of public money. I
have not enriched myself with a most lucrative post, torn from the old age of a
worthy man, who was grey-headed, long before my birth. I have not, while the
Preface to pretended speech pa. 4. line 13.
"shop" was open for the sale of laws, and good substantial purchases might
have been made -- wasted the public wealth, in buying at an exorbitant price,
those that would not last a twelve month. I have not lined my pockets, and the
pockets of all my dependants, with the spoils of my country, infamously
plundered in vile jobs, while with unbounded confidence she trusted her stores
to my faith. I have not bought with the public money, commissions of judges in
all the courts where I practice, for my most intimate friends. I have not
attempted to abolish that sacred right of englishmen, the right of trial by a
jury. I have not juggled in dirty cabals, about the offices of chief justice
and attorney general -- with competent salaries to be annexed to them. I have
not taken raw councils in taverns, for regulating the conduct of Pennsylvania.
In short I have not in all my public conduct had an eye to my private emolument
-- and therefore I have not the consolation to reflect, that I found this
province in credit, and that while I have been druming -- merely for her good,
as I pretended -- my interests have This was the fate of unhappy Athens; which
saw her pretended patriots thriving in proportion to her misfortunes.

"Cast your eyes, I beseech you, upon those men, to whom you owe these rare
monuments of their administration. Some of them were raised from poverty to
affluence, others from obscurity to splendour; some have built magnificent
houses, others have acquired large tracts of valuable lands; and the lower the
fortune of the state has fallen, the higher has that of much people risen,"

DEMOSTHENES in the second Clynthian.
advanced, as her interests have declined, and that I am now possessed by my
popularity alone, of a considerable estate, while she is sunk into disgrace.

I CANNOT boast indeed of such exploits as these -- and I sincerely pray, that
my mind may be never tainted with the base ambiton of rising by sordid
practices. No dignities can adorn his character, who has attained them by
meaness.

With equal scorn do I behold him, who endeavors to recommend himself, either
to men of power, or to the public, by flattering their passions or errors, and
by forfeiting his honor and integerity.

THE good man who is guided through life by his conscience and reason, may in
particular instances, offend even honest and wise men -- but his virtue will
naturally produce an uniformity in his conduct upon the whole, that will
discover his probity, and procure him the general approbation of the worthy.

THESE sentiments perhaps may prove destructive to one, who designs to
establish his reputation and felicity on the basis of a party -- This sentiment
is so strongly confirmed by a beautiful passage in SULLY's memoirs, that it is
hoped the inserting it will afford pleasure to every one who reads it.

The duke of SULLY being a Protestant, was appointed by his master, Henry the
fourth of France, to preside in a general assembly of the Protestants, which
was called to meet at Chatelleraut. -- The duke was their faithful friend
through his whole life, and strictly attached to them by principle; but the
warmth of their temper led them into many things, in this assembly, in which he
could not join with them -- without offering violence to his own sentiments --
and integrity. --

The following is the account he gives of his conduct. A common prejudice
prevails among all sorts of religion; a man is never supposed to be a sincere
professor of the one he has embraced, unless he supports it obstinately, even
in such points, where it is most visibly wrong. The same remark may perhaps be
found true in all parties. Upon this footing, I confess, the method I was
determined to pursue, might from some persons, draw upon me the epithets of
false brother, deserter, and if they please, traitor: However, it was not the
approbation of such as those, that I proposed to obtain, but of persons, who,
of whatever party or religion they were, would in their judgment of my
conduct, preserve the balance of equity and disinterestedness. If ever
religion admits of the assistance of policy, it ought to be of a policy pure,
simple, and upright as itself; any other may indeed appear to serve it, but
does not in reality, and sooner or later never fails to ruin it.

Having determined to be guided by no other principle in my transactions with
the assembly, I thought I could not too carefully avoid all appearances of
affectation or disguise in my conduct; that those who were influenced by an
imprudent zeal, or actuated by a spirit of cabal, might have no hopes of
gaining or seducing me: Therefore from the beginning, I showed myself
solicitous to support on this occasion, THAT CHARACTER by which the public was
to know how I would act on every other; that is, of a man sincerely attached to
the true principles and interest of the protestant religion, yet incapable of
drawing the false consequences which many of the protestants did, or of
approving their irregular proceedings: The speech I made at the opening of the
assembly, which lasted half an hour, was wholly calculated to produce this
effect, without troubling myself to consider, whether it would give pleasure or
offense to the greatest number.

SULLY's Memoirs, 4 vol.
since it is highly improbable, that any man will be long esteemed by a party,
unless he is bound to it by PREJUDICES, as well as by PRINCIPLES.

TO support the attrocious charge he has made against me, Mr. Galloway produces
no kind of proof -- except my differing in opinion from him, be proof. But if
this be admitted, then Mr. Norris, Mr. Richardson, and the two other gentlemen
who differed from him, are villains also, influenced by the same views,
attributed to me.

THIS would be too daring a charge, and more difficult perhaps for Mr. Galloway
to support, than to crush by calumnies and conspiracies, a young man, who has
excited more than one passion in more than one man's breast.

HAD I intended to recommend myself to the government, I certainly might have
given the sentiments I delivered in the House, a more courtier-like air than
they now bear. Had I intended this, I should not have been one of the first and
warmest to declare my fixed resolution, not to admit of the governor's
construction of the stipulation he disputed with us; nor should I have steadily
persisted in this opposition to the last.

HAD I intended this, I should not have been the only man in the House, who
constantly refused to assent to the supply bill, because the money emitted by
it, was made a legal tender in payment of all demands "except proprietary
rents," -- when that exception might have been safely extended (as was granted
by the most distinguished members) to the rents of all other persons -- who
would then have been as well secured as the proprietors, and a distinction in
their favor alone, avoided.

ONE thing more I beg leave to mention, since Mr. Galloway compels me to speak
of myself. I was appointed to carry the bill to the governor the second time
for his assent, after he had once refused it. This was long before the change
of government was talked of. On my delivering it, some conversation arose
between us on the subject, Mr. Shippen the secretary being present. As the
passage of the bill was of the utmost importance to his majesty's service, and
the good of the public, I took the liberty, though my acquaintance with the
governor was very slight, of mentioning several reasons to prove, that the
assembly's construction of the disputed stipulation was extremely equitable;
consistent with the established rules of explaining a sentence capable of two
meanings; and therefore ought to be admitted -- and that his honor's conduct
in passing the bill, as it then was framed, would not be disapproved of in
England. I further added, that I was persuaded, his refusal would throw every
thing into the greatest confusion

BEING soon after taken ill, and confined to my room, so anxious was I to
prevent any difference at that time between the governor and assembly, that I
sent for a gentleman, whom I knew to be intimately acquainted with the
governor; and urging every thing I could think of, to convince him that our
bill ought to be passed as we had formed it, I entreated him to go to the
governor, and endeavor to prevail on him to give his assent.

I HOPE this cannot be called the conduct of a man influenced by "mischievous
passions destructive of public liberty."

ANOTHER charge brought against me by Mr. Galloway is, that I neglected my duty
of attending in the House, and never spoke my sentiments till it was too late.

MR. Galloway's behavior in making this charge, is a plain proof to what
lengths he will proceed, in hopes of injuring me. The first time, since I have
been a representative of this province, that a change of government was
mentioned and debated in the assembly, was on Saturday the 24th day of March
last, on the governor's sending down to them his message absolutely refusing to
pass the supply bill, unless the stipulation was literally complied with. That
day, the assembly's answer was composed and sent -- "the frequent motions, with
the solemn debate" Mr. Galloway talks of, made -- the resolves past -- and the
House adjourned to the 14th of May.

MR. Galloway must be conscious, that this day, and the day before, I was
confined to my chamber, and mostly to my bed, by a severe attack of the fever
and ague. He knows, that on the Thursday before, I was so ill, that there not
being a sufficient number of members without me, those who were met, intended
to come and sit at my house; and that to save the gentlemen this trouble, I
determined to wait on them, and was carried up in the late speaker's chariot,
which he was so kind as to send for me, it being a rainy day.

THIS state of my health at that time, being a fact well known to many persons,
and particularly to Mr. Galloway, how cruel and unjust is it to blame me for
not attending, when it was impossible -- and when, if it had been possible, I
had not the least suspicion, that any thing of such vast importance would come
into consideration.

ON the meeting of the House, the 14th day of last May, according to their
adjournment, I constantly attended every day, until this important matter was
determined, except on Monday the 21st -- on which day there was no House, only
eighteen members meeting, Mr. Galloway and many others being absent. The
following days, the petition for a change came in -- were read -- as other
petitions were -- lay on the table -- and not a word spoken on the subject.

Thus business went on till Wednesday the 23d, when I was prevented for the
first time from attending the House, by a fever -- which, as it was very
injurious to my health, would also, if Mr. Galloway's charitable and humane
wishes could prevail, prove destructive to my reputation. This day the matter
was started. In vain did the speaker recommend the deferring to take any
resolution, till the House was more full -- and the absent members then in
town, could attend -- He desired that the affair might be put off to the next
day -- in vain -- the debate was begun -- quickly determined -- a committee
appointed to prepare a draught of the petition -- that draught made -- brought
in -- presented -- read --

THE next day, though still extremely indisposed, I attended -- and was surprised
to find so much business of the utmost consequence had been done in so short a
time -- and though I could have wished that such a step had not been taken,
without allowing me, and every other member, of whose attendance there was any
probability, an opportunity of offering our sentiments; yet I comforted myself
with reflecting, that though it had been resolved, "that a petition should be
drawn," yet it was not resolved "that any petition should be presented," and
that I should be at liberty to offer my opinion hereafter. I was determined
therefore to attend diligently; and to take the first opportunity, which would
be on the second reading of the petition, to oppose it. This I was induced to
do, by considering, that if I did not say any thing, till the question was put
for transcribing, or signing in order to be presented, it would look very odd
for me to be silent so long, and that it would answer no purpose.

ACCORDINGLY, on the second reading of the petition, which was the first
opportunity I ever had, since the change of government was attempted, I spoke
against it.

THE only objection then made by Mr. Galloway and every other member who spoke
on the occasion, was -- that I had offered my sentiments too soon to the House
-- and that I should have staid for the question to transcribe or sign the
petition.

THAT I did not act with any stupid and useless reserve in lying by till this
time, was never dreamt of by any member who knew, why I had been detained at
home, whenever I was detained.

HOW vain is his attempt who strives to please all men? Or indeed to please one
man at all times? Mr. Galloway and others then said, that I spoke too soon. He
and some more now say, I spoke too late. Why too late? Were not my arguments as
well understood then, and had they not the same force, as if they had been used
before? And if they proved the measure to be dangerous and improper, ought they
not in a matter of such importance to the public, to have been as much
regarded, as if they were one day older?

IF this affair had not been so quickly decided, I never should have been
charged with omitting to speak in time. But I must not quit Mr. Galloway. What
must the public think of a man who dares to abuse them by the grossest
deceptions, with the pious intention of injuring another? He says "that during
the time of the several debates respecting the change of government, I seldom
attended, and was absent when the important one came on, which issued in the
resolve, to adjourn and consult the people."

YET the candid Mr. Galloway knows -- that there never was any debate in the
assembly, since I have been a member, respecting the change of government --
until that which issued in the resolve to adjourn -- and that I was then ill.
Again, he says, "at the next meeting, (meaning that in May) several motions
were made to bring this resolution to an issue, and after great deliberation,
it was resolved by a majority of 27 to 3, that a committee should be appointed
to bring in the petition to his majesty to resume the powers of government. --
But at none of these debates and resolutions was I present, though I well knew,
or at least had great reason to expect this business was in continual
agitation."

YET the correct Mr. Galloway knows, that there never was a motion -- or debate
-- or resolution, concerning this matter, upon the meeting of the house in May
-- until Wednesday the 23d day of the month, when I was taken sick, as has
been mentioned -- and that I attended as diligently as himself till that day.

THIS Account of the time when every transaction passed in the house -- and of
my attendance, is taken from the minutes of assembly, and the book for entering
the attendance of the members -- both which I have carefully looked over, in
the presence of Dr. Moore, the clerk, who therefore is perfectly acquainted
with the truth of every thing I have averred.

ANOTHER charge against me is, that "I formed my thoughts into order, and
reduced what I had to say, into writing, in an unparliamentary way."

I ACKNOWLEDGE myself guilty of taking some pains to put my thoughts into
order, and that my notes were long and exact, that I might thereby be enabled
to deliver my sentiments with clearness. I regarded this as a duty, upon an
occasion where such an interesting subject was to be discussed -- and I was
encouraged to use this mode -- because I once before had used it, and received
such public praises from the present speaker, for introducing a method, highly
commended, and the next day, imitated by him, as afforded me the sincerest
pleasure -- and I hope, will " Preface to pretended speech -- pa. 25. I would
only advise him carefully to preserve the panegyricks with which" the
proprietary faction "have adorned him: In time, they may serve to console him,
by balancing the calumny they shall load him with, when he does not go THROUGH
with them in all their measures: He will not probably do the one, and they will
then assuredly do the other. -- There are mouths that can blow hot as well as
cold, and blast on your brows the bays their hands have placed there. --
Experto creed Roberto. Let but the moon of proprietary favor withdraw its
shine for a moment, and that great number of the principal gentlemen of
Philadelphia who applied to you for a copy of your speech, shall immediately
despise and desert you. --
serve to console me, by ballancing the calumny with which I am loaded, because
I would not go THROUGH with measures," which my conscience and reason commanded
me to oppose. -- A conduct! I am DETERMINED, whatever "moon" shines on me or
"withdraws" her beams, upon all occasions, STEADILY TO PURSUE. -- And as its
own reward is sufficient for me, I beg leave to restore to the gentleman's
"brows," from which it Experto crete Roberto. Preface to pretended speech --
pa. 25.
once fell, the "laureled" wreath, that unenvied, unsought and unwished for by
me, he has been pleased -- with what design I will not presume to guess -- to
place upon mine.

MR. Galloway also accuses me of having promised him a copy of my speech, and
of not performing my promise. Here he is egregiously mistaken. I told him he
should have the copy that night it was delivered, if I could get it ready. The
house broke up late in the evening. He soon after called upon me. It was not
ready. He told me it would be too late, if he had it not soon. I did not then
understand his meaning, as I did not in the least apprehend, the most important
matter that ever came before the house of assembly, was to be decided with less
deliberation than is generally bestowed on things of much slighter moment. Next
morning I took the copy to the House in my pocket. No one called for it. I did
the same in the afternoon. The like silence was observed. I did not choose to
show any forwardness in forcing it on those, who seemed willing to forget it.
Had I acted otherwise, I should have been called impudent and conceited, by
those who are fond of bestowing epithets.

MR. Galloway says, "that I attempted to deliver my objections against the
measure ore tenus; but finding every thing I offered judiciously and sensibly
refuted by several members, I was obliged to retreat to my speech in writing,
which after a short introductory apology, I read in a manner, not the most
deliberate."

AS to the last part of this whimsical charge, I shall not pretend to give any
answer; because that would be in some measure allowing Mr. Galloway capable of
judging, what is a "deliberate manner" of speaking.

AS to the first part -- any man but Mr. Galloway would have discovered why I
began to speak, without recurring to my notes. The resolves were past -- and
the petition ordered to be drawn in my absence. I never had heard the change
spoke of in the house -- and did not know but by information of others, the
reasons by which the members had been influenced. Before I offered my
sentiments, it was therefore necessary for me to discover the arguments that
would be used against me. On the information I had received, I had prepared my
answer; but to make this answer appear with propriety, I thought it requisite
to have the arguments of those who desired a change, repeated before the house.
I threw out general objections, and desired to know what reasons could be though it
sufficient to engage the house in so hazardous a measure? Then the "judicious
and sensible members" Mr. Galloway mentions, and he among them -- for that
phrase I suppose, is his way of complimenting himself -- discovered all the
arguments on which they relied. -- They proved to be the same I expected; and I
"retreated to my speech," which was prepared to answer them.

THE last objection made by Mr. Galloway, of which I shall take notice, is,
"that the speech, as printed, is different from that delivered -- and that the
preface sufficiently demostrates, by whose hands it has been dressed up, and with
what views it has been published."

HERE he is again mistaken. The printed speech is exactly the same with that I
pronounced, except the corrections, and additions I made to complete the sense,
the evening before it was to be delivered to the Members, as is above mentioned
-- and except some slight alterations in a few places. I further declare, that
I have not received the least assistance from any person, in composing or
correcting it; not even so much as the addition of a single word; and that no
man ever saw it, or knew that I had written it, except my clerk, who
transcribed it -- until it was delivered in the House.

AS to the preface, it makes no "demonstrations" that can affect me. Finding
that Mr. Galloway and his emissaries were traducing me in every company, and
misrepresenting every thing I had said -- I thought these aspersions might be
removed, by laying before the public, the reasons by which I had been induced
to act as I did. This consideration had the more weight with me, on receiving a
letter from some gentlemen in this city, desiring a copy of the speech.

THEY being my constituents -- and men of the clearest characters, I thought it
my duty to comply with their request. I sent a copy to them -- and they had it
printed with such a title, and in such a manner, as they thought proper,
without ever consulting me; which could not conveniently be done as I was out
of town. -- For immediately after delivering the copy, I was obliged to go into
the country for my health. I went to the Jerseys. While I was there, the
preface was written, and printed. I never saw it. -- I never was made
acquainted with its contents, till it was published. I do not even know at this
time who wrote it, but by common report.

EVERY thing I have said on these last heads, is known to be true, by my
friends; whose virtue and good opinion I too much revere, to appeal to them as
witnesses, if I was not conscious of the sincerity with which I speak.

THUS have I faithfully laid before the public, my whole conduct relating to
the change of our government, and the reasons on which it was founded. If
sensible and good men approve of my behavior, I quit without regret the
applauses of others, and all the attendant advantages, to those, who think
proper to court them.

JOHN DICKINSON.

APPENDIX.
What sin of mine could merit such a fate?
That all the shot of dullness now must be
From this thy BLUNDERBUSS discharged on me!
POPE.
WEAKNESS and ignorance when attended by modesty, are naturally entitled to
pardon and to pity. But when they impudently pretend to the characters of
wisdom and knowledge -- when they aim at power, which they understand not how
to exercise -- and to honors, which they understand not how to deserve -- when
they make use of their good fortune in life to wound their country --
insolently to abuse those, who know and despise them -- and when with proud and
solemn formality, they demand a respect by no means due to them -- then they
become the proper objects of contempt and ridicule, if not of hatred.

IT is not my intention to trouble myself with observations, on Mr. Galloway's
continual "But, Sir, let me ask, what" public good, what service to our country
can we do, when proprietary instructions, and proprietary private interest IS
to enslave our judgment, and to rule in our councils!

Pretended SPEECH pa. 29. at the bottom. "Besides, Sir, I have seen the opinion
of some very great men, his majesty's servants, and often near his person, that
the powers of government IS an interest that cannot be transferred or aliened."

Pretended SPEECH, pa. 43.
breaches of the rules of grammar; his utter ignorance of the English language;
the pompous obscurity and sputtering prolixity reigning through every part of
his piece; and his innumerable and feeble "Pretended speech -- passim -- "
greatest wealth and most invaluaable jewels -- "bondage and thraldom" --
"spending and wasting" -- "fruitless and ineffectual" -- "conduct and
behavior" -- "such horrid guilt, such heinous offenses" -- "groundless fears
and frightful apprehensions" -- etc. etc. etc. and
tautologies. This labor would be too great. I only intend to present to the
public, stripped of that bundle of words in which he has rolled them up, a small
collection of his rhetorical flowers and figures. Sorry am I to say (...) --
flowers without fragrance -- and figures without force. Yet perhaps their
novelty may recommend them.

SOME authors have industriously endeavored in their writings, to surprise
their readers -- and some readers have thought this a great merit in authors.
With gentlemen of this taste, Mr. Galloway must be a darling writer -- for no
man ever possessed so surprising a way of surprising his readers. A few instances
will discover his excellence in this kind.

Pretended speech. pa. 10.
"LET us but consider, says he, that the experience of ages, fully demonstrates
wealth to be the parent of power, the nurse of influence: and that an increase
of wealth, will as naturally beget an increase of power and influence, as an
increase of velocity in the falling stone will produce more certain death."

IN the third line of this simile, wealth is the nurse of influence -- but in
the fourth, this nurse is the begetter of influence -- a transition somewhat
sudden and odd -- but it does not stop here -- for id. pa. 13. line 5 from the
bottom. --
three pages further, this begetting nurse is turned into a weapon, and put
into the hands of its own child, INFLUENCE. What now, could a reader expect,
that this wicked child, Ovid.
"improbus ille puer," would do with the nurse that begat him, changed into a
weapon.

WILL he cut and destroy? No! With that weapon, he will -- what will he do?
Pretended speech, page 13, line 4 from the bottom.
"En -- crease our discredit, and the ministerial displeasure." What vivacity
of invention? What uncommoness in the figure? What strength in the expression?

BUT this is not the only beauty of this curious simile. What precision is
there in the expression of "the falling stone? For what would an increase of
velocity signify to any thing else but a "stone?" Or to any other stone but
"the fall -- ing stone?" Besides how exactly has Mr. Galloway provided some
unlucky head for this stone to fall upon, in order to produce "more certain
death?"

MR. Galloway's ingenuity, in forming the extraordinary weapon abovementioned,
out of the nurse, is nothing, when compared with his following feats. Ovid with
his Metamorphosis was but a type of him.

IN the forty third and forty fourth pages of his piece, he makes WEAPONS, (as
has been hinted) out of the "old contract" between the crown, and the first
proprietor; "out of an opinion of the king's servants;" and out of the
"quit-rents in the lower counties:" For having copiously mentioned these
several matters, he concludes, Pretended speech, page 44, line 1.
"THESE are the WEAPONS, which I am confident will be used for the restoration
of our liberties."

IF he can make weapons out of such slight stuff, it seems a probable opinion,
that he can form them -- in his way I mean -- out of an "ideal shadow," or "a
chimerical notion" -- or what is still more extraordinary -- even out of his
own courage.

MR. Galloway, ever fruitful in useless inventions, has found another way of
giving surprise -- and that is, by useing the same word in different senses in
the same page or sentence. Thus, speaking of our first impracticable frame of
government, and its change, he says -- Pretended speech pa. 34.
"if it (meaning the change) is valid, then the resolution of this House for a
change, assented to by nine tenths of the members met, must be valid also."

But the resolution of the assembly alone cannot make a change of the
government; and therefore he cannot mean, that it is valid, in the same manner
with the first change, which was made with the consent of every branch of the
legislature. So that by these words, "valid also," must be intended some other
kind of validity, of which no man but Mr. Galloway can form an idea -- unless
it be, that this valid resolution binds those who made it, and no body else.

MR. Galloway seems to be very fond of these abstruse meanings, which has
inclined some people to think him addicted to the study of the This supposition
will not appear unreasonable, if it be considered, that Mr. Galloway speaks in
direct terms of "THE ROYAL MEDICINE," an expression used only by adepts in the
occult sciences, with whom it signifies some wonderful secret, by which dead
persons may be restored to life; and what renders the supposition more just, or
indeed reduces the matter to a certainty, is -- that Mr. Galloway uses the
expression, in the very same sense. Pretended SPEECH pa. 44.
"occult sciences." What else could induce him to talk of the king's naming our
governors with his hands -- or of people's reading with their mouths, and
hearing with their eyes.

"WE ask the king," says he, Pretended speech pa. 8. and 18.
"to take the nomination of the governor who is to rule his people into his
royal hands" -- and afterward -- " Pretended speech pa. 37. "But, Sir, should
we waive these things, and draw our petition in a different dress, can we
annihilate the messages between the governor and assembly? Can we withdraw the
governor's proclamations? Can we hold the hands of his majesty's general, whose
aid we were obliged to accept, from giving the intelligence? Can we stop the
mouths and close the eyes of ALL England and America, or prevail on his
majesty, or the ministry, to bury in oblivion what they have, ever now so often
read and heard."

N.B. "All England" does not include the king and ministry.

Mr. Galloway may indeed say, that the expression of "reading with the mouth,"
is proper when a man reads aloud. I grant it under that restriction -- and
therefore let it be supposed, that ALL England AND America, AND his majesty AND
the ministry read aloud, like boys in a country school.

Perhaps some persons may think me more obliged to Mr. Galloway, in this part
of what he calls his speech, than I have yet acknowledged myself to be, since
he seems to have aimed at an imitation of these my expressions. -- "Though we
should keep the secret, can we seal up the lips of the proprietors? Can we
recall our messages to the governor? Can we annihilate our own resolves? Will
not all -- will not any of these discover the true cause of the present
attempt?" Speech -- pa. 9.


can we stop the MOUTHS, and close the EYES of all England and America, or
prevail on his majesty, or the ministers, to bury in oblivion what they have,
ever now, so often READ and HEARD?"

WHAT a charming confusion, what a motley mixture is here -- of "stopped mouths"
-- "closed eyes" -- "reading and hearing" -- "ALL England and America" --
"majesty" -- and ministry. --

WHO that meets with such expressions as these, and has read Ecclesiasticus,
can forbear admiring the truth of that verse, which says -- Ecclesiasticus
XXXIII. 5.
The heart of the foolish is like a cart-wheel; and his thoughts are like a
rolling axle-tree.

NOTHING less than a love of the "occult sciences," can give one a true relish
of these mystical lucubrations, with which Mr. Galloway's piece abounds. Any
person may observe, that his meaning always appears like an object in a mist,
that renders it confused and indistinct; which kind of deception may cause
persons of weak sight sometimes to mistake a lamb for a lion, or Mr. Galloway
for a gentleman.

HOW remote from the plain, common mode of speaking, is this sentence,
Pretended speech, pa. 5, line 2.
"we have often attempted to obtain relief from oppression from the
proprietaries but in vain."

THE reader may guess at the meaning -- but the writer leaves it doubtful,
whether application was made to oppression against the proprietors, -- or to
the proprietors against oppression.

WHAT a beautiful obscurity is there in this sentence? "If, Pretended speech,
pa. 35.
Sir, a true representation of the uncommon mischiefs which attend the
liberties of a free people, Quaere -- Whether the mischiefs or liberties arise
"from the very nature of proprietary government?" The reader will no doubt take
notice of the pretty repetition of that little word "if" which Mr. Galloway
seems to have introduced with no other intention, but to rescue the poor
monosyllable from the obscurity, in which hard hearted authors have suffered it
to languish -- He has done the same justice in several places to the merit of
that other diminitive word "OF." In est sua gratia parvis.
arising from the very nature of proprietary government -- If a true state of
our present confusion, both in and out of our public councils -- If a just
account of our present insecurity of life and estate, given to the crown, be a
just cause of terror, then the gentleman's pannick is just, But, Sir, these
things, I conceive, are rather causes of joy, than fear. It Is from hence, we
must hope to be relieved from our present unhappy circumstances."

NOW what "things" can a reader find in this description, if he is a good man,
that are "causes of joy?" Not the public misfortunes to be sure. -- What then?
Not the "representation" "state" and "account" of calamities, because it is
said "they are true." What then can be a "cause of joy?" Eureka! Eureka! This
"representation" "state" and "account" may relieve us from our present unhappy
circumstances." May they so? But until we are so delivered, if we are the
miserable people we have been described, a patriot in the midst of present
misfortunes, would from an uncertain prospect of relief, hardly find "cause of
JOY" though he might entertain some hope. A man on the rack would scarcely feel
joy, though he might have expectations that he would some time or other be
released.

THIS may be called the true "twilight way of writing" which like the bat in
the fable, keeps in the middle between sense and nonsense, to the exceeding
edification and entertainment of those readers, who like paragraphs that are
mysterious and wordy, because they show depth and language.

ANOTHER sentence in which Mr. Galloway gives the reader a very pretty
surprise, is that, where he says -- Pretended speech, pa. 6.
"this colony has so remarkably flourished, and now takes off such vast
quantities of English manufactures, from no other cause but her extensive
privileges."

HOW new and striking is this observation? Any other person would have said,
that "the people took off such vast quantities by reason of their necessities
or luxuries." But Mr. Galloway scorns such trite notions -- He establishes a
new dogma -- "our extensive privileges take them off." Pretended speech page 15.
BROAD-SHOULDERED PRIVILEGES! indeed.

PERHAPS if he should write a comment on his own text, he would say -- that he
meant, that the extensive privileges occasioned the settlement of this province
-- and the settlement occasioned the demand for the manufactures -- and so the
privileges were That is "the cause without which the manufactures would not
have been taken off."
Causa fine qua non. But this argument will not extricate him -- since, if he
travels so far backwards, the same way of arguing will oblige him to go still
farther. -- For those privileges would not have been granted by William Penn --
unless Charles the second had first made a grant to him -- which would not have
been, but for his father's services -- and so, these sercvies of old admiral
Penn, who died in the last century, "NOW take off such vast quantities of
English manufactures."

IN this extraordinary manner does Mr. Galloway indulge himself in his
political reveries. Even the most simple and common observations in life,
utterly lose their force in his language.

THE mystical lucubrators, among whom he may with justice claim the president's
seat, seem to be first-cousins to the authors of the PROFUND style. Certain it
is, that they are governed by the same laws, and that there is a wonderful
resemblance in their productions. In order to prove this, I shall beg leave to
mention the rules to be observed by that numerous and venerable society, as
they are described by Mr. Pope, in his learned treatise (...).

POPE's works, vol. VI. page 172.
"I WILL venture to lay it down, as the first maxim and cornerstone of this
our art; that whoever would excel therein, must studiously avoid, detest, and
turn his head from all the ideas, ways, and workings of that pestilent foe to
wit, and destroyer of fine figures, which is known by the name of common sense.
His business must be to contract the true gout de travers; and to acquire a
most happy, uncommon, unaccountable way of thinking. His design ought to be
like a labyrinth, out of which no body can get clear but himself."

AGAIN -- " POPE's works, vol. VI. pa. 190.
our authors of this style, should lay it down as a principle, to say nothing
in the usual way, but (if possible) in the direct contrary; therefore the
figures must be so turned, as to manifest that intricate and wonderful cast of
head, which distinguishes all authors of this kid; or (as I may say) to
represent exactly the mold in which they were formed, in all its inequalities,
cavities, obliquities, odd crannies, and distortions.

"IT may be observed, that the world has been long weary of natural things. How
much the contrary are formed to please, is evident from the universal applause
daily given to the admirable entertainments of Harlequins and Magicians on our
stage. When an audience behold a coach turned into a wheel-barrow, a conjurer
into an old woman, or a man's head where his heels should be; how are they
struck with transport and delight?"

YET what are all these, when compared with Mr. Galloway's changing in an
instant a nurse into a weapon, and putting that weapon into the hand of its own
child? Or what are they to his forging weapons out of an old parchment, an
opinion, and arrears of quit-rents? What author of the profund can vie with
this our Pennsylvanian patriot?

"Ye little stars, hide your diminished heads."

NOT to dwell upon other instances, how exquisitely "uncommon" "unaccountable"
and "unnatural" is his making our privileges take off all the English beer and
cloth imported into this province? And also his making the king strip us of
liberties, of which we were stripped before?

THE great poet I have mentioned further observes, " Mr. Pope's works, VI vol.
pa. 180. 181.
that the manner of these authors forming their thoughts is aided by
familiarising their minds to the lowest objects; and exercising them on the
dregs of nature."

NUMBERLESS instances in our author's piece prove how much his thoughts have
been formed on this plan. I will only mention one, where to revive and regale
his reader's imagination, he kindly puts him in mind of a certain
sweet smelling place.

THESE "WITH MANY OTHER PARTS" of this our "political institutor" which must be
remarked by any careful peruser, are "irrefragable proofs" with what diligence
and success, he has studied the aforesaid treatise.

I NOW proceed to that renowned page, where the whole powers of Mr. Galloway's
genius are collected into one dreadful simile.

"WITH great propriety, (says he) a political body has often been compared to a
human constitution. Let us suppose then, that a human constitution is attacked
by a violent disease, the EFFECT whereof has nearly destroyed the powers of
life, AND living motion, This is a mistake -- for it is "vital" in the original
-- however it is to be hoped this error will be excused, as the words "vital"
and "living" have nearly the same meaning.
and nature is It is to be remarked by the reader, that though nature is " no
longer capable of struggling" at the beginning of this simile, yet this is only
to heighten the description -- a license frequently taken by Mr. Galloway --
for before the simile is finished, she "can and does struggle" -- and the only
danger is, that "death will put an end to them."
no longer capable of struggling for relief." -- Surely this human
constitution, whose " vital motion as well as its powers of life are nearly
destroyed" is now sick enough for any simile in the world --

"IS not this the time to apply the remedy? No! For it should have been applied
before -- and now nature is so much exhausted, may "entirely destroy" her --
which frequently happens, when people will venture to take physic from
"quacks"; who are a sort of gentry, never remarkable, before Mr. Galloway made
the discovery, "for waiting in hopes of some lucky crisis" -- NOW OR NEVER, is
a motto, that suits alempirics. --

"THE powers of legislature truly resemble the soul, which animates and
directs" not only "the conduct" but "the behavior of the political
institution." Yet these "powers of legislature truly resembling the soul," nine
lines afterward, are so checked and controlled that they are almost
ANNIHILATED" -- poor soul!

"AN upright administration of justice resembles the active blood, which by its
pure and uninterrupted course, preserves and supports ITS health and vigor."
But we have no upright administration of justice in this province, according to
our author, and therefore by his own simile, no active blood in our political
institution. Yet immediately after, he says, "in these two vital parts," to
wit, the This word "passive" is inserted here -- it being supposed, that it was
omitted by a mistake in the original, as Mr. Galloway has given the epithet of
"active" to the blood, in order to distinguish it from some opposite quality in
the soul.
passive soul and Quaere if physicians, surgeons or anatomists reckon the
"active blood" among the "vital parts?"
active blood, "the fever of ambition and Quaere, what is the fever of arbitary
power?
arbitrary power is, and has been raging with unremitting violence."

PERHAPS the author of this famous simile may say, that by the, "vital parts"
he means the power of legislature, and the administration of justice -- But
this will be a contradiction of himself, for he only allows "an upright
administration of justice" to be a vital part; and as among us, "the stream of
justice is become so turbid and thick, that it can no longer discharge its
duty," this "vital part" composed of "an upright administration," is wanting.

HOWEVER, if both these vital parts should be annihilated, Mr. Galloway has
allowed the fever room enough to exert itself. "It rages, says he, in these two
vital parts, with many others." -- Preface to pretended speech, page 24.
"Well chosen, that expression, and prudently guarded." -- It rages not only in
the soul of the legislature, and the active blood of the administration -- but
in MANY OTHER VITAL PARTS. Unexampled energy of diction!

Blansted.
When "active blood" shall flow in lifeless veins,
The wondering world shall praise thy "turbid" strains.
PERHAPS some curious critics may be disgusted at the preference Mr. Galloway
gives the legislative powers over an upright administratian of justice, in
comparing the first to "Divinae particulam aurae." HORACE.
"that particle of divine air" the soul; and the latter to mere matter -- the
blood. -- But this seems to be too hasty a censure, by no means to be adopted
-- for it is to be observed, that soon after, in saying "these two vital
parts," he places the soul and blood exactly on a level, making them both
"vital parts" without the least distinction. Besides Mr. Galloway, when he uses
the word "soul" or "spirit," does not annex the same idea to the term, that is
always annexed by others -- for he talks of a "spirit" that may be "worn out,"
and "dissolved," and to which "reviving medicines may be administered." -- "And
if such a medicine can be obtained, shall we not even attempt to obtain it,
before the MIDNIGHT GLOOM approaches, and FATAL DEATH puts an end to our
struggles?" Undoubtedly! Doctor -- and if it proves a preventive against these
dreadful disorders -- midnight gloom and fatal death -- I shall hereafter
entertain a better opinion than I do at present, of those bold pretenders, who
undertake to cure all diseases "past, present and to come," by a ROYAL
MEDICINE, or some other nostrum, with the like pompous title. --

FINIS.

