AN ANSWER, TO THE PAMPHLET Entitled the CONDUCT of the Paxton Men,
impartially represented: Wherein the ungenerous Spirit of the AUTHOR is
Manifested, etc. And the spotted GARMENT plucked off.

Isaiah Chapter 9. v. 16. For the Leaders of this People cause them to err, and
they, that are led of them, are destroyed.

Luke Chap. 6. v. 39. And he spoke a Parable unto them: Can the Blind lead the
Blind? Shall they not both fall into the Ditch?

And though full loath, cause their Ill natures urge,
I Will send alread a Satyr with a Scourge,
That to their Shame for this abuse shall strip them,
And being naked in their vices whip them:
And to be sure of these, that are most rash,
Not one shall escape him, that deserves a Lash.
HORACE. Philadelphia: Printed by Anthony Armbruster, in Moravian Alley, 1764

AN ANSWER, etc.
IMPARTIALITY (it seems this Letter writer would have his Readers believe) is
the chief Bases, on which he has founded his Arguments; but eiher for want of
Honesty, or Policy, or both, he has forsook it in the most obvious Manner: For
where a Man is impartial, he deals in Truth to the best of his Judgment, not
favoring either party; but this Author has endeavored, with all his little
Politics, to paliate the Actions of the one Side, when for want of Policy he
has exclaimed against the other, in the most malignant Manner.

HE begins his Letter thus, The Paxton Riot (as it is called) makes so great a
Noise, And is so much the general Topic, that a Man must be but little in
Conversation, without having his Opinion asked concerning this Affair. What
must this Question be! Whether the King will bring those Men to Justice, for
that Act, and punish them according to their deserts. Not whether they deserve
Punishment; that is a Question, I believe, never asked: For I think it must be
the settled Opinion of every solid Man, that the Paxton Men, who Murdered the
Indians, deserve the same Punishment as though they had Murdered so many white
People under the same Situation. -- Again. -- In Truth Matters are now come to
such a pass, that some People are of Opinion, that an endeavor to make them
worse may probably be the way to make them better. Here he must mean the Paxton
People and their Advocates, who, if they had succeeded in their attempts on the
Lives of the Indians in the Barraks, with Murdering some of the Citizens, for
whose Scalps they offered Two Hundred Pounds each, then they should have been
able to have destroyed the Constitution of Government, and settled a Republic,
agreeable to their own darling Principles. Again, for my Part, I am no adept in
Politics, and have but seldom troubled my Head about that Science beyond the
reading of a common News-Paper. -- The word Politics is this, (that Part of
Ethick, or Moral Philosophy, that relates to the well-governing a State or
Kingdom. Here I join him: But why did he not content himself soly with reading
his Newspapers? And not Vindicate the Paxton people; and their bloody Act, by
introducing Quotations from diverse places in Historys, that I am sure his
common Newspapers never ushered into his Brain: And that with false Quotations
and horred Misrepresentations, which I am sure, agreeable to his own
Sentiments, proves that he is no politition. But did this Letter Writer
imagine, that in case the Paxton people had succeeded in their Attempt, it
would have escaped the Notice of his Majesty? (Woeful stupidity! Or did they
propose to have thrown of the Reins of Government entirely, and paid no Tribute
but to their Goddess Presbytery? If this I say be his meaning (which I rather
think it is) it also proves him to be no politition, for had he been one of
that Class, he would have concealed his Sentiments from the populace, and only
devulged them to his dear Brethren. He says I have no other View in troubling
you with this Letter, then to rescue the miserable Frontier people, who lately
rose in Arms, from the infamy and odium thrown upon them. I think the Paxton
people may be tired of their Advocate by this Time. They committed the worst of
Crimes, and he is making bad worse; he is devulging the whole Scheme; he tells
us it was to make better Times. If that be so it must be under the head I have
already mentioned; but this Opinion is no policy; for if they have by that Act,
ushered into their corrupt Minds, some small Glimps of feigned pleasure, I think
the Time is coming, when they I wish they had never seen the Light of that Day.
He goes on and tells us, that whilst they were thus busied, and thus stripped
of their Birthrights, -- Israel and Joseph, two petty fellows, who ought to
have no higher Claims than themselves, were permitted to Lord it over the Land,
and in contempt of the Government and the express Orders of the Crown, for
bidding them to hold private Treaties with the Indians. -- Here is the want of
policy; when he intended to exclaim against Israel and Joseph, he heaps the
highest Ecomiums on them, when he says they ought to have (observe) no higher
Claims than themselves; which plainly points out, that they should have no
higher Claims than their own Merits deserve, which it seems was esteemed great,
-- (by whom?) Why by our Superiors. For he says, that they were (observe)
permitted. I ask this Writer, who permitted them? It could not be their Equals.
For no Man has power to permit another to do a Thing, but he must also have
power to forbid the doing of that Thing. Here is the meaning of the Word,
(permit.) I. e. to give leave, to Authorize, Suffer or allow, a person to do
somewhat -- now I say, a person must be invested with power in himself, before
he can deligate another to Transact any Affair; neither can a Man act in
Contempt of Authority, when his Actions receive their very Being from that
Authority. Well I conceive the Force of his Argument carries thus much, that
Israel and Joseph were Men, whose Viracity the Government might confide in;
therefore allowed to act in the Manner they thought fit. A very just
permission; for it has evidently appeared, that those two Men have acted their
parts in the most worthy Manner they were capable of, for the well-being of
this province, with regard to Indian Affairs. -- I ask how can that be? When
the same Writer affirms, that they have acted in Contempt of the Government,
and the express orders of the Crown. Why I must allow it to be a plain
Contradiction. But will not his speaking the Truth in the Front of his Letter
(where he says he is no Adept in politics) paliate for a few Untruths in the
following Sheets, well but he says they held private -- Treaties with the
Indians. (Where was that) why at the public Treaty at Lancaster: Where his
late Honor, the Governor, with the Commissioners, was present. How could that
be a privacy when acted publicly? And he says by permission of his Honor:
-- Excuse him he is no Adopt in politics. -- But all this they have done,
says this Writer, without so much as including the simple Menonists, from
whom they have extorted large Sums of Money, to support their Expense. (The
meaning of the Word Extort is this) to exact Illequally, or get, or take
violently and by unjustificable Means, to abuse Authority) this must be a false
Assertion.

Let the Menonists Answer for themselves. But the Truth is, that the Menonists,
as a Society of good Religious people, by way of Simele collected Money and
desired the Quakers to hand it to the then suffering people on the Frontiers,
to serve their Necessities. Is this extortion in the Quakers? I leave the
Candid Reader to judge. Or does it show the Menonist to be a simple people? No;
it is evident that the Menonists, were a compassionate people, not regardless of
their fellow Creatures sufferings, and willing to contribute toward their
Support, (observe) here is a possitive Assertion, when he says -- Nay with
the most matchless impudence, Insinuated to the Indians, that they were Rulers
and Governors. (Well let us hear his proop:) As plainly appeared, at the late
Treaty at Lancaster, where the principal Chief and Speaker told Mr. H -- n,
then Governor, that as he understood there were two Governors in the province,
he would be glad to know which he was to Treat with. In Case this writer speaks
the Truth,) here is not so much as a single Indians Affirmative, to prove the
Assertion; no not any Evidence at all. Again the Indians were induced to look
upon Israel, as the first Man, or Chief Cechim of the Province (why so, because
they say his Haughtiness and the Contempt with which he treated his fellow
Subjects; -- then I conclude, our Author must be of Opinion, that this has been
a standing Rule with our Governors, (viz.) Haughtiness and Contempt -- by which
the Indians has known them. (He just now said Mr. H. -- n. was a Quaker, and
now calls him something else fie upon such a fellow) he must have had a high
Opinion of the Indians judgment, or he would not have made it the chief Bases
of his Argument, and by this means of false Reasoning, unjustly blamed the
Quakers. Here I shall take some notice of his Note in Page the 7th, where he
says, one Patrick Ignew, of the Borough of Lancaster, who upon Oath said,
that at the late Treaty at Lancaster, he was commanded to make Proclamation by
the Governor, to forbid any Person to either sell, or give, Spiritious Liquors
to the Indians; and when he proclaimed, and said by order of the Governor, the
Infamous Tediuskung, as be is called, in Page the 4th. Cried out, D -- n your G
-- nr, D -- n your G -- r. I Am -- tn is our Governor, he allows Rum enough; Who
also upon his Oath, declares, that notwithstanding the Proclamation, the
Indians where privately entertained at a certain Tavern in the Town: Well and
what does all this make for him? suppose Tediuskung did say that, Pm -- tn
allows Rum enough; so did his Honor too. But at that Time, and upon such
Important Business, the Governor, being apprehensive; that any quantity might
be too much, therefore forbid the use of it entirely. Well but they were
privately entertained at a Tavern in the Town: I ask with what? Here this
writer is Silent. Now if he would but comply with one word, in the front of his
Letter (Truth) and tell us it was no other then with the Necessaries of Life,
he would then give the Peoples Actions a genuine Connection with the Governor's
Proclimation; for the said Deponent does not Charge the Quakers or any one of
them, with the least Misconduct; neither is there one word of Spiritious
Liquors in the whole Affadavit, nor the Name Quaker mentioned: And as to the
rest of the Affadavits, I think they are not worth a solled Man's notice. I
think they were all trumpt up, since the Indians were Murdered, to gloss over
that horred act. Was the like ever known before? For a set of Men in Conspiracy
together, to fall upon and Murder a number of their Neighbors, and then
ransack the Earth, to find Evidence to prove that they were dangerous
Neighbors; and that they had received but their deserts. This is a very odd
Affair, first to kill a Man, then to pass Sentence on him, and after all that
to produce the Evidence against him: Surely those People, that were in danger
of the Indians, must be very careful to keep the Magistrates in Ignorance of
their Dangers; or the Magistrates had but little regard to their Neighbors
safety: For it seems this Writer has traced Time back toward Noah's Flood; nay
quite as far as Governor Keith's Administration to produce Evidence against
dead Indians. Page the 8th. here is another Paragraft, that plainly discovers
their Design of overturning the present Constitution of Government, when he
saves; -- they looked upon it as their duty, (...). (The Paxton Men) to
Administer such Remedies, however severe they might be looked upon, by some, as
might raise her drooping Head, and restore her to Health and Vigor. -- What
Measures where they, certainly Murdering the Indians at Lancaster; collecting
into a Body with Guns, Swords and Tomahawks, in Contempt of all Authority;
vowing Death to the Indians in the Barraks, and a total extinction to the very
Being of Government. Well but they were disappointed, -- and the Quakers had a
hand in it; For the Readers Satisfaction, I recommend to his perusual, a Piece
lately Published Entitled a Vindication of the Quakers Proceeder in
Philadelphia, with regard to the safety of the Indians, where that Matter is
set in a clear Light. This writer Caluminates the Quakers, when it is some of
his own Kidny, that has been the hateful Agressors. Did not a Colony from
New England settle on Lands, unpurchased of the Indians, in Contempt of
Government and contrary to all Rules of Equity? And did not his Honor, the
Governor Issue out several Proclamations, and forbid all his Majesty's Subjects
to act in such a prefidious Manner; warning them to turn off the Lands, under
the severest Penalties? And did not the Indians declare to them, that the Lands
were theirs, and if they did not turn of their Land, they would certainly drive
them off, or kill them on the spot? And did they not stay there in spite of all
this, until the Indians Scalp'd some of them? (Where those Quakers, I answer
no) I believe they were Presbyterians: Was it not Presbyterians that Murdered
the Indians at Lancaster? Was it not Presbyterians, that came down with an
intent, to murder the Indians in the Barraks? Was not the Author of the Quaker
Unmasked one of their esteemed Ministers? And was not the Author of this
preposterious Letter, the same Man, or one of his base Brethren? In fine, I
think the Presbyterians have been the Authors, and Abettors, of all the
Mischief, that is happened to us, as a People. Did we ever read or hear tell of
a Quaker, being guilty of any one of the above Villainous acts? I say no. But if
any pretended Member of their Society had been found guilty of any one of them,
they would have disowned him in ten Minutes: But the Presbyterians do all this
with impunity; And who but their Ministers becomes their Advocates? See the
Looking-Glass. Well might the Prophet cry, in the Name of the LORD, and say,
the Leaders of my People cause them to err, Page the 9th. The names of Rioters,
Rebels, Murderers, white Savages, etc. have been liberally and indiscriminately
bestowed upon them; but all this they look upon only as the Effects of
disappointed Malice, and the Resentments of a distructive (Faction,) who see
their darling Power in Danger. I shall answer this Paragraph, and Adapt the
discourse to the Faculty of Reason, and that in so plain and familiar a Manner,
as to reach the Capacity of every soled thinking Man; which I am confident is
an easy Task. The Inhabitants of this Province, and under this Government, are
a body Corporate, which body composes a Society in civil Government; and every
Loyal Person, a real Member of that Society. Thus we are bound together by
Unaminity and Concord, under the sanction of Laws, to support our civil and
Religious Rights in Government: And we are not to be disturbed in this happy
Situation, but by a failure in one, or more of the Members; and this appears in
every Person, that acts contrary to the system of Laws, by which this body
Corporate is formed into a Society. The Word, factious, declares for me, that
those People, whom this Writer so much extoles, are the very Men, whom he so
horridly exclaims against. See the word (factious) ie. Quarrelsome, Riotous,
Rebellious, disatisfied with the public Establishment; here it wants of Policy
with a Witness to it: But I have so much Charity for the Letter Writer, as to
think, if he has at any Time met with some of these, sholastick Words, that he
has made use of, in his common News-paper, the printer has been so ungenerous,
as not to give him the Meaning of one half of them. Let the Blame lie there.
Well but is this agreeable to his Title Page? Impartially represented? I think
its the nearest that of any Branch of his Discourse I have met with; he has
been exclaiming against the Government; he has been exclaiming against the
Quakers; and now he exclaims against the Presbyterians.

There is no one thing appears clearer, then that the Quakers are blamed
without a Cause. Is the Governor a Quaker? Is his Council Quakers? Is the
Majority of the Assembly Quakers? I answer in the negative. Well, they are the
Men, that all Acts of State are determined by; then pray what are they blamed
for? why, because they assisted their honest Neighbors to save the Indians
from a horrid Massacre: And this is every Thing I find against them, when I
have canvas'd the whole Affair, in the minuetest Manner, I am capable of. Did
not the Governor request all the Freeholders in the City, to meet him at the
State-House? Was not this with the Approbation of his Council? And did not the
Governor and Assembly pass an Act against Riots and Rioters? All this was done
on the Approach of the Paxton Rebels: And without the aid of the Quakers. Now I
conclude, this none-Politition has in the first Place to prove, that for one
Man to endeavor to save the Life and Fortune of another, is an unjustifiable
Act; Secondly, the whole Sistom, or Body of Laws, which support civil Society,
and binds the Body corporate, as with Chains of Iron, to be a mere Fandom or
useless Ceremony: Nay it strikes at the very Assence of those Laws; I mean the
Laws of God: For why did the great and wise Legislature form those Laws, but
for the Regulation and well being of Mankind. I say he must first prove the
abovesaid Possitions, or he cannot prove the Quakers worthy of any Blame. If
this is not the most palbable Essay toward the entire Demolition of all good
Government, I know not what is. Well my Countrymen, by this Time you see, in
what a sophistical Manner, this Author has wrote: He means one then, and
speaks another; he spitts his Spite at you our Superiors, whose Title I have
just mentioned, under the Similitude of Quakers; but how you will put up with
such glarring impudence, I don't undertake to determine.

Now I come to consider that Part, where he affirms, that it can be proved,
the first Quakers took up Arms, and fought well too upon many other Occasions;
the first Man he mentions, is George Keith: Where he says page 9. Whoever
will take the trouble to read the printed Trials of George Keith, will find,
that when a Quaker Sloop belonging to this province, was formerly taken by some
pirates; and finding it impossible to save both the Sloop and their so much
cried up principles, etc. Opposed Force to Force, retook their Vessel: This
parragraph contains both Nonesense and Contradiction i. e. A Quaker Sloop, what
can he mean by that? Does he call the Sloop a Quaker, or does he suppose the
Owner was a Quaker? Well, but he does not tell us, whether the Mariners were
Quakers or what they were. But that's not all, for he says the Sloop was
taken; (observe) and after it was taken, (here is the Cunning) they found it
impossible to save it (I believe so), And their so much cried up principles
against outward Force. Now I ask this Writer, how it was possible for the
Captain of that Sloop to deliver up his sole Right of that to the pirate?
(which was the Case if he had taken it) And still retain his sole property in
that Vessel. And after it became the others property fight and save it: But he
tells neither Book or page, therefore I shall take no more Notice of it: But
shall inform the Reader that George Keith though once in Community with the
Quakers, was afterward disowned by them, and wrote against them and their
principles; out of which Book this Writer has undoubtedly fetched this
Quotation. I remember a saying of a great and wise Man i. e. one Runagate is
worse than ten Turks-Men; the next he mentions is George Fox, as worthy a Man
as I believe the modern Ages has produced on purpose to bespatter the
Character of the Quakers (but this is want of Policy) for if he would have
vilified the Quakers Reputation: He should have Quoated the Works of none but
those like himself, and concealed Book and Page; in doing of which he might
have dragged some sort of Men into his Scheme. However I shall Quote a passage
or two of the genuine Works of George Fox, by which the moderate Reader will be
convinced that that good Man was quite of the Reverse opinion, to what this
Writer insinuates. If George Fox made use of any of those Expressions, which
this Writer has, they are picked words, and a Connection given them as they now
stand to serve the Purpose of some envious Apostate, of whom there were several
that run into such Extravagances, or took such undue Liberties, that the Rules
in the Society could not dispense with; then they testified against them, and
those Men being of the like Spirit with our Author, thought the worst they
could say or write, was hardly enough to bespatter them, and their innocent
Principles. This Letter Writer says: It is plain that the first Quakers were
never against force of Arms, if they thought the Quarrel just; if you will
believe their own writers, they fought well in the Reign of Oliver Cromwell.
George Fox in the fifth page of his Letter directed to the Council of Officers
of the Army, etc. complains that many were disbanded out of the Army for no
other fault, then their being Quakers. -- I will not undertake to say that
George Fox, did not make use of any of the above Expressions to Cromwell or his
Army (though I find nothing like it in any of his Writings) for I conceive the
Quakers Principles took place by degrees. They first saw one thing wrong and
then another: And by acting according to what they saw to be their Duty, they
at length became acquainted with every Part that constituted, a sound religious
Society of People. And amongst the many that joined them, there was some of the
Soldiery part; and those were Men of good Carracters, they were zealous for
what they thought right, and some were convinced inpart of the Quakers
Principles: But for a Time did not see, its their Duty to lay down their Arms,
but stood as valiant Soldiers for their Lives and Liberties. That was the Case
with George Bishop, whom this Writer mentions, he was a Captain in the
Parliament Army: And in that Station manifested his Loyalty to the best of his
Knowledge to detect and suppress every thing that might obstruct thee, then
hope for peaceable Government. But this was before he became established in the
Quakers Principles, he afterward laid down his Sword, entered into Community
with them, and became as faithful a Warrior for his God as he had been a
Soldier in the Parliaments Army. And was Author of a Book entitled,
New England Judged. In which he has set forth the Cruelty and Barbarity of this
Authors Brethren, while they had the Reins of Government in their Hands. -- I
would advise him to get one of those Books, and read it through with good
Attention, I believe it might be of more Service to him, then his Newspapers.
This is a small Degression, I shall return to George Fox, and give you his own
Word. George Fox's Journal page 31. Some would have had me into the auxiliary
Bands among the Soldiery but I refused. This was in the twentieth Year of his
Age. Page 96. there being new Soldiers raised, the Commissioners would have
made me Captain over them: And the Soldiers cried, they would have none but me.
They asked me, if I would not take up Arms for the common Wealth against
Charles Steuart: I told them, I knew from whence all Wars did arise, even from
the Lusts according to James's his Doctrine. And that I lived in the Virtue of
that Life and Power that took away the Occasion of all Wars, but they courted
me to except of their offer, and thought I did but Complement with them: But I
told them I was come into the Covenant of Peace, which was before Wars and
Strifes were, they said they offered it in Love and Kindness to me, because of
my virtue, and such like flattering Words they used. But I told them, if that
was their Love and Kindness I trampled it under my Feet, then their Rage got
up. And they said, take him away Jailer, and put him into the Prison amongst
the Rogues and Fellons: This was in the 26th. Year of his Age, when he was
committed to a loathsome stinking Jaile, among thirty Fellons where he remained
near six Months, and for no other Reason but because he would not bear Arms;
what I have wrote all happened in Cromwels Life time, he died in 1658 and the
Year following George Fox wrote the following Paper, wherein he showed the
unlawfulness of Wars and Fighting, representing it as a Work not at all
becoming the followers of CHRIST. And he exhorted his Friend not to join with
those that took up Arms, but to fight only with Spiritual weapons which took
away the occasion of the Carnal; this was in the 35th Year of his Life, the
next is Robert Rich, another Author (here he shows his cunning) for he neither
tells Book nor Page, neither is he so kind as to inform us that the Quakers had
disowned him when he wrote; he also tells us that the said Rich names five
Commissioners, to nominate Officers, etc. But the Assertion might be proved as
it deserves to be a positive Untruth, the Truth is that Robert Rich was a
Member of the Quaker's Society, and continued so for sometime, but could not
content himself to live agreeable to the Rules of that Society, but run into
immoral or at least indesent practices; being a Man naturally of a haughty and
asspiring Temper. However the Quakers disowned him, and then to be up with them
he became just such another fellow as our Letter Writer. He might as well have
mentioned another Author, (for he don't say Rich was a Quaker,) Bur -- on, and
he recommended us to the perusal of his Works (where I Will be a Voucher for
him,) that nearly every Page is examined with wrong Quotations,
Misrepresentations, false Insinuations and horrid Exclamations, against almost
every Thing that is good, well, but if he was ordained to do, all this he cannot
help it: I allow that, but I will affirm that if he was ordained to do so, he
was never ordained to be a Minister of CHRIST. The next he Quotes is Robert
Barclay, and all the Mischief he seems to Design at him, is to call him St.
Robert: But I shall not thank him for that, for he has no Apostate Quotations
to cite were by he might be able to vilify that good Man, but this Sentence is
to condemn the Quakers; whereas, a little before he justifies them, where he
says, it can be proved that those People have taken up Arms, and fought well
too. However, this I am sure that he has fell prodigiously short of his proof;
for there is not one Circumstance produced by him, that no one of them took up
Arms and fought for neither King or Parliament; p. 9, 11. That usurpation
Friend has such an Interest, that by the Act of Parliament, bearing date June
28 1659, for setting the Militia? The Quakers were made Commissioners to form
Troops, and Regiments, to buy Horses, etc. This Paragraph contains both
Nonsense and Contradiction; but Friends will deny all these Things, (observe)
and if you turn over to the very Expressions, they will sneere at your
Ignorance; for taking them in a literal Sense, and tell you with a very grave
Phyz, that they are all to be taken spiritually. What strange Logic is this?
in the first Place, the deny that Charge, and in the second Place, and at the
same Instant allows that Charge; and in the third Place he confirms it, when he
says they tell you that the Battle with the Pirates, the Petition to Cromwell,
the choping off Charles Stuarts Head, the forming of Regiments, and the buying
of Horses, are all to be taken spiritually. Now I shall answer agreeable to,
and in his own words; i. e. If any Man has a mind to be imposed upon by such
Quibbles, I have no objection: Let him believe that no more is mentioned here,
than Malice in disguise, Hypocricy under a Cloak, Venum as from under the
Tongue of a Serpent; an attempt to destroy Government, an Essay to make
Neighbors invitarate Enemies, in fine, to destroy all good Rules and Order.
And you may believe if you will too, that our Letter Writer is the chief
promoter of it all: Page ^3. he begins with the Debates in Parliment, and tells
us of one great Lord's opinion, and then of another; about Tumults and Riots.
I would have him to know, we have reason as well as he to believe, that there
may be great Debates in the Parliment House, before a Matter comes to a
Determination. But if he will be pleased to look in one of his News Papers, he
will find the parliments result on that; how Rioters are to be dealt with, in
page 17. he begins with the Narrative, and tells us that a shock of Electricity
would have had a much more sensible effect upon those people, than all the
Arguments and Quotations he has produced; (I believe him) for that opperation
of Electricity can effect no more than the Animal parts. And those people with
their Advocates, have so much likeness ^o the Ala^^^t Stone, that they seem
determined to pay no regard to any Thing, though ever so well wrote, that may
be likely to touch the Internal. Notwithstanding that worthy patriot has wrote
in a good Style; and has produced Quotations so parallel to support his
opinion, and the just leneaments of that horrid act at Lancaster, that it makes
his Works vuluable to every good Man: But alas! what good Man either alive or
dead, escapes this writers cruel censor. I think we read in the Bible that some
Men's countenances are as hard as though they were seared with a hot Iron: I
cannot think what he proposed to himself by Annamadvertion on the Narrative; for
it has no ways deminished the valitity of that Work, (but if his Evidence
avails any Thing,) it adds to the Renown of the Author; in that he ranks him
with the best of Men for it, those he tries to Redicule; next comes the curled
Lawyer in page 22. In his Exclamation against the Author of the Narrative, he
says, every body knows that this Assertion is the reputed offspring of the
curled Lock Lawyer, who wrote the Dialogue between Andrew, etc. (observe) a
Creature by his Debaucheries and Immoral Life; has done more dishonor to the
Scriptures and Religion than all those Men put together; i. e. The Men that
murdered the Indians at Lancaster) the forepart of this Paragraph is an
Introduction to the Crimes laid to the curled Head's charge; hence is the
Crime, who has been endeavoring for a series of Years, to sow the Seeds of
Discord and Desention, among his fellow Subjects: And has even in prints
propagated groundless and wicked Insinuations among the Germans. I expect this
Writer has gained the displeasure of all that Class of Men: By exclaiming
against one of their Clan, (and in that he has no policy,) seeing he is just on
the brink of ruin. I think he will want half a dozen of them to fetch him out
of the scrape; (Remark) here he has absolutely -- though I believe unadvic'dly
passed an irravocable Sentence on himself, for he is the very person that has
done this; though handed to us by him under the Similitude of a curled Lock
Lawyer: I say this Author is the very Man. I submit it to the Judgment of every
Man that can think for himself, whether this Man's Works can have any other
Design or Tendency, then to sow the seeds of Discord and Disention amongst his
Neighbors: Is it possible that it can be of any service to any one soul on
Earth. A Thing that is stuffed full of Malicious Sentences, a Thing that has all
the leneaments of Spite, Hatred, Malice, bitterness of Heart, Detraction, open
Violation to the Laws and Government. A Man that is not ashamed to declare to
the World, that the Actions above mentioned in that one Man is worse, (that is)
he deserves a more grievious punishment, then if he had murdered twenty of his
Neighbors in cool blood, I cannot find the Lawyer stands indicted for one more
then that he in Print has propigated groundless and wicked Insinuations among
the Germans, and for that deserves D -- h, what then does this Letter Writer
deserves? who has been guilty of the like Crime, and of a ten Times worse
Consequence: I say he has past Sentence on himself, and must stand condemned in
the Judgment of all good Men, to all Intents and Purposes. Page the 23 he tells
us that the Author of Cato's Letters very justly observes that, viz. It is a
most wicked and absurd position to say, that a People can ever be in such a
Situation as not to have right to oppose a Tyrant, a Robber or a Traitor, who
by Violence, Treachery, Rapine, Infinate murders and Devestations has deprived
them of safety and protection, etc. This Author could mean no other here, but
those who had the Reins of Government in their Hands, it represents the very
Situation our happy People were in, when the Mob, (as this Writer calls them)
were coming down; it really condemns the Rioters, and justifies the Loyal
Citizens, and so will every good Man. Is it not something strange; that Men of
good natural Parts and Learning enough to be Conjurers; should be so confused
and bother'd in their own Brain, to contradict themselves, introduce Quotations
of other Men's Works, that makes more against, then for them; I think their
Master has a Design against such, he does it to make them look like himself;
and he has been too cunning for our Author, for he is like to gain his Point:
Whereas our Letter Writer I think will fall short in every Part. Page 24. He
tells that the Senators killed Julius Caesar even in the Senate House: But is
not so kind as to inform us how it fared with the murderers, the Historian
says that the Judgments of GOD was evidently manifested, in taking Vengeance
on those treacherous Villains; he says there was hardly one of them that died
a natural Death, divine Justice persued them where ever they went, until they
were exterpated, Brutus and Cassius the chief Conspirators put an end to their
own Lives; not for fear of coming under Tyrany, (as this Author asserteth) but
because it should not be said they were put to Death by the Hands of other Men;
If our Author produces this as a Parallel Case, with that of the Paxton Men;
he must also think the like Catastrophe may be all them, in which opinion I
think the Majority may safely join him: our Author tells us, he hopes that he
shall not be suspected to be an encourager of Insurrections and Tumults;
certainly this must be the hope of the Hypocrite, which the Scripture says
shall fail, I hope he is not quite so stupid as to think all Men are like
himself, not in a Capacity to judge what is for, or what is against their
presents or future Happiness, but if it be just so, I query, what he wrote this
Letter for, it is stuffed with little but immoral Sentences; it has no Connection
with Religion, it has no persuasive Arguments, that has any Tendency to promote
the good of the Church or State? What was it wrote for? was it not to divide
and scatter People one from another? by sowing the Seeds of Discord and
Contention, by ushering into the Minds of the one Part an inveteracy and hatred
against the other, by the most unjust way of Arguments, that Malice could
Dictate.

The moderate Reader has seen by this Time, how I have canvas'd his Quotations,
not in the Minuetest but in a Corsory way; and find no one Instance of any
Quaker that has been seen in the Field of Battle, or of using earnel Weapons of
any sort as this Writer has asserted: again, he has Quoted Heathen Authors to
vindicate the Actions of the Paxton Men: But for want of Judgment (I think) it
must be that he has handed us such that make against and not for him. He tells
us that he has as great an Advertion to Mobs and all Rioters proceedings as
any can have, (observe) as any Man ought to have a hardened Man. However we
shall see his proof in Page 24. After telling us the Storys of the most
celebrated Heroes of Antiquity: Men whom the present World is not worthy of
etc. Who have recited, destroyed or expelled Traitors and Tyrants, the Pests,
the Burdens and the Butchers of Mankind. Then draws a Line, makes it an entire
Paragraph of it self, throws off all his covering; and tells us in plain Terms
that indeed such an Action could never have been censured in the World, if
their had not lived in all Ages; abject Flatterers and servile Creatures of
power, always prepared to sanctify and abet the most enormous wickedness, if
it were gainful, and they are they, who have often missed good Men in the worst
Prejudices. Here I have given the entire Paragraph; now I propose to give the
definition, ergo: Indeed such an Action could never have been censured in the
World, i. e. killing the Indians at Lancaster, coming down to Philadelphia with
the like Design, ergo: If they had not been in all Ages abject Flatterers, and
servile Creatures of Power; the Governor, Commissioners and Assembly, it can be
well else: They are always prepared to Sanctify and abet the most enormous
wickedness, if it were gainful, these are those who have often led good Men in
the worst Prejudices, i. e. The Actions of Philadelphia, who at the Governors
request, saved the Lives of the Indians in the Barraks, and this Letter writer
and his Brethren are the Men that are Prejudiced against them for it; the
Reader may see that I have not strained this Paragraph in the least, but have
given the genuine Character and Sentiments of the Author, which is that he was
the Instigator of all the Mischef; or that he is the Abettor and does approve
of all their Conduct, nay, we have his own Qualifications for what I assert in
the following Words, viz. (As any Man ought to have) and his whole Writing make
a Chain of Circumstances, which being linkt together at the Ends, makes a
Lawful Evidence, therefore by the valitity of these two Evidences and according
to Form in Law, I shall pass Sentence on him; and do hereby Pronounce in a
sollid Manner, the Author of this Letter I now have under my Notice to be a
Stark Naked Presbyterian, Page 22, 23. Here he seems to be somewhat mift'd at
the Author of the Narrative, for calling the killing of the Indians murder; and
wants to know, who made him Judge or Jury, etc. I shall let him know their
wants neither Judge nor Jury in that Affair: Such like Actions as that at
Lancaster has been condemned by the express Name murder, some thousand of Years
past. Numb. 35. v. 16. And if a Man smite another, with an Instrument of Iron,
(so that he die,) he is a murderer: The murderer shall surely be put to Death.
Is not the Barrel of a Gun Iron? and is not that the principle Part of the
Machine? and are not the Tomahawks Iron? and did they not kill the Indians with
those very weapons? ergo* This cannot be denied, well then, I assert it is
proved that the Paxton People did murder the Indians at Lancaster? the Author
has Quoted one Passage in the Bible, and another in the Apocriphy, which I
conceive he has brought for no other Purpose than to palliate the Horrid
perfidy of the Paxton Men, in showing us that there was two People in former
Times that did make use of Treachery, though it was in Cases quite fore-on from
his Subject. In Page 32. He tells us that to stifle the Notions of Revenge is
prudent and Religous in private Persons. But at the same Time it is undoubtedly
true, that a proper Spirit of Jealousy (observe) and revenge too, in a People,
who are oppressed and injured; is a Politic and commendable Virtue: I should
have been glad to have seen a little of his Activity displayed here, where he
might have saved this Paragraph from a plain Contradiction; for my Part I cannot
to stifle the Notions of Revenge, is Prudant; that is when a Person thinks
himself or his Friend injured, he feels something stiring in his Heart, which
inclines him to do somewhat as bad or worse to the Person whom he looks upon to
be, or is the Agressor; this motion ought to be stifled (observe) and never
allowed to come forth into Action; nay, he seems to bind every Person to this,
by the Cords of Religion; (well this is sound Doctrine.) But (observe) when Men
kick against the Pricks of Conscience, and will pay no Regard to the divine
Instinct in themselves. notwithstanding, our Author cries out against it;
Religion absolutely forbids it. Each Man suffers it to raise into a Flame, and
Numbers of them being infatuated, combine together determined to be revenged
and will Prosecute their Design, let the Consequence be what it will; even to
murder their Neigbours, insult Government, redicule their Friends, pay no
regard to Laws moral or Divine. Then behold! this Letter Writer says, it is
acommendable Virtue without which they will never be valued or respected: I am
sure I have done this Author no other diskindness on my Definition of this
Paragraph; but to expose his notorious Nonsense. I expect this little Book when
it comes into the World, will meet Men of three opinions; the one may think I
have been too smart on the Presbyterians, the other may say its but what they
deserve, and the third will hardly have Patience to read a single Page. The
Reader may see I have run over the whole, and here and there made a Remark: But
in Truth, they are but slightly touch, if Life and Health Permitted: I could
write a Volume upon it, showing the Authors Envy and Folly; in such a Manner
that it would disgrace him to all Intents and Purposes: However, I am spared,
that Pains, for his own Work, will come nearly to the same thing; I say as I
was inspecting into the Charges against the Quakers, I found myself, as I
thought under a Necessity to mention some Facts against the Presbyterians, that
the impartial Reader may judge as he finds Things stand in an obvious Manner
either for one or the other of the two Societies: And that he may be the better
enabled to determine upon the Whole, and judge for himself, which Societies
Members may be the fitest for Representatives of the Peoples Lives and
Fortunes, the fitest for Magistrates to judge impartially between a Man and his
Neighbor, the fitest for Assessors to value Men's Goods and Chattles without
Malice or Favor, the fitest for Collectors of Taxes and Assizes, where a Man
ought to do by his Neighbor as he would have his Neighbor do by him; in
short, whether an honest Man would rather have a Quaker or a Presbyterian for
his Neighbor. I shall conclude with a short Address, (but with a great deal of
sencerity) to doom Bur -- on and his Ulceration Presbyterians, desiring the
next Day, they dedicate to Liberty and St. Patrick; and at the end of their
Chorus, he will make a Proclamation, as with the sound of a Ram's-Horn, begging
and entreating those that murdered the Indians, to surrender themselves up to
Justice: Pray their Neighbors to take warning by them, confessing his hearty
sorrow for his being the Author or Abetter of such a horrid Crime, promising in
the most sollid Manner that he will never protitute his Pen to such villianous
Purposes more; pray that the Quakers will forgive, and pass by, acknowledging
that he wrote by no other Motion than the Spirit of Lucifer, and declare that
his Will and Pleasure is; that whosoever has this spurious Letter, that he will
commit it to the Flames. Amen. And then we may expect to feel the happy Effects
resulting from Liberty and Law; to see the Quiet of the Province restored, and
Harmony and good order of Government re-established among us.

I am PHILANTHROPY.

Errata. Page 17. l. 11. read but why has he conseal'd the Names of those
Officers. l. 25. read crammed for examined. p. 18. l. 10. r. in the userpation,
for has read had. l. 32 for mentioned read meant. p. 19. l. 32 read Consciences
for Countenances. p. 21. l. 14 read for one Thing more. p. 24. l. 17 read none
for well. (...)


