A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN IN TRANSYLVANIA To his Friend in America giving some
Account of the late disturbances that have happened in that Government, with
some Remarks upon the political revolutions in the Magistracy, and the Debates
that happened about the change.

Humbly inscribed to Counselor QUONDAM By his Friend ISAAC BICKERSTAFF, of the
Middle Temple.

"Hail, happy Pope! whose generous mind
"Detesting all the Statesmen kind;
"A Genius for all stations fit,
"Whose meanest Talent is his wit;
"His Heart too great, though fortune little,
"To lick a rascal Statesman's spittle,
"Appealing to the Nations taste,
"Above the reach of want is placed.
SWIFT. NEW YORK, Printed in the Year 1764.

DEAR SIR,
IN making the tour of Europe I had the pleasure of writing to you last from
Belgrade the Capital of Hungary; I have since had the curiosity, (before I
enter Poland) to visit Transylvania, a Province formerly under the Dominion of
the Turk, but now belonging to the Emperor of Germany; and as its Waywode, the
name given to the Prince or Governor.
Waywode is almost independent of his Sovereign, he has peopled it with Persons
of all Nations, and of every profession under Heaven.

Having made a purchase of the soil from the Barbarians, who were the original
Proprietors; he has also obtained a grant from the Emperor to him and his
Heirs, for being perpetual Waywode of the Country: This enables him, together
with his great distance from Court, to govern the Inhabitants, who flocked from
all Quarters to settle the Country under the sanction of a Charter of
Privileges and immunities, granted for the preservation of their Religion and
Liberties, with an absolute sway.

In ancient times the Natives and Foreigners lived in perfect friendship; but
within these ten years past, there has been nothing but bloody Wars carried on
between them. -- The original cause of which is said to be, the Waywode's
taking the advantage of the simplicity and ignorance of the Natives in
purchasing their Lands, with regard to their nature and situation, as well as
description; and cheating them out of ten times more than ever they sold. This,
(with the trade driven on among them by some Christians, who first made them
drunk, and then defrauded them, and prostituted their Females, -- a System of
religion unknown to them and their Forefathers) disgusted them to such a
degree, that they immediately declared War. The Turks joining them, there was
then a necessity for the Waywode and his Subjects to raise money. The Delegates
being assembled to consult the welfare of the Country; insisted that a Tax
should be laid upon all the Cow-kine in the Province. The Waywode agreed, but
upon condition, that all his own should be exempted, as he had large flocks all
over the Country -- This, the Delegates refused, because his Cows were as
liable to be made a prey of by the Enemy, as their own. He then told them his
Bulls were free from Taxes, as they could not come under the denomination of
Cow-kine, but Bull-kine; this construction however the Delegates would not
admit of. A long dispute then ensued. His Excellency told them that if Bulls
should be taxed, which he could not believe was just, yet certainly Heffers and
Calves of all kinds were clear. The Delegates replied, they saw no reason why
his Excellency's Bulls, Heffers and Calves should be exempted and not their
own. The Barbarians in the mean time, laid waste the Frontiers with fire and
sword. This intestine dispute proved more fatal to the Province, than all the
depredations of a foreign Enemy. Such was the cruel, unrelenting disposition of
the Lord of the soil, that he would rather see a general Massacre of all the
Inhabitants of the Land, than suffer one of his calves to be taxed toward
protecting them from a foreign force.

A few of the well affected Natives to the Government, threw themselves under
it is protection, and delivered up their Wives and Children as a pledge of their
future Fidelity; Lands were assigned for the maintenance of some, and others
were supported at the public-expence near the Metrapolis. Such was the state of
Transylvania upon my first arrival at the Capital.

I waited upon his Excellency the Waywode, who received me very politely. He
appeared to be a middle-aged Man of small stature; surrounded with half a Dozen
boys who were called Prime Ministers of State; four young Nymps of Circassian
breed, and a Calidonian wry necked Musician. The Room was filled with
instruments of music. A Violin; a harpsichord; six Bagpipes, and one dozen of
Jews Harps, He enquired if I understood Music; I answered, some few Italian
Airs upon the Bagpipe. Joy then appeared upon his countenance, and he
immediately gave me a general invitation to accompany him either to the chase
(as he loved a bow and arrow) or concert, every day during my stay at
Weissenburgh.

Scarce had two days elapsed, when the City was all in arms, at the news of the
Piss -- Brute -- tarians (a bigoted, cruel and revengful sect, sprung from the
Turks, and Adorers of Mahomet as to absolute Fate, but nominal Christians in
some other respects, having murdered the innocent Natives, Man Woman and Child,
who were settled in the Country, were in full march to butcher those under the
protection of the City. In consequence of this intelligence, eight hundred men
were put under arms, and ten pieces of cannon prepared. A Truce however ensued,
and the Waywode, not only put up with the insult, but meanly stooped to carress
the, rebels; nay, he promised them an act of Indemnity, and engaged to take
them into high favor, if they would turn their resentment upon the Delegates of
the Province, instead of himself. This they agreed to. The Delegates had no way
to save themselves from destruction, and preserve the Government from Anarchy;
but by appealing to the Emperor to be taken under his own protection, and
rescued from the oppressions of the Piss -- Brute -- tarians, and the Tyranny
of the Waywode. By this strange revolution at Court, all that were Rebels but a
few days before, were now the Court Favorites; and those, who had bravely and
generously taken up arms to save his Excellency's windpipe from being severed
in a thousand pieces, were looked upon as Enemies to the Government. Such is
the instability of Courts, and the wonderful Wisdom of Ministers of State! It
is said his Excellency's Musical Instruments in the fray were all put out of
tune, and that he has been disconcerted ever since; be that as it will; a
sudden resolution was taken to call a Council, wherein it was decreed, that
there should no Magistrates hold Commissions under the Government, who had
shown any Love for the Emperor; or was not a Piss -- Brute -- tarian; or could
not play upon the Jew's harp.

As I had the happiness to be acquainted with Counselor Wiseman, a most
accomplished Gentleman, who had directed the Board for ten Years, with the
greatest integrity through all the political storms and tempests that had
threatened the destruction of the Province, during the whole time by reason of
a bloody war that had been carried on with the grand Turk, he took the first
Opportunity after the Council broke up to communicate to me the substance of
the debate upon that important subject.

His Excellency the Waywode, informed the Board, that he would not have one
Assertorian in the Commission of the peace or any other civil office throughout
the Government, as they seemed all tinctured with a rebellious disposition
toward him and his family, and had transferred their Loyalty to the Emperor
himself. That by their late proceedings, in choosing such men to represent
them, who were his bitter Enemies; and in complaining to the Emperor against
him, by which means he would be looked upon with an evil Eye at the Court of
Vienna, and either obliged to resign his Government, or throw himself under the
Protection of the grand Turk; therefore as they had thus shown their malicious
intentions against his Administration they were no longer to be enrolled among
the Number of his Friends. He also added, that those of the Emperors' Religion
had behaved in such a cold indifferent manner (a few in Weissenburgh excepted)
as plainly made it appear that they were as well affected to the Emperor as
himself; -- that their principles in Religion and the maxims by which they and
their Ancestors were governed for one Thousand Years, were peculiarly adapted
to support the Emperial Family; -- that these things being considered, he could
not expect their firm attachment to his person, or their general concurrence to
his measures; and therefore in good policy they ought not to be trusted at such
a critical conjuncture. He therefore desired the Council to give their
opinions, whether any other Sect was to be trusted as Magistrates in the
Government, besides the Piss -- Brute -- tarians, a Sect whose principles have
ever been diametrically opposite to Monarchy; and not only This has reference
to their solomn Leauge and Covenant.
sworn Enemies to the Emperial Family, but murdered one of the Emperors before
his own palace; and have always been the foremost in all the Rebellions that
have been raised against his Successors ever since. He also said, that there
was a few of his Enemies, who have dared publicly to espouse the Emperor's
cause, and whom he "marked" out for punishment; he wished it could be with the
loss of their heads, instead of their Commissions. The Enemies were Pottonius,
Paulinus, Mortonus, and Trumponius, the last he was somewhat sorry for, as he
supposed his Ancestors were great Musicians; for they had taken a name, to
perpetuate their posterity, by which, some Nations call a Jews-Harp.

The Generality for the Council heartily concurred with his Excellency the
Waywode; but when it came to Counselor Wiseman to give his opinion, he begged
leave to dissent from the rest of the board; and hoped his Excellency, would,
with that attention and deliberation for which he was remarkable, hearken to
his reasons.

He told his Excellency, he hoped he would excuse him, if he differed with him
in some of the Political Observations he had just now made; and unto which
Messieurs Simpleton, Prigg, Beau, and Brainless his Brother Counselors had
signified their approbation. He told him that as he had been but a short time
Viceroy of the province he ought to use every method in his power to cultivate
a good understanding with the people; -- that as a spirit of Freedom had drawn
them from all Nations to populate such an extensive province, stripping them of
their rights and privileges, was not the way of either gaining the good opinion
of those who were wavering, or of bringing them back that were the most
seditious; that though his Excellency was sensible, how little either himself, or
the Council troubled themselves about what was called Religion, yet (as he very
well knew] there was a necessity of keeping up external appearances, and that
it was a useful engine to keep the Vulgar in awe; -- that if therefore he
abandoned the profession of it, he would be held in universal, disesteem by all
its Professors; -- that if he appeard more zealous for one sect than another, a
general Jealousy would take place among the rest, and perhaps unite them all
against him; that if this should happen; the Piss -- Brute -- tarians, were not
the tenth of his Subjects, and consequently could not support him against the
other nine; -- that if he made an impartial distribution of places of Profit
and Honor in the Government, and established them in all their equitable
demands, the Emperor would have no objection toward the continuing of him in
his Vice-Royality; no complaints could have any weight against him, his
Character would appear fair at Court, and perhaps save him the expense and
trouble of a long Journey to defend himself.

As to the Assertorians, the taking them into his favor, in imitation of many
of his worthy Predecessors, would perhaps, effectually regain their Friendship;
make them drop the prosecution of their Appeal; and as they are above one fifth
part of the Inhabitants, they are no contemptable body to disoblige. Pottonius,
(who appears to be particularly singled out) is a Gentleman, who has remarkably
distinguished himself this twenty Years past, for his Integrity, in faithfully
discharging the Office of a Magistrate; his fortune places him above the fear
or affection of Mankind, in the destribution of Justice; and therefore he does
your Excellency as much honor in accepting of the Commission, as you can do him
in giving it. As to those of the Emperor's Religion, it is well known that two
of their Priests; and a number of their People, who either hold Offices in
reality under you, or live in expectation of them, in this Metrapolis, have
gone greater lengths to serve you, than any other Sect among us in some
particulars.

Have they not abandoned their former Principles; violated every obligation
that was either civil or sacred, or that bound them by the ties of Conscience
or honor to be faithful to the Emperor, in order to support your Cause? Have
they not prostituted their Temple, (a place solemnly dedicated for pious uses)
as an Amphitheatre for the Rabble to combat in? Has not their Altar been
profaned by the unhallowed hands of Turks, Jews, Infidels and Piss -- Brute --
tarians? And all this in favor of your Excellency.

As for Paulinus, Mortonus, and others of the Emperor's Profession, whose
characters have been irreproachable, and whose Virtues have made them revered
by their Country, shall they become the objects of your Excellency's
disapprobation for no other reason, than that they still continue to have a
regard for the Emperor, and cannot easily conquer their old prejudices in
favor of the Emperial Court? -- Time might bring them over as well as others;
but such rash and precipitate measures, will create a Jealousy throughout all
Transylvania, as if your opposition to them was purely out of spite to the
Emperor, for whom they would be made a Sacrifice.

Your Attachment to the Piss -- Brute -- tarians is somewhat remarkable, as
they have been the cause of all the trouble that has happened in the
Government. Had there never been a Rebellion amongst them here, your Excellency
would never have been brought into such difficulties. Had the Traitors been
punished according to their Demerit, there never would have been an Appeal to
Vienna. How then can you place your chief confidence in a sect who have been
the sole cause of your misfortunes? These invincible arguments staggered his
Excellency; but being a Man of weak Intellects, and abandoned (like The last
King of the Assyrian Empire, who for his Extreme Effeminacy was so disdained by
his own Captains, that they conspired against him. When he saw himself so
straightened, that there was no escaping, he turned valiant, and making a funeral
pile of all his precious Things (Fiddles) he burnt himself in his Palace, and
went out in a blaze.

See a full account of him in Justin.
Sardana palus) to wine, music and Women, was soon confirmed in his former
opinion, by his other Counselors, who told him, that all the People in the
Province were a set of Villains, but the Piss -- Brute -- tarians and
themselves, and hoped he would govern himself accordingly. Thus the Council
broke up. But I am afraid I have transgressed the bounds of a single Letter,
and have only tired your patience with some few hints about the Politics of a
Country, the name of which is scarcely known in America. You see by this how I
improve my time in my Travels, and I hope to return to America equally
accomplished with those of my Countrymen who have made this Tour before me.
Adieu, dear Sir, at present! You need not expect to hear from me, till my
arrival at Warsaw, where an account of the Politics of Poland, will be the
subject of my next.

I am yours, etc. JACK TRAVELLER.
WEISSENBURGH in TRANSYLVANIA, August 1st. 1764.

