A DIALOGUE, Containing some Reflections on the late Declaration and
Remonstrance, Of the Back-Inhabitants of the PROVINCE of PENNSYLVANIA.

With a serious and short ADDRESS, to those Presbyterians, who (to their
dishonor) have too much abetted, and connived at the late Insurrection.

By a Member of that Community.

The more the bold, the bust'ling, and the bad,
Press to usurp the Reins of Power, the more
Behooves it Virtue, with indignant Zeal,
To check their Combination. --
THOMSON. Philadelphia, printed: and sold by all the Pamphlet-sellers.
M,DCC,LXIV.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
POSITIVE and ZEALOT. Posit. BROTHER, -- Aye dad, I had like to have said
Brother Scrivner, I hear rare News Today


Zeal. About what?


Posit. About what! -- Our DECLARATION and REMONSTRANCE.


Zeal. Why, does it take well with the Philadelphians?


Posit. Take! Aye Man, by my Faith, three Parts of the City seem to approve of
it, if their Minds don't change with the next Wind that blows. -- Why, Brother
Zealot, there are Hundreds in Philadelphia tapping their Neighbors on the
Shoulder, and saying, It is a prodigious sharp Thing: Yes it is a very smart
thing, says the other; -- Poor Fellows! I didn't once think the Paxton-Boys had
such Provocation and Grievances to provoke them to do as they did, but now I
don't wonder at them. -- I assure you our Remonstrance has gained us many
Proselytes, and many of the Philadelphians to our Party. Aye, aye, and it is my
Opinion, that if the Governor and Assembly will not grant all and each of our
reasonable Requirements, and redress our many Grievances; I say, it is my humble
Opinion we, by our excellent little Book, shall have more than half the
Country, as well as three Parts of Philadelphia, to back us when we give them
the next Visit.


Zeal. Hold! Hold! Hold! Mr. Positive, I Am afraid you count your Chickens
before they are hatched.


Posit. What do you mean, Mr. Zealot?


Zeal. My dear Sir, I mean this, I am not, on second Thoughts, so much
prejudiced in favor of our little Book as you are, nor perhaps as many of our
careless giddy Readers; for tho not One in Fifty understands what he reads, or
seeks for Proofs for Propositions laid down, neither has Capacity to enter into
the Spirit of the Author: Yet there are Men quick-sighted, both in City and
Country, who, I Am afraid, will easily discern the Fallacy of our Arguments, and
the lightness of our Matter; and give me leave, Brother Scrivner, as I am a
Party, as well as you, in writing this excellent Piece, and expect to be paid
as well for it; I say give me leave to tell you, that I am not so sanguine as
you are, respecting it is Success, notwithstanding our seeming reasonable
Remonstrances, covered over with a few tender Expressions, and thin, very thin
Glosses; together with Propositions and Assertions without Proof, expressed in
bad English, and here and there in contradictory Terms; and many other Faults,
which before they came out of the Press, I was not aware of.


Posit. Oh Lud! Oh Lud! Pray good reformed Sir, have you no more than these few
Faults to find with your own sweet Works and my witty Inventions? Oh my Heart!
I believe the Man is going Mad! Why Zealot, do thou deny thy own Works?


Zeal. No, Mr Positive, I don't deny my own Works; but I am afraid, as the
Traitor Syphax once said to Sempronies his chief Captain, in a Case parallel
with this, Cato has piercing Eyes, and will discern our Frauds, unless they are
covered thick with Art.


Posit. Puh! puh! puh! mad indeed! quite mad! stark mad! what in the Name of
the D -- l have we to do with Cato's, Sempronies's, or Syphax's.


Zeal. I beg your Pardon Sir, but perhaps this may not be so great a Digression
as shallow Politicians may imagine, and as it seems to offend you, I will drop
it, and come to the Point at once.


Posit. Aye, aye, come to the Point at once; but I swear you shall never bring
me into your Opinion, to think that our Declaration and Remonstrance is either
false, foolish, or impertinent, or that it borders on Rebellion. No, no, Mr.
Zealot, so far from Rebellion, that I wonder that all the witty Politicians and
great Geniuses in the Province, have not employed their Pens in applauding our
never-to-be-forgotten Action at Lancaster; where we bravely conquered, our Eye
not pitying, nor our Hand sparing either Age or Sex; exulting, as one of our
modern Poets says, in the Widow's Wail, the Virgin's Shriek, and Infant's
trembling Cry. -- Oh Zealot! tell me not of Cassius, Brutus, Caesar, Pompey, or
even Alexander the Great! We! we Paxton Boys have done more than all, or any of
them! We have, and it gives me Pleasure to think on it, Slaughtered, killed and
cut off a whole Tribe! a Nation at once!


[Here a third Person, an honest plain Man, one Lovell, interrupting, said]

Lovell. Gentlemen, if I may be permitted, I will give you my Opinion of the
Matter you are so warmly debating; but I beg you will not be offended at what I
shall offer.


Posit. Aye, aye, do, my good Neighbor Lovell, let us hear your honest, simple
Opinion; for Mr Zealot, I believe, is out of his Head.


Lovell. I believe it is not much Learning has made him mad, for setting aside
the common People of the Town, and those many Readers, who judge of Books and
Things like old Wives, for the sake of pretty Glosses, and fabulous Stories; I
say setting aside these two Classes of People, there are three to one who say
it is a weak and wicked Thing, and only serves to make your very bad Cause still
worse.


Posit. Hey day! Hey day! Why this is worse and worse: I thought you would have
been of my Side the Question!


Lovell. No, Sir, I am a Man that loves the Truth; and I humbly think, that it
is always the best Side of the Question; and though it should be against my
Interest with Man, yet if required, I shall, and must, always declare my honest
real Sentiments: And so, Gentlemen, upon the Liberty you have just now granted
me, I shall proceed in as brief a Manner as I possibly can. First then, I shall
take Notice of the Title Page of your REMONSTRANCE. -- After your courtly
Compliments to the Honorable the Governor and Assembly, etc. -- Showing the
Causes of your late Discontent and Uneasiness, and which you humbly pray to
have redressed! -- What Man in his Senses can help smiling at such a flagrant
Piece of Contradiction? Pray when was it ever known, that after a Herd, or
Number of Rebels and Violent Men, had, contrary to Reason, Religion, and the
Laws of Nations, as well as in Defiance of the good Laws of Government where
they lived, had murdered, killed, and cruelly massacred a Number of Men, Women
and Children, who for so many Years had proved themselves to be peaceful
Subjects of the Government, and good Neighbors amongst those where they
resided; in such a Case was ever such Audacity known, for People who have, and
must be conscious they have so heinously offended, to pray to have Grievances
redressed, when they themselves are the known Agressors? Add to this their
clamorous Threats against some of the most worthy, useful and publick-spirited
Men in the City and Country, is something very daring and --


Posit. Interrupting. Why, Mr. Lovell, you talk strangely! You must certainly
know that a great many of our Friends and Neighbors have been cruelly
massacred, and others carried into barbarous Captivity amongst the Indians. You
know Revenge is sweet; and it is a common Saying, BLOOD REQUIRES BLOOD.


Lovell. Well, Mr. Positive, you have had it, and in your own Way too, and yet
you are not satisfied. -- Now had your Vengeance fell on the Guilty, it would
have much altered the Case. Suppose a Brother of mine had killed a Relation of
yours, would it be just in you to kill me? That is as the Proverb is, not
putting the Saddle on the right Horse.


Posit. But does not our little Book justify us? wherein we have so fully
declared that nothing but Necessity itself, could induce us to do as we did.


Lovell. Why, Sir, I shall speak to that bye and bye, when I have done with
your Title Page; in which, say you, We humbly pray to have Redress. -- Very
humbly indeed! How? With Sword in Hand, Rifles, Tomahawks, and other Implements
of War? In Truth, if one don't mind what one says, a mighty humble Way of
praying. I rather think these unhappy People should have come with Ropes about
their forfeited Necks to sue, as they call it, for Redress of Grievances; or
rather, for Pardon of past Guilt of so black a Nature. For this kind of Conduct
we have an extraordinary Precedent in the First Book of Kings, Chapter 20th, in
which some of the Servants or Officers of King Benhadad wisely counseled him to
act in this Manner, (see Ver. 32.) So they girded Sackcloth on their Loins, and
put Ropes on their Heads, and came to the King of Israel, and said, etc. For
the rest I refer you to the whole Passage. Now, though I confess my Warmth, yet I
cannot help feeling in my Heart a Tenderness and Pity for these my deluded
Countrymen; and I can truly say, I could wish to God that they had followed the
laudable Example of these wise distressed People, the Syrians of Old, instead
of the rash, inconsiderate Method they so violently pursued: For see Verse 31,
where it is said, Behold, etc. I beg, without further Addition, to refer you to
the whole Chapter, as nothing in Language can be better adapted to the present
Purpose.

Now, Gentlemen, by your Leave, for a Remark or two on your Declaration. -- In
as much (say you) as the killing the Indians at Connestogo-Manor and Lancaster,
has been, and may be the Subject of much Conversation, (^o Wonder) and by
invidious Representations of it, which some, we doubt not, will industriously
spread, many unacquainted with the true State of Affairs, may be led to pass a
severer Censure on the Authors of those Facts, and any others of those of like
nature, which may hereafter happen, than we are persuaded they would, if
Matters were duly understood and deliberated! -- How is it possible to pass a
Consure severe enough upon Rioters and Murderers in cool Blood? Let the
Provocations be what they will, every humane tender Heart must shudder at, and
detest both the Facts and the Authors of them: Nor is it possible for any, even
their nearest Relations, to offer one single Argument of Weight in their
Favor. But further; by your own Words, you seem to have a Design of yet
trampling on the Laws of Government, and committing the same Thing over again,
when a convenient Opportunity offers; else what is the Meaning of the Words
before mentioned, on the Authors of those Facts, and others of the like nature,
which may hereafter happen? Now, what becomes of this humble Praying? In short,
it amounts to this, and ought to be read thus, "We the distressed," or rather,
angry "bleeding," or rather " bloody-minded, revengeful Inhabitants of
Pennsylvania, do request;" or rather, insist, to have as many of the now
present Laws and Acts of Assembly abolished, as suit not our Interest, or is
not agreeable to our Wills; and we will, when, and as soon as it suits our
other Purposes, let the Honorable Governor and Assembly know our further
Pleasure. -- You farther say, in Page 3, We think it proper, thus openly to
declare ourselves. And what is this Declaration? Why, that we are not sorry
that we have knowingly and deliberately violated the Laws of Government, for we
do frankly confess, that nothing but Necessity itself could induce us to it. To
what? To downright Rebellion and Murder: -- Audacious and horrid Confession
indeed! And then call it a seeming, or bearing an Appearance of flying in the
Face of Government and Authority! -- But how easy is it for any one that is not
prejudiced in your Favor, to see through such thin Glosses and mean Sophistry?
In Line 18, you say, And is attended with much Labor, Fatigue and Expense. O
dear! This is neither new nor strange! -- When was it ever known that an angry,
giddy, violent and revengeful People, first sat down and counted the Cost, or
would be persuaded to stop their mad Career, till their Folly had run them
aground, and brought them to a too late Repentance? But as I can only touch
upon Things, I shall conclude this Head with telling you, that if such an
Affair had happened in England, it would have brought your Leaders to the
common Gallows, or to have had the Honor of a new one erected on Pupose for
them; and your poor deluded Followers, to Transportation for Life. -- Now,
Gentlemen, I will for Brevity's Sake, omit taking Notice of those ridiculous
uncertain Stories of a certain injured Society in this City, as they appear to
be without any Proof, Weight or Signification. -- If even they could be proved,
this could be no Excuse for Rebellion, Sedition and Murder, putting a whole
City in a Panic, and the Country in an Uproar and Surprise. -- But what can you
possibly mean by your notable Harangue, in Page 9? And can it be thought
strange (say you) that a Scene of such Treatment at this Time, and now adding
at this critical Juncture to all our former Distresses, the disagreeable Burden
of supporting in the very Heart of the Province, at so great an Expense,
between one and two Hundred Savages, to the great Disquietude of the Majority
of the good Inhabitants of this Province, etc. And must not (say you) all
well-disposed People entertain a charitable Sentiment of those, who, at their
own great Expense and Trouble, have attempted, or shall yet attempt, to rescue
a laboring Land from a Weight so oppressive, unreasonable and unjust? It is
this we design, it is this we are resolved to prosecute; though it is with great
Reluctance, we are obliged to adapt a Measure not so agreeable as could be
desired and to which Extremity alone compels. -- Pray, Gentlemen, what do you
mean by supporting at a great Expense, between one and two Hundred Savages, to
your great Disquietude, etc.?


Posit. We mean, Sir, those Savages in the Barracks.


Lovell. Alas, Sir! how strangely mistaken are you, as well as many Hundreds
more, whom I Have heard express themselves in this random Way; either not
knowing, or not distinguishing, between Savage Indians, Heathen Indians, and
Christian Indians. -- Now, Gentlemen, through the tender Mercy of their and
your Creator, who is one God over all, blessed for evermore; I say, through
him, whose tender Mercies are over all his Works, and before whose Eye the
Color of the Skin is nothing, has been pleased in his boundless Compassion,
to send Gospel Ministers amongst them, and these few, out of the many Thousands
in America, have embraced and received the joyful Report of the Gospel: And
further, they have, after believing in JESUS, been baptized in his Name, and
into his Death, who is both their Lord and ours. And again, many of these
Savages, as they are called, have, and do yet, partake of the Lord's Supper, or
Holy Communion; and it is not only a Pleasure, but Astonishing, when one
converses with them, to find how well grounded they are in the Principles and
Doctrines of the Old and New Testaments, and our reformed Religion. -- One
Thing more I would observe, which to me, is a stronger Proof yet, of their
being rooted and grounded in the Living Power and Faith of the Gospel; and that
is, at the Time of the late Tumult, when most of the People believed that the
Rioters from the Frontiers had their Eye chiefly against them, to cut them off
from the Land of the Living, both Root and Branch; yet through the Time of this
deep Calamity, their serene Looks and quiet Deportment, plainly indicated an
upright Heart, and a Mind at ease; and this even in the View of an approaching
and untimely Death, by wicked and cruel Hands, already stained with Human
Blood. I myself have visited them two or three Times in their present Exile,
and have always found them to be free, pleasant, calm and unruffled, Like a
Summer's Sea, when not a Breath of Wind flies over its Surface.


Zeal. And may I, Sir, give Credit to this Report of yours?


Posit. For my Part, hang me if I Will believe any Thing like it. -- CHRISTIANS!
I swear it cannot be true; nor shall this, or any Thing you can advance in their
Favor, alter my fixed Opinion of them; nay, if I though it that any of their
Color was to be admitted into the Heavenly World, I would not desire to go
there myself.


Lovell. Well Mr. Positive, since it offends you so much, I will drop this
Subject of our Discourse, and come to a Conclusion, as you harden your Mind
against Conviction, and obstinately refuse Reproof. Therefore, a few Remarks
more, and I have done; as to the great Expense you complain of, are not you
yourselves the absolute Cause of it? Is it not to the Horror of the Government?
And did not you oblige them to take those distressed People under their
fatherly Protection, to save a considerable Number from Destruction? And where
could they be safer than here, from the Fury and Rage of an incensed, riotous
and lawless Mob? You are the last that should complain of this Expense, as you
yourselves are the Occasion of it. And further, the Necessity of keeping them
here, evidently appears from your insolent and daring Confession in the four
last Lines of your Declaration: It is this (you say) we design, it is this we
are resolved to prosecute, etc. -- Yes, yes, if we may judge of your future, by
your late treasonable Conduct, we may take your Word for it, without swearing
to it: And, to make Use of your own Words above, Will not the good Inhabitants
of this Province, and all well-disposed People, awaken to Resentment, and put
themselves in Readiness to repel, if fair Argument will not do; I say, repel Force
to Force, and severely chastise such lawless Rioters; who, in the Conclusion of
their Threatenings and Demands pretend to say, though in Contradiction to their
Actions, GOD SAVE THE KING. -- What unprejudiced impartial Man, after a
deliberate Reflection on all they have done and said, will view their
Declaration in any other Light than a sophistical Piece of Irony, artfully
insinuating into the Minds of the Ignorant and Vulgar, that they are, as they
say in another Place, attached to the Person and Reign of our dear Sovereign
King George the Third? -- Is not their Conduct too much like that notorious
wicked Traitor who at the Head of a tumultuous Mob, came up to his Lord with a
Hail Master, and kissed him?


Posit. I Will hear no more: You would make us out to be a Set of vile People.


Lovell. Sir, you have made, and proved yourselves such; and dangerous as well
as vile.


Posit. Dangerous! How?


Lovell. Why dangerous to the Commonwealth; and if not nipt in the Bud. God
only knows where such unwarrantable Practices may end.


Zeal. Why pray what Harm did we do in coming down to Philadelphia? We neither
killed nor hurt any Body; and every one that saw us, must say we were very
civil.


Lovell. Aye, aye, you were so, and so are common Highwaymen, if you do not
resist them; there are some of those Gentlemen, who when they stop a Coach, and
make their Demands -- Gentlemen and Ladies, pray don't be frightened, we will not
hurt you, only give us our Demand -- your Purse Madam -- If you please, that
Gold Watch Sir -- Oh pray don't be angry with us, who are honest Gentlemen, and
Men of Honor, and love our King and Country; but Necessity, Necessity obliges
us to do this, therefore you must excuse us. -- Gentlemen, your most humble
Servant -- GOD SAVE THE KING. -- Rides off.


Zeal. I think, Sir, you bear a little too hard upon us here.


Lovell. No, Sir; Tumult, Sedition and Rebellion, [and more so when they are
attended with cruel Murders] are more inexcusable than the Wretches I allude
to, who have sometimes a better Right to plead Necessity, than many of the
Abettors of our lawless Frontier Inhabitants.


Zeal. But, dear Sir, I am credibly informed that there are Gentlemen of
Learning and Judgment, who say our Book is a well wrote Thing; particularly --
--, and a few more very knowing and topping Men.


Lovell. Oh yes, Sir; I know who you mean: But are not these Party-men; warm
Bigots, attached only to them of their own Community? which Community is well
known to be an aspiring People, who, when they have attained their Aim, or
gotten the Reins of Government in their Fists, have grasped it hard, and drove
on Jehu-like; or which is more to the Purpose, like that conceited giddy-headed
Fellow who thought himself sufficient to guide the Chariot of the Sun, soon,
very soon, set the World on Fire.


Zeal Pray, good Sir, when was it ever known that we Protestant Dissenters
discovered an angry persecuting Spirit? We are indeed a very zealous People,
and we think it our Duty to be so; besides, if I remember right, I have either
read or heard that our Forefathers have suffered and been persecuted for this
same good Cause, namely, for being Presbyterians.


Lovell. Very well, Sir, I will allow the latter Part of your Argument, it is
true: At the Time when a Paper War was carried on, and libelling between
Conformist and Nonconformist prevailed, your Predecessors and Forefathers did
suffer a good many Things, and stood it out bravely: I believe also, that there
was many great and good Men who became of that Sect, and were an Honor to the
Religion they professed. -- But alas how is the Scene changed? The Crown is
fallen from your Heads; or, as one of your own Poets elegantly expresses it, --
Happy the Times; but ah! those Times are gone, when wondrous Power and radiant
Grace round the tall Arches of the Temple shone, etc. etc. Indeed in these
Times when Non-conformists were but comparitively few in Number, and were a
Laughing Stock to others, then, and for many Years after, true Religion, Zeal,
and a Spirit of Love, prevailed gloriously: But when they became more numerous,
and the Ministers and People more rich, they began to aspire after worldly
Power and Greatness, their Godly Zeal abated, and in its Stead grew up Bigotry,
Superstition and Party-Zeal; and by Degrees, the same bitter persecuting Spirit
by which their Forefathers were persecuted took Place in them, and continues
more or less unto this Day: From hence it is, they are divided and sub-divided
into so many Sects and Parties, every one thinking themselves most Orthodox,
and condemning and charging their Dissenting Brethren with Error Heresy and
Schism, who don't jump into each of their Opinions. -- For the Proof of this we
need not go beyond the Seas; even in this City it is too glaringly manifest, by
the intestine Broils and Schisms that have lately happened; so that not the
meek and peaceful Spirit of the great Founder of Christianity prevails, but
unhappily a Spirit of a very contrary Nature; though we are expressly told in
sacred Writ, that where Contention is, there is every evil Work. It Is grievous
to see what Heat and Bitterness subsists in the Breasts of many PRESBYTERIANS
in this Town, as well as in the Country, against the People called QUAKERS. --
It truly seems as if some make it their Study, as well as Boast, to asperse,
vilify and blacken the fair Character they have generally maintained for so
many Years in all Places throughout the Christian World, where there are any of
that Society living. -- And let me further observe here, the extreme severe and
cruel Treatment these People met with in New England, where they not only
endured cruel Mockings and Scourgings, but Imprisonment, and even Death, for
CHRIST's Sake. -- Let us not recount the Cruelty of PAPISTS, when even
DISSENTERS have been guilty of persecuting Dissenters, breaking up their
Meetings for public Worship, plundering their Houses, hauling Men and Women to
Prison, stripping, whipping and cutting off their Ears, banishing, and at last,
hanging them, till they, as their cruel Judges used often to express it, till
they were dead.


Posit. Mr. Lovell, I will hear no more; nor can I believe your Narrative to be
true.


Lovell. One Minute's Patience more, and I have done. If I should recount but
even the hundredth Part of those cruel Wrongs and Indignities practiced against
those innocent and useful Body of People on account of their Religion, the Time
would fail me: I shall therefore only refer you to Sewell's and Bess's
Histories of the Sufferings of that People, from those who call themselves
Protestant Dissenters, and the Church of CHRIST. So Gentlemen, I wish you both
a good Night, and a better Way of thinking; to wit, Peace Charity, Love and
Good Will to all your Fellow Creatures. Adieu.


To the Protestant DISSENTERS, called PRESBYTERIANS.
My dear Countrymen and Brethren in Community,
AS I have been a Member of one of your Congregations for more than twenty
Years, and am yet so in a good Sense, though I must confess I cannot so readily
fall in with your newfangled Doctrines and Manners, nevertheless I must love
and wish you well. -- I do most humbly beseech and entreat you to fit down and
seriously consider what Spirit you are actuated by: Why are the Quakers, your
good Neighbors, so falsely and slanderously abused by you? Why do you
endeavor to vindicate or lessen the Crimes of those lawless Rioters, more
fatal to a Commonwealth than Thieves and Robbers? Why do you abet their
tottering treasonable Cause, while you fling Dirt and Mire on Government and
your worthy peaceable Neighbors? Why do you shake your Heads and grin with
your Teeth, as though, if it were in your Power, you would bite and devour them
up, even as a Morsel of Bread?

But as a Word to the Wise is enough, let me entreat you, my dear Brethren, to
lay aside all Malice, Revenge and Evil-speaking, and to cultivate that sweet,
amiable and happy Temper of loving one another for Christ's Sake, that we may
prove ourselves to be the Children of the Day (and not of the Night) by all
Acts of faithful tender Love and brotherly Kindness, speaking the Truth every
one to his Neighbor.

One Word more, Gentlemen, and to come close to you, I appeal to your selves:
-- Have not you, with your Ministers, often joined in Prayer to GOD, that he
would be pleased to send his Gospel among the Heathen? And do you not continue
still to do so in your public Assembly? And I think you cannot be ignorant
that the Government at Home, as well as the Religious Societies there, have at
much Pains and Expense, sent many of their Missionaries into these Parts for
this laudable and Christian Purpose viz. To direct their Feet in the right Way,
and to bring them to the Knowledge of the Truth as it is in JESUS; and that
their Labors have not been in vain, or altogether fruitless, is exceedingly
evident from this Circumstance; it is well known that there are five or six
Societies of converted, once Heathen or Savage Indians: And how must it hurt
and retard their Progress in the Christian Life, to find themselves so
grievously used and persecuted by their professed Christian Friends? And how do
you think our SAVIOR and common LORD must look upon this your evil and unkind
Treatment of your Fellow Servants? Do you not make yourselves obnoxious to that
sharp Reprehension in the 12th Chapter of St. Luke, Ver. xlv? For Shame, suffer
your Eyes to be opened, and your Hearts to become affected toward these poor
suffering Exiles, and begrudge them not that scanty Pittance allowed them by
our good Governor and Assembly for their present Subsistence. -- I mention
this, because I have heard many with ill timed Heat, Zeal and Ill Nature,
express great Dissatisfaction against the Government for this very kind and
benevolant Act of Charity, at this Juncture become so absolutely necessary and
unavoidable, and which, I doubt not, our gracious and bountiful LORD takes
Notice of, and will reward an hundred Fold, since a Cup of Water given in his
Name, shall not go unnoticed by him, though bestowed on the least or poorest of
his Followers.

Let me conclude, my dear Fellow Mortals, with this excellent Advice from
Scripture, Be careful lest you be found Fighters against GOD, calling Light
Darkness and Darkness Light, putting Good for Evil and Evil for Good.

I am, Gentlemen, Your Well-Wisher, And very Humble Servant In any Good WORK,
The AUTHOR.
WATER-STREET, April 20th, 1764.
FINIS.

