A LOOKING-GLASS, FOR PRESBYTERIANS.

When up a dangerous Faction starts,
With Wrath and Vengeance in their Hearts;
By solemn League and Covenant bound,
To ruin, Slaughter and confound;
To turn Religion to a Fable,
And make the Government a Babel:
Fair Liberty is then my cry;
For her I stand prepared to die.
SWIFT. Printed in the Year MDCCXLIV.

To THE Friends of Pennsylvania and Lovers of Liberty. This Looking-Glass is
With much Affection And great Respect Inscribed By A Pennsylvanian

A LOOKING-GLASS, etc. NUMB. I.
Put them in mind to be subjest to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates.

Titus 3. v. 1. Knaves out of favor, grudge good Men their place
And Rogues are always honest in disgrace,
The grand Contention's plainly to be seen.
To get some Men put out, and some put in.
True born Englishman.
IN Consequence of the present Debate, every impartial Freeholder of the
Province of Pennsylvania will be naturally induced to consider which of the
Professions in this Country he would venture to choose as Guardian of his civil
and religious Liberties, in a Government, where, according to the Constitution,
no one Profession in particular can be established by Law, withous a manifest
breach and Violation of its original Foundation. But as the Contest seems
particularly to be between the Quakers and Presbyterians, we ought, as Members
of one common Society, seriously to weigh the Merits of both Parties, before we
list ourselves under the Banner of either, -- Neither ought Country, Prejudice
of Education, or particular Opinions in Religion, sway us with regard to
Government* because even the Mohammedan Jurisdiction is to be preferred (with
respect to Liberty of Conscience) to many Countries in Europe governed by
Christians.

I have never read of any Country in the World, where Quakers have had
Authority except Pennsylvania; so that all the Examples of their good or bad
Administration, must be drawn from this Place. Now even the most prejudiced
cannot but acknowledge, after taking an impartial View of the conduct of the
Quakers, that we have been wisely and judiciously governed. For Matters of Fact
speak loudly in their Favor. The present amazing Perfection this Province has
arrived to in so short a Time, both in Riches, Trade and Commerce, is owing to
the wise and prudent Administration of this good People. Was not every useful
and salutary Plan pursued by them to encourage Emigrents of all Nations to
settle here? And when they did settle, did they not enjoy Liberties both civil
and religious in the most ample Manner? Has the bloody Spirit of Persecution
ever prevailed among them to the Detriment of other Christians. And to whom can
the distressed go with surer Confidence of Relief than to them. And I dare
venture to affirm that these very Considerations moved the first Adventurers
from Ireland, to send for their poor Relations to populate this Province, whose
delightful Plains far surpass the barren Mountains of Carentaugher, Slemish or
Slevgallion.

Whether any of these new comers settled upon unpurchased Land belonging to
Indians, or whether they always kept within Bounds, is a Question I will not
undertake to determine. But however it appears very unlikely that the Indians
should maintain an inviolable friendship with us, when they might have crushed
us in a moment, till we were grown a numerous People, and then go to war with
us for no reason when we were able to cope with them in the field of battle.

I shall readily allow that according to the strict rules of Quaker principles,
they are not qualified to govern in time of war. And indeed the majority of
those worthy people themselves are of the same opinion; for some time ago, when
there was an absolute necessity for protecting this province by an armed force,
many of the Friends who were then in the House of Assembly resigned their
seats, and left the management of public affairs in the hands of people of
another profession. This part of their conduct certainly argued great prudence
and discretion, as well as wisdom and modesty. But had their seats been filled
with Presbyterians, we should innevitably have been in a much worse condition,
for it is very evident from undeniable facts, that they are by no means proper
men to hold the reigns of government, either in war or peace.

For if a firm attachment to the King, and the laws of our country, be
necessary qualifications for a Representative of the people, a Presbyterian can
lay no claim to them; and consequently ought not to be elected. If we are to
form any judgment of the present members of that society by either their own
conduct, or that of their forefathers, we shall find that in the annals both of
ancient and modern History, Presbyterianism and Rebellion were twin-sisters,
sprung from faction; and their affection for each other has been ever so
strong, that a separation of them never could be effected. What King has ever
reigned in Great Britain, whose Government has not been disturbed with
Presbyterian Rebellions, since ever they were a people? Will they not be
answerable for all the innocent blood spilt at Pentland Hills and Bothel
Bridge? From whence could they have possibly learned but from Mahomet to
propogate their Religion with the Sword. If we were to credit their
Hypocritical declarations, we must believe they are actuated in all their
proceedings by the gracious influences of the Blessed Spirit, and to be the
most loyal subjects in Europe or America. But do they not belie the Blessed
Spirit in fathering upon him all the unnatural Rebellions they wickedly raised
against their lawful Sovereign King Charles the First? Did the Blessed Spirit
teach them to rebel twice, and match to the borders of England; and after
obtaining every thing they unjustly desired, break their public faith the third
time, by entering into a most damnable covenant to march an army into England,
with a view to extirpate or butcher all those of the English Nation, who would
not join them in the worship of their great goddess the Presbytery, which they
had set up in their own country* Did the Blessed Spirit teach them to sell
their King, in imitation of Judas who sold out Savior, even after he had
voluntarily resigned himself: Did they not murder their King in the face of the
sun, and put a Tyrant chosen from the very dreggs of the people upon the
Throne, who ruled them with a rod of iron, and corrected their hardened and
stubborn dispositions with scorpions instead of whips? How did they raise
insurrections in various parts of the kingdom against Charles the Second. And
when they collected an army of saints to fight Cromwell at the battle of
Dunbar, did not their ministers in the name of the Lord assure the army of
success; declared that they had been seeking God; and had obtained an answer to
their prayers? Cromwell however soon made it appear that they had belied the
Holy Ghost, and prophesied falsely.

Was not the Scotch Rebellion one principal cause of the insurrection of the
Irish-Papists in the Year 164^? The Success that attended the one in behalf of
the Kirk, encouraged the other to pursue the same steps in favor of the Mass,
and if so, it may undoubtedly be made a question, whether all the innocent
blood that was shed in that horrid Massacre, may not be justly laid to their
charge? Certain it is the Natives of both kingdoms seemed to vie with each
other in acts of cruelty. For if the Catholics committed many outrages in
defending their country against the inroads and depredations of those foreign
interlopers who swarmed like locusts from the barren hills of Loughaber in
search of a better country, the Scotch-Presbyterians were no way behind hand
with them, when without the least remorse, they murdered 4,000 of the native
Irish, men, women and children in the Isle Mc-Gee, much in the same manner
their offspring murdered the Indians at Lancaster.

However glorious the Revolution might be, it is very certain the Presbyterians
had no hand in it; for it is well known that when the English Church refused to
comply with King James's dispensing power (for which seven of their Bishops
were imprisoned, and one of their Universities ruined) the Presbyterians joined
with that weak, bigoted and tyrannical Prince, and thanked his Majesty in many
fulsome Addresses from all parts of the kingdom, for his goodness in
overturning the constitution in favor of them and their dear Brethren the
Catholics. Many of this same godly sect took commissions from James, and raised
Regiments in order to oppose the Prince of Orange, but when the designs of our
glorious Deliverer were attended with success, then indeed they turned tail
upon their old master, and set up their pretensions for merit with the new
King, who, being bred a Calvinist, established their Religion in Scotland, and
conferred many other acts of favor on them. All this, notwithstanding, could
not preserve his peace, or deter them from plotting against his Government and
person; for although they valued the Man, yet they hated the King, being desirous
of no King, but King Jesus. His Majesty, who had been bred up in the principles
of moderation in Holland, recommended a Bill to be passed for the Toleration of
Dissenters in Scotland; but the General Assembly of that kingdom represented it
to the people in such odious and black colors, and petitioned with so much
spirit and warmth against it, as having a pernicious and dangerous tendency to
destroy the Kirk, that it was laid aside. From this period the King despised
and abhorred them, as a bigoted, stiff-necked, rebellious, pedantic crew, who
had grossly imposed upon him, in procuring an order to massacre the poor
innocent inhabitants of Glencoe in cold blood.

I should exceed the bounds I have prescribed to myself if I was to give a
minute account of the Rebellions, which happened in the Year 1715 and 1745 in
Scotland, when that kingdom was twice up in arms in favor of the Pretender,
under two of the wisest and best Kings that ever swayed the British Scepter; I
mean George the First and George the Second. Neither has the Government of our
present most gracious Sovereign escaped. It was but the last summer that
thousands of the Presbyterians in the North of Ireland took up arms under
pretense of grievances; but it evidently appeared that their malice was chiefly
bent against the Church-Clergy, who stood in the way of their idol, Presbytery;
for they made all the established Clergy in the North fly to the strong
Fortress of Londonderry, in order to avoid being massacred. From all these
instances it appears that Presbyterians have been always enemies to
Kingly-Government, and consequently not fit to be entrusted with any share of
the civil power, when a King reigns: And how can it be otherwise, seeing that
not only their solemn League and Covenant, to which thousands of them adhere to
this day, was founded on Rebellion; but that Formula of doctrine and
discipline, called the Westminster Confession, which is the present infallible
standard received by the whole body of them, was composed by a set of men, when
they were in open Rebellion against their King; destroying the Monarchy, and
endeavoring to plan, both in Church and State, the Constitution of
Great Britain after the model of a Geneva Republic.

These few hints may serve as a Looking-Glass for Presbyterians born within the
Dominions of Great Britain (as Foreigners who go under that name in this
Province are not concerned) who would feign think themselves qualified persons
to sit as Representatives of a free People. I earnestly hope, every other
denomination will take the pains to examine them through this perspective, which
is no magnifying one; and then judge whether they are fit to be entrusted with
our lives, liberties and properties; especially if they keep in mind, that
whenever this righteous people have the power in their hands, they will
tolerate no other profession or opinion but their own, and never cease till
they establish themselves in such a manner as to exclude all other sects. For
the proof of this, witness Scotland and New England; countries where their
religion has been propagated by the Sword, instead of that peaceful manner
recommended by the blessed Jesus.

Let the righteous blood of the Quakers unjustly shed in New England, purely
for Conscience sake, warn the inhabitants of Pennsylvania from trusting
Presbyterians with power, least the same mournful Tragedies should be acted
over again!

I come now more particularly to consider the Pamphlet entitled the "Quaker
unmasked" or "Plain Truth" addressed (and that seriously too) to the Freemen of
Pennsylvania.

Our Author sets out with advising us, to find out the "Aggressors" that the
saddle at last may be put on the right horse. Here I join Issue with him, and
do affirm that the reason of all the present Party-Rage was the Presbyterians
murdering the Indians at Lancaster, under the Protection of Government; had
this not happened we should have had none of all this disturbance among us. But
how they came to be spirited on to such an inhuman deed, more than the Dutch
who are equal sufferers with them on the Frontiers, can be accounted for no
otherwise, than because they exceed all other People in acts of brutality. This
polite, elegant, witty Pamphleteer condemns the action himself, but would have
us consider the alleviating circumstance, " What are they? Why the Massacre of
the back Inhabitants. Here one would have expected that the Gentleman would
have attempted to prove the Lancaster Indians guilty; but not a word against
them; not even a presumption. They had lived long it is true even from their
infancy, in the interior parts of the province; their characters are well known
to be inoffensive; but we lost our relations by Indian Barbarians; and
therefore we will kill Indians wherever we can find them. A fine way of
reasoning! Old King Hendric who died gloriously fighting at the head of his
troops for the English, would innevitably have been murdered, had he met with
any of the Paxton-Voluntiers before that time. Those brave Fellows also under
Sir William Johnson, would have dyed by the very men, for whom they are going
to battle. And not even the blessed Presbyterian Indian Saints under the
learned, pious and Rev. Mr. Braynard would have escaped the Paxton-Boys.

Another alleviating Circumstance our Author mentions, page 6th, is, "that they
had long before sent several petitions to the Governor and Assembly, which were
concealed by ill designing persons." I wish this elegant writer had named the
men to whom the Petitions were delivered, that the public might be aware of
them. Those in Government who act wrong should undoubtedly be brought to the
light, that if members of the House, we may mark them at the next election; and
if of the Council, that his Honor may call them to an account for thus bringing
him and the Province into distress. This is a Piece of Justice due to the
innocent, who are under this indefinite charge? for why should the prudent and
just be censured for a fault of which they never were guilty; Besides, why was
not copies of the petitions published, that the public might judge whether they
contained any thing worthy the attention of the Legislature.

After all, I am induced to believe the truth is, these men acted in the same
manner the Catholics did in Ireland, First begin the Rebellion, and then
appoint the ablest of their Divines to study for arguments to support it.

We are told in this same sublime pamphlet, that some of the Indians in the
Barracks were well known to have been at the battle against Col. Bouquet, and
at the Siege of Fort Pit by officers who are in town. If so, these military
Gentlemen's conduct, upon this occasion, ought to have been a pattern of
humanity to these brave Paxton Volunteers* Particularly when we reflect that
Capt. Don.
one of these very Officers whom we have the honor to reside among us, in an
engagement with these Savages, was shot, as I apprehend, through the Lungs, and
notwithstanding this took up arms in their defense, when likely to be attacked
at the Barracks.

What was it did honor to the characters of General Amherst and Sir William
Johnson upon the total reduction of Canada, but their rest^aining our Indians
and Army from any acts of cruelty upon the Canadians or their Savage Allies,
who had been murdering and scalping our Prontiers all this war? To kill an
enemy in the heat of battle is honorable, but to put him to death when he is
disarmed, tied and bound at your feet, is a cowardly action, and argues a
prodigious depravity of Human Nature.

Our Author produces the Revolution as an instance to justify the
Paxton-Insurgents. If he thus misapplies the Bible when he preaches, he shall
never be my Teacher. But for curiosity sake, let us see how the comparison will
hold. The whole People of England headed by two branches of the Legislature,
opposes the King for perverting the Government. Therefore about two hundred
lawless Banditti of Paxton and Donegall may attempt to overthrow all the parts
of the Legislature in Pennsylvania. -- A Province containing about 250,000
Inhabitants. Such is the great force of our Author's Logic when reduced to
form; but I am almost tired with his absurd and inconclusive manner of
reasoning.

Our Author further tells us, page 6th, the Indians were in great danger of
receiving their just deserts; i. e. the Paxton Boys were just at hand with
intention to murder them, had not their Friends from the City, who were in
League with them, made them acquainted with the regular force in the Barracks:
But he forgets himself page 8th, where he informs us, that their design was
nothing else, but that their grievances might have a fair hearing. Thus he
contradicts in one page what he asserts in another, My advice to him is (and I
humbly apprehend it is salutary) that he would get some better information of
the subject he undertakes to discuss. when he takes up his pen the next time to
write, otherwise he will be perpetually liable to mistakes and blunders.

"The Paxton Boys were brave and loyal subjects to his Majesty" says this
judicious Pamphleteer. As to their bravery no body will ever dispute it that
has heard of their gallant and loyal behavior at Lancaster where only fifty of
them completely armed were able to vanquish a numerous company of eight men and
women, and seven small children, all cooped up in a Jail. The same of this
noble and gallant exploit ought surely to be recorded in the annals of America
for the honor of the religious, christian Presbyterians.

Their Loyalty was equally conspicuous in bidding defiance to the proclamations
of his Honor; trampling upon the just and righteous Laws of their Country; and
holding a Treaty with his Majesty's Representative as if they were Foreigners
at war with Great Britain. What a Nose of wax the word Loyalty has been made to
serve the vile purposes of all the insurrections that have been raised against
the Sovereign, is well known to those, who are the least acquainted with
History? The Rebels in Ireland, in 1641, called themselves loyal subjects to
King Charles. And the Scotch Rebels, when they marched an army to destroy the
king, not only warmly professed, but swore to be loyal to him and his hens in
their infamous covenant. -- Oh! but cries the Gentleman, they did no body any
harm. No thanks to them for that For had they gone to rob and plunder the
country, the whole Province would have bravely hunted them down like wolves,
Besides it was politic in them to behave discreetly to the Inhabitants. When
the Pretender marched into England the last Rebellion, his Adherents behaved as
discreetly as the Paxton Boys, yet this did not save the Leaders of them from
the ax and the halter.

I cannot comprehend how our Author should know that Squaws have charms, had
they not made some deep impressions on his own heart. For Love Solomon says, is
stronger than Death. Possibly however the jealousy of being rivall'd may have
been the cause of the late distaste he and his brethren have conceived for
these poor females; it so, I can assure them, they may with all the freedom in
the world repair to the Barracks, and brighten their former acquaintance, as
all transgressions of this kind are easily washed away by standing in the Kirk.

I would seriously ask this great Writer, or any of his Advocates, what could a
set of men do more in the Assembly for protecting this Province, than the
people called Quakers have done* It can be undeniably proved that more money
has been raised in this Province for carrying on the war, than any other in
America. It can also be proved that the necessity of raising money was never
disputed, but the mode of taxation: Had our Representatives given up this
inherent right of Englishmen, they would have betrayed the trust reposed in
them by their Constituents, and deserved the censure of the very Paxton Boys
themselves. Besides their peculiar tenets in religion as is alleged, have no
influence on their actions relative to Government. For Quakers are no more
answerable for the bad consequences charged upon their doctrines by the
Presbyterians when they do not affect their conduct) than Presbyterians are
chargeable with all the absurdities of Absolute Decrees.

Should not a Presbyterian be as passive as a Quaker according to his own
principles; for certainly if God fore-ordains whatever comes to pass, he can no
more alter the irresistible decree, than he can overturn the world;
consequently all resistance against an enemy is vain, because we then fight
against the will of God, and resist the Holy Ghost, which is an abominable
crime.

Our Author makes a tedious Harrangue about the Quakers for once taking up arms
to defend themselves, when the city appeared to be in the utmost danger of
massacre, Plunder and desolation, (...) a total overthrow of the very being of
our constitution. This is a similar case to that at the Revolution. No one
precept in the Gospel is more powerfully enforced than obedience to the King;
absolute necessity, however, for once compelled the English Nation, at the
Revolution, to dispense with this positive command. Now will our Author be so
hardy as to ask, if these are the people, who always profess obedience to the
King according to a divine command;" and then conclude; "what amazing hypocrisy
appears in their profession." "They must either confess that they have hitherto
resisted the blessed Gospel, or that the Holy Spirit has given them a new
Gospel contradictory to the old one; but this is to blaspheme God, and belie
the Holy Ghost; yet such is their conduct. This is the force of his Argument
when applied to the Revolution; and any one would certainly conclude that our
Author by his manner of reasoning was a Nonjuror: And indeed I am apt to
believe there is something in it; for I never heard that Presbyterian Ministers
in (...) country were obliged to take the Oaths to the Government, or give any
other test of their fidelity to the King. Whoever heard a Presbyterian Sermon
upon the duty of submission to the present establishment? Are not the
Covenanters preaching against his Majesty every day, and all by the direction
of the Spirit? Four different sorts of Presbyterians have all in the name of
the Blessed Spirit damned each other in Pennsylvania. Must not each party have
belied the Blessed Spirit, in anouncing contradictory and blasphemous Anathemas
in his name? But to conclude. Beware, my Countrymen, of men who would cram Laws
down your throats with muskets, daggers, tomahawks and scalping-knives. Give me
leave to recommend to you a spirit of watchfulness and jealousy. The
Inhabitants of Pennsylvania enjoy the most extensive privileges both civil and
religious of any people in the world. Let us then, like true Britons, warmly
oppose any that would presume to deprive us of them! Let us boldly contend for
the cause of Liberty and our Country, and never be pusillanimous or supine*
when we see men of bad principles at work behind the curtain, to wrest them out
of our hands! Let us as we value every thing that is dear and sacred to us,
endeavor to suppress the present prevailing faction! And finally, let us exert
all our influence and power to keep the Reigns of Government out of the hands
of Presbyterians (which can be done no other way than by placing ourselves
under the protection of our gracious and royal Master, King George the third of
blessed memory) as we are convinced, thoroughly convinced, of their unfitness
to govern both by experience and undeniable instances from History!

A LOOKING-GLASS, etc. NUMB. II.
Fear God, honor the King.

St. Peter 2. ver. 17. For he that resists shall receive Damnation.

Romans 23. ver. 2. The Pope and Calvin, I Will oppose,
Because I think them both our Foes.
The Church and State have suffered more
By Calvin, than the scarlet Whore.
Popish and Presbyterian Zeal
Both bitter Foes to Britain's Weal.
The Pope would of our Faith bereave us.
But still our Monarchy would leave us.
Not so the Presbyterian Crew
That ruined Church and Monarch too.
SWIFT.
My dear Countrymen and Fellow Citizens,
THE time is now come that we must either submit our necks to the yoke of
Presbyterian bondage, or exert ourselves with a true British Spirit in behalf
of our King and Country. For was it ever known in any part of the world, that
such as appeared in defense of a Government, should be treated with contempt,
and looked upon as enemies to it; and that others could recommend themselves by
boldly flying in its face and trampling upon its authority. But such is the
profound, wise policy of some of our State Physicians, who have been at work
behind the scenes to encourage one part of the inhabitants to rise up in arms,
and attempt to draw blood of the rest; though happy for us, they are too rampant,
and not easily rid out of their liberties.

The veil of hypocrisy was too thin, and is now plainly seen through by the good
inhabitants of this province, who heartily and sincerely pity the poor
despicable wretches that were made Dupes of upon this occasion to serve the
turn of those shallow pated Statesmen, who cunger up storms and tempests to
cast away the ship that they may (like the moon-cursers of Cornwall) murder the
crew, and run away with the plunder.

As I am an American born, and have neither place nor pension under the G -- t,
I earnestly hope my dear countrymen will look upon my weak endeavors to serve
them, free from prejudice and partiality, and as the overflowings of a heart
truly touched with a deep sense of their misfortunes, and sympathizing with
them under their present unhappy calamity.

Must it not rouse the indignation of every patriot breast in P -- a to see so
many hireling pens prostituted to support arbitrary measures; when if they were
equally employed in vindicating the rights and liberties of the people; in
exposing wicked ministers of state, those sons of corruption, who are preparing
the minds of mankind for slavery and bondage, they might do honor to
themselves, die without a guilty conscience staring them in the face, and their
memory (instead of rotting) would be gratefully revered by posterity?

As my principal design is to examine the merit of Presbyterians for
government, without troubling myself much about pamphlets, that have, or may be
written in defense of the P -- r and his Tools in Opposition to the Freemen of
this Province; nevertheless I look upon it as a Duty incumbent on me just to
give a Key to one of them, called the "Conduct of the Paxton Men impartially
represented."

This Sixpenny Piece consists of thirty three Pages, twenty of which the Author
has borrowed in Order to swell the Performance, otherwise I apprehend the
thirteen pages of his own dry Reflections would have been sold for two Coppers,
by which Means the mercenary Views of both Author and Printer would have been
entirely disappointed. -- Such are the cunning Schemes projected amidst the
Scarcity of Cash that now prevails, by these pamphleteering Gentlemen, in Order
to make the Public pay for what they were in Possession of before. The Injury
he has done to the back Inhabitants by misrepresenting their Manifesto, can
scarce ever be forgiven him, for in transcribing this Remonstrance of
Grievances, he has artfully substituted the Word, " Quakers, for P -- r, in
order I apprehend to throw the blame upon them and their Assembly. If the
Reader however in the Perusal of the Pamphlet, will bear this in his Mind, and
as he goes along, when he meets with words. Tyrant, Traitor, Rebel, etc. Apply
the first to a certain Ruler not much esteemed, and the two last to the Paxton
Men, and Presbyterians! These with a few more of the like Emendations, may make
it tolerable Sense and what is more give it some Color of Truth.

Our Author commends the Representatives of the Freemen of Rome, for murdering
Julius Caesar in the State House, because he had tyrannically deprived them of
their Liberty, and reduced them to a State of Vassalage and Slavery. -- I
believe his Employers have more Understanding than to thank him for this
Instance of his Zeal, as it militates so strongly against the Cause for which
it was produced, and sets such an Example to the Senators of P --,a as I am
confident they would by no Means imitate. Thus I might run a Parallel through all
his Instances from Profane History, to show that every Example he has adduc'd
is in Favor of the People and their Representatives. He has taken a Deal of
Pains to show the Similarity between Jews and Presbyterians (but this was a
needless Undertaking, as every Body knew it before). He has also endeavored to
make it appear that all other Professions intermixed among them, are the
Heathens with whom they have to contend. That if therefore Force will not do,
Fraud may be made use of to destroy their Opposers, by Craft, Treachery, or
Dissimulation. -- He would feign make us believe too that as God formerly gave
the Land of Canaan by a Charter from Heaven to the Jews; so he has given
Pennsylvania to the Presbyterians by Virtue of the same Commission, Judith,
cries our Author, tells a Lie to Holofernus, makes him drunk, and then severs
his Head from his Body with a Scymitar, -- so ought all the Sons and Daughters
of Presbyterianism, serve those of a different Persuasion who do not coincide
with them in Religion and Politics, smite them under the fifth Rib as Joab did
Abner, and betray them with a Kiss into the Hands of their Enemies, as Judas
did our blessed Savior. Might I not as well quote this Passage of the
Apocrypha, and apply it with equal Propriety to the late Expedition to
German-town? Holofernus (i. e. Col -- A.-m-s-g) was the chief Captain of the
Army of the Paxton Volunteers, who had formerly marched West and secured
himself behind a Tree; till his Forces vanquished the Catananites; after which,
in the Name of the Hosts of Israel, he fired at a Bundle of Deer-Skins which
fell before him; for which gallant and brave Exploit he was crowned with
Laurels: He then ruined his Sword against Judah to the Eastward, and said I
will go forth in my Wrath and devour mine Enemies, and straightly block up the
Capitol. -- Now had there been a Woman in Philadelphia, as bold as Judith, and
used the same Means to destroy this Holofernus in Germantown, would she not be
equally entitled to the Blessings pronounced by Ozias, that Judith was,
according to the curious Application our judicious Author has made to this Text?

What a shocking Opinion must Mankind have of Presbyterians who first kill
People, and then erect Courts of Judicature to try them? Our Author has been at
great Pains to take ex Part Depositions, and publish them to the World as
sufficient Proof of the Indians Guilt. Therefore whether they were innocent or
guilty is little to the Purpose now, as their Doom is irreversable. Will the
Verdict of the Public restore them to Life, suppose it is given in their Favor.
These Allegations were sufficient, if true, to confine them by Virtue of the
civil Authority in order to bring them to a legal Trial, that they might either
be acquitted or condemned by their Country. -- But who, under the Heavens, gave
Presbyterians Authority to be their own Carvers, or appointed them Judges,
Jurors, Hangmen, and Executioners, to butcher the Indians, Man, Woman and Child
in cold Blood, without first examining either their Merit, or Demerit, or
giving them any Chance to plead for themselves?

The Presbyterians want more Members from the back Counties to represent them,
and have added this to the Catalogue of their Grievances upon the Frontiers.
Now suppose it was granted, I believe it would make very little Alteration for
the better, as that County has seldom sent a Presbyterian to represent them,
(one qualified being very rarely to be found,) and but a-few from the others;
and even some of those that are sent, appear as warm for the Liberties of their
Country as any of their Brother Members. Are not the Gentlemen in general who
represent the five back Counties, I would seriously ask this Gentleman, as
unanimous in their Votes against the P -- r as any of the Members who represent
the interior Parts of the Province? And are not they the best Judges from what
Fountain the Grievances of their Constituents flow? Had they protested against
the Resolves of the House, published their Reasons, and shown that they were
out numbered by a Quaker Majority; there would have been some color of Argument
for making such a Clamor about more Members. But no such Thing. These Gentlemen
know the odds between sixpence and a Shilling, as well as other People, and
think it no Deed of Charity to pay the P -- r's Taxes, whose Estate is said to
be worth, at a moderate Computation, ten Millions Sterling.

It is said that all Means are to be used between this, and next Election to
unite the Presbyterians as one Man to choose such Persons for Assemblymen who
(upon certain Conditions) will grant any Thing the P -- s demand. This Plot may
be conceited by some-time serving Hirelings of that Party, but I cannot suffer
myself to believe the Majority of the landed Men among them who, by the bye,
love Money as well as their Neighbors, and are no Creatures to the G -- t
would ever submit to such a servile Yoke -- If any Thing induces them it must
be their close Attachment to their peculiar Tenets in Religion; the artful
Persuasions of their Teachers; and the comfortable hopes of an Establishment in
Pennsylvania. And if these Motives prevail what may we expect to be the
Consequences? Why --

First, a Bill exempting the Proprietaries from all Taxes forever,

Secondly, A Bill settling an Annuity upon Deputy Governors for the Time being
of one Thousand per Annum or more. In lieu of which the Presbyterians shall
have.

Thirdly A Bill for establishing Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk Sessions.

Fourthly. A Bill rating every Taxable of whatever Denomination toward the
supporting Presbyterian Ministers and their poor Widows.

Fifthly, A Bill obliging every Body to attend Presbyterian Mettings, under
Pain of Corporal Punishment for the first Offense, and Hanging for the second.

For the first Offense five Pounds to the Minister, and for the second Offense
Excommunication from the Conversation of all Man kind, and to be given over to
Satan to be buffered, till absolved by the Kirk. Vide Knox's Leturgy.
such, my dear Countrymen, would be the Effects of a Presbyterian Assembly,
when properly tutored by the Government and their Preachers. The Presbyterian
Policy therefore pursued with indefatigable Zeal, in this, and the Neighboring
Province of New Jersey ought to awaken the Attention of every true Lover of his
Country, and rouse all other Persuasions, to unite as one Man against them,
being the most formidable and dangerous Enemies we have to cope with.

Let us next examine into the Charity of the Presbyterians so much boasted of,
I will not say to other Societies; for that was never heard of; but even to
their own distressed Brethren on the Frontiers.

I believe it will be as hard a Task to prove, that ever they, (considered as a
Society) raised a general Contribution, of their own Money, for the Relief of
the back Inhabitants, as it is to prove, that Quakers did so; and I think the
most difficult Work of the two. Here I suppose some of their passionate
Teachers will be ready to fly in my Face, and ask me, with an angry Tone, if we
did not give away Hundreds both at Lancaster Treaty, and afterward, when every
Body was raising Men for them, except Quakers. I readily own it. But the next
Question is, pray Gentlemen, whose money were you so liberal of? Was it your
own, or the charitable contributions of the Good People of England and Ireland,
put into your Hands for that Use? -- If it was your own, then you have these
charitable Donations still in your Pockets, to supply the Sums you have
advanced, and pay you for your Disbursments. And if it was not your own, but
the Money raised in England, that you and your Brethren paraded away upon at
Lancaster. and since made such a Noise about your Charity to the Inhabitants on
the Frontiers, as I am apt to believe it was? why in the Name of Sense do you
assume the Merit of it to yourselves, as if you were the only charitable,
humane People in the Province. -- Either you must heartily confess that this is
the true State of the Case, or you have imposed upon the generous People of
Europe with false Notions.

As many of my Readers, (who are not of their Profession) may be unacquainted
with this Piece of Presbyterian craft, I shall unravel the whole Mystery of
their iniquitous Scheme, contrived in their most sacred Assemblies, by the best
and ablest of their Divines and Lay Elders.

A few Years ago the Heads of this Society petitioned the Governor of this
Province for a Charter to incorporate a certain Number of themselves, to raise
Money for the Use of poor, distressed Presbyterian Ministers and their Widows;
their Petition being granted with certain Powers and Limitations, the next
Consideration was how to procured Fund. One of their own Members who had been a
Pedlar, and consequently well qualified for such an undertaking, offered his
Service. Having had his Education under Mr. T -- ^, who was a Master Workman at
begging, ha was universally approved of as one of their ablest Disemblers,
fitted out with proper Credentials, and sent abroad. At a secret Committee of
this Corporation it was agreed on, that, as collecting Money for a Widows Fund,
might prove but a dry subject to declaim on in Europe, their Delegate should
have a set of private Instructions directing him, that upon his Arrival, he
should make no Mention of the Widow's Fund, but get a Brief drawn up, setting
forth the Miseries and Distresses of the back Inhabitants of Pennsylvania; the
vast Numbers of Christian Captives doomed to perpetual Slavery, together with
the absolute Necessity of contributing Money for their Redemption. This was
undoubtedly a crafty Scheme. For as the English had often contributed Money for
the Redemption of Christian Captives in Africa, large Sums were generously
given for these pious Uses; at which liberal Donations we need not be
surpised, if we can credit the Presbyterians themselves, who say, "that this
very Deputy of theirs carried Home with him a Parcel of Squirrel Scalps* and
when he had in Ireland, worked up the Passions of his Audience by dismal and
melancholy Relations of murdered Ministers in the back Woods to a proper
Degree of Fermentation; produced these as Proofs, declaring they were the Skins
of their Heads that were barbarously and cruelly torn off by the wild Indians.
In Consequence, I say, of this mournful Detail, the People were extremely
charitable; never once dreaming that three fourths of their Donations would
never be applied to the Uses for which they were given. -- However when the
Cheat was discovered innocently in England by one who was their very good
Friend, but not in the Plot, the Pedlar slipped off, and left the best Part of
his Pack behind him, which was detained, till proper Assurances were given from
this Side the Water, that it should not all be misapplied. --.To save
Appearances then, an Address was presented to Governor H -- n from a Deputation
of this Presbyterian Corporation setting forth their Desire to advance a Sum of
Money for the Redemption of Captives, a Copy of which, with his Honor's Answer
was sent to England to justify the Pedlar's Brief, and confute the supposed
Aspersions of a certain Gentleman, however notwithstanding all this, as Truth
will generally prevail he justified himself, by detecting their Falsehoods,
Malice and Knavery in a written Vindication, Signed by one of the P -- rs, and
Dr, Chandler, (the Head of the Presbyterians in England) and transmitted it
over here, by way of a Looking-Glass for them to see themselves in; but they
appeared so exceedingly ugly and deformed they were ashamed to show this Glass
even to some of their own Brethren.

This Address and Answer were looked upon by People of other Denominations in
this Province, as a severe Reflection cast upon them; as if Presbyterians were
the only People here, who had the Redemption of these poor Slaves at Heart;
whereas it is well known that the large Presents made to the Indians by the
Government in order to bring about a Pacification and Return of Prisoners were
raised by an equal Assesment upon every Denomination. -- After all; how
fraudulent was it to collect Money for one Use, and then apply it to another.
This Crime I apprehend is equal in Guilt to many made Capital in England: If
so, what then did our Orator deserve who wickedly defrauded the Public, or what
did those men deserve, who advised him to that base and unrighteous Measure?
How wicked and ungenerous was it for them to deceive their Benefactors by false
Representations, and after they had obtained the Cash, to pocket three fourths
of it for their own Use, and the remainder give away way at a Public Treaty for
charitable Purposes as their own? -- They took particular Care never to inform
his Honor, or the Public, in their Address that they had received a Sum of
Money from England to redeem their poor Countrymen in Bondage -- no; this would
be to act out of Character; for it must be all a deceitful, blind Piece of
Deception from Beginning to End.

When we seriously consider the Kind of an Establishment Presbyterians have
obtained in the Midland Provinces of North America by Virtue of this Charter,
and the particular Favors done for them by Governor Belcher in the Jersey; who
procured them an exclusive Charter from the Crown for the Management of their
College to the Detriment of all other Professions (for which Favors they are
now gratefully paying his Majesty in Pennsylvania, we ought all to be alarmed,
and try to stem the Torrent of Presbyterianism, which is pouring down upon us
from the North Pole, and if not timely prevented, will, with more than vandalic
Barbarity, bury us, our Religion and Liberties, in one general Inundation.

Prince-Town was chosen for the Seat of their College, because it was situated
in such a manner that no Place of Worship was within many Miles of it, by which
means, the Students would be obliged to attend Presbyterian Preaching. This was
an Artifice to erect Presbyterianism on the Ruins of all other Societies, and
to instill their Mode of Worship, and Principles of Calvinism into the tender
Minds of the Youth, who by the Time, they had taken their Degrees, would either
be Converts to Presbyterianism, or at least go away with favorable Ideas of it.
-- It is well known that there is little or no Peace at this Seminary for the
Students who retain their Integrity, and do not swallow all the wild,
indigested Fumes of Enthusiasm taught by the New-Lights and their Followers.
The Severity of their Discipline has been carried so far very lately as to
prohibit all Conversation between what they call the converted and unconverted
(how fair soever their moral Character might be) till this holy Inquisition had
set a Seal upon their Foreheads, as a Mark of their being absolutely elected;
and by which Means they might be known to all the sanctified Children of true
Presbyterianism.

The College in this City plan'd upon the Principles of Moderation and Liberty,
and intended for the Use and Benefit of every Denomination is now got into the
Hands of a Presbyterian Faction. The Professors and Tutors being generally
chosen of that Persuasion, lord it with such a high Hand over other
Professions, that they are not contented with using their Power to keep all
others out; but are indefatigable in planing to thrust those out who differ
from them that are in.

The Church of England, by charitable Contributions has raised six thousand
Pounds Sterling for the Use of this Seminary, and to buy Bread for those who
would not let one of her Sons enjoy a Shilling of it if the (...) means prevent
it. The Baptists have received no better Quarters from this College than the
Church, and are drove to the Necessity of building one at Rhode Island. The
Number of Students greatly decrease, not caring to stay where there is so much
Partiality shown in Favor of a particular Society and generally return Home
with their Heads stuffed full of Vulgar Phrases, instead of that native Purity
of their Mother Tongue they brought with them. The Honors of the Institution
are so indiscriminately conferred in Favor of Presbyterians, and with so little
Discernment, that Leather-Britches Makers, and Gentlemen are put upon the same
Level. Such is the present Situation of our College, which might have been at
this Day an Ornament to the Province, had it been carried on upon the
Principles of Moderation, and Catholicism as was originally intended.

The Eligance and Politeness of these Presbyterian Divines, who set themselves
up for Professors of Colleges will be handed down to Posterity to their
immortal Infamy, in the two stupid Addresses they presented to Governor F -- n
and Governor P -- n. That they understand a little Latin and Greek I will not
dispute, and perhaps may be something acquainted with the logical, pedantic
Rules of Aristotle, Anti Arminian, or Calvinistic Metaphysics, and some other
Mystical Rhapsodies; but that they understand Dignity of Style, Propriety and
Elegance of Expression, let these two Addresses declare. The Plain Dealer tells
us his* Majesty will judge of Quaker and Presbyterian Loyalty; according to the
substantial Proofs that each gives of it in Time of Danger. Half a Million of
Money given to defend the Government, is certainly one substantial Proof of
Quaker Loyalty; and what is a farther and stronger Confirmation of it, is, that
they are heartily willing, and extremely anxious that his Majesty should take
them under his immediate Protection and Government. They are not afraid of
loosing their Charter; of being saddled with heavier Taxes; or paying Tithes to
the Church Clergy, as this whiffling Politician squints at in one of his
Observations.

Let us next consider what are the substantial Proofs of Presbyterian Loyalty.
And here I will put the Public in Possession of a circular Apostolical Letter
wrote by the Presbyterian Pope in Philadelphia, and his two Cardinals, to all
the inferior Brethren and their Flocks throughout the Province, in order to
deter them from becoming immediate Subjects of King George.

Copy of a circular Letter.
Philadelphia 30 March 1764.
Our general Assembly having adjourned for a short Time to consult their
Constituents whether an humble Address should be drawn up and transmitted to
his Majesty, praying that he would be pleased to take this Province under his
immediate Protection and Government; that is; whether the Freemen of this
Province should Petition the King, that we may be reduced to the Form of a
King's Government.

The Presbyterians here, upon mature Deliberation, are of opinion, that it is
is not safe to do Things of such Importance rashly; Our Privileges by these
means may be greatly abridged, but will never be enlarged.

We are under the Kings Protection and Government now as much as we can be, for
he will never govern us in Person, and it is of no great Consequence whether
his Deputy be recommended by the Proprietaries, or by some other great Men to
his Majesty.

Our Charter is in Danger by such a Change, and let no Man persuade you to the
contrary. There has been a half yearly Meeting of the Quakers in this City, but
this Change of Government has not been proposed in their Meeting, as we can yet
understand, nor is it approved of by the Heads of that Society.

This Affair is in all Probability, a Trap laid to ensnare the unwary, and then
to cast an Odium on the Presbyterians for ruining or attempting to ruin the
Province. The Frontier Counties are now suing for a Redress of Grievances, and
we have the greatest Reason to believe that it is no more than an artful Scheme
to divide or divert the Attention of the injured Frontier Inhabitants from
prosecuting their Petitions, which very much alarm them. For these Reasons we
would earnestly recommend it to you to lose no Time in advising all under your
Influence, whether of our Denomination or others, from signing any such
Petition --

Signed per Order -- G. T -- t F. A -- n I. E -- g



By this Letter his Majesty and the Public may plainly see what sort of Loyal
Subjects Presbyterians are to him in this Government, who think it the greatest
Curse that can befall them, to be reduced to the Form of a King's Government:
Their Quarrel is not with a bad King, more than a good one; but their
Abhorrence is to the very Form, which they utterly detest, as inconsistent with
their Westminster platform, and a perpetual Check to the Rigor of their
Discipline. The general Cry of modern Presbyterians, is to glory in the
Revolution, and their firm Attachment to the House of Hanover; to lay all the
Blame of former Rebellions at the Door of the Covenanters, and the Oppressions
of the House of STEWART. -- What kind of Affection they have for King George is
evident in this Letter, by which they are sowing the Seeds of Disloyalty among
the good People of Pennsylvania. -- This however is quite agreeable to the
Tenor of their Conduct under King William.

When the Presbyterian Commissioners returned from King William in Flanders,
and told the General Assembly of Scotland, that the King had positively
declared, that he would not any longer suffer them to oppress and persecute the
Episcopal Subjects. The Moderators said openly that if it were not for the
great Army he had with him he durst not have said so to them," And however, it
would have been wiser in him to have held his Peace, for they owned no Master
but Christ." One of them in a Sermon "declared, that King William designed to
dethrone. King Jesus." And the Moderator of the General Assembly immediately
after it is Dissolution, reflected upon King William, as sent in Wrath to be a
Curse to God's Kirk. -- Another of their Preachers tells us that they brought
in a Dog, ( i. e. K. Wm.) for Gods Sake, and that he now began to bite the
Bairnes i. e. the Children. -- One Mr. Kennedy in the same Reign, before the
General Assembly in which he was Moderator said in his Prayer, "Lord!
Moderation is recommended to us by the King, and we all know that it is a
Virtue that is sometimes useful, Lord; but I cannot say that which he calls
Moderation now, is so convenient at this Time for thy People and Cause; for
even to be free with thee, good Lord, I think it is best to make a clear House,
by sweeping them out all at the Door, and casting them out to the Midden
[Dunghill] i. e. other Professions.

Mr. Borlands in Gallowshields prayed thus, O God! Thou have bidden us pray for
Kings, and yet they have been always very troublesome to thy Kirk; they say
that this new King thou have sent us, viz. King William takes the Sacrament
from the Hands of a Bishop kneeling; ah! That Is black Work, that is foul Work.
Lord deliver him from Popery, and Prelacy; from a Dutch Conscience; and the
Hardheartedness of the Stewarts.

Thus it appears that nor only Covenanters, but the whole Body of Presbyterians
are actuated by the same rebellious Principles since the Revolution, they were
before; and that not even the Establishment of their Profession in Scotland can
make them in Love with Monarchy. Is not the Language of these Quotations from
their Moderators and principal Divines, exactly of a Piece with this
treacherous Jesuitical Presbyterian Bull sent forth from the College of
Philadelphia? Are these fit Men to have the Tuition of His Majesty's Protestant
Subjects? To instill into the Youth an evil Idea of Royal Government; to
instruct them, that a covetous, mercenary, avaritious, tyrannical hard-hearted
Landlord, who is for laying heavy Burdens on his Tenants, and will not touch
them with one of his Fingers is to be preferred to our most gracious Sovereign;
that his Majesty will ABRIDGE us of our Privileges, but we may be assured he
never will ENLARGE them, or grant us any Favor; and lastly, that the Province
may expect nothing but Ruin, Destruction and Desolation, the Moment we put
ourselves under King George the Third. -- Could a Frenchman, could a Spaniard
entertain a worse Opinion of the glorious Constitution of Great Britain? Yet
these are the Men, who would scarce have a Mouthful of Bread to support
themselves or their Families, had it not been for his Majesty's Royal Bounty
and Favor, in promoting a generous Collection by his own good Example; I say,
these are the Men, who maliciously asperse his Crown and Dignity.

However some particular Friends have suffered themselves to be distrain'd
upon, rather than pay Taxes toward carrying on the War, yet they have been
always passive without the least murmuring. The Number that entertain these
conscientious Scruples is but small, the Majority of that good People having
always contributed their Quota as cheerfully as any other Society. How
therefore Presbyterians or those who write in their behalf, can have the
Assurance to cast this in their Teeth, above all other People (when they know
that they have carried this Point further than any Quakers ever did in the
World) is a Piece of Effrontery that can only be fitted to their own Foreheads.

In a Book called the Hind let loose which is almost as sacred among them as
the Confession of Faith, Page 701, I find this Declaration. The exacting
Taxations for maintaining the Army, and the paying of Subsidies, was, and
remains to be a consuming crimson wickedness, the cry whereof reaches to Heaven.

In the same Author, Page 912, I find Words to this Purport, The paying of
Subsidies to the present Government, is to furnish that Party of the Dragon's
Legions, in their War against Michael with Supplies, which no Body can excuse
no more than sheding the Blood of their innocent Children to Molach. -- Now did
ever any Quaker make use of such vile Language against the Government? Did ever
a Quaker reckon the granting of Supplies for the King's Use as crying a Sin as
the sacrificing innocent Children to the Devil?

I appeal to the impartial Part of the Presbyterians themselves, if they think,
that our Representatives can have any Thing else in View but the Good of their
Country, in the Struggle they make in Behalf of the Liberties of the Province,
-- I have often heard that Parliament Men have been blamed and censured for
selling themselves and their Country, to wicked Ministers of State, for a
Bribe, Place or Pension, but never for opposing illegal Taxes; arbitrary Power;
or Ministerial Corruption. -- The ever memorable Hambden in the Reign of
Charles the 1st, rather than pay an illegal Tax of 30 S. (a much less Sum than
110 pounds demanded by the P -- r according to his own Calculation) went to
Jail; by which noble stand the Liberties of England were in a great Measure
preserved. Must it not be an everlasting Blot in the Character of the
Presbyterians, that they are the only People in P -- a, among all the Nations,
Sects and Professions settled in it, that will assist a T -- l Landlord to
distress and oppress his Tenants; -- a Land lord, who cannot be contented wirh
his Legal Dues, but wants the People to pay his Taxes for him into the Bargain,
and if he cannot persuade them to pay the whole, would rather (like Murtah O
Lavery) take the one Third of a farthing, than go away with nothing at all.

APPENDIX.

THE SUBSTANCE, OF A COUNCIL Held at Lancaster August the 28th 1764, by a
Committee of Presbyterian Ministers and Elders deputed from all Parts of
Pennsylvania, in order to settle the ensuing Election of Members for the
Assembly.

PUBLISHED, At the REQUEST of their respective CONGREGATIONS.

When Gospel Trumpeter surrounded
With long-ear'd rout, to Battle sounded,
And pulpit Drum ecclesiastic,
Was beat by Fist instead of a Stick,
Such Priessts deserve to have their A -- se kicked.
The SUBSTANCE, etc.
MR. J -- n E -- g being chosen Moderator, the Meeting was opened by him with a
Prayer to the following Effect.

L -- d thou know the end of our Meeting as well as we can tell thee, that
it is to settle the Election; not the Election of Grace, but of Members of
Assembly for this Province! O! Do thou confound these cursed Quakers, that are
endeavoring to bring us under a Kingly Yoke, which thou know that neither we
nor our Fathers ever could bear! Do thou turn the Hearts of the ignorant Dutch
from King George to serve the P -- r in such a manner as will enable us to
establish our Religion upon the Necks of both! Confound our Enemies the
Assembly and all their Adherents* who are Lovers of Monarchy and Abhorrers of
Presbyterianism! Pour down in a particular manner thy Judgments upon F -- n and
G -- y, and let the thunderbolts of thy Vengeance sink them down to the lower
regions! Enable us thy Servants at this Time so to settle Matters that
Presbyterianism may be established among us, and all other Professions crumble
before it! Let the King's Name become odious and stink in the Nostrils of the
Dutch, and let them join heartily with us thy Servants in turning out the
present Members of Assembly, and in putting in such Men as shall be subservient
to all our present and future Views for the Good of thy Kirk! Amen!

After which Prayer he opened the Council with the following Speech.
My dear Brethren!
THE Business we are now met upon demands our most serious Consideration. It is
of no less importance than the establishing of our most holy Religion in this
Province; for the Accomplishment of which you know all means, whether
justifiable or unjustifiable, are to be used, seeing the End is so valuable.
Our late Behavior in killing the Savages in in this Place; marching to
Germantown; and intimidating the Assembly, has so far recommended our Society
to the G -- t that all the Places of Trust are to be thrown into our Hands,
especially the Commissions of the Peace. And as you know the New Lights and old
Lights who were formerly Justices, gave Judgment against the Followers of each
other, according as the Plaintiff or Defendant was of a Party, and not
agreeable to the Merits of the Cause, for which four or five of them were
turned out, through the interest of a certain eminent and sensible Courtier; so
now as we are all one People again, our Elders who will generally be made
Justices, will have it in their Power to be revenged upon all the Enemies of
Presbyterianism. This is the first Advantage we shall reap from our firm
Attachment to the P -- ^, especially if we can carry our point at the ensuing
Election.

The second Advantage is we shall have an A -- y G -- l of our own persuasion;
for it it said the Personage that holds it now, and who has governed our G -- s
this ten Years is to resign for that Purpose.

The third is of greater Consequence still and that is, the passing se(...)
Laws in Favor of Presbytertanism; this, be assured, my Friends, is (...)ated
in our Favor upon the following Conditions's First, that the P -- s Lands be
exempted from Taxes forever; and what is Six or Seven Hundred a Year,
especially when not above one fourth of it will be taken from us Presbyterians,
as the Burden will fall equally upon other Societies; and we shall reap all the
Profit? Secondly, that an Annuity of 1000 per Annum be settled upon all our
succeeding G -- s; for which Favors we shall have in return. --

1st. A Law establishing our Kirk by Sessions, Presbytaries and Synods, with
all the Appendages of Presbyterianism.

2dly. A Law rating every Taxable, of whatever Denomination, toward supporting
our Ministers; and you all know how much we ought to have this at Heart, as
Numbers of us can scarce afford a Dram of Whisky in the Morning.

3dly. A Law obliging every Body to attend our Worship under Pain of Corporal
Punishment for the first Offense, and hanging for the second; this will oblige
the Heathenish Quakers; the papistical Church of England; the ignorant and
stupid Dutch (whom we have now got fast in a Halter, and upon whose Credulity
we have artfully imposed, by spreading some seasonable, political Romances
about the Country) to attend our places of Worship; and will be the happy means
of adding many Souls to our Number.

4thly. A Law prohibiting all carnal Conversation between Men and their Wives
on the Sabbath Day, least the Flesh should be more powerful than the Spirit.
For the first Offense, L. 5 to the Minister; for the second, Excommunication
from the Conversation of all Mankind, and to be given over to Satan to be
buffetted, till absolved by the Kirk, according to the Plan laid down by the
Reverend Mr. Knox. Such my Brethren, are the Advantages we shall assuredly
reap, if we are able to carry our point at the ensuing Election; for that End
is this Meeting appointed, that we may fall upon such ways and means as will be
the most likely to accomplish it. Dr A -- n and I put W -- n; (who you know was
cast out of our Presbytaries for kissing a Girl behind a Bush in Sermon time on
the Sabbath) upon writing that stupid Epitaph on Mr. F -- n; and although it is
stuffed with such palpable Falsehoods, yet the ignorant Dutch, who are no
Witches, swallow it down with the greatest Avidity. If they once get a Story by
the end, it is hard beating it out of them; however, if it holds them 'till the
first of October is over, we don't care how soon they are undeceived afterward.

In order to cajole the Church of England we have agreed that several of out
Members be chosen from among them; but as their Principles are all for Monarchy
Dr. -- S -- h has undertaken to make them as good Republicans as ourselves: And
although we despise the Man from our Hearts, and look upon him in the most
contemptible Light, as one who blew up Mr. B -- y in England; discovered the
Artifices we made use of in collecting Money for the Widows Fund, and babled
out in London, that although we assured the World in our Brief, that the
charitable Donations given to us was for the Redemption of thousands of our
Countrymen in Captivity by the Indians, yet we had no such Intention, as our
Charter was purely for our Widows and poor Brethren; nevertheless he may answer
our puposes at present, and we may make use of him, as we do of a
necessary-House, occasionally in Cases of Necessity. W -- ^ and D -- a as good
Presbyterians as any in the Land have got him in tow, and have cast such amist
before his Eyes, that they begin to lead him about, like little Dogs who trot
before blind Men in a String.

A Motion by Mr, --
Moderator,
I have one Question to ask, and that is -- how can all these good Laws be
obtained in favor of our Church, if we choose Episcopalians to represent us?

Mr. Moderator replied, that there were a good many Presbyterians who would be
returned: but it was not material who were chosen this Year, if they could but
get F -- n G -- y and R -- s out, with two or three others; the rest would be
like a Body without a Head. -- And they knew if they could but put in whom they
pleased this Year, by Virtue of the same Strength, they would be able to put
them out the next. For if, says he, we can change them for one Year, we can
always do it, so that we may fill the House with Presbyterians at pleasure.

The grand points we have to carry is to be unanimous among ourselves, and to
blind the Dutch by all the Political Dust we can raise; by increasing their
Prejudices against the King; alarming their Fears; and trying to persuade them
that the Pr -- r is a Prince.

A Motion by Mr. --
Moderator,
I believe that will be hard to do. I sounded one of them who is a Neighbor of
mine upon that Subject the other Day, and the Fellow very abruptly told me,
that the first Thing he did when he came into this Country, was to swear
Allegiance to King George, not the P -- r; that King George's Father and Mother
were both Dutch People, and he would spend the last Drop of his Blood for them;
-- that they might talk of the Assembly as they pleased, but Dutch Men knew the
Worth of Money as well as their Neighbors; that no Body could persuade him
that it was right for the Country People to pay the P -- r's Taxes; that he
lived close by one of the P -- s Manors, as fine Land as any in the Province;
-- that it was rated no higher than some barren stony Hills in his Possession,
not worth Sixpence an Acre; -- that he knew these Manors had served upon the
Frontiers, as so many lurking Places for the sculking Indians to murder them;
-- that had they been settled, they could have made a better Defense against
the Inroads of the Savages; but if they are kept unimprov'd, all the Laws or
Treaties in the World will never protect the back Inhabitants, nor give them
one Hour's Security from those Barbarians, who have always a safe Retreat in
these Wildernesses interspersed among the People, and kept to all Appearance
for that Use. The Man was going on with Abundance of such Reasoning, but I
stopped him short, and told him he knew nothing of the Matter, upon which he
went away in a Passion. I confess his Arguments thunderstruck me so at that
time, that I did not know how to answer him otherwise.

Mr. Moderator Speaks,
Brother,
Your Conversation with the Dutchman brings to my Mind some Discourse I had the
other Day with one of my Elders, a Man of tolerable good Sense and honest, but
extremely opinionative, proud, loquacious, and one who gives me more trouble
in the Sessions, when any Matters of Fornication, Adultery, Slander,
Drunkenness or Lying is discussed among us (which alas! is very frequent] than
all the Rest of the Elders put together.

Having called a Sessions about the ensuing Election, I expatiated upon the
Advantages we should reap in opposing the K -- g, and adhering to the P -- r;
the many distinguishing Marks of his Favor he has shour'd upon Presbyterians
in particular, above any other Denomination in Pennsylvania* and that ever
memorable Charter for the Incorporation of Presbyterian Ministers to raise a
Fund for their Widows and poor Ministers; -- (you know that is to raise a Fund
for all of us, for we can all justly plead Poverty; his own liberal Donation,
and the generous Encouragement he gave to the Collection when our Agent was in
England. Here I was going on with a Dissertation as long as a Sacrament Sermon,
and as much to the Purpose, when I was interrupted by my impertinent Elder, who
undertook to be Mouth for the rest of his Brethren, and said.

Sir,
I never understood that the Clergy had any Commission from Heaven to settle
the Affairs of this World; I always imagined their Business was to prepare us
for the next: Whenever they attempt to regulate Kingdoms and Provinces, I am
always suspicious thrt they are making fair Weather with Satan in order to
enjoy those earthly Kingdoms themselves, which are rejected with the greatest
contempt by our blessed Savior.

In the Days of Darkness and Superstition, the Clergy had engrossed all the
civil as well as religious Authority in Europe. It was the Glory however of
Presbyterianism at the Reformation to strip them in a great Measure of both. In
every Attempt they have made since to regain their lost Influence they have
generally failed; and although one would think that the past Experience of our
Forefathers might convince the Ministers of this Day, and deter them from such
unparalled pride, and consummate Folly; yet, such is the Nature of ambitious
Priests, that they are ever restless, like the foaming Sea, casting forth Mire
and Dirt, till either a few of them domineer over the rest, or the whole over
us that are Laymen.

The Motive that led me to these Reflections, was the Consideration of that
imperious Jesuitical Bull sent forth from our Ministers in Philadelphia to
their Brethren in the Country.

Suppose we have no great Affection for Kingly Government, yet why our
Ministers should be such shallow Politicians as to publish this to the World
under the mild Reign of George the Third, who has never done us any Injury, is
a Piece of Priestcraft that I cannot account for? Can it render us acceptable to
the King to proclaim to the World, that our Antipparhy is to the "Form of his
Government," of which he can by no Means divest himself, without renouncing his
Crown? Surely by this Declaration, viz. "as long as the Sea Circular Letter in
No. 2 of the Looking-Glass.
form of his Government subsists etc. we declare ourselves not only his, but
his Successors inveterate Foes.

Neither was it prudent in them to insinuate that we should be "reduced," by
such a Change; surely they did not mean like half-pay Officers, broken
Soldiers, or Wealthy Farmers reduced to Want and Beggary through the Calamities
of the Times, and who had Nothing to live upon but daily (...). I am still more
astonished when reading their Letter; I find them possessed of such
disrespectful Thoughts of our most gracious Sovereign, as to compare him to a
Rat-Catcher by indecently saying he would make "Traps," to catch the poor and
worthy Inhabitants of Pennsylvania! I love our Christian Cause, and therefore
blush and shudder at the Consequences of such rash and disloyal Conduct. Men
who can make so free with their Sovereign, may well take upon them to lay their
peremptory commands upon their Fellow Ministers, who are their Equals in all
respects, in this thundering and arbirary Tone, And let no Man persuade you to
the contrary, Did ever the Pope exceed this in his Conclave? Whatever Mandates
they are pleased to send us we must swallow them down implicitly by Wholesale,
without Examination, and not even suffer any Man to Reason with us on the
Subject: Surely if a few Ministers in Town, who are of a passionate Disposition
with such horrid Presumption' diametrically opposite to our Discipline, and the
sublime precepts of the Christian Religion lord it with such a high Hand over
their Brethren in the Country, what will our Ministers do over us that are
Laymen? As for my part I am determined to be a free Agent and think for myself;
I have read all the Pamphlets and Speeches that have been published on the
present Dispute, and am fully of Opinion that Religion has nothing to do with
it; I am also persuaded, that if our Ministers spent the Time, that they trot
about the Country after Politics in correcting their Sermons and adapting them
in a better Manner than they have latterly done to the Use and Benefit of their
Hearers it would be much more for our Edification and their Credit. Can it
redound to the Honor of our Profession, the Time our Ministers ought to spend
in reading and studying the Scriptures, is taken up in Writing Lampoons,
Satires and Libels upon the honorable and worthy Speaker of the Assembly in
this Province, and his Son the Governor of a Neighboring one, and who has been
no way concerned in our late Controversies? How can our Brethren in the Jersey
ever with any Face request that Gentleman to do them any Kindness, when we here
have basely insulted him in the most scurrilous and inhuman Manner? what is the
unpardonable Crime our Assembly has committed? Why that great one of contending
with the P -- r, whether he shall pay his own taxes or we shall pay them for
him; I confess the reason of my leaving my native Country was to get clear of
oppresive Land lords, and paying of Tithes; -- And while the Assembly is
defending me from the first, I shall always admire their Firmness and
Integrity; neither shall I ever willingly contribute to the latter, though it
were to the establishing of you Sir (speaking to the Moderator) in this
Congregation. I love my Profession very well, but I love my Liberty better, and
think it much more to the Advantage of the Laity to have the Clergy under their
Thumb, than the Clergy to have us under theirs.

Show me an instance in the Annals of Great Britain or America, where the
present Royal Family has attempted to See Circular Letter.
"abridge" the religious Liberties of the People; or taken any Advantage of
their intestine Commotions to lay any Hardships upon the Consciences of their
Subjects? Can any one believe that the Assembly don't love their own Liberties,
and the Priviliges of their Constituents better than the P -- r and his Tools,
who would rather see the Province overflowed in a Deluge of Blood than pay his
proportionable Share of the Taxes? It is my humble Opinion that if six and
thirty Turks were on the Assembly in Place of the present Members, that the
same innate love of Freedom would prompt them to struggle for the Liberties of
their Country, and pursue the same measures while the same Bone of Contention
subsisted. -- That Bone may now be removed by an Application to the Crown to
take us under it is immediate Protection, and send us Governors to pass such
Bills as will lay an equitable Tax upon all Lands without any Exceptions? --
And were all the Assembly to be chosen from among my Countrymen, and Brother
Elders tomorrow, were they to give up that single point, of an equitable Tax
upon all Estates, even though they should procure an Establishment in Lieu of it
for our Ministers [which by the by, would be no Advantage to us Laymen) I would
be one of the first that would hang them up as high as Gilderoy, and send their
Quarters into all parts of the Province by way of Memento to their Successors.
-- Here I interrupted my Elder, for I could not bear his Impudence no longer,
and assured him if he was not silent in an instant I would cain him; he
acknowledged, without making any other Reply, that my Argument was much more
powerful than his, and hoped I would use it to the whole Congregation.

The Council was adjourned till 9 o'clock the next Morning, when they met
punctually at the Time appointed, prayed, und unanimously made the following
Resolves.

1st. Resolved, n, c, That the P -- r should be King in the Place of George, as
Oliver had been formerly in the Room of Charles.

2dly. Resolved, n, c, That Presbyterians have as good a Right to Pennsylvania
as the Children of Ifrael had formerly to the Land of Canaan, and that it is
lawful and right for Presbyterians to make use of the same Means in extirpating
Quakers, Indians, or any other of their Foreign or Domestic Enemies, that the
Jsralites did to expirate the Cananites.

3dly. Resolved, n, c, That the sole right of civil and ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in this Province, belongs to Presbyterian Ministers; and that they
have the same Authority to preach against, and exclude Kingly Government at
this Day, as the pious and raverend Mr. Knox had to write and preach against
the Government of Females in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

4thly. Resolved, n, c, That there be an annual Meeting of a Committee from the
Synod in the Month of August in order to settle and regulate all future
Elections; and that all Elections shall be null and void, if previous
Instructions laid down by the said Committees are not adhered to.

5thly. Resolved, n, c, That whatever member of any of our Congregations shall
vote contrary to his Minister, shall be excommunicated from all Privileges in
the Kirk, especially the Sacraments; and be deemed as one cut off from the
Communion of the Faithful, and given over to Satan to be be buffetted.

6thly. Resolved, n, c, That some part of the Money collected in England and
Ireland by Mr. Beaty,) in order to redeem Presbyterian Ministers taken captive
by the Indians, and to purchase from them the Scalps of others who died
gloriously fighting for their Country, as well as the many thousand Prisoners
taken during this War upon the Frontiers from Georgia to Canada be applied as a
Fund to keep in Pay one thousand Volunteers chosen Men from our Congregations,
who shall always be ready to march upon any occasion to see these our Resolves
put in Execution.

Mr. Moderator concluded with a short Prayer to the following Effect.
O! L -- d! Thou have bidden us pray for Kings, and yet thou know they have
always been very Troublesome to thy Church! Either make us free from their Rule
and Government, or else make them Presbyterians, and then we shall bless thee!
Have Mercy on all ignorant Persons, Fools and Idiots, and particularly us thy
Servants at this Time' L -- d! Take the Pistol of thy Vengeance, and the
Mortar-Piece of thy Wrath, and pound all our Enemies to Hodge Podge! But for us
thy Children feed us with the Pruins and Raisins of thy Promises, and give us
the Spurs of Confidence, and Boots of Hope, that like new weaned Fillies we may
jump over the fold-Dikes of Grace! Amen!

A DIALOGUE between a Churchman in the Country, and a Presbyterian in the City
of Philidelphia.
Churchman. GOOD Morning Sir! -- Well, how has the Election gone with you?


Presbyterian. Not quite as well as I could wish, we have only got out three of
the old Members.


Chr. It is not as I could wish neither, if any of our old Friends of Liberty
are turned out.


Pr. Friends of Liberty do you call them? I Will assure you I have a different
opinion of them, and think it was quite Time to turn them out; a Man must be
mad to trust those with our Liberties, who were going to give them up.


Chr. I am of your opinion that we should not trust those with our Liberties,
who would not preserve and defend them, which I insist our late Assembly did do
to the utmost in their Power and I wish that some of you, who have been the
promoters of the new Ticket may not be found the Madmen, by endeavoring to
throw our Liberties into the Hands of those, whose Attachment to the
Proprietary Interest, may in some Measure prevent them from making that
glorious Stand against Proprietary oppression, which those you have turned out
have done heretofore. Who in defense of our Liberties, went so far as to
Petition his Majesty to take the Tyranical Yoke of one of his Subjects from off
our Necks, that we might enjoy the full Liberties granted to us by his Royal
Predecessor.


Pr. You may say what you will of the Proprietors, or of a Proprietary
Government but I Will assure you, if we should have a King's Government we shall
be out of the Drying Pan into the Fire; for if our Assembly should Petition the
King to take the Government, they can have no Right to Stipulate, or even to
propose the Terms on which the King is to take it,


Chr. What do you say? The Representatives of the Freemen of the Province of
Pennsylvania, have not a Right to Petition their King against the Tyranny and
Oppression of one of their Fellow Subjects, and pray him to deliver them out of
Slavery, by taking the Government into his own Hands, reserving to the People
their Rights granted by Charter. Pray if the Representatives of a whole
Province have no Right to propose or Stipulate with the Crown in Matters of the
utmost Consequence to their Constituents. How came William Penn to have a Right
in behalf of one Man only, and that himself, to propose the Sale of this
Government to Queen Ann, and Stipulate with her about the Price; for he at
first asked several Thousand Pounds more for it, than he afterward agreed to
take -- and at the Crowns rejecting his first offer, he was but in the same
Situation which he was in before he made it; we don't understand that the Queen
thought he had no Right, to make Proposals in regard to his Rights, but left it
to two of her Ministers to agree with him as they should think proper; which
will undoubtedly be the Case, with regard to the Petition now sent home: Either
the King will accept the Government on the Terms proposed; or reject it, and
leave us as we are until other Terms can be agreed on.


Pr. I make no doubt but that the King will accept the Government, upon its
being offered to him, but the Reservation of our Liberties is expressed in such
faint Terms, that the King will take little or no notice of them; and on the
change will new moddel them over again, whereby we shall loose our Rights.


Chr. Herein you are again mistaken, for there will be no new Moddeling, as the
Government is already sold, and One Thousand Pounds of the purchase Money paid
to William Penn at the Time of Sale; and if that was not the Case, all our
Privileges are confirmed, either by the Royal Charter, or by Acts of Assembly
transmitted home and confirmed by the Crown, so that the King, was he inclined
to Abridge us of any of our Priviledg^^ on accepting the Government, which I
think no Man can possibly suppose, has not that Power to do it.


Pr. If the King has not that Power, I suppose you will grant that the King,
Lords and Commons have and as we are looked on, in no favorable light at home,
but on the contrary viewed with a very jealous Eye, I am fully assured they
will do it.


Chr. You seem to be filled either weakly or wickedly with groundless
Apprehensions to support a bad Cause* I would ask you, if the King, Lords and
Commons look upon us in an unfavourable Light, and with a jealous Eye, why they
cannot make Laws to Abridge us of our Privileges, as well under a Proprietary
Government, as if we were immediately under the Crown; or whether their Power
is too feeble and weak to reach us under a Proprietors Government* if not, pray
what are you afraid of: Cannot they make Laws To morrow to govern us under the
Proprietor as well as next Day under the Crown? To be plain with you, I believe
you are against all Kingly Government, and that some of the Members of our
Church, who have united with you in the present Debates, are afraid of loosing
their Offices; which together I take to be the Cause of all the present
Clammour against the late Assembly.


Pr. You talk like a Fool, to say you think we are against all Kingly
Government, for we are as Loyal to the King as you are, and almost to a Man
signed the last Petition to his Majesty against the Change of Government, which
Petition was as expressive of Loyalty and Affection as our best Men were
capable of wording it; and as much so, as could be expressed by Subjects to a
Sovereign.


Chr. I grant the foregoing Part of it expresses a great deal of Loyalty
indeed* but how does it read toward the winding up, where you tell him, you
had rather be under the Government of one of your Fellow Subjects, and one who
is represented in no very favorable Light neither, by the Representatives of
the Province: Nay some of you have been bold enough to tell us, that his
Majesty's little Finger will be heavier then that Subjects Loins; both of which
Expressions I take to be no great Marks of Loyalty or Affection, and serves
only to convince me more firmly of what I said before, that you are against
Kingly Government.


Pr. No, we are not against Kingly Government but we are not for having the
present Government changed, for if the King should take it, it will cost
100,000 L. which Money we shall be obliged to pay, as the Change will be made
at our request.


Chr. You make me smile to see the many shifts and turns you have made use of,
to screen the Proprietors, and blame our noble Patriots of. -- I should be glad
you would tell me why it will cost 100,000 L. since William Penn sold it to Queen
Ann for 12 000; and received 1000 in Part of pay, is it not then highly
probable that on an Application from the Crown, a Decree in Chancery will pass,
obliging the present Proprietors to Confirm their Fathers bargain, which will
reduce your 100,000 l. to a 11000, and pray why must we pay, even that, who had
no band in Contracting the Debt? For my Part, I always understood it as a Maxim
amongst Englishmen, that no Man is to pay a Sum of Money without receiving in
Consideration that, for which the Money was paid; if then that Maxim be true,
and we pay for the Government, must not that Government be ours, and we have a
Right to Elect our Governors as we do our Assemblymen.


Pr. Well, you may say as you will, but I had rather be under a little Prince
then a Powerful King.


Chr. That is saving by the same rule of Gradation, that you would choose to be
under none at all; but I Will assure you I would rather be under the King then
under a fellow Subject; for the King can have no private Ends to serve; it can
never be supposed that he would encourage Murder, to obtain a Militia Law, nor
raise a Rebellion to the great Terror of his Subjects, just to see if Quakers
would ^ight or not, but on the contrary, bring all such Offenders to Justice.


Pr. Methinks you have a great deal of Assurance, to charge the Proprietor's
Governor with being the Author, or Instigator of Murder or Rebellion.


Chr. No, I will not charge him with being the Author of either, nor can he be
charged with calling of any of those offenders to Justice, but they are passing
at this Time up and down with Impunity; I wont say they are not apprehended
least upon Examination, those whose Duty it is to call Offenders to Justice,
should be proved the first Instigators of the Crimes.


Pr. You are a blockhead, and are not worth talking to; you know nothing about
Government, you are only a bastard Quaker.


N. B. The Reader may suspect this Churchman to be I. H. -- Esquire near
Franchford, but I Will assure him it is not.

A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN IN TRANSYLVANIA:
"Hail, happy Pope! whose generous mind
"Detesting all the Statesmen kind,
"A Genius for all stations fit,
"Whose meanest Talent is his wit;
"His Heart too great, though fortune little,
"To lick a rascal Statesman's spittle,
"Appealing to the Nation's taste,
"Above the reach of want is placed.
SWIFT
DEAR SIR,
IN making the tour of Europe I had the pleasure of writing to you last from
Belgrade the Capital of Hungary; I have since had the curiosity, (before I
enter Holand) to visit Transylvania, a Province formerly under the Dominion of
the Turk, but now belonging to the Emperor of Germany; and as its Waywode, the
name given to the Prince or Governor.
Waywode is almost independent of his Sovereign, he has peopled it with Persons
of all Nations, and of every profession under Heaven.

Having made a purchase of the soil from the Barbarians, who were the original
Proprietors; he has also obtained a grant from the Emperor to him and his
Heirs, for being perpetual Waywode of the Country: This enables him, together
with his great distance from Court, to govern the Inhabitants, who flocked from
all Quarters to settle the Country under the sanction of a Charter of
Privileges and immunities, granted for the preservation of their Religion and
Liberties, with an absolute sway.

In ancient times the Natives and Foreigners lived in perfect friendship; but
within these ten years past, there has been nothing but bloody Wars carried on
between them. The original cause of which is said to be, the Waywodes taking
the advantage of the simplicity and ignorance of the Natives in purchasing
their Lands, with regard to their nature and situation, as well as description;
and cheating them out of ten times more than ever they sold. This, (with the
trade driven on among them by some Christians, who first made them drunk, and
then defrauded them, and prostituted their Females,) -- a System of religion
unknown to them and their Forefathers disgusted them to such a degree, that
they immediately declared War. The Turks joining them, there was then a
necessity for the Waywode and his Subjects to raise money. The Delegates being
assembled to consult the welfare of the Country, insisted that a Tax should be
laid upon all the Cow-kine in the Province. The Waywode agreed, upon condition,
that all his own should be exempted, as he had large flocks all over the
Country. This, the Delegates refused, because his Cows were as liable to be
made a prey of by the Enemy, as their own: He then told them his Bulls were
free from Taxes, as they could not come under the denomination of Cow-kine, but
Bull-kine. This construction however the Delegates would not admit of. A long
dispute then ensued. His Excellency told them that if Bulls should be taxed,
which he could not believe was just, yet certainly Heffers and Calves of all
kinds were clear. The Delegates replied- they saw no reason why his
Excellency's Bulls, Heffers and Calves should be exempted, and not their own.
The Barbarians in the mean time laid waste the Frontiers with fire and sword.
This intestine dispute proved more fatal to the Province, than all the
depredations of a foreign Enemy. Such was the cruel, unrelenting disposition of
the Lord of the soil, that he would rather see a general Massacre of all the
Inhabitants of the Land, than suffer one of his calves to be taxed toward
protecting them from a foreign force.

A few of the well affected Natives to the Government, threw themselves under
it is protection, and delivered up their Wives and Children as a pledge of their
future Fidelity; Lands were assigned for the maintenance of some, and others
were supported at the public-expence near the Metrapolis. Such was the stare of
Transylvania upon my first arrival at the Capital.

I waited upon his Excellency the Waywode, who received me very politely. He
appeared to be a middle aged Man of small stature; surrounded with half a Dozen
of boys who were called Prime Ministers of State; four young Nymphs of
Circassian breed, and a Calidonian wry neced Musician. The Room was filled with
instruments of music. A Violin; a harpsichord; six Bagpipes, and one dozen of
Jews Harps. He enquired if I understood Music; I answered, some few Italian
Airs upon the Bagpipe. Joy then appeared upon his countenance, and he
immediately gave me a general invitation to accompany him either to the chase
(as he loved a bow and arrow) or concert, every day during my stay at
Weissenburgh.

Scarce had two days elapsed when the City was all in arms, at the news of the
Piss -- Brute -- tarians (a bigoted, cruel and revengeful sect, sprung from
the Turks, and Adoters of Mahomet as to absolute Fate, but nominal Christians
in some other respects, having murdered the innocent Natives Man Woman and
Child, who were settled in the Country, were in full march to butcher those
under the protection of the City. In Consequence of this intelligence, eight
hundred men were put under arms, and ten pieces of cannon prepared. A Truce
however ensued, and the Waywode, not only put up with the insult, but meanly
stooped to carress the rebels* nay, he promised them an act of Indemnity, and
engaged to take them into high favor, if they would turn their resentment upon
the Delegates of the Province, instead of himself. This they agreed to. The
Delegates had no way to save themselves from destruction, and preserve the
Government from Anarchy but by appealing to the Emperor to be taken under his
own protection, and rescued from the oppressions of the Piss -- Brute --
tarians, and the Tyranny of the Waywode, After this strange revolution at
Court, all that were Rebels but a few days before, were now the Court
Favorites; and those, who had bravely and generously taken up arms to save his
Excellency's windpipe from being severed in a thousand pieces, were looked
upon as Enemies to the Government. Such is the instability of Courts, and the
wonderful Wisdom of Ministers of State! It is said his Excellency's Musical
Instruments in the fray were all put out of tune, and that he has been
disconcerted ever since; be that as it will; a sudden resolution was taken to
call a Council, wherein it was decreed, that there should no Magistrates hold
Commissions under the Government, who had shown any Love for the Emperor; or
was not a Piss -- Brute -- tarian; or could not play upon the Jew's harp.

As I had the happiness to be acquainted with Counselor Wiseman, a most
accomplished Gentleman, who had directed the Board for ten Years, with the
greatest integrity through all the political storms, and tempests that had
threatened the destruction of the Province, during the whole time by reason of
a bloody war that had been carried on with the grand Turk, he took the first
Opportunity after the Council broke up to communicate to me the substance of
the rebate upon that important subject.

His Excellency the Waywode, informed the Board, that he would not have one
Assert^rian in the Commission of the peace, or any other civil office
throughout the Government, as they seemed all tinctured with a rebellious
disposition toward him and his family, and had transferred their Loyalty to
the Emperor himself. That by their late proceedings, in choosing such men to
represent them, who were his bitter Enemies, and in complaining to the Emperor
against him, by which means he would be looked upon with an evil Eye at the
Court of Vienna, and either obliged to resign his Government, or throw himself
under the Protection of the grand Turk; therefore as they had thus shown their
malicious intentions against his Administration, they were no longer to be
enrolled among the Number of his Friends. He also added, that those of the
Emperor's Religion had behaved in such a cold indifferent manner (a few in
Weissenburgh excepted) as plainly made it appear that they were as well
affected to the Emperor as himself; -- that their principles in Religion and
the maxims by which they and their Ancestors were governed for one Thousand
Years, were peculiarly adapted to support the Emperial Family -- that these
things being considered, he could not expect their firm attachment to his
person, or their general concurrence to his measures; and therefore in good
policy they ought not to be trusted at such a critical conjuncture. He
therefore desired the Council to give their opinions, whether any other Sect
were to be trusted as Magistrates in the Government, besides the Piss -- Brute
-- tarians, a Sect whose principles have ever been diametrically opposite to
Monarchy; and not only * sworn Enemies to the Emperial Family, but murdered one
of the Emperors before his own palace; and have always been the foremast in all
the Rebellions that have been raised against his Successors ever since. He also
said, that there was a few of his Enemies, who have dared publicly to espouse
the Emperor's cause, and whom he "marked" out for punishment; he wished it
could be with the loss of their heads, instead of their Commissions. The
Enemies were Pottonius, Paulinus, Mortonus, and Trumponius, the last he was
some what sorry for, as he supposed his Ancestors were great Musicians; for
they had taken a name, to perpetuate the posterity, by which some Nations call
a Jews-Harp.

The Generality of the Council heartily concurred with his Excellency the
Waywode; but when it came to Counselor Wiseman to give his opinion, he begged
leave to dissent from the rest of the board; and hoped his Excellency would
with that attention and deliberation for which he was remarkable, hearken to
his reasons.

He told his Excellency, he hoped he would excuse him, if he differed with him
in some of the Political Observations he had just now made, and unto which
Messieurs Simpleton, Prigg, Beau, and Brainless his Brother Counselors had
signified their approbation. He told him that as he had been but a short time
Viceroy of the province he ought to use every method in his power to cultivate
a good understanding with the people; -- that that as a spirit of Freedom had
drawn them from all Nations to populate such an extensive province, stripping
them of their rights and privileges, was not the Way of either gaining the good
opinion of those who were wavering, or of bringing them back that were the most
seditious; that though his Excellency was sensible, how little either himself, or
the Council troubled themselves about what was called Religion, yet (as he very
well knew) there was a necessity of keeping up external appearances; that it
was a useful engine to keep the Vulgar in awe; -- that if therefore he
abandoned the profession of it, he would be held in universal disesteem by all
its Professors -- that if he appeared more Zealous for one sect than another, a
general Jealousy would take place among the rest, and perhap unite them all
against him; that if this should happen, the Piss-Brute -- tarians were not the
tenth of his Subjects, and consequently could not support him against the other
nine; -- that if he made an impartial distribution of places of Profit and
Honor in the Government, and established them in all their equitable demands,
the Emperor would have no objection toward the continuing of him in his
Vice-royalty; no complaints could have any weight against him; his Character
would appear fair at Court, and perhaps save him the expense und trouble of a
long Journey to defend himself.

As to the Assertorians, the raking them into his favor, in imitation of many
of his worthy Predecessors would, perhaps, effectually regain their Friendship;
make them drop the prosecution of their Appeal: and as they are above one fifth
part of the Inhabitants, they are no contemptable body to disoblige. Pottonius
(who appears to be particularly singled out) is a Gentleman, who has remarkably
distinguished himself this twenty Years past, for his Integrity, in faithfully
discharging the Office of a Magistrate; his fortune places him above the fear
of affection of Mankind, in the destribution of Justice; and therefore he does
you Excellency as much honor in accepting of the Commission, as you can do him
in giving it. As to those of the Emperor's Religion, it is well known that two
of their Priests, and a number of their People, who either hold Offices in
reality under you, or live in expectation of them, in this Metrapolis, have
gone greater lengths to serve you, than any other Sect among us in some
particulars,

Have they not abandoned their former Principles, violated every obliligation
that was either civil of sacred, or that bound them by the ties of Conscience
or honor to be faithful to the Emperor, in order to support your Cause? Have
they not prostituted their Temple, (a place solemnly dedicated for pious uses)
as an Amphitheatre for the Rabble to combat in? Has not their Altar been
profaned by the unhallowed hands of Turks, Jews, Infidels and Piss -- Brute --
tarians? And all this in favor of your Excellency?

As for Paulinus, Mortonus, and others of the Emperor's Profession, whose
characters have been irreproachable, and whose Virtues have made them revered
by their Country, shall they become the objects of your Excellency's
disapprobation for no other reason, than that they still continue to have a
regard for the Emperor, and cannot easily conquer their old prejudices in favor
of the Emperial Court? -- Time might bring them over as well as others; but
such rash and precipitate measures, will create a Jealousy throughout all all
Transylvania, as if your opposition to them was purely out of spite to the
Emperor, for whom they would be made a Sacrifice.

Your Attachment to the Piss -- Brute -- tarians is somewhat remarkable, as
they have been the cause of all the trouble that has happened in the
Government. Had there never been a Rebellion amongst them here, your Excellency
would never have been brought into such difficulties. Had the Traitors been
punished according to their Demerit, there never would have been an Appeal to
Vienna. How then can you place your chief confidence in a sect who have been
the sole cause of your misfortunes? These invincible arguments staggered his
Excellency; but being a Man of weak Intellects, and abandoned (like The last
King of the Assyrian Empire, who for his extreme Effeminacy was so disdained by
his own Captains, that they conspired against him. When he saw himself so
straightened, that there was no escaping, he turned valiant and making a funeral
pile of all his precious Things (Fiddles) he burnt himself in his Palace, and
went out in a blaze.
Sardana palus) to wine, music and Women, was soon confirmed in his former
opinion, by his other Counselors who told him, that all the People in the
Province were a set of Villain but the Piss -- Brute -- tarians and themselves,
and hoped he would govern himself accordingly. Thus the Council broke up. But I
am afraid, I have trangress'd the bounds of a single Letter, and have only
tired your patience with some few hints about the Politics of a Country, the
name of which is scarcely known in America. You see by this how I improve my
time in my Travels, and I hope to return to America equally accomplished with
those of my Countrymen who have made this Tour before me. Adieu! dear Sir, at
present! You need not expect to hear from me, till my arrival at Warsaw, where
an account of the Politics of Poland, will be the subject of my next.

See a full account of him in Justin. I am yours, etc. JACK TRAVELLER
WEISSENBURGH in TRANSYLVANIA, August 1st, 1764.
FINIS.

