THE QUAKER VINDICATED; OR, OBSERVATIONS ON A LATE PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, THE
QUAKER UNMASKED, OR, PLAIN TRUTH.

He that is first in his own Cause, SEEMS just;
But his Neighbor comes and searches him.
PROVE. XVIII. 17. These Things, indeed, you have articulated,
Proclaimed at Market-Crosses, read in Churches,
To face the Garment of Rebellion
With some fine Color, that may please the Eye
Of fickle Changelings and poor Discontents;
And never yet did INSURRECTION want
Such Watercolors, to impaint his Cause.
SHAKESPEARE. Printed in the Year MDCCLXIV.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
AFter the late Insurrection was quelled, it was hoped that unanimity and
concord would again have taken place among the good People of this Province:
And as the lenity of the Government was so great as to pardon the Offenders, it
was expected that not even their abettors would again attempt to rekindle the
coals of strife and jealousy in the breasts of the rash and inconsiderate.

But unhappily for Pennsylvania, there seems to be some of its Inhabitants that
are resolved to leave no stone unturned till they can hit upon the means that
will force a lasting breach among their Fellow-Countrymen. In this Class of Men
appears the Author of the Piece under present consideration; called The Quaker
Unmasked; or, Plain Truth. Which, as he asserts to be matter of fact, it may be
expedient to canvass its pages, and see if it be the spirit of Truth that
breathes through it, or a wilful Misrepresentation: In the disquisition of
which, we shall endeavor, as much as possible, to avoid railing, and only
stick to the argument.

The Unmasker says, "He thinks it a Duty incumbent on every good subject to
make diligent search, in order to find out the aggressors, and then to inform
the Public how he has found matters". -- Let us see how consistent he
prosecutes this design: First then, without giveing the least proof of it, he
roundly asserts, that "These Incendiaries (the Quakers) have wrote and
published several inflamatory Pamphlets with a design to enrage the Populace".
Surely, our Unmasker never could have made "diligent Search", or he would not
have begun with so great a mistake; the Quakers Address to the Governor being
the sole Piece they have published, vindicating themselves from the invidious
reflections of the Declaration and Remonstrance.

How unfair does this Unmasker proceed in the next paragraph, "The Savage
Indian Butchers -- whose cause and interest Quakers so warmly espouse". Do the
Quakers, or any one else, espouse the cause of such? Did not several of the
Rioters examine all the Indians at the Barracks that the City has protected?
and didn't they acknowledge that they knew not one of them? then how groundless
is this Assertion! --

Again, "Terrible! indeed beyond Description, are the Cruelties daily practiced
by those Savages on our Fellow Subjects, while Prisoners amongst them! But
where are the Quakers who have taken up arms to defend them"? Defend who? --
What, defend those that are prisoners? -- Have not the Quakers bore their
burden of taxes equal with others? and what other way has any interior part of
the Province defended its Frontiers?

The Unmasker now opens a paragraph as angry as it is grossly fallacious; "When
the Indian incursions last summer laid waste a considerable part of our
Frontier, how did these meek Quakers behave on so melancholy an occasion; to
their immortal Infamy be it known that they would not grant a single farthing
(as a Society) for the relief of their poor Fellow Subjects". A great
deficiency appears here in his "diligent Search": The Quakers (or Incendiaries,
as he handsomely calls them) did make a Collection as a Society, but withheld
it for a while, as there were generous Contributions sent to the assistance of
the Frontier-Inhabitants, by several other Societies in Town; thinking, that,
when those Moneys had been nigh exhausted, their Subscriptions might be of
greater use. Accordingly some Gentlemen of their Society (with whom the Money
was deposited) wrote several times to a Clergyman in one of the
Frontier-Townships, desiring him to take upon him the distribution of their
Money, as he was best acquainted with the circumstances of those about him; --
and he as often refused: alleging that their assistance was not wanted. --
This they did as a Society. -- And at the same time many Individuals most
freely opened their purses, and joined in private Collections. -- So that we
see, this vehement outcry "of immortal Infamy" means nothing. --

But, says the Unmasker, "When their good Brethren the Indians ( some of whom
were well known by Officers now in this City, to have been in the battle
against Colonel Bouquet, and others at the siege of Fort Pit, during the
summer) seemed in danger of receiving their Just deserts, etc. no toils are
thought too great -- to protect these Bosom-friends". The Officer who was
charged with saying he knew them, declared in diverse public Companies that it
was an absolute falsehood, and that he had never uttered such a thing. Is it
likely that in the hurry and confusion of a battle, or at the irregular siege
of Fort Pit, See 12th Page of Q -- r U -- 'd.
"the red, blue, or any other color painted" Indians seen there, should be
well known, when seen again in Philadelphia in their natural color? -- Or were
it possible that that should be the case, is it to be thought that those
Gentlemen Officers would not have informed the Civil Magistrates of so
essential a truth? On the contrary did they not all (the Officer in particular
who was charged with saying be knew them) express the greatest abhorrence of
the intended Massacre, and willingness (as well as the Citizens) to protect the
Indians? But the Unmasker, we see, unmasks himself with all his circumspection:
In the first page he says, "shall we attempt to vindicate their killing Indians
under the protection of the Government? By no means". But here we see he thinks
it would have been "Just". And in the next paragraph he acknowledges "the
Paxton People's coming down in a seemingly hostile manner, is justly to be
condemned". What a strange contradiction is here! But this will be always the
case, when men under the Veil of Truth, endeavor to hide the bitterest Rancour
and Ill Will. --

But let us further listen to what is said in behalf of the Rioters: -- "They
had long before," says their Champion, "sent several Petitions to the Governor
and Assembly, which, it is supposed, have been concealed by some ill-designing
persons; his Honor never having received these Remonstrances, -- and they
looked upon themselves as neglected by the Government". Is it not surprising
that if these People had done so, they should not have availed themselves of so
strong a Plea in their Declaration and Remonstrance? where not a word like it
is mentioned. And are those that they sent such Petitions to (whom we may
suppose their unquestionable Friends) so neglectful of their cause and
interest, as to conceal such important Papers? But this Writer has made so bold
with Truth in several other places, that he has given us reason to doubt the
verity of this assertion. But admitting that to be the case, why are the poor
Quakers to be so egregiously reviled? Is it to be thought that they either
concealed the Petitions, or bribed others to do it?

In the next paragraph he owns, the Paxton People are "mad", but says it is
owing to their "Oppression". For, says he, "have not all Nations and
Generations found it so? Nay, is not the happy and glorious Revolution, by
which our Civil and Religious Rights, as Englishmen and Protestants, were
secured on their present footing, a striking Instance of this Truth"? that is,
were not the renowned Nassau, and all those Worthies, that assisted in
establishing the blessed Revolution, "mad", like the Pr -- st. enflamed Rioters
of Pennsylvania? Noble comparison! thrice puissant Advocate! -- And how can the
Quakers help their "madness" and "desperation"? But here we have a Clue to the
whole Scheme of Philopatrius, which accounts for the great zeal and warmth he
has shown on this occasion; it is a Revolution then that he is hankering after,
and prompts him, thus, by way of simile, openly to prostitute one of the most
auspicious Events in the British Annals to his low and illiberal purposes. But
let the Caballers have a care that they don't fare like the Dog in the Fable,
and loose the Substance by grasping at the Shadow.

"What these People intended by their coming down armed", says he, "let
themselves declare". This is no bad instance of Philopatrius's modesty, as we
see he is ashamed to mention their intention, for it would be too ridiculous to
suppose he could feign ignorance of it so late in the day; more especially as,
he says, they sent "several Petitions", which not being mentioned in the
Declaration, etc. must be a piece of private intelligence which he was let
into. But the style of both these Pieces is so wonderfully similar, that it is
more than possible the same Lucina ushered them into the world.

To elucidate this matter, let us see what reason the Citizens of Philadelphia
(including the few armed Quakers) had to put themselves in a defensive posture:
-- News was brought to them of a great Number of armed Men being on their way
toward the City; their design being, as they gave out, to kill all those
Indians (Friends of this Province) in the Barracks, Men, Women and Children,
that were under the Protection of the Government, and to force their way
through all opposition, or die in the attempt; and likewise threatened what
they would do to several of the Citizens. The Inhabitants therefore, (shocked
at so inhuman and illegal a project) entered into an Association, at the
request of the Governor, to strengthen the hands of Magistracy, and oppose the
extravagant designs of the Rioters, few of whom were Freeholders or Men of
Property, the majority of them being people the Caballers had in pay. But the
Citizens of Philadelphia had no design to offer them the least injury, unless
they should use violence; which evidently appears from the measures they
entered into with them.

However, Philopatrius " only observes that their behavior did them honor, as
it showed them to be brave, loyal, and discreet". I would ask this Gentleman,
in what Nation was it ever counted "brave", to desire to attack a defenseless
confined body of people, with a resolution, in cool blood, to kill them all,
Men, Women and Children? In what State or Government was it ever thought
"loyal", to fly in the face of Authority, and trample down the Laws of their
Country? In what Realm or Region was it ever deemed "discreet", for a Man to
come with a Petition in one hand, and a loaded Musket in the other. The
Unmasker may think as he pleases, but I am sure this is not PLAIN TRUTH.

"They sent in a Memorial", says this Writer, "to the Governor; letting his
Honor know that by such a time they would be at Germantown, and there halt
till he was pleased to give them an answer". If they did send in their Petition
before they came to Germantown, it was so far commendable, and spoke more in
their favor than their preceding conduct. But it has been observed that it was
by no means dictated in the petitory manner; a small quotation will evince the
truth of this remark, where, speaking of killing the Indians in the Barracks,
they say, "It is this we DESIGN, it is this we are RESOLVED to PROSECUTE".

"Some of the People called Quakers", says the Unmasker, "said that they had
force sufficient to kill the whole", and "it was better so, than condescend to
treat with such a Banditti". It is impossible in an answer of this kind to
decide what "some of the People" might say. However, had any Quakers of note
made such a proposition, why did he not mention their names? Certainly, he does
not want good will enough to expose them. But as he only asserts it without
proof, I must use the freedom of suspending my assent.

"Nevertheless", says he, "those Gentlemen, who were more averse to the
shedding of the blood of their Fellow Subjects, than the meek, peaceful,
inspired Quakers, did prevail". Here we have another instance of our Author's
fair and ingenuous way of arguing. Even admitting (though with little reason)
that some called Quakers might have been of that opinion, does it infer that
the Quakers (i. e. the Society) approved of such sentiments. Let us reduce the
sense of this to the scholastic way of reasoning, and see what a pretty
syllogism it will make.

If some called Quakers would have fought the Paxton People, had they come to
Philadelphia, it means the meek, peaceful, inspired Quakers would.

But some called Quakers would have fought, had they come to Philadelphia;

Ergo, the " meek, peaceful, inspired Quakers wanted to shed the blood of their
Fellow Subjects."

What a curious Logic is here! And yet this would be the Unmasker's inference.

"They were willing," says he, "to disperse and return to their respective
homes, which was accordingly agreed to". (Though by the by, it is conceived from
an other reason than that alleged; to wit) "on proviso they might have a fair
hearing", "and they dispersed without doing any Mischief". Then their design
was mischievous? "They (the Paxton People) have charged the Quakers with gross
partiality to Indians, and their being unfit for Government, nay, ascribe the
greatest part of their sufferings to them ALONE". This is not so "glaring a
Fact" neither, as the Unmasker would make it out. That the Quakers have had
more trouble, and been at more expense than any other Society in the Province,
in endeavoring to bring the Indians over to the English Interest, ever since
the commencement of last War, is a truth that all the impartial will
acknowledge. If they have not been so fortunate as to accomplish their design,
and have shown too much lenity toward them, would it not be more becoming an
unprejudiced, candid person, to attribute such errors to a failure in judgment,
rather than a design in the Quakers to have our bleeding Borders infested with
the cruel Barbarians of the Wilderness? Indeed our Frontier-Inhabitants have
been strangely deluded and abused concerning the character, that has been
handed to them, of this People. "They do sympathize" (most sincerely) "with
them", and unfeignedly "pity their distresses". But they have Enemies in
Philadelphia, that are determined, if it lays in their power, to make the
Frontier-Inhabitants everlastingly hate them. -- The rest of this paragraph
contains some low invectives, quite foreign to PLAIN TRUTH, and are too mean to
deserve any further notice.

"Let us next consider Quakers with respect to Government"; says the Unmasker,
"Can it be consistent that a Person who declares that his conscience forbids
him to take up Arms, should be a Representative for a warlike People? By no
means: Neither is it an " inexpressible absurdity" that a man who communes with
the Quakers may not make a good Representative even "in time of war". You stare
at this, Sir, as militating against itself; but let us examine, look into any
Set of Christians, and you may find some of its Members that don't agree in
every Article of its Believe, and yet commune with that Society which they have
been educated among. Nor is this, I conceive, at all preposterous or
hypocritical. The Father instructs his Son in what he thinks is truth, and
during the son's minority the father endeavors to implant his own opinions
into the bosom of his child, but when the son arrives to years of
understanding, it is his peculiar privilege to judge for himself; (and he is
accountable to GOD only, the Author of his being, for his thoughts) and then,
as men vary so much in their sentiments, how common is it for people to recede
from their primary instructions in some particulars, and yet hold in the main
with the Christian System in which they have been educated? nor was this ever
thought duplicity, or counted a dissembling part, by sensible and thinking men.
Thus, we have had several instances, at diverse times, of men who have been
educated Quakers, (unexceptionable, moral men) who have thought it no Crime to
defend their King and Country, their Laws and Immunities against the violence
of a foreign, or domestic enemy. Non-resistance, therefore, is not "a
fundamental Principle" universal among Quakers. But if it is so "inexpressibly
absurd" for a Quaker to be an Assemblyman, why in the name of sense are they
not left out at the annual Elections? How few Quakers to Members of other
Societies is there, in the Counties of Lancaster and York! and yet we find
Quaker Assemblymen even in those places: What can be the reason of this? Is it
that the people really think them the suitablest men, or are their Constituents
under an "infatuation"? as the Declaration civily expresses it.

"Here", the Unmasker "observes, that the people whom the Quakers took up arms
to destroy" (might not the Quakers, with equal justice, rejoin, the people that
said they would scalp them) "were those who preserved them from feeling the
Severities and Contrivances of Indian Cruelty? "'It Is owing", says he, "to the
brave stand which these unrequited Volunteers have made against the inroads of
Savages, that the Quakers are now able to treat their Protectors with such
ingratitude." (Is that really the case then? God bless them for it! and may
their King and Country amply reward them!) -- Can the Unmasker seriously think
that the Paxton Volunteers expedition to the Great Island was the means of
Philadelphia's not being laid waste by Savages, and its Inhabitants butchered?
If this is not his meaning "feeling the Severities and Contrivances of Indian
Cruelty," must be idle words. (That Expedition was unquestionably
praiseworthy) but surely the Unmasker must be dreaming, or only means this for
a flourish. Were the Quakers the only people that armed on the late occasion?
Were there not Churchmen, Presbyterians, Roman Catholics, etc in short did not
all good and honest men approve of the opposition? But the Quakers must be made
odious at any rate.

"Behold the Meeting House", says he, "converted into a place of Arms". One of
the days that the City was under arms happened to be Meeting-Day, and the
Meeting House was opened at the usual hour for the reception of its Members,
but before they came, a Company of the Association had taken possession of it
to shelter themselves from the inclemency of the weather, it being a rainy day,
and there remained till evening; from thence, he says, the Quakers have
converted it into "a place of Arms".

"Whilst some of their Preachers are busied in procureing Powder and Shot,
others are employed in refreshing the spirit or their brave Soldiers with Wine
and other Liquors." Amazing Falsehood! and is this his Address to the Public of
Plain Truth? -- Despicable Scribbler! thus to violate the sacred name of Truth
with such barefaced Fictions.

The Unmasker here gives way to his depraved fancy once more, and, to make use
of a peculiar expression of his, "saddles" the Quakers with a malicious
invention of his own, instead of proving matters of fact; -- wretched
succedaneum! -- in which among other things, equally kind, he puts this into
the mouth of a Quaker, "nay we secretly rejoice when we hear of whole
Settlements MURDERED and DESTROYED". Sure this unhappy man's senses must be
steeped in gall, and his heart dashed with wormwood, to utter such detestable
calumny.

"But it may be asked", says the Unmasker, "why all this Clamor against
Quakers? ay! and with the greatest reason! but Philopatrius seems to be
sensible at last, that he is grossly abusing a Society of People, on little or
no grounds. This Writer says, "to talk against Presbyterians as such, is the
effect either of party-spirit, malice or nonsense." I agree with him with all
my heart; and think likewise that to talk against Quakers as such, is equally
the effect either of malice and party-spirit or nonsense. To confine virtue or
vice to any particular sect or set of men, shows little knowledge in human
nature and a most uncharitable narrowness of spirit; human nature being all
formed out of the same essence, and only dispersed in different degrees to
different men; every Society, therefore, has its knaves and honest men; and
that the Quakers have their Modicum of the later, with other Communities, I
must in charity believe.

In the next paragraph we have an observation of the father of Constantine the
Great, that, "they who were false to their God, would never be true to their
Prince." Which he seems to insinuate is applicable to the Quakers; and that
they are like "the Pagans, ready to embrace any religion indifferently", and of
course should be "discarded," and, "the Christians", that is, Paxton people,
"be employed, who firmly adhere to their profession." I would not invidiously
pervert any man's meaning, but I can put no other sense on this paragraph.

"Let us look round", says the Unmasker, "and see who are those who enjoy the
Places of Profit and Trust in this Province; ( a very few excepted) are they
not Quakers or Quakers Creatures?" are all those Gentlemen then, of other
Societies in the Province, ( a very few excepted,) that bear public Offices,
Quakers Creatures? -- abusive man! -- to let his factious zeal carry him to
such lengths of vile defamation.

"It has been argued", says he, "if the Indians are guilty let their accusers
appear, and not put them to death without a fair trial"? and doubtless a very
upright and Christian argument it is: but because "it is a hard matter to prove
Indians guilty, -- that are not guilty -- "put them to death without a fair
trial."

Again, "But it has been proved by a very circumstantial Oath of a young man
(who has since very unaccountably disappeared) that the Quakers, or Persons who
appeared to be such, have conveyed off and concealed these (Indians) that were
most suspected". It is said in the Scriptures, that there be some men who will
debase themselves even to Hell: what a mavelous degree of turpitude does this
Writer here discover! and what a malignant heart must such a man have! to
mention a most infamous Forgery, as -- "a very circumstantial Oath"? and to say
the assertion "has been proved": a perjury that had been plotted with a design
to scandalize and vilify the King's Officers, (that had orders from the General
to guard the Indians) and the Society of Quakers; the Person who took the
qualification, having absconded, and the Magistrate, who gave the Oath, being
afterward of opinion that he was perjured.

I have now gone through the task I imposed on myself; to wit, a discussion of
"THE QUAKER UNMASKED", or PLAIN TRUTH": and from what the Unmasker has said, "I
hope my Countrymen will coolly consider", whether or no, in his "diligent
Search after Aggressors", he has hit upon "PLAIN TRUTH"? and whether it is
apparent that the Quakers have shown any favor to our Savage Enemies, or
attempted to screen one of them from Justice? and whether some Members of that
Community's joining their Fellow-Citizens to protect the Innocent from the
bloody violence of a deluded people can be called so? And lastly, that this did
not proceed from any prejudice to the distressed Frontier-Inhabitants, or the
want of generous sympathizing hearts, but from a noble regard to justice, and
the preservation of the Laws of their Country, is it not equally clear?

And now, my Countrymen, if this is the case, and I believe all the impartial
will acknowledge it is, what must we think of a Writer who without any
provocation could thus attempt to blast the reputation of so large a Body of
People, many of whom are valuable Members of Society? What must we think of a
man who could treat his neighbor with such scurrility* who could publish such
base falsehoods, under the mask of truth? It surely could not arise from a
zeal, as he pretended, "that Peace might again be restored among us?" No: Such
a supposition would imply greater stupidity than belongs to his character. Let
me speak with boldness what reason and truth conspire to dictate. We must than
conclude that our Unmasker had no other design but to vindicate the conduct of
Rioters, and bespatter as much as possible the name of a Quaker, no matter with
how little justice or decency; to impose on the ignorant, inflame the giddy,
and to prolong the alienation (unhappy circumstance!) which has already taken
place. Judge then, my Fellow-Countrymen, whether such a man's opinion should
determine you in your choice of Representatives? --

But I hasten to conclude, in the sentiment of a noble Lord, upon another
occasion; Whatever factions may arise, and however loud the Drummers of faction
may sound their noisy alarms; however they may attempt to drown the voice of
reason and truth by their clamor; let the Friends of Pennsylvania lay aside
the animosities which have been raised and maintained by the wicked and by the
weak; let them hold fast their integrity, and support with spirit the Cause of
their Country and its Laws, and they will confirm the good, reclaim the bad,
vanquish the incorrigible, and Peace again shall be restored among us.

PHILALETHES.

POSTSCRIPT.
I cannot withhold expressing the pleasure I have, in seeing the happy fruits
of having Indian Allies in the prosecution of an Indian War; and therefore
shall make no apology for annexing the following paragraph out of the Public
Papers; which I humbly conceive is not foreign to the nature of this Pamphlet.

NEW YORK, March 12.
"Our advices from the Frontiers of this Province, received by way of Express
on Thursday last, and by the Albany Post on Saturday, are of as indubitable
authority and credit, as the Extract we gave in our last relating to the march
of 200 Indians sent out by Sir William Johnson, against the Indian village of
Kanestio. -- " These advices are, that on the 2d instant, at night, Sir William
received an Express by an Indian and a white Man, from the above party,
importing, "That on the evening of the 26th of February, they had reached the
main branch of the river Susquehanna, on their way westward, when they received
private advices, that a large body of Delawares, our Enemies, were at a small
distance, destined against some of our settlements; upon which intelligence our
party immediately made all possible dispatch to surprise them, which they
happily effected, by surrounding them in their encampment at the dawn of day on
the 27th. Their approach was so sudden, that our Enemies could make no defense,
and were made prisoners to the number of 41, with their Chief Capt. BULL (an
Indian) son of Teedyuscung, a person who has been in Arms against the English,
during all the late hostilities, having headed many parties, and discovered
great inveteracy against us. Our Indians immediately bound the prisoners, and
sent them under a strong escort to Sir William, where they were expected a day
or two after the 3d instant." (We trust this good beginning will be followed by
some other successes, and sufficiently prove the IMPORTANCE they are of in an
Indian War, as well as the Judgment of the present General, who has made use of
their Services.) Pennsylvania Gazette, Numb. 1838.


