Anno Quarto GEORGII III. Regis.
An ACT for preventing Tumults and riotous Assemblies, and for the more speedy
and effectual punishing the Rioters.
WHEREAS of late several dangerous Riots and Tumults have been, in diverse Parts
of this Province, to the Disturbance of the public Peace, and the great Terror
of His Majesty's Subjects; and the same are yet continued and fomented by many
turbulent and evil-minded Persons: Therefore for the preventing and suppressing
of such Riots and Tumults, and for the more speedy and effectual punishing the
Offenders therein, BE IT ENACTED by the Honorable JOHN PENN, Esquire
Lieutenant Governor under the Honorable THOMAS PENN, and RICHARD PENN,
Esquires, true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, and
of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the said Province,
in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Persons,
to the Number of Twelve, or more, being unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously
assembled together, to the Disturbance of the public Peace, at any Time after
the Publication of this Act, and being required or commanded by any one or more
Justice or Justices of the Peace, or by the Sheriff of the County, or his
Undersheriff, or by the Mayor, Bailiff or Bailiffs, or other Head Officer, or
Justice of the Peace, of any City or Town Corporate, where such Assembly shall
be, by Proclamation to be made in the King's Name, in the Form herein after
directed, to disperse themselves, and peaceably to depart to their Habitations,
or to their lawful Business, shall, to the Number of Twelve, or more
(notwithstanding such Proclamation made) unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously
remain or continue together by the Space of one Hour after such Command or
Request made by Proclamation, That then such continuing together, to the Number
of Twelve, or more, after such Command or Request made by Proclamation, shall
be adjudged Felony, without Benefit of Clergy, and the Offenders therein shall
be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer Death, as in Case of Felony, without
Benefit of Clergy.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That the Order and Form
of the Proclamations that shall be made by the Authority of this Act, shall be
as hereafter follows; that is to say, the Justice of the Peace, or other
Person authorized by this Act to make the said Proclamation, shall, among the
said Rioters, or as near to them as he can safely come, with a loud Voice
command, or cause to be commanded, Silence to be while Proclamation is making;
and after that shall openly, and with loud Voice, make, or cause to be made,
Proclamation in these Words, or like in Effect;

OUR Sovereign Lord the King charge and commands all Persons being
assembled, immediately to disperse themselves, and peaceably to depart to their
Habitations, or to their lawful Business, upon the Pains contained in the Act
of the General Assembly of this Province, made in the Fourth Year of GEORGE the
Third for preventing Tumults and riotous Assemblies.

GOD Save the KING.
AND every such Justice and Justices of the Peace, Sheriff, Under Sheriff,
Mayor, Bailiff, and other head Officer aforesaid, within the Limits of their
respective Jurisdictions, are hereby authorized, empowered and required, on
Notice or Knowledge of any such unlawful, riotous and tumultuous Assembly, to
resort to the Place where such unlawful, riotous and tumultuous Assembly shall
be, of Persons to the Number of Twelve, or more, and there to make, or cause to
be made, Proclamation in Manner aforesaid.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Persons, so
unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled, or Twelve, or more of them,
after Proclamation made in Manner aforesaid, shall continue together, and not
disperse themselves within one Hour, that then it shall and may be lawful to
and for every Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, or Under Sheriff of the County
where such Assembly shall be, and also to and for every high or petty
Constable, and other Peace Officer, within such County, and also to and for
every Mayor, Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, Bailiff, and other Head Officer,
high or petty Constable, and other Peace Officer, of any City or Town
Corporate, where such Assembly shall be, and to and for such other Person and
Persons as shall be commanded to be assisting unto any such Justice of the
Peace, Sheriff, or Under Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, or other Head Officer
aforesaid (who are hereby authorized and empowered to command all His Majesty's
Subjects, of Age and Ability, to be assisting to them therein) to seize and
apprehend, and they are hereby required to seize and apprehend such Persons so
unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously continuing together, after Proclamation
made as aforesaid, and forthwith to carry the Persons so apprehended before one
or more of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County or Place where
such Persons shall be so apprehended, in order to their being proceeded against
for such their Offenses, according to Law; and that if the Persons so
unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled, or any of them, shall happen
to be killed, maimed or hurt, in the Dispersing, Seizing or Apprehending, or
endeavoring to disperse, seize or apprehend them, by Reason of their resisting
the Persons so dispersing, seizing or apprehending, or endeavoring to
disperse, seize or apprehend them, that then every such Justice of the Peace,
Sheriff, Under Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, Head Officer, high or petty Constable,
or other Peace Officer, and all and singular Persons, being aiding or assisting
to them, or any of them, shall be free discharged and indemnified, as well
against the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, as against all and every
other Person and Persons, of, for, or concerning the Killing, Maiming, or
Hurting of any such Person or Persons so unlawfully, riotously, and
tumultuously assembled, that shall happen to be so killed, maimed or hurt, as
aforesaid.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, T^^^ if
any Person or Persons do or shall, with Force and Ar^^ wilfully and knowingly
oppose, obstruct, or in any Man^^^ wilfully and knowingly let, hinder or hurt
any Person (...) Persons that shall begin to proclaim, or go to proclaim,
^^cording to the Proclamation hereby directed to be (...) whereby such
Proclamation shall not be made, that (...) every such opposing, obstructing,
letting, hindering or hurting such Person or Persons, so beginning or going to
make such Proclamation as aforesaid, shall be adjudged Felony, without Benefit
of Clergy, and the Offenders therein (...) be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer
Death, as in Case of Felony, without Benefit of Clergy; and that also every
such Person or Persons, so being unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously
assembled, to the Number of Twelve, as aforesaid, or more, to whom Proclamation
should or ought to have been made, if the same had not been hindered as
aforesaid, shall likewise, in case they, or any of them, to the Number of
Twelve, or more, shall continue together, and not disperse themselves, within
one Hour after such Let or Hindrance so made, having Knowledge of such Let or
Hindrance so made, shall be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer Death, as in Case
of Felony, without Benefit of Clergy.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act shall be
openly read at the next, and every other Quarter Sessions of the Peace in each
County respectively, during the Continuance thereof, by the Clerk of such
Sessions, by Order of the Justices thereof.

AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act shall be
and continue in full Force and Virtue during the Space of one Year, from the
Publication thereof, and from thence to the End of the next Sitting of
Assembly, and no longer.

Signed by Order of the House, ISAAC NORRIS, Speaker.
PASSED by the GOVERNOR, this Third Day of February, in the Fourth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, Annoque Domini One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-four.


By his Honor's Command, JOSEPH SHIPPEN, junior, Secretary.


