A COURSE OF EXPERIMENTS, IN that curious and entertaining Branch of NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY, called ELECTRICITY; Accompanied with explanatory LECTURES: IN which
ELECTRICITY and LIGHTNING, will be proved to be the same Thing.

BY EBENEZER KINNERSLEY, M. A.

Professor of ENGLISH and ORATORY, in the COLLEGE and ACADEMY of PHILADELPHIA.

Printed by A. ARMBRUSTER, MDCCLXIV.

As the Knowledge of Nature tends to enlarge the human Mind, and give us more
noble, more grand and exalted Ideas of the AUTHOR of NATURE; it is presumed
that this Course of Experiments will meet with Encouragement, as a rational and
commendable Entertainment.

The Works of the LORD are great, and sought out of all them that have Pleasure
therein.

PSALM CXI, 2. LECTURE I.
I. OF Electricity in general, with some Account of its Discovery.

II. Experiments, showing that Electricity, when produced by the Friction of
Glass, is not created by that Friction.

III. That it is not extracted out of the Substance of the Glass.

IV. That it is not collected out of the circumambient Air. But,

V. That the excited Glass receives it from the Rubber, and other conducting
Matter communicating with the Earth; the Whole terraqueous Globe, with every
Thing thereon, containing naturally a certain Quantity of it.

VI. That even our Bodies contain enough of it to set a House on Fire.

VII. That it is not the same with culinary Fire.

VIII. That it has, when in a State of Rest, no sensible Heat.

IX. That, when it darts through the Air from our Body to another, it will
produce Heat by its violent Motion. The two last Propositions will be proved by
a very accurate Thermometer of a new Construction.

X. That it will subsist in WATER as well as in any other Matter; the greatest
Quantity thereof being not sufficient to quench the smallest Spark of it.

XI. That Sparks of it may be seen and felt rising out of cold Water, or even a
Piece of Ice, which will kindle up a burning Flame.

XII. That it is an extremely subtle Matter; as appears by its passing with
the greatest Readiness through so dense a Body as Metal.

XIII. That it takes no perceptible Time in passing through large Portions of
Space.

XIV. That Glass and Sealing-Wax, as well as several other Substances, when
excited by Friction, produce quite contrary Effects; one increasing, the other
diminishing the natural Quantity of Electricity in whatever Body is electrised
thereby; which will be shown by several Experiments made with a Globe of each.

XV. That separate Bodies having different Quantities of it in Proportion to
their respective Magnitudes, mutually attract each other; and the greater the
Difference, the stronger the Attraction.

XVI. That suspended Bodies in Contact, upon having their natural Quantity
either increased, or diminished, mutually recede from each other.

XVII. That Bodies thus separated, will immediately come again into Contact, if
the Air surrounding them be made to have (...) the same Degree of Electricity
that they have.

XVIII. That Bodies containing just the natural Quantity, will recede from each
other, if the Air wherein they are suspended, be made to have either more or
less than that Quantity.

XIX. That different Quantities of it in separate Bodies, may be reduced to an
Equality by Means of Metal in Form of a slender sharp Point, at a greater
Distance than in any other Form.

XX. A Shower of electrised Sand, rising again as fast as it falls.

XXI. An Artificial Spider, animated by Electricity so as to act like a live
one.

XXII. A Representation of the Sensitive Plant.

XXIII. A new Property discovered in electrised Points; by means of which will
be exhibited an electrical Horse-Race.

XXIV. Eight musical Bells rung by an electrised Phial of Water.

XXV. A Battery of eleven Guns, discharged by Fire issuing out of a Person's
Finger.

LECTURE II.
I. A Description and Explanation of the famous Leyden Experiment, which is the
Foundation of most of the principal Discoveries that have been since made in
Electricity.

II. An empty Bottle performing the Leyden Experiment, without having any
non-electric Matter communicating with its inner Surface.

III. The amazing Force of Electricity in pasing through a Number of Bodies at
the same Instant.

IV. A diverting Eperiment, which cannot well be comprehended but by those who
try it.

V. Electrised Money, which few Persons will take when offered to them.

VI. Electricity shown to be the same with Lightning.

VII. A bright Flash of real Lightning, darting from a Cloud in a painted
Thunder-Storm.

VIII. The Cause and Effects of Lightning explained.

IX. The Force of a small Quantity of it making a fair Hole through a Quire of
Paper.

X. An Animal killed by it instantaneously.

XI. Metal melted by it on Glass, and some of the Metal incorporated with the
Substance of the Glass.

XII. A Wire heated by it so as to become red and burning hot.

XIII. An Experiment showing why Thunder Clouds float lower in the Air than
other Clouds; and why Eminences are most frequently struck by Lightning.

XIV. Why Lightning darts through the Air in a crooked Direction.

XV. Why it is more frequent in Summer than Winter.

XVI. An Experiment showing how Houses, Ships, etc. may be secured from being
damaged by Lightning.

XVII. What Part, in a House not so secured, is safest to be in, during a
Thunder-Gust, in Case the House should be struck with Lightning.

XVIII. The Endeavoring to guard against Lightning, in the Manner proposed,
shown to be not chargeable with Presumption, nor inconsistent with any of the
Principles, either of natural or revealed Religion.

XIX. A curious Machine put in Motion by Lightning, and playing various Tunes
on eight musical Bells.

XX. A Battery of eleven Guns discharged by Lightning, after it has darted
through ten Feet of Water.


