TO THE KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY in COUNCIL, The REPRESENTATION and
PETITION of Your Majesty's dutiful and loyal Subjects, FREEHOLDERS and
INHABITANTS of the Province of Pennsylvania.
Most humbly shows,
THAT having received certain information that the Assembly of this Province,
during their last sitting, had drawn up a PETITION to your Majesty, setting
forth among other things, "That mischievious disagreements subsist in this
government, which proceed, as they conceive, from the very Nature of it; and
that a Spirit of Violence, Riot and Confusion prevails among us, which cannot
be controuled by the present Powers of Government and renders a Change of the
same necessary": -- Sundry Magistrates and reputable Freeholders, alarmed at
the Nature of this Petition, and considering the whole Province as deeply
affected by it, did (in Behalf of themselves and others) apply to the Speaker
of Assembly for Copy of the same, and to know whether the House intended to
transmit it to England, without communicating its Contents to their
Constituents, and obtaining their fullest and most explicit Content therein.

THAT they were informed by the Speaker, that the Petition had already been
transmitted to be laid before your Majesty, and no Copy of it could be given
without the Leave of the House, at their Meeting in September next; when we
apprehend it might be too late for us to submit our Sense of this Matter to
your Majesty; and therefore we beg Leave in all humble Duty, to represent --

THAT as there is no civil Happiness on Earth which we should esteem equal to
that of being under your Majesty's immediate personal Government, if our remote
Situation could permit such a Blessing; yet as we and all your American
Subjects must be governed by Persons authorized and approved by your Majesty,
on the best Recommendation that can be obtained of them, we cannot perceive our
Condition in this Respect to be different from our Fellow Subjects around us,
or that we are thereby less under your Majesty's particular Care and Protection
than they are; since there can be no Governor of this Province, without your
Majesty's immediate Approbation and Authority.

THAT the particular Mode or Frame of Government which we enjoy under your
Majesty in this Province (as derived to us by the Charter of your Royal
Ancestor KING CHARLES the Second, and delivered to us by our wise Founder
WILLIAM PENN Esquire) is held in the highest Estimation by good Men of all
Denominations among us, and has brought Multitudes of industrious People from
various Parts of the World, who trusting in the perpetual Enjoyment of the
inestimable Privileges it gives them, have, at their own Expense, settled this
Colony, and raised it, in a few Years, to be one of the most flourishing in
your Majesty's American Dominions cheerfully embracing every Opportunity of
manifesting their Loyalty and Affection to your Majesty's Royal Person and
Family.

THAT such Disagreements as have arisen in this Province we have beheld with
Sorrow, but as others around us are not exempted from the like Misfortunes, We
can by no Means conceive them incident to the Nature of our Government, which
has often been administered with remarkable Harmony; and your Majesty, before
whom our late Disputes have been laid, can be at no Loss, in your great Wisdom,
to discover whether they proceed from the above Cause, or should be ascribed to
some other.

THAT this Province (except from the Indian Ravages) enjoys the most perfect
internal Tranquillity; and a Spirit of Riot and Violence is so foreign to the
general Temper of its Inhabitants, that there are as few instances of any
Disturbance of this kind to be met with among them since the first Settlement
of the Colony, as perhaps among the like number of People in any part of the
World: That where such disturbances have happened, they have been speedily
quieted; the civil Powers have been supported; and though there are perhaps Cases
in all Governments, where it may not be possible speedily to discover
Offenders, yet we know of no instance among us where Persons legally accused or
convicted, have been screen'd from public Justice; and if the executive Part of
our Government should seem in any case too weak, we conceive it is the Duty of
the Assembly, and in their Power, to strengthen it, without representing us in
a Light that might undeservedly subject us to your Majesty's Royal Displeasure,
which we should deem the greatest of all Misfortunes.

WE therefore most humbly PRAY -- That your Majesty would be graciously
pleased, wholly to disregard the said Petition of the Assembly, as exceeding
grievous in its Nature; as by no means containing a proper Representation of
the State of this Province; and as repugnant to the general Sense of your
numerous and loyal Subjects in it; there being but few of them (comparatively
speaking) who could by any means be prevailed on to give the least Countenance
to this Measure.

AND your Petitioners, as in duty bound, shall ever pray etc.


