REASONS Against the Renewal OF THE SUGAR ACT, As it will be prejudicial to the
TRADE, NOT ONLY Of the NORTHERN COLONIES, BUT TO THAT of GREAT BRITAIN ALSO.

Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed for THOMAS LEVERETT, in Cornhill. MDCCLXIV.

Advertisement.
THE Reasons offered in the following Pages against the Renewal of the Act of
Parliament, imposing a Duty on foreign Sugar and Molasses imported into the
British Colonies, are founded principally on the pernicious Effect this Act
will have on the Trade of the Massachusetts Province in particular, and the
Detriment which will hereby accrue to the Trade and Manufactures of
Great Britain. It is not attempted here to show in what Respects, and how far,
it will operate to the Disadvantage of the other Northern Colonies. But, it is
certain, they are all concerned in it, and will be affected by it, in some
Degree or other, according to the particular State and Circumstances of their
Trade. And if this Act, considered only as it affects the Trade of a single
Province, will be detrimental to Great Britain, it surely will be so, in a much
greater Degree, if we take into Consideration the ill Effects it will have on
the Trade of the whole Continent,

REASONS against the Renewal of the SUGAR-ACT.
AS the act, commonly called the sugar act, has been passed upwards of thirty
years, without any benefit to the crown, the duties arising from it having
never been appropriated by parliament to any particular use; and as this act
will soon expire, the following considerations are offered as reasons why it
should not be renewed.

First, It is apprehended that the trade is so far from being able to bear the
high duty imposed by this act, on sugar and molasses, that it will not bear any
duty at all. As the price of molasses now is, it will barely answer to distill
it into rum for exportation: Should this duty be added, it would have the
effect of an absolute prohibition on the importation of molasses and sugar from
the foreign islands, and consequently the same effect on the exportation of
fish, lumber and other commodities from hence to those islands, as the french,
dutch and other foreigners, whom we supply with those articles, will not permit
us to bring away their money; so that unless we can take their ordinary sugars
and molasses in return, this trade will be lost. And if an end should be put to
our trade to the foreign islands, Great Britain would finally lose much more
than would be gained by the duty on sugar. For should the colonies be obliged
to take from our own islands all the west india produce that they consume, the
price in Great Britain must necessarily advance more than double this duty. But
if we are permitted to import foreign sugars and molasses into the northern
colonies, more of our west india produce will be carried to Great Britain,
where the consumption is supposed to be equal to the whole produce of our
islands.

Secondly, The loss of the trade to the foreign islands, on which great part of
our other trade depends, must deeply affect all the northern colonies, greatly
hurt the fishery at Newfoundland, and entirely destroy that of this province,
as our own islands are not capable of taking off above one third of our west
india cod fish, or one quarter of the mackrell, shad, alewives and other small
fish exported from hence. --

In this province, we have about 300 sail of vessels from 45 to 75 tons,
employed in the cod fishery, and about 90 sail from 25 to 40 tons in the
mackrell fishery: these vessels carry from six to ten men each; the bankers,
one with another, make 800 quintals a vessel in the season, (from March to
October) and by an exact account taken at several of our fishing towns, the
proportion of west india cod fish was about three fifths of the whole quantity
taken. The mackrell vessels get about 200 barrels a vessel in the season.

Now as our own islands take off but about one third of the west india cod
fish, and not more than one quarter of the mackrell and other small fish, the
remainder will be lost, if we are prevented from supplying the foreign Islands;
there being no other market where it can be disposed of.

The fishery, at present, is carried on to very little profit, and wants all
the encouragement that can possibly be given, to support those concerned in it,
supposing they had a vent for all their west india fish. But should they be
deprived of a market for two thirds, (which they will be if this act should be
put in execution) the whole fishery must infallibly be broken up; for it is
impossible to procure fish for the european market, separate from the other;
the merchantable being such as is culled for that market out of the whole,
after it is cured; what remains is fit only for the west indies. So that any
interruption in either branch must be the destruction of the whole.

The manner of carrying on the fishery is this: The vessel draws 2 eighths,
after what is called the great general is taken out of the whole; the shoreman,
who is generally the owner, has one eighth for making, and the fishermen the
other 5 eighths. Suppose the vessel makes 800 quintals, which appears by an
exact account taken last year to be the medium, and this is estimated as
follows, Sterling. 340 Quintals fit for the European Markets, at 12 s. per
Quintal, L. 204 0 0 460 Quintals, fit only for the West India Market, at 9 s.
207 0 0 12 Barrels Oil, at 30 s. 18 0 0 L. 429 0 0 From this Sum of L. 429
deduct the Great General, which is Salt, Bait, Candles, Ballast, Boots, etc.
for the Salter, L. 85 10 0 L. 343 10 0 To the Vessel 2 eighths, which barely
pay for the Wear and Tear, as these Vessels expend double the Quantity of
Cables, Anchors, Rigging and Sails, that those in any other Employ do, L. 85 17
6 To the Shoreman's 1 eighth for making, on which the Support of his Family
depends, as the Vessel don't clear any Thing, 42 18 9 To the Crew for the other
5 8ths, 214 13 9 L. 343 10 0

From the crews 5 8ths amounting to L. 214 13. 9. is to be deducted, the small
general, so called, being for wood and provisions of all sorts, paid for by the
crew, amounting to L. 44 10 s; likewise their craft, as boots, barvels, hooks,
lines and small stores, amounting to L. 5 15. a man for 7 men, is L. 40 5 s.
this leaves L. 129 18. 4. to be divided amongst the crew, and amounts to L. 18
11. 3. sterling a man, which is but a bare subsistence, as most of the
fishermen have families, and are at double the expense for clothing that other
seamen are; the supply of which, as well as the rigging and sails for the
vessel, is from Great Britain. Should they be deprived of the trade to the
foreign islands in the west indies, by which two thirds of the west india fish
will be lost, this will reduce the vessel's share to L. 51 17. 6. which is not
sufficient to pay the necessary wear and tear: the fishermen's shares will
likewise be reduced to L. 6 5. 6. a sum by no means sufficient for their
support. -- The merchants who ship the fish to Europe, and remit the neet
proceeds to England, allow their vessels from 2 s. 6 d. to 3 s. sterling a
quintal freight; if they go to Bilboa or the Streights, where they cannot
procure salt, the freight is 3 s. if to Lisbon or Cadiz, it is only 2 s. 6 d.
and at this low freight, the fish seldom or never yields any profit. If upon
the whole, the merchants by these voyages can make their remittances to England
at parr, they are very well satisfied, and would always compound, at this rate,
for the season. This evidently proves, that the fishery will not bear the least
additional encumbrance, and that a very small discouragement will totally
destroy it.

Thirdly, A prohibition of the trade to the foreign islands will greatly
promote the French fishery. If the French islands can be supplied with fish for
their molasses, it will be easier for them to purchase it of us, than to catch
it themselves. Should they be obliged to pay money for our fish (as some have
supposed they will be) they must give a much greater price for it than they do
now, as our vessels must come back empty; we consequently cannot afford it so
cheap as when they make a freight home. This will have a tendency to promote
and enlarge the French fishery, which the planters in their islands will not
apply for, while they can be supplied with fish for their molasses; and their
establishing such a fishery will be very prejudicial to Great Britain, as great
numbers of our fishermen, having no employ at home, will be induced to enter
into the French service, where they will have all possible encouragement given
them.

Fourthly, The fishery being a great nursery of seamen for his Majesty's navy,
the destruction thereof must very much weaken the naval power of Great Britain.
The fishery, in this province alone, employs near 3000 seamen, allowing seven
men to a Vessel: The vessels employed in carrying the merchantable fish to
Europe are about 50 sail at 8 men to a vessel, which will make 400 men. The
vessels employed in the west india trade are about 300 sail. By the
custom-books it appears, that there were cleared out for the west india islands
at the ports of Boston and Salem, from January 1762, to January 1763, 266 sail
of vessels; suppose only one half of these went to the foreign islands, that
is, 133 from these two ports, and only 27 from Newbury and Casco-Bay; this will
make 160 vessels, at 8 men to a vessel amounting to 1280 men: So that in the
whole, there will be near 5000 seamen immediately turned out of employ. From
this nursery of seamen, his Majesty's ships on this station and in the west
indies, have often been supplied with men in a time of war, by which our trade
and fishery have sometimes been greatly distressed; particularly the squadrons
employed in the reduction of Louisbourg and Quebec upon application from
Admiral Saunders, were supplied with upwards of 500 seamen who was inlisted at
Boston, to serve in those expeditions, and sent on board the fleet then laying
at Halifax. Besides which, two armed vessels were fitted out, at the expense of
this government, for the protection of our coast, and manned out of the
fishermen; notwithstanding all which, many were impressed by the commanders of
his Majesty's ships, out of the vessels on the banks; which obliged several of
them to return without their fairs: And by this means our fishery was reduced
one third during the late war.

Fifthly, The destruction of the fishery will be very prejudicial to the trade
of Great Britain, by lessening the demand for her manufactures, (of which that
branch of business occasions a very large consumption): The imports into Great
Britain, from the sugar islands, may appear more considerable than the imports
from the northern colonies; but the exports of the manufactures of Great
Britain to the northern colonies (on which the wealth of the nation so much
depends) exceed those to the sugar islands, vastly more than their imports
exceed ours. The planters in the west indies soon get estates, leave their
plantations and retire. The inhabitants of the northern colonies, are not able,
by their trade and industry, to procure estates sufficient to enable them to
retire, but are obliged to remain in this cold climate, where they consume more
of the manufactures of Great Britain than the sugar planters have occasion for;
and their consuming these manufactures in the colonies is more beneficial to
Great Britain, than their going home would be in order to consume the same
quantities there.

The whole produce of our fishery, though not immediately sent to Great Britain,
finally centers there, by means of our other trade, which in a great measure
depends on this: So that the importation of goods from England into this
province, will thereby be lessened very near, if not the whole amount of our
fishery, being L. 164,466 sterling per annum, as appears by the following
estimate of the fish caught and exported from hence, Viz.

300 Vessels in the Cod Fishery, which caught last Year, by the Accounts taken
from the fishing Towns, 240,059 Quintals, viz. Sterling.

102,265 Quintals, fit for the European Market, at 12 s. per Quintal, L. 61,359
0 0 137,794 Quintals for the West India Market, at 9 s. 62007 6 0 90 Mackrel
Vessels, at 200 Barrels each, is 18000 Barrels, at 18 s. 16200 0 0 Shad,
Alewives, and other pickled Fish, 10,000 Barrels, at 10 s. 5000 0 0 West India
Cod Fish from Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, in Return for Provisions, Rum,
Sugar and Molasses, 10,000 0 0 12 Barrels Oil to each Banker, is 3600 Barrels
at 30 s. 5,400 0 0 15,000 Hogsheads for packing the West India Fish, at 6 s.
4,500 0 0 L. 164,466 0 0

The exports of fish to the west indies, may be proved by the custom-house
books, where it will appear, that from January 1762, to January 1763, there was
entered for exportation at the two ports of Boston and Salem, 14891 hogsheads,
and 2614 quintals, equal to 330 hogsheads, which makes in all 15231 hogsheads
of fish of about 8 quintals each.

Sixthly, The destruction of the fishery will not only lessen the importation
of goods from Great Britain, but must greatly prejudice the whole trade of
these colonies. The trade to the foreign islands is become very considerable:
Surinam and the other dutch settlements, are wholly supplied with provisions,
fish, lumber, horses, onions, and other articles exported from the northern
colonies, for which we receive molasses in return; this is distilled into rum,
for the fishery, and to export to the southern colonies for naval stores, which
we send to Great Britain, and for grain; and to Africa to purchase slaves for
our own Islands in the west indies. If this trade is destroyed, the distillery
on the continent must be broke up, as all our own islands don't export molasses
sufficient to supply the northern colonies with beer.

The annual supply of rum and molasses for this province alone, including the
whale, cod and mackrell fishery, amounts to near 9*000 hogsheads; besides
which, we export to the southern colonies upwards of 3000 hogsheads, to Nova
Scotia and Newfoundland about 1300 hogsheads, and to Africa about 1700
hogsheads; which amount to upwards of 6000 hogsheads exported; so that the
whole demand for this province is about 15,000 hogsheads per annum, of 100
gallons each. It is said by the planters in the west indies, that they can
supply us with rum and molasses for the fishery, and our own consumption, and
that there is no occasion for any distillers in the northern colonies.

To which it may be answered; first, that they are not capable of supplying us
with all the rum and molasses we want. It appears by the entries at the custom
house, that from January 1762, to January 1763 there were entered at Boston and
Salem, from the conquered islands, upwards of 7000 hogsheads of molasses;
whereas from our own islands were entered at Boston only 406 hogsheads rum, and
424 hogsheads of molasses; 412 of which were from Jamaica, and only 12 from all
the other Islands. 2dly. That the price of rum at our own islands for many
years past, has been, and now is, so high, that the fishermen cannot afford to
purchase it, nor do they make use of any but what is distilled here. Should we
be obliged to take all our supply from them, the price would immediately
advance more than double. 3dly. the demand of the northern colonies for
molasses is at present so great, that the price of it in our islands would soon
be equal to the price of rum; and from the natural increase of inhabitants on
the continent, our demands would soon render that article too dear for the
poorer sort to purchase, even as a medicine. 4ly. Molasses is distilled here
into rum 50 per cent. cheaper than in the west indies, which is a very great
advantage to the fishery; and we are hereby enabled to supply the southern
colonies, and save our money to send to Great Britain, which otherwise must go
to those colonies for grain. We are able also to export large quantities to
Africa, in return for which we receive slaves and gold dust, and likewise to
supply the fishery at Newfoundland. So that the distillery here is become very
necessary, not only for our fishery, but for our other trade too, and has been
a very considerable branch of business which we cannot do without. Rum, sugar
and molasses, are become so necessary, by being universally used among the
lumbermen, tradesmen, and all sorts of laborers, that advancing the price of
those articles must greatly inhance the price of lumber and ship building, by
which large remittances are made to Great Britain; and this will be a further
discouragement to the english trade. In short, as necessity is the mother of
invention, the people will be driven into manufactures for their support, which
they will never think of, while they can maintain themselves by trade.

The advocates for our sugar Islands, allege further, that the supplies the
foreign Islands receive from us, by our trade with them, are of great advantage
to them, in carrying on their works, and supporting their slaves, and that they
are hereby enabled more easily to send their sugars to market, and to become
our rivals in that trade. If this was really the case, the french government
would certainly permit, and even encourage our trade with their islands. But
they are so far from doing this, that they have laid a prohibition on it, and
thrown so many discouragements in the way, that it is with difficulty, and
oftentimes with considerable hazard, that it is carried on at all.

Seventhly, The destruction of the fishery will be the ruin of those concerned
in that business, and that are dependant on it. The fishing vessels, which cost
upwards of L. 100,000 Sterling, more than one half of which was supplied from
Great Britain, will thereby be rendered useless and of little or no value;
consequently a loss to near that amount must ensue to the owners. The merchants
concerned in shipping the fish to Europe and the west Indies, will be great
sufferers, by their vessels being reduced in their value for want of employ.
The tradesmen of all sorts in the fishing towns, will be reduced to beggary, as
their whole support depends on the fishery. Nor will the distress end here. The
tradesmen in the country towns will be greatly affected, particularly the
coopers, who will lose the making of 5000 Barrels for Oil, Blubber and
Fishermen's Water Cask, at 2 s. 7 d. L. 656 5 4 18,000 Barrels used for
Mackrell and other pickled Fish at 2 s. 3 d. 2025 0 0 10,000 Hosheads and
Barrels used for Rum, as the Distillery will be broke up with the Fishery, 3750
0 0 10,000 Shook Hogsheads sent to the foreign Islands for Molasses, at 3 s.
1500 0 0 200 Thousand Hoops to make up the Molasses Hogsheads, 525 0 0 The
Tanner and Shoemaker will lose the Sale of 2000 Pair of Boots and Barvills, at
15 s. 1500 0 0 The Farmer will likewise be affected, as each Banker carries 6
Barrels Pork, each Mackrell Vessel 4, which makes 2160 Barrels, at 60 s.
besides what is used by the Vessels employed in carrying off the Fish, which is
at least 500 Barrels of Pork, at 60 s. and 500 Barrels Beef at 30 s. 8730 0 0
5000 Quintals Bread for the Fishermen, besides what is used in their Families,
at 15 s. 3750 0 0 1000 Bushels Beans and Pease at 6 s. besides Butter, Cheese,
Roots, etc. 300 0 0 L. 22*736 5 4

The whole amounting to L. 22,736 5 4 sterling per annum' besides the lumber,
horses, provisions and other commodities, sent to the foreign islands as
cargoes.

Eighthly, The sugar act, if put into execution, will greatly affect the king's
revenue, by lessening the importation of rum and sugar into Great Britain. The
duty paid upon rum, it is said, amounts to upwards of L. 50,000 sterling per
annum. This will be wholly lost to the crown, as the northern colonies will
take all the rum our islands can make; consequently none can be shipped to Great
Britain: They will likewise want a great proportion of their sugars, and in a
few years, should the number of inhabitants increase in proportion as it has
done for a century past, the whole produce of the islands, we at present
possess, will not exceed the demand for this continent. The consumption at
present is computed to be about 15,000 hogsheads of 1000 with each, the duties on
which, if imported into Great Britain, would amount to upwards of L. 30,000
sterling per annum; besides, such a large proportion of their sugars being
brought this way, for our supply, would raise the price so much in Great
Britain, that they would soon feel the unhappy effects of it.

Ninthly, This act was procured by the interest of the west india planters,
with no other view than to enrich themselves, by obliging the mother colonies
to take their whole supply from them; and they still endeavor the continuance
of it, under a pretense that they can supply Great Britain and all her colonies
with west india goods; which is perfectly chimerical. Take their own accounts
of the exportation of their produce from their several islands (which by the
way, from some, would be much more than is really their own produce, it being
foreign produce run among them, and then cleared out as english) then take the
natural demand of Great Britain for their sugars, and the demand of the
colonies for rum, sugar and molasses, and it will appear that their produce is
by no means sufficient to supply even the bare necessities of the english. If
the demand for rum and molasses, in the southern colonies, is in any proportion
to that of this province, it will still further surmount the exportation of
molasses from our islands.

The planters in our islands have no reason to complain of our trade to the
foreign islands, as it will appear, by examining original accounts of sales and
invoices, from their islands, for twenty years before the french war in 1744,
that our goods were sold higher to them, and their goods much cheaper to us
than since the peace in 1748. The increase of our lumber business and fishery
has been such, that by exporting to them such large quantities of these
commodities, they don't sell for more than their prime cost; and so many of our
vessels going to their islands have occasioned the rise of their goods about
fifty per cent.

The general course of our trade to the west indies has been this: Our vessels
(except those bound to Surinam, and some that go directly to Jamaica) call at
Barbados to try the market; from thence they proceed to Antigua, Nevis and St.
Kitts; and in case they meet with a tolerable market at either of those
islands, they always embrace it; if not, they then proceed, some to Jamaica,
others to St. Eustatia, and the other foreign islands, where they dispose of
their cargoes, which our own islands don't want, being already over-stock'd
with those commodities.

But a further proof that the trade is in their favor, is this: formerly, when
our goods fetched a price with them, and their produce did not vend quick, they
owned and sent vessels with their produce to sell among us, and took our
produce in pay. But this is not the case now; for where one vessel, owned in
the west indies comes to us, we send 100 sail to them; which plainly shows that
they don't want our goods so much as we do to sell them, nor to vend their own,
so much as we do to buy. Their navigation is otherwise employed; they take our
fish and other commodities, dispose of them among the french, and pay us in the
return of those goods, only shifted into english cask, at 100 per cent (...)

Upon the whole, it is evident that the (...) be followed by the most
pernicious (...) increasing, it will sink the king's revenue (...) naval power
of Great Britain, by (...) nursery of british seamen, and (...) the marine of
France, by (...) will be highly prejudicial to the (...) to that of these
colonies: for our (...) to supply us with what we want from (...) from us what
lumber and fish we are obliged (...) they will be still less able to do either;
for our (...) be growing faster than their produce, and our (...) has been
increasing, will continue still to increase, if not obstructed, while their
demands have not increased in any proportion, and never can.

FINIS.

