A LETTER of REPROOF TO Mr. John Cleaveland of Ipswich, OCCASIONED BY A
defamatory Libel Published under his Name, ENTITLED. An Essay to defend some of
the most important Principles in the Protestant reformed System of
Christianity, etc. -- against the injurious Aspersions cast on the same, by
Jonathan Mayhew, D. D. in his late Thanksgiving Sermons on Psalm CXLV.9. In
which, etc.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

-- Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

Levit. XIX.17. -- If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him --

Luke XVII.3. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by R. and S. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street;
EDES and GILL, in Queen Street; and T. and J. FLEET, in Cornhill. 1764.

A LETTER, etc.
BOSTON, Jan. 17, 1764. Mr. Cleaveland,
BY the great vanity which you discover, and the self-important airs which you
assume throughout your slanderous Essay, I conclude you supposed that I would
either enter the lists with (...) as a shrewd polemical writer, or else be
wholly silent, from a conviction of my inability to defend the sermons which
you have attacked in so heroic a manner. But if you imagined either of these
things, you was under a mistake. If ever I enter into a formal controversy with
any person upon such points, it shall be with One, who appears to me to have
both a better head, and honester heart than you have discovered in this
specimen of your abilities, and zeal for what you call orthodoxy. And yet I do
not think it convenient to be quite silent upon this occasion. Though my sermons
need no elaborate, argumentative defense against your ratiotinations, and
impertinent criticisms; yet so much rudeness and insolence, so much
misrepresentation and slander, falsehood and forgery as your libel contains,
should not, methinks, be passed over without some animadversions: Especially
since it is probable that this will be read chiefly by those who have never
seen the sermons aforesaid; and who may be so ignorant of you, as to imagine
you had too much integrity and honor to misrepresent and falsify them. It is
partly upon this consideration, that I give you and myself the present trouble;
my principal aim being, not to dispute with, but to chastize and admonish you,
for your real good; and to make you an example and warning to others. If in
doing this, I should transiently touch upon the merits of the cause,
theologically considered, you are not to flatter yourself, that I mean to
controvert such points with you; whom I consider as a person wholly unworthy to
be reasoned with about them, any farther than is requisite to show your
dishonesty and wickedness with reference to them.

If I had really published any material errors in point of doctrine, let me
tell you, Mr. Cleaveland, that you was one of the most unsuitable persons in the
world, to undertake a confutation of them, or to set yourself up for an author,
though you say, p. 4, that you have 'an undoubted right' to do it. I am sensible
that British subjects have a legal right to expose themselves in print, on
politics, divinity, or any other subject: And if this is what you insist on as
an invaluable privilege, I would by no means have your liberty, or that of the
press restrained. But you speak, p. 3. of 'Divines of indisputable ability for
such an undertaking', as that of vindicating the truth against me. Can you then
possibly think it became you, an obscure person from another province, and one
so unlettered as you are; an outcast from the college to which you was a
disgrace; for some time a rambling itinerant, and promoter of disorders and
confusion among us; so raw and unstudied in divinity; one hardly ever heard of
among us, but in the frequent reports of your follies and extravagances, and at
length set up as a minister to an assembly of separatists; -- Can you possibly
think it became you to turn author upon this occasion; and to take this
supposed necessary work of defending the most important principles of the
protestant religion against me, out of the hands of our Divines of indisputable
ability? What unaccountable vanity and infatuation was this! And you have
presumed to pass an implicit censure on those Divines also, by saying, p. 3. I
marvel that none of our divines of indisputable ability for such an
undertaking, have attempted to vindicate the truth against him -- Is not this a
proof, that none of our able Divines thought there was any occasion for
opposition to me? And do not you show the utmost assurance, in thus setting up
your little self in opposition to their opinion, as well as to my sermons?
Poor, unhappy man! You doubtless thought to emerge from your obscurity, and to
appear as a person of some consequence, by this vain attempt. But you have
great reason to wish, you had continued as unnoticed as ever: For it were much
better to remain as unknown as heretofore, than to be only more infamous; as
you are at least in a fair way now to be, by means of your libel.

If it were my intention to write to you as a scholar, logician or divine, I
would take some notice of the confusion and want of method, so apparent
throughout your Essay; the needless and numberless repetitions therein; and your
running the proposed heads of it into each other: So that one had almost as
good look for what you propose under any particular one, under any of the
other, as that. This is particularly observable with respect to the three
latter of them, which are the principal. And even under your first, the design
of which, you say, is, to mention several things in which you "agree" with me
Thus it is expressed p 4. I. Mention several things, WE agree with the Dr. in.
So p 7. 'Yea, WE stick not to say'. -- p 95. 'OUR system of doctrine' -- 97.
'Another principle of OUR system' -- After this manner he speaks in numerous
other places: WE, OUR, US. etc. As if all this wrong headed creature's whimsies
were the common cause of protestants, and himself a distinguished champion
therefore. Who can help smiling at the folly and impertinence of this, that is
not too much provoked at the insolence and arrogance of it?
, you mention near as many, I think, in which, you say, we disagree. But it is
as much beneath me to play the critic on such a performance as yours, as it
would be particularly to expose the vanity of your criticisms on my sermons.
Let me here only just observe by the way, that if I agree with you in so many
things as you say I do, this is a better presumptive evidence, that I am under
some mistakes, than any which you have produced. For I can hardly suppose it
possible for any one to be of your opinion in many points of doctrine, without
being in the wrong with respect to some.

But I will now proceed to the main business of this Letter, which is, to set
your falsehood, and iniquitous proceedings with reference to my sermons, in
some order before your eyes; and to administer the reproof and correction which
you deserve; or rather a part thereof. For it is only they that hold the sword
of public justice, that can legally punish such wickedness to the extent of its
demerits. Your villainy in this affair appears written, as one may say, even
upon your forehead; I mean in your title page: In which you have the assurance
to represent me to the world, as an enemy to 'the most important principles' of
the protestant religion; particularly 'the doctrine of Christ's sacrifice and
atonement', etc. On which, you there say, I cast 'injurious aspersions'. After
the word atonement, you indeed insert these clauses, viz. as being absolutely
necessary to the pardon of sin, consistently with God's infinite and
unchangeable rectitude; -- that you might have an hole to creep out at. But
this will not serve your turn. You know, Mr. Cleaveland, in your conscience,
that I did not deny any necessity of atonement, arising from wisdom, fitness,
the ends of government, or the moral character of God; but rather said what
implies it, as will hereafter appear to your confusion, unless you are past all
shame. How then could you have the confidence, because my expressions
concerning atonement do not exactly correspond with yours, to represent me to
the world, as casting 'injurious aspersions' on it? by which you doubtless
intended something beyond a simple denial of it. But it must be observed, that
I am charged, in this villainous title page, with injuriously aspersing other
important doctrines of the gospel, besides that of Christ's atonement; unless
you will say, that there are some 'most important principles in the protestant
reformed system of christianity', which are not themselves real and important
doctrines of the gospel; and therefore that I may be supposed to asperse the
former, though I maintain the latter: Which, I conclude, you will not say.
Indeed, nothing is more manifest, than that it was your formal intention to
asperse me, as an enemy to some of the most fundamental doctrines of the
christian religion; which you accordingly essay to defend against the supposed
injurious aspersions cast on them in my sermons. You must be sensible, that
this is a very high charge to be brought against one who is, at least by his
station and profession, a minister of the gospel. But I have the less reason to
be any ways uneasy at your dislike of my sermons, because I think it pretty
evident that you do not well like the text itself, in its plain, literal sense;
or, in other words, that you do not really believe, 'The Lord is good to ALL,
and his tender mercies over ALL his works.' Had you believed this to be
strictly true, I do not think you would (I am sure you could not consistently)
have made such a tragical outcry against those discourses.

But having made these cursory remarks on the iniquity of your title page, as
well as the vanity of your introduction, and the impertinence and confusion of
your first head; I shall now pass on to your second: which is thus expressed in
your libel, p.9. To take notice of the Dr's evident design. And this, you
immediately add, was, To represent the divine goodness in such a light as to
show, there was no absolute necessity for the sacrifice of Christ to make
atonement, or to satisfy It should be remembered, that the scripture makes use
of no such language as this, of Christ's satisfying divine justice, in any one
place. However, the author of this letter is far from having any disposition to
contend about mere words. If those who express themselves after this manner,
intend no more by the satisfaction of Christ, than is implied in his sacrifice
or atonement, (as they ought not to do) he makes no objection against it; but
asserts the doctrine of satisfaction himself, in this sense; as is evident even
from those sermons which have been attacked in so outrageous a manner.
divine justice, in order to God's forgiving the sins of men consistently with
his moral goodness. Upon which let it be remarked in the first place,

That if I had, in express terms, asserted the non-necessity of atonement or
satisfaction, in order to the forgiveness of sin; this would have been no more
than some eminent protestant Divines have done; even Calvinistical Divines;
whom, I conclude, you account the most reformed of any. I will particularly
mention but one of them; the famous Dr. Twisse, who was in such high reputation
with the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, that he was chosen and served as
Prolocutor, or Chairman of that venerable assembly. And his opinion ought,
perhaps, to have almost as much weight as that of Mr. Cleaveland of Ipswich.
The Dr. has nine folio pages in his Vindiciae Gratiae etc. upon this point;
beginning p. 198. under the head De Electione; the eighth Digression, as he
terms it: In qua probatur posse Deum per potentiam absolutam vel CITRA
SATISFACTIONEM peccata remittere, simulque ad Lubberti and Piscatoris
contrasentientium rations respondetur. Which, for the sake of you, Mr.
Cleaveland, and my other English readers, I here translate -- In which it is
proved, That God can forgive sins by his absolute power, even WITHOUT
SATISFACTION; and also the reasonings of Lubbertus and Piscator, who think
otherwise, are answered. It immediately follows, Posse Deum vel citra
satisfactionem peccata remittere, juxta potentiam ejus absolutam, adeo
manifestum mihi videtur, ut extra controversiam ponendum esse facile censerem.
i. e. That God can forgive sins even without satisfaction, by his absolute
power, appears so manifest to me, that I should think it a point which ought to
be placed beyond all controversy. Afterward, Si Deus non possit peccata sine
satisfactione remittere; tum vel quia non potest per potentiam, vel quia non
potest per JUSTITIAM. At neutrum horum dici potest, etc. i. e. If God cannot
forgive sins without satisfaction; this is either because he cannot, with
respect to power, or because he cannot, in respect of JUSTICE. But neither of
these things can be affirmed, etc. From hence it is manifest, that this eminent
Calvinistic Divine, in high repute with the Westminster Assembly, for which you
express so great a veneration, was full and positive in his opinion, that sin
might have been forgiven without any satisfaction; and particularly, that the
justice of God did not indispensibly require it. This he thought so plain a
point, that it ought not to be called in question. If, therefore, I had as
expressly asserted the same thing, did it become you, -- I say, you, Mr.
Cleaveland, to inveigh against me for it; and to load me with so much obloquy?
Could you not differ from me in opinion, and yet observe some sort of decorum
and modesty in your opposition?

But let me remind you in the next place, that I did not assert the possibility
of forgiveness without atonement. So far from it, that the manner in which I
expressed myself upon this point, rather implied a moral necessity thereof in
order to forgiveness: And surely you will not assert any other kind of
necessity, or a natural one, as contradistinguished from moral. At least, I am
persuaded that no man who understands what he says, supposes any other: What
you may do, I cannot say. -- That I denied not such a necessity, but rather
supposed it, will fully appear hereafter; together with your wilful fals^ (...)
iniquity with reference hereto.

IN the mean time, I shall make a (...) on the method which you take to prove
that I had the design aforesaid. You infer this from what I said of divine
justice, considered as a branch or mode of goodness; which opinion of mine you
suppose, without any reason, to be inconsistent with the doctrine of atonement.
But what an iniquitous method of proceeding is this? Upon supposition I was
mistaken about divine justice, (which I am persuaded no man can prove) is this
a sufficient ground to charge me with such a design as you speak of? This is
the same kind of dishonesty, that it would be in any one to accuse you of deism
or atheism, because he supposed some of your principles, being pursued into
their just consequences, would terminate therein; which probably may be the
case. But yet I should think it injurious to charge you with a design to
propagate deism or atheism, while you profess the contrary; even though you have
shown so little regard to truth and integrity, as you have done in many parts
of your libel. One instance hereof may indeed be found in this part of it, p.
9. Where you insinuate that I hold every act of punitive justice in God, to be
intended for the good of the individual, on whom it terminates. You say, Now if
justice, even punitive justice in God, is only a mode or modification of his
goodness, or kindness and beneficence toward his creatures, then the great end
(as the Dr. says it is) of God's exercising punitive justice, must be "the good
of his creatures," and even the good of those that it is exercised upon; and
hence every act of punitive justice must be an act of kindness, "for it is
goodness itself that gives the blow." Here you refer to Sermon. p. 21. Now would
not any one who never read my sermons, and took you for an honest man, conclude
from hence, that I supposed it would be unjust for God to punish any sinner
more than would be for his own good? Indeed you say expressly, p. 10. that
according to my principles, God would not be perfectly good but cruel, if he
should punish them [sinners] any farther than would be for their good or
happiness -- Now are you not ashamed, Mr. Cleaveland, of such prevarication as
this? I did indeed compare God's acts of punitive justice to those of a wise
and good earthly parent or sovereign; who has always some good or benevolent
design in punishing. But then I expressly guarded, as you know, against the
supposition, that all acts of punitive justice, whether in God or man, are acts
of kindness to the suffering individuals. That those who have never read my
sermons, may see it is not without good reason that I accuse you of dishonesty
in this respect, I shall here extract a few passages from them, out of many to
the same purpose.

SPEAKING of the motive from which a wise and good parent punishes his
children, when he is under the influence, not of mere passion, but of reason
only, I say, Is it not in order to reform, and do them good? -- or at least
with a view to the benefit of his other children, or those of the household; --
that they may be kept under due subjection, etc. -- So that in a good parent,
as was said before, there is no such quality as justice, really distinct from
goodness; not even in punishing: For it is goodness itself that gives the blow,
Sermon. p. 21. This last clause you dishonestly introduce, as if I had not only
used it expressly concerning God; but had thereby intended to assert, that he
never punishes a sinner, but for his own good, in distinction from the public
or common: And is not this a wicked, wilful perversion of my evident meaning?
Again:

SPEAKING just after, of a wise and good earthly sovereign, I expressed myself
thus, -- Neither does he inflict any punishments, but what he considers as
needful for the support of his government; -- if not for the particular good of
those that suffer, as in capital cases, yet for the good of his people in
general, by way of example and terror, that good order may be preserved. So
that even in this case of excision, or capital punishment, the justice of the
sovereign is no real quality in him, distinct from goodness. It is goodness, or
a regard to common good, that takes off the head of the traitor, etc. p. 21,
22. It is afterward observed, that God is often represented to us in scripture
under the characters of a Father and a King; 'the wisest and best Father, the
wisest and best King,' p. 23, 24. And after quoting Heb. XII. 6 -- 12. where
God is represented as chastening us 'for our profit,' I go on thus, p. 25. No
man will deny, but that God is at once just and good in these chastenings.
Goodness and justice in him, therefore, are not to be considered as opposites:
They may, in all other cases without exception, be coincident; the latter
being, perhaps, only a particular modification of the former, and tending to
positive good, at least the public or common. And you your self, Mr.
Cleaveland, know, and have often acknowledged, particularly p. 15. that I speak
of the future punishment of wicked men in the language of scripture, as
eternal, everlasting, etc. How then could you have so much dishonesty and
impudence, as to represent it to the world as my doctrine, or at least implied
in my doctrine concerning divine goodness, that every act of punitive justice
in God, is an act of kindness to the individual punished; or that God's end
therein is the good even of those, that it is exercised upon? Was not this very
foolish also, as well as injurious? For do you think you can make the world
believe that I either asserted or supposed, it was for the good of sinners
themselves to be eternally punished? For shame, Mr. Cleaveland; what do you
think of yourself? Or what opinion do you suppose the world can have, either of
your sense or honesty in this respect? You proceed upon the same known false
supposition, when you so pertly demand, p. 10. And if God's punitive justice is
positive kindness, or if all his acts of punishing, are acts of positive
kindness, how could the sufferings of Christ, the just for the unjust, be an
effect of God's love, mercy and grace? Is it an act of love, mercy and grace,
to withold from sinners an act of positive kindness? Fie! Mr. Cleaveland. You
know that, according to my principles, sinners may be justly punished by way of
terror and example to others, for the support of government, order and common
good, though themselves are not benefitted, nor designed to be benefitted
thereby. And Christ's atonement, or his suffering, the just for the unjust, or
in the room, place or stead of sinners, (which I suppose the true, natural
import of that expression) was not in order to their being exempted from any
disciplinary correction, or medicinal punishment, for their real good; (for
thus the saints are corrected, or punished, notwithstanding Christ suffered for
them) but in order to their being exempted from that punishment, to which they
might otherwise have been subjected, in order to vindicate the honor of Gods
law and government; for the support of order, and therein for the good of the
universe, which essentially depends thereon. And if these ends may be answered
by the sufferings of a mediator or substitute, as I suppose, I hope you will
allow it to be an 'act of love, mercy and grace,' to appoint a mediator to
suffer thus, in order to prevent our suffering personally, by way of example
and warning, as malefactors do in the case of capital punishment; though it would
not be an act of love, mercy and grace, to withold from sinners an act of
positive kindness, or any punishment which is for their good; as you, at once
with equal folly, effrontery and malice, suggest it would be, upon my
principles.

YOU go on with your imaginary proof of the design imputed to me; but really,
only in further exposing the naughtiness of your heart. You say, This design
farther appears from what the Dr. says in p. 64 and 65; where he plainly
intimates, that there was no necessity of the atonement of Christ, in reference
to any such divine justice in God, that must be satisfied by the sufferings or
death of Christ, that men might be pardoned or saved; "such idea of divine
justice, must be wholly and forever excluded. -- Libel, p. 10. The last clauses
here, with double comma's, you cite as mine; though they are altered, so as not
to give your readers a true idea of my meaning. You have here the confidence to
insinuate, that I denied the atonement of Christ had any reference to the
justice of God, the honor of his law and government; or was designed to exempt
sinners from that punishment, which must otherwise have been inflicted upon
them. This is your manifest intention; and yet it is absolutely false, and you
know it to be so. You know that in the places, to which you refer, I did not
speak of divine justice in general, as if Christ's sufferings had no reference
thereto; but only of a particular notion of justice, as if it were in nature
wholly and absolutely distinct from goodness; for which, I suppose, there is no
foundation in reason or scripture. But, instead of fairly quoting my words, you
had the dishonesty to mutilate them in such a manner, as to give your unwary
readers quite a wrong conception of my meaning; as if I had, in general terms,
denied any justice in God, to which the satisfaction [atonement] of Christ had
reference, in order to the pardon of sin. Are you not ashamed of such a wicked
artifice as this, at once to slander me, and impose upon your readers?

YOU proceed in the same page, viz. 10. to cite me thus* in order to prove your
point: I shall transcribe the sentence just as it stands in the libel -- "We
are assured (says he) in the holy scriptures, that God forgives the sins of men
through this great sacrifice (of Christ) intervening, rather than without any."
This is your pointing; here you make a period for me, where I made only a
comma, the sense being incomplete. It immediately follows in the sermon, p. 64.
after the comma at the word any, -- not because he is deficient in goodness, or
not perfectly merciful, but because he is infinitely wise as well as merciful;
taking such a method herein, as is in its nature admirably adapted to magnify
the law and make it honorable, i. e. to beget and preserve in the minds of
reasonable creatures a just sense of God's authority, the dignity of his laws
and government: Which, as was intimated before, is evidently best even for
themselves. Now, had you quoted the sentence entire, instead of mutilating it
in the shameful manner you have done, it would probably have convinced every
discerning and unprejudiced man, that you had injuriously represented my
design. No person, surely, that understands himself, will say, that the
appointing a mediator to atone for sin, and forgiving us through him, proceeded
from any want of goodness or mercy in God. Nor can any thing be said more
honorary to the atonement, than that God provided it, 'because he was
infinitely wise as well as merciful; taking such a method,' etc. But all this
latter part of that long sentence you dishonestly leave out, making a period at
the word any; and go on to comment upon the former part thus: q. d. There was
no absolute necessity of this sacrifice intervening; God might have forgiven
sin without any; but of the two, he chose rather to do it with than without
any. You quote and point that part of the sentence just in the same manner, I
think, ten or a dozen times in your libel; and often give the like comment upon
it: As if I intended, that God might, consistently with the supposition of his
infinite wisdom, and his moral perfections, (all summarily comprehended in
goodness) have forgiven the sins of men, in a method not wise and good, or at
least not so wise and good as that which he actually chose. You pretend to give
my sense thus, -- 'of the two he chose rather to do it with than without any':
Which evidently amounts to this, that of the two, God chose to act as became an
infinitely wise and perfect being, rather than to act as did not become such an
One! My expression does not any more suppose that God might, consistently with
his perfections, have forgiven the sins of men without the atonement of Christ,
than it does, that he might in any, or all other respects in general, have
acted a part different from that which is the wisest and best. And do you find
neither nature nor grace inclining you to blush, Mr. Cleaveland, when you see
your perverseness and dishonesty thus exposed to the world! If either of them,
I am persuaded it is the former, corrupt as it is; for a reason which I leave
to be conjectured -- You go on thus, p. 11. 'But why did God choose to do it
with a sacrifice, rather than without any?' What impudence is this! Did I not
plainly inform you why, both negatively and positively, in that part of the
same sentence, which you so felloneously left out? -- viz. 'not because he was
deficient in goodness, or not perfectly merciful; but because he was infinitely
wise as well as merciful; taking such a method herein, as is in its nature
admirably adapted to magnify the law, and make it honorable.' Is not this a
sufficient reason, -- that this method was infinitely wise, and admirably
adapted to answer the most important ends in the divine government? What would
the man have? It might perhaps have pleased you, who, it seems, have so little
regard either for wisdom or goodness, or even common honesty, (in writing) if I
had said that the atonement had not its foundation in, or rise from, infinite
wisdom and goodness. For it seems, that to say it had, is, in your depraved
opinion, to cast injurious aspersions upon it: In which, it is to be hoped,
that no wise and good man will agree with you.

BUT it seems you would farther infer my design to show the non-necessity of
Christ's atonement, from my words quoted by you in the last-mentioned page.
Speaking of that passage, Heb. II.9, 10. -- It BECAME him, etc. I said, It
became his wisdom, it became his goodness -- There was a fitness and congruity
in it, as the wisest and best method of saving sinful men, without any kind of
reference to that common, but yet strange supposition, of divine justice being
entirely distinct from divine goodness. -- Therefore, to be sure, I supposed
there was no moral necessity of atonement, with reference to divine justice in
any sense! This is evidently what you design to make your readers believe, p.
11. after citing the passage aforesaid.

NOW the dishonesty of this appears diverse ways: According to my idea of God's
goodness, it is always to be considered as inseparably connected with his
wisdom; and regulated thereby in all its operations. It is not to be considered
as a sort of blind instinct, or goodnature; detached from reason and right, or
a regard to fitness and propriety. (Sermon. p. 14.) And being thus considered, I
supposed that it comprised the whole moral character of God, even his justice.
These things you knew; for you have quoted many passages to this purpose, only
to pervert them; as may appear hereafter. You therefore doubtless knew, that
when I said, it became the wisdom and goodness of God to forgive the sins of
men, through the sacrifice of Christ, I did not speak of his goodness in the
common restrained sense, but as including his justice; in a sense analogous to
that, in which the goodness of a wise prince or parent includes justice. So
that if the atonement of Christ had any reference to goodness in this sense, it
must necessarily have some, indeed a particular reference to justice. And this
evidently appears to have been my meaning, because I expressly speak of it, in
the same passage, as a method 'admirably adapted to magnify the law, and make
it honorable,' etc. which could not be said with any propriety, if the
atonement had no reference to justice and law. What then became of your honesty
or your senses, Mr. Cleaveland, when you wrote as you did? Besides; this very
passage, which you have used so villainously, is introduced in a manner, which
plainly supposes I allowed a sort of moral necessity of atonement, in order to
the forgiveness of men's sins. For it is an answer to this objection, which, I
thought, some might possibly make against the doctrine delivered by me -- What
occasion was there for any atonement, upon these principles? -- Whereas the
scriptures constantly suppose the need of it in order to the pardon of sin.
Now, that the scriptures really suppose a need, or necessity of it in order to
our forgiveness, I plainly allowed: And accordingly went on to show, whence
that need or necessity arose, upon my own principles; viz. that the law of God
might be magnified and made honorable; that a just sense of his authority, the
dignity of his laws and government, might be begotten and preserved in the
minds of reasonable creatures; which is evidently best even for themselves. And
yet you have such a front, Mr. Cleaveland, as to represent me to the world as
having injuriously aspersed the atonement of Christ as unnecessary.

BUT it is the word rather, as used by me with reference to this point, that
seems chiefly to provoke your spleen, and put you upon fibbing and raging in
such an ungodly manner as you do. Though I used this harmless word but once, I
think, you fall foul of it in ten or a dozen places: In all of them giving a
specimen of your sense and honesty. For example, p. 43. you quote, paraphrase
and remark on my words thus, verbatim, in order to prove me guilty of an
inconsistency -- 'He was just saying, That we are assured in the holy
scriptures, that God forgives the sins of men through this great sacrifice
intervening, RATHER than without any. q. d. He might have done it without any,
there was no absolute necessity of his doing it in this way, or not all. I
suppose this was intended for, not at all; but I follow my copy.
And yet immediately adds, There was a necessity of God's doing it in this way;
otherwise he could not maintain his own authority, nor the dignity of his laws
and government. This were doubtless a very palpable contradiction; such an one
as few besides yourself could be guilty of. But, Mr. Cleaveland, do you not
know the old proverb concerning persons of a certain very infamous character?
-- that it behooves them to have a good memory. In the first place, I neither
immediately, nor at all added the words which you say I did; they are none of
mine, though you have formally quoted them as such, in order to fix an
inconsistency on me. In the next place, though I had actually expressed myself in
that manner, I should not have been guilty of the least inconsistency. For I
never denied a moral necessity of Christ's atonement, in order to God's
maintaining the dignity of his laws and government, while he forgives the sins
of men; though you have the front to insinuate that I did. Thirdly, your
allowing, as you here do, that I assert there was a necessity of God's
forgiving the sins of men through Christ's atonement, if he did it at all; since
otherwise he could not maintain his own authority, etc. Your allowing this, I
say, entirely overthrows the grand indictment brought against me, in order to
support which you have told so many falsehoods; viz. that of having injuriously
aspersed the doctrine of Christ's sacrifice and atonement, as not being
absolutely necessary, etc. Unhappy man! I beg that, at least for your own
credit, you would rub up your memory, before you publish any more slander to
the world.

BUT I must take a little farther notice of your cruel persecution of the
innocent word rather, against which you rave through so great a part of your
libel. In p. 77. (a passage which will be further noticed hereafter, with
another view) you introduce me saying expressly, God might have forgiven the
sins of men without any sacrifice intervening; indeed it was rather the best
and wisest method to forgive the sins of men, through this great sacrifice of
Christ intervening, than without any. The eternal rule of right, and the honor
and dignity of God's moral law and government, are of so small weight, that
they did but just turn the scale in favor of an atonement -- These, you know,
you quote as my words; but I will indulge you so far at present, as to consider
them only as your paraphrase upon my words, though it is beyond dispute, you
intended your readers should think them mine. Now the manner of your commenting
upon the word rather, as used by me, (supposing this to be designed only as a
comment) brings to my mind many passages of scripture, in which the same word
occurs: And I have been thinking what a notable expositor, casuist and divine
you would appear, if you was to preach or print upon them, observing the same
rule and method of interpretation, that you have in expounding my words. It
must be hugely edifying to the good people of Ipswich -- For example, the
Psalmist says, 'I had RATHER be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than
dwell in the tents of wickedness.' This you might descant upon thus -- There
was no absolute, indispensible moral reason or ground, why holy David should
prefer the house of God to the tents of wickedness: But of the two, he rather
preferred the former to the latter. He might have well and wisely chosen the
tents of wickedness: The eternal rule of right, the honor of the divine
authority and laws, were of so small weight, that they did but just turn the
scale in favor of the holy tabernacle. Mark, O ye dear children of --, ye
precious souls! mark well what a slight, superficial regard this eminent saint
had to the house of -- the place where his honor dwells; and how little
aversion he had to wickedness, and the habitations thereof. O ye dear souls!
what glorious encouragement does this give, to think yourselves in a converted,
safe estate, even though you should not love the one, or hate the other quite so
much as holy David did, little as that was! Again, it is said, 'Fear not them
that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but RATHER fear him that
is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.' The pious Mr. Cleaveland upon
the place, in conformity to his own method of interpretation: q. d. It is of
very little consequence which of these you fear: indeed it is of the two rather
the wisest and best to fear the latter; but there is no absolute, indispensible
obligation to do so; the eternal rule of right, the dignity of -- 's moral law
and government are of so small weight, that they do but just turn the scale:
and whether only your bodies are killed now, or both your souls and bodies are
destroyed hereafter, is hardly of any consequence -- It is easy to imagine what
practical and comforting uses you might extract for yourself, and dear
christian brethren, from this text so interpreted. Again: It is said, 'Seek not
what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be
clothed: But RATHER seek the kingdom of God' -- The learned and pious Mr.
Cleaveland in Locum, q. d. The kingdom of heaven, righteousness, and life
eternal, are indeed of the two rather preferable to good eating, drinking and
fine clothes; this must be allowed: But yet, precious souls! the difference is
so inconsiderable, that it is not much matter which ye seek: the eternal rule
of right, etc. are of so small 'weight, that,' etc. The excellent practical
instructions and consolations resulting naturally from such an exposition of
the place, I need not mention. -- Once more: It is said, 'Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness; but RATHER reprove them.' The warm and
zealous, the clarified and greatly illuminated Mr. Cleaveland upon the place --
q. d. There is no absolute necessity, dear souls! of your abstaining from the
works of darkness and dishonesty, or of discountenancing them in others; you
may be justified and saved without this. But yet of the two, it is rather more
becoming you to reprove, than to practice and encourage such works. This is all
that can be said. The eternal rule of right, the honor of -- the dignity of his
laws and government, and the credit of christianity in the world, are of so
small weight, that they do but just turn the scale, etc. What excellent, useful
and most comfortable reflections might the apostle's words afford to some
people, being thus paraphrased?

I HAVE here taken the liberty, Mr. Cleaveland, to comment for you, in your own
way: giving the word rather, in these passages, precisely the same
signification and force, that you have given it in my sermon: Upon which
interpretation of it, the grand argument of your libel turns. I might
altogether with as much truth and justice say, that I have delivered your
natural, genuine sense of these several texts, as you can, that you have given
mine, in your paraphrase. Indeed I might add, that by what I have heard of your
wild, senseless and extravagant way of preaching in times past, I can scarce
doubt but that you have often expounded scripture as ridiculously, as
licentiously and profanely as you would have done, had you actually paraphrased
those several passages, in the manner before expressed. And if you continue in
the same way, though you style yourself V. D. M. a minister of God's word; it
should have rather been V. D. C. a corrupter of his word. Let me add that, by
the many gross falsehoods, and wicked slanders in your libel, some of which
have been already shown, (and more are behind) it may be feared, though I do not
affirm, that you are near as great a corruptor thereof in practice, as you are
in principle or doctrine.

IT is needless for me to spend time to brush away the other flimsy,
cobweb-reasonings in the second part of your libel; and indeed it was my
determination from the first, not to enter into a dispute with such a
wrong-headed and worse-hearted wretch, any farther than was requisite to lay
open the villainy of this attack upon me. That you have wilfully misrepresented
my design, misquoted my words in some places, and put a most perverse
construction upon them in others, is, I believe, very apparent to every
impartial and intelligent person, who has ever compared your libel with my
sermons. And if any thing, coming from you, could astonish me, (except sober
truth, solid reasoning and candor) after what I have already observed in your
libel, I should be astonished at the effrontery which you discover at the close
of your said second head, p. 15. If I have not hit upon the Dr's evident
design, I confess it is because I cannot comprehend him -- What do you mean,
pray! by not hitting upon, or not comprehending an evident design? If the
design is evident, who but an idiot could help hitting upon, comprehending, or
at least in general knowing what it is? That you could not comprehend my whole
design, may be true; but that you understood more of it, than you was willing
to own, and knowingly misrepresented it, is apparent; particularly from your
misquoting, curtailing, mangling and mispointing my words, and by your perverse
commenting on the word rather: Whereas had you acted honestly, it would have at
once appeared to your readers, that you was only exposing yourself, by
objecting against my sermons, in the manner you have done. No one can help
hitting upon your design, in this way of proceeding; and seeing it to be
villainous in an high degree. And pray! how much better a design had you, in
what you say in the margin of p. 14. about my being full in the scheme (at
least as to the fundamental and leading principles of it) which the Rev.
President Clap, of Yale-College, collected out of several authors, viz. Chubb,
etc. etc. etc? I will tell you what some suppose to be at least partly your
design, in introducing that pamphlet, and thus charging me with being in the
scheme therein represented: viz. recommending yourself to the author, and the
other governors of said College; which, it is said, spewed you out some years
ago; (though not as a Laodicean, 'neither cold nor hot' --) and so obtaining, by
this dishonest means, those academical honors, of which you are at once so
unworthy and so ambitious: For had not this been the case, you would not,
surely, so long have sought them in vain --

THE third head of your libel, from p. 15. to 47. is to give a concise
representation of the doctrine of the divine attributes, together with some of
the natural inferences, as held by protestant reformers. This tedious medly of
inconsistencies and absurdities, which you call a concise representation, etc.
I take to be the marrow and quintessence of several of your old sermons,
revised and transcribed upon this occasion. You appear in most parts of it to
talk without any clear ideas; making as free with your Creator, almost, as if
you was his equal, or comprehended his nature as perfectly as he does himself.
I consider this as your system of divinity; and a greater piece of confusion
and impertinence I hardly ever saw. It is partly such precious, sublime jargon
as the wild, rambling exhorters used to entertain the gaping rabble with,
several years ago, when you was one of them. Only by being printed, it appears
rather more ridiculous, than if it were fo^med out extempore. I shall not
mispend time by particularly exposing it. I do not indeed deny, but that there
are several important, well-known truths scattered here and there; as
particularly when you say, and endeavor to prove, p. 21. that God cannot lie.
And yet, I think, you have much more clearly demonstrated in many places, who
can, even without designing to make it appear. Whether you have, or have not
done this, even in the next page, I leave you and others to consider. Speaking
there of me, you say, We may with greater propriety charge him with a robbing
of God, of what he esteems his glory -- in excluding the attribute of divine
justice. Now, Mr. Cleaveland, what do you think of such a representation as
this? Did I not often speak of justice, even punitive justice, as a part of
God's moral character? -- as a branch of his essential goodness, considered in
connection with infinite wisdom, a regard to right, fitness and propriety, etc?
Why then would you slander me thus, as if I excluded divine justice; especially
when I sometimes speak of it, in conformity to the common method, as a
particular distinct attribute of God? If you go on in this way, Mr. Cleaveland,
without repentance, I verily believe you will have reason to wish in earnest,
that God was not a just Being, either in your own sense or mine -- You have
interlarded your aforesaid system of divinity, with other gross
misrepresentations of me, and many rude aspersions, by way of seasoning; that
it might go down the better. But I leave you to enjoy the credit of these; not
thinking them worthy of any particular notice.

I PASS on to the 4th and last general head of your libel, which you express
thus, p. 47. To take notice of some of the Dr's inaccuracies and
inconsistencies. I cannot but observe here, that your whole libel contains but
108 pages, 61 of which belong to this last head; in which you was to play the
critic upon my inaccuracies, and show your own wit and sagacity. Mr.
Cleaveland, I never pretended to much accuracy in writing; but, methinks, it is
a little merry, that you, of all men, should undertake to show my inaccuracies.
When or where did you learn this curious art of criticizing? -- in what
college? in what university? -- during the little time that you was permitted
to continue at Yale-college? -- Was you a freshman or sophimore, or of what
standing was you, when you left that seat of the muses? Though this was so early,
yet what an Aristarchus are you! But it must be observed, that nature had done
a great deal for you, without art. For, I think, it will be apparent to any
one, that your criticisms actually proceeded from nature; I mean human nature
as it is commonly represented -- wholly evil and corrupt -- To be serious; had
you not exposed yourself enough before, in quality of a theologian, and
champion for the protestant faith in opposition to the injurious aspersions
cast upon it by me, without pretending to set up for a critic too! Should you
not at least have learnt the difference between rustic impudence and wit,
between lying and criticizing, before you attempted to show your talents in
this way? Whether you did, or did not know these material differences, may
appear to all who shall think it worth while to compare your pretended
criticisms, with my sermons. I am far from designing a defense of them against
you. I only mean to shame you, if possible, for your vanity and wickedness, by
taking a cursory notice of some of your criticisms. This being my chief aim, I
shall scarce meddle with any of them, in which folly and ignorance bear the
greater part; but almost entirely confine myself to those of them, in which
impudence and falsehood are the most conspicuous. Some indeed may be briefly
mentioned, in which it will not be easy to determine, whether the former or the
latter are most prevalent.

As to what you object concerning my using the terms attribute or property and
quality, as synonymous; I shall only ask you, What would be the material and
precise difference between one person's saying of Mr. Cleaveland of Ipswich,
that the attribute or property of self-conceit is very conspicuous in him, and
another's saying that the quality of self-conceit is so? Which of these would
be the greatest compliment, or the most accurate way of speaking? In p. 48. you
speak of me as having represented God as a compound being, made up of as many
distinct self-existent qualities or parts, as he has divine attributes. Now
what foundation had you for this, besides a passage in which I expressly spoke
of the impropriety of ascribing parts to God? Speaking of goodness as an
'essential attribute' of God; I add, that it is no borrowed or precarious
excellency, as the goodness of men and angels is in them, but as necessary as
his being. Indeed, one need not scruple to call it a part of God himself, only
as there may be an impropriety in that manner of expression concerning the
infinite God, in ALL other respects in general -- Sermon. p. 12. Now, after this,
what greater dishonesty or villainy could any Critic be guilty of, than you
are, in making such a bustle as you do, for almost two pages together, about
parts of God? And you have the insolence to say, p. 49. -- 'see what an
accurate and consistent description the Dr. 'gives of the One only living and
true God. q. d. God is a compound being, made up of eternal, essential, and
equally necessary, self-existent parts: And though these parts, etc. Now, could
you have given your readers such a representation of my doctrine, if you had
understood the material distinction which I before mentioned to you; that
between lying and criticizing? If you take these for synonimous terms, I do not
wonder that you think yourself a very masterly critic. -- Thus you father your
own nonsense and impiety upon me; contrary to my express, declared opinion.

The next of your criticisms which I shall take notice of, is this, That I
sometimes speak of justice as a particular moral attribute of God, distinct
from goodness; and at other times speak of it as one branch of his essential
goodness. Your cavils about this, make so great a part of your libel, that
there is no occasion to refer to any particular place. I explained myself so
far, respecting this matter, that no intelligent, candid person could mistake
my meaning. For it is evident that when I spoke of justice in God, as distinct
from goodness or benevolence in the common restrained sense; I considered it as
no otherwise distinct therefrom in him, than it is in a wise and good man,
whether a parent or a prince. It is common to speak of justice in man, as a
moral virtue distinct from charity or love, which is frequently spoken of as
another moral virtue. And yet it is certain that love or charity, considered in
the largest, or most comprehensive sense of it, includes, not only justice, but
all other moral and social virtues. The apostle Paul often speaks of charity in
this comprehensive sense; but most expressly, Romans XIII.8, 9. A passage, of
which if you had had any tolerable understanding, you could surely never have
cavilled in the manner you have done -- Owe no man any thing, says he, but to
love one another. For he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. For this,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false
witness, Thou shall not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thyself. Pray, learned Sir, is not doing justice often spoken of as a
particular moral virtue in scripture, as if it were in some sort distinct from
loving money, or from charity; and vice versa? And yet does not the apostle
here speak of that commandment, loving our neighbors as our selves, as
summarily comprehending all the commandments of the second table? and
consequently justice? And are not christian magistrates and parents bound, by
that comprehensive command which the apostle speaks of, when understood in its
proper extent, even to punish their subjects and children respectively, for the
good of those that do evil, or for the warning and benefit of others? But your
narrow, dark and grovelling mind can perhaps have no conception of punishment
proceeding from love, or from any thing besides a spirit of revenge. Not that I
by any means exclude the hatred of sin or vice, as if it had not, or ought not
to have any place in him that punishes it; whether it be God or man -- All the
nugatory, flimzy ratiotionations and criticisms which you have adduced,
respecting my sometimes speaking of justice as if it were a distinct moral
attribute of God, and at other times of goodness as if it comprehended justice,
and all divine moral attributes, would hold equally good against the apostle
Paul's account of charity, and its various branches. When once you have enough
of wisdom, and of the spirit of christianity, to conceive how love is the
fulfilling of the law; or how all moral, social virtues are summarily
comprehended and enjoined in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self; you will no longer be at any loss to understand what I mean, when I speak
of divine justice and divine goodness in the manner I do; nor be so captious as
to object against it as an inaccuracy or inconsistency. Whether your criticisms
upon this head chiefly proceed from ignorance, or from malice and vanity, I
will not pretend to determine: But, that there is a great deal of both
discovered therein, is undeniable. And you may if you please, in the next place
try your critical skill upon the apostle Paul; and endeavor to show that he
did not understand himself, but wrote inaccurately and inconsistently -- But I
forgot myself in what I have said in this paragraph; by descending to reason
with a man, whom I was only to reprove and chastize as a captious, conceited
wrangler, etc.

That you deserve no better a character than this, is farther evident from what
you offer page 50, 51. in order to show me guilty of an inconsistency, because,
though I spoke of the goodness of God as infinite, "without measure, without
bounds;" yet I afterward spoke of it as directed, controuled and regulated by
infinite wisdom in all its operations; in opposition to its being a sort of
blind instinct, or goodnature, detached from reason and right, or a regard to
fitness and propriety. With reference to which you say, What is controuled and
regulated, I thought was bounded and limited! A great deal of the like critical
stuff is in the pages aforesaid. So that, in your sage opinion, if the divine
goodness is directed, controuled and limited by infinite wisdom in its
operations; and always to be considered in connection therewith, in opposition
to its being a mere blind instinct, it must be bounded and limited, and
therefore finite. And if you here mean any thing, in opposition to me, it must
be this, that God cannot at once be infinite both in wisdom and goodness; for
if infinite wisdom regulates goodness, the latter, say you, must be 'bounded
and limited* The same way of reasoning, or rather of impious trifling, might be
applied to the power of God. I suppose all are agreed in general, that the
power of God is exercised according to, or regulated by his infinite wisdom;
not exerted at random. If so, according to you, great Critic! God's power
cannot be infinite, without measure, without bounds: because you always
thought, that what is directed, controuled and regulated, even though it be only
by infinite wisdom, 'is bounded and limited,' and therefore finite -- What but
the most stupid ignorance, or the blindest rage and malice, could lead you to
critize in this manner? So desirous are you to prove me guilty of inaccuracies
and inconsistencies, that you will run yourself into atheism, or what is next
akin to it, by denying, in effect, that God can be both infinitely wise and
infinitely good!

With the same pious intention doubtless it is, that you misquote my words, p.
57. "That the truly great, noble and excellent end which a good God has in
view," etc. These are none of my words, though you quote and comma them as if
they were. You also misquote me p.58. where speaking of me, you say, -- 'He
argues thus 'to prove punitive justice to be a branch of goodness, viz. "God's
end must be either positively good, or positively bad; if it be the creatures
happiness, it is positively good; if it be the creatures misery, it is
positively bad and cruel," etc. etc. -- Now though you mark these words as a
quotation from me; I assert that they are none of mine. And in that passage in
my sermon, which comes the nearest to them, (not very near) p 30. I was not
speaking concerning punitive justice, as a branch of goodness; but of the
almost infinite variety of God's works, or of the universe; and the end thereof
-- Why will you fib so, Mr. Cleaveland? You discover your dishonesty again, p.
60. where you say, Let us see how the Dr. reconciles God's leaving the heathen
world to unavoidable and eternal misery, with his being actually kind and
merciful to all. You then pretend to give my solution of this difficulty;
adding with an unmannerly sneer -- A satisfactory answer this! -- This is
enough to satisfy some I trow! -- But, you know, I did not allow the truth of
the said supposition about the heathen world; nor pretend to show its
consistency with God's goodness to all. It was therefore knavish in you to give
such a representation of the matter, saving, Let us see how the Dr. reconciles,
etc. -- But it seems almost as easy for the Ethiopian to change his skin, or
the leopard his spots, as for you that have been so accustomed to
misrepresentation and fibbing, to write, and represent things fairly. You are
at your dirty work again, in several pages following; and particularly page 67.
where you say, In p. 45 the Dr. presumes to tell, how God BECAME infinitely,
perfectly good, etc. This is another infamously false representation. What I
endeavored to show in the passage to which you refer, is not how God became
infinitely wise or good; but, as it is there expressed, that God being supposed
all-knowing, independent and almighty, the absolute perfection of his goodness
may be deduced from hence, etc. i. e. clearly argued or inferred. And I
expressly guarded against the impious supposition, that God is not eternally and
necessarily good. Now are you, or are you not an impudent slanderer, for
publishing to the world, that I presume to tell how God BECAME infinitely good,
etc. only because I showed an eternal, necessary connection between omniscience,
independency, omnipotence and goodness? Is this criticizing or lying, Mr.
Cleaveland? For once, let conscience speak.

But I now proceed to take notice of a wonderful criticism indeed: I mean one
of the most impudent, barefaced and execrable pieces of forgery that, I
believe, any man ever committed, without being pillor'd or cropp'd, or suffering
some other infamous punishment; unless where proof of the fact was wanting, as
it is not in the present case. You have pretended to cite from me, in the most
formal manner, a long passage, part of three pages in your libel, not a single
complete sentence of which is mine. You have, indeed, taken two or three scraps
of sentences from my sermons, here and there, at many pages distance; filled
them up with your own nonsense and impiety; put all in such an order as best
suited your critical design, and palmed the whole upon the world as mine,
without the least distinction; I mean as my very words: And all this, in order
to show my inaccuracies and inconsistencies! For your utter confusion, I shall
now set this piece of wickedness in folio before your eyes, and the eyes of the
world. Page 76 and onwards, you say thus, verbatim --

But I must not pass from this without taking some notice of the Dr's
consistency, or rather inconsistency: SAYS HE, A good God from his punitive
justice, which is a branch of his goodness, may be obliged to punish
transgressors, for the support of order, right, etc. or of the honor of God's
violated commandments, and the dignity of his moral government -- Christ
suffered from punitive justice, and was numbered with transgressors (though he
was without sin, a lamb without blemish and without spot, for he suffered the
just for the unjust) when he made atonement by his blood, and thereby supported
the honor of God's violated commandments, and the dignity of his government, in
such sort that guilty sinners might be pardoned consistently with the eternal
rule of right; but though God may from punitive justice be obliged to punish
sinners for the support of order, right, etc. and when he punished Christ, the
just for the unjust, it was to support the honor of his violated laws, and the
dignity of his government, and that guilty sinners might be pardoned
consistently with the eternal rule of right: Yet Christ's sufferings were
without any kind of reference to divine justice to satisfy that, for this is
absolutely irreconcilable with Christ's dying the just for the unjust, as
consequential to, and the effect of, God's love, mercy and grace, -- And though
punitive justice in God, regarding the eternal rule of right, and the support
of the honor and dignity of God's laws and moral government, in order that we
guilty sinners might be pardoned consistently therewith; obliged God to lay on
Christ the iniquities of us all, and to bruise the son of his love in our
stead: Yet there was no absolute necessity of Christ's atonement in reference
to justice being satisfied thereby, such idea of divine justice must be wholly
and forever excluded; God might have forgiven the sins of men without any
sacrifice intervening; indeed, it was rather the best and wisest method to
forgive the sins of men, through the great sacrifice of Christ's intervening,
than without any. The eternal rule of right, and the honor and dignity of God's
moral law and government are of so small weight, that they did but just turn
the scale in favor of an atonement to be made for sin, by the sacrifice of
Christ: And though the result was, that Christ was to make an atonement by
suffering the penalty of the law at the hands of punitive justice, yet this
must be without any kind of reference to divine justice, to satisfy that. -- O
Doctor! can God the Judge all the earth, require an atonement to be made, if he
is not offended? And can he be offended, and yet not justly offended? --

O Mr. Cleaveland! can you read these last words of your own, without
trembling? Do not your knees smite one against the other, when you reflect on
your own falsehood and villainy, particularly in the pretended long citation
from me, immediately foregoing? All that long passage, which I have here marked
with double commas, is so marked, and stands exactly thus in your libel. It is
also introduced by you in the most formal manner, as a quotation from me, with
these words preceding, 'SAYS HE' -- Nor is there the least room to doubt, but
that you intended your readers, who were unacquainted with me and my sermons,
should believe you had extracted this passage from them, word for word. Must
they not necessarily have supposed so, if they had been so credulous as to
think you a man of any truth, honor or conscience? And yet you know in your own
conscience, if you have any, that this is a piece of right down forgery; that
not one entire sentence of all this gallimafry or hotch potch, is mine. Is not
the worst sort of lying and slandering, that of writing, and publishing to the
world known falsehoods, injurious to the reputation of another? It is well, Mr.
Cleaveland, if you have not, sooner or later, great reason to wish, that you
had never learnt even to write; in which case your guilt might probably have
been less than it is. For you could not possibly have used me in so injurious a
manner with your tongue, though set on fire of hell, and walking through the earth,
as you have done by writing and publishing this libel; which may be dispersed
farther abroad than you might have been permitted to ramble in person, without
being taken up, and receiving your due deserts. I find, on this occasion, a
great strife in my breast between indignation against, and pity for, a person
so lost to all sense of honor, virtue and religion, as to be capable of such a
piece of wickedness as this -- Is it not as easy to prove one man as another
guilty of inconsistencies, in your way? -- a Newton, Lock, Clarke or Butler,
as a Cleaveland! --

Another instance of gross prevarication, and even profaneness in you, I find
p. 79, so soon after this. After quoting something which I had said concerning
the goodness of God to his creatures in general, in punishing wicked men
hereafter, by way of example and terror; you wickedly wrest my words, as if I
had said, that he would therein be good and merciful even to those whom he will
destroy, soul and body in hell. For thus you express yourself -- I have no
apprehension that tender mercy itself will manifest and exercise itself toward
the wicked in their terrible punishment in the other world -- How tender mercy
to the miserable is manifested, in making the miserable as miserable as they
can be, by executing punishment upon them for their sins -- is beyond my
apprehension! I believe, if the Dr. was to suffer the punishment of hell, he
would have no discovery at all of the tender mercy of God toward him in such a
terrible punishment. I pray God that neither of us may ever know what that
punishment is, by experiencing the same in the other world. P. 79, 80. Mr.
Cleaveland, you know in your own soul, that you here pervert my words and
meaning. And are you not ashamed and afraid to trifle thus upon so tremendous a
subject, in order to prove me guilty of an inaccuracy, or inconsistency? Do you
really believe there is any hell for wicked men? -- particularly a lake burning
with fire and brimstone, in which all liars are to have their part? If you do,
it appears to me that you are chargeable with the worst and most unaccountable
kind of inconsistency, in mis-representing and falsifying my sermons, in the
manner you have done; and particularly as to this point --

But still you go on to fib egregiously for many pages together, in order to
show me inconsistent with myself. I shall only glance at a few particulars
more. You give a sad example of the sin that does so easily beset you, p. 87.
with reference to what I said concerning an unwarrantable expression of Mr.
Calvin in his commentary on my text. You there say, The Dr. places in the
margin of p. 83 and 84 a passage of the learned Mr. Calvin, concerning the
reprobate, and says, That a certain decree of reprobation was the known opinion
of that learned man. These words are there marked by you with double commas, as
if they were mine, though they are not. Upon which you immediately go on thus,
'And adds, A sentiment at once unsupported by reason or scripture; nay contrary
to both, etc. These words are mine; but you here misrepresent me, as denying
any ' certain decree of reprobation'. This will appear to any one who consults
the passage, to which you refer. After quoting Mr. Calvin's words, I observed
that they naturally import, That there are many persons who, by a supposed
eternal decree of reprobation, are absolutely precluded from the benefit of
pardon, or the grace of God revealed to the world. This was the known opinion
of that learned man: A sentiment, at once unsupported by reason or scripture,
etc. Now why could you not quote truly and fairly, Mr. Cleaveland? Can you give
any other reason for it, than that it is more agreeable to your depraved mind
to fib, cavil and misrepresent, than to speak truth? You go on to exercise your
talent, and to show whose child you are, in the same page; where you say, --
'The Dr. states the doctrine' (i. e. as you evidently mean, the Calvinistic
doctrine of reprobation) in an objection; but discovers himself disingenuous
and abusive in the manner of his stating it; and then vents his indignation
against the doctrine, etc. Now it is false, that I stated either the scripture
-- or the Calvinistic doctrine of reprobation, in the place to which you refer,
Sermon. p. 66. May not one speak of the absurd, impious notions which some
persons have of reprobation, but you must presently take it to your self, or
say this was aimed against the Calvinists? even though you deny they hold it in
the manner expressed! Besides; I did not say, that any actually held the
impious doctrine, which I there spoke of; though, I believe, I might have truly
done so. I spoke with great caution, because I would not needlessly give offense
to any: Saying, -- If any persons really hold such a doctrine, etc. And even
you, Mr. Cleaveland, with all your uncommon stock of assurance, will not dare
openly to assert the doctrine of reprobation, in the sense there denied by me.
Are you not then an insolent caviller, to talk at the rate you do here? -- I
hope there are but few persons in the world, who have such strong and sad marks
of reprobation upon them, as a certain man whom I could name to you; but one,
to whom you are a great stranger, though it nearly concerns you to have an
intimate acquaintance with him. --

You go on misrepresenting and cavilling, till you come to p. 94. where you
again misquote me. You there say, 'And as the Dr. says,' God's knowledge (which
formed his plan) -- This is none of my expression. So prone you are to leasing,
when you pretend to cite, that you will some times do it, even without having
any occasion for it: And what is this, but fibbing for fibbing's sake? Will you
never leave off this scurvy trick? You are at it again in the next page. You
there represent me as speaking of 'the doctrine of original sin', as the
grosest of all absurdities, etc. Now you know, I said not this of the doctrine
of original sin, but only of that unscriptural opinion, that infants, --
infants of a span long, are justly liable to eternal torments -- Do all that
hold the doctrine of original sin, hold this opinion also? If not, I could not
be justly charged in general, with calling that doctrine the grosest of all
absurdities: or as speaking of those that maintain it, as persons of a sadly
depraved judgment. I am sorry if you have so little conscience, as to feel no
remorse after such base and disingenuous conduct, to say the least of it. You
trifle and prevaricate shamefully again, p. 97. by applying what I said so
respectfully of those, who have in some respects different conceptions from my
own, about justice as a branch of goodness, and the atonement of Christ, to
those who hold that infants are justly liable to eternal torments: This you do,
in order to show an inconsistency in me. You captiously and falsely represent
what I say upon these different points, thus -- "He has a high veneration for
many of Us, as wise and excellent men, that are to be pitied as persons of a
sadly depraved judgment." -- Many of US! -- to be sure, US, if wise and
excellent men are spoken of! Many such I know, but who art thou, Mr.
Cleaveland? Do you think this discovers your sagacity or your impudence? --
Whatever others are, yet that you are a person, not only of a sadly depraved
judgment, but heart also, is very manifest: And if you excel in any thing, it
is in what all wise and good men of every denomination, greatly detest and
abhor.

I must next rebuke you for your irreverence and profanity in speaking of the
great God. p. 101. You there say, Why may not the judgment of God -- be a just
and righteous judgment? The Dr. will not say, it was the effect of a sadly
depraved judgment in the Almighty! I take no notice of the nonsense of this;
(that being so common with you, and your libel so much below criticism): But
you are very culpable for your impiety in speaking of the ALMIGHTY in this
light, fleering, flouting manner: Showing a want of due reverence to him, as
well as of all decorum and good manners in your treatment of me. Rudeness and
insolence toward man, Mr. Cleaveland, though inexcuseable, are harmless in
comparison of impiety to God. I fear you have forgotten, or never learnt the
third commandment. I therefore advise you to think seriously of, and to
remember it. Men of your stamp, are generally much too free with their Maker.

You are guilty of another falsehood, at least an implicit one, when speaking
of original sin, you say, p. 101. 'Hence the Dr. does not state the doctrine
right, when 'he says, "without any offense of their own". You know I neither
stated, nor attempted to state that doctrine; though I mentioned what I take to
be one great error relative thereto; viz. that infants, before actual sin, are
justly liable to eternal torments. And you doubtless designed to impose upon
your readers, by speaking of my stating the doctrine, etc.

Thus I have produced a specimen of your way of criticizing. I have let pass
innumerable scurrilous reflections, as well as senseless remarks on my sermons;
scarce taking notice of any thing in your libel, but what betrays the falsehood
and wickedness of your heart. Mere nonsense and absurdity I can overlook in
you; but for your dishonesty you ought to be rebuked, and that before all;
because your sin, in this respect, is public; you have proclaimed it yourself.
However, before I proceed to administer the more general correction which I
intend for you. I must take notice of one very singular piece of insolence in
your 104th page. After so much falsehood and forgery, abuse and calumny, you
have the front to give me a caution, not to throw dirt at you. -- If the Dr.
shall think proper to make any reply, etc -- it is justly expected, that he
will not debase his noble powers, by raking together, and throwing dirt -- What
matchless impudence is this! Whether you speak of my 'noble powers', by way of
irony, as I conclude from the whole tenor of your libel, or by way of
compliment, is a matter of great indifference to me. I equally despise your
clownish, unmannerly sneers and scoffs, and your panegyricks. Or rather, the
compliments of so insignificant, false a person, as you appear to be by this
libel, would be more nauseous and dishonorable to me than your foulest
invectives; which are, in one respect, the highest encomiums that you can
bestow. And yet, for your own sake, I am sorry you should discover so much
insolence, and causeless virulence against me, (to crown all the rest) as to
caution me against throwing dirt at you. You was doubtless conscious, that you
deserved a severe chastisement. But know, unhappy, shameless man! that to
administer proper reproof and correction to such an one as thou art, is not
throwing dirt! And though the chastizing a Thersites is not thought a matter of
much glory; yet it has ever been accounted a useful service to the public at
least, if not eventually to the brawling, wrangling wretch himself, who is the
subject of the discipline.

Mr. Cleaveland, your guilt is really great, very great; and it is proper you
should be made sensible of it. What is the ground of your public quarrel
against me? Does it really amount to any thing more than this? I think divine
justice is comprehended in divine goodness, in a way analogous to that in which
justice, and all other social virtues are comprehended in the love of our
neighbor: you think it is not. I think God forgives the sins of men, through the
atonement of Christ, because this was wisest and best; what most became a God
of infinite wisdom and goodness: you seem to think otherwise. I do not think
God has decreed to damn men, but for their unrepented sins; neither dare you
assert that he has, though you have reviled me with reference to this matter. I
do not think it consistent with justice to make infants eternally miserable,
solely on account of the first transgression: you think it is. This is the sum
of the matter. And do you, can you suppose my sentiments in these respects, as
expressed in my sermons, a sufficient foundation for representing me to the
world as an enemy to some of the most important principles of the christian
religion! -- Or can it be a credit to any religion, to represent it as mainly
founded on such principles as I denied! You reproach christianity by doing so,
whatever you may imagine.

Besides; if I was erroneous in any of these respects; yet how unwarrantable a
method have you taken? In your very first page, the civil epithets you give me,
are, 'bold and dogmatical' -- And are not palpable falsehoods, misquotations
and forgeries, in order to give the world an ill opinion of the principles, and
to hurt the reputation of any one, very heinous sins? You and I, Mr.
Cleaveland, know very well who has done these things -- Is not a good name
rather to be chosen than great riches? If so, your endeavoring, by repeated
falsehoods proved upon you, and the most vile arts, to represent me to the
world as an impious fool and madman, is certainly a much more heinous sin, than
to have stolen a great treasure from me, or taken it from me on the highway. I
really think the sin you have been guilty of, in writing and publishing this
libel, far greater than either of these, or to have burnt my house, would have
been. Nor have I reason to think, you would refrain from doing me any kind of
mischief in your power, unless more restrained by something else, than either
by the fear of God, or a principle of justice -- The injury would have been
great, in my opinion, if you had palmed upon the world any thing of your own
writing, as mine, even though you had done your best: What is it then, to palm
upon it, as mine, what you wrote when you did your worst; crowding together as
much folly, contradiction and impiety, as even you could get into so narrow a
compass! This is what you have done, more especially in that long piece of
forgery beginning p. 76 of your libel. Now suppose any should be so
unacquainted with my principles, and so ignorant of you, as to think you fair
and honest in your citations, and in the representations you have given of my
sermons; as possibly some may be: What opinion must they have of me? -- Such an
one, do you imagine, as they would have from reading those sermons themselves?
-- How would you like, Mr. Cleaveland, to be treated in this manner yourself?
-- Make the case your own. -- If your conscience is not scared as with an hot
iron, you must feel great anguish therein: Or if that is past feeling, still
your anxiety must be great, unless you are also lost to all sense of shame, and
regard for your reputation.

You undoubtedly sinned against light. For you acknowledge p. 8. (perhaps
inadvertently, but certainly unluckily for you) that ' lying and unfaithfulness
are as really moral evils, as unkindness or unmercifulness.' -- How then could
you misrepresent and falsify my sermons so notoriously; at once abusing me and
the world, after such a concession as this! Is it because you think lightly of
moral evils; or imagine the practice of them consistent with a state of grace?
and that your orthodoxy will cover all? -- But if such things are really moral
evils even you must own, it is RATHER best of the two, that men should abstain
from them; even though you should suppose it not absolutely necessary in order to
salvation. I do not pretend exactly to know your sentiments upon these points:
But if the eternal rule of right, and God's moral law and government are of so
small weight, that they do but just turn the scale in favor of truth and
integrity, in opposition to lying and unfaithfulness; yet since they actually
turn it, I see not but that you must be self-condemned upon your own
principles. And whereas you say, that these are as certainly moral evils, as
unkindness or unmercifulness; I must remind you, that if you are guilty of the
former, you are certainly guilty of the latter also. For what could be more
unkind or unmerciful in you, than to father your own nonsense and impiety upon
me! -- And this, not when you did your best, but worst! How unmerciful, as well
as false and perfidious was this, Mr. Cleaveland!

You are the more inexcuseable for this outrageous assault upon me, because of
the cautious manner in which I expressed myself as to divine justice and
goodness, and the atonement; (which are the chief ground of your quarrel.)
Speaking of divine justice as included in goodness, and of my intention briefly
to explain my-self on that point, I said, This I would do, at once with all
reverence to God, and with all due respect to those who have different
conceptions of the matter, Sermon. p. 20. Again, p. 24. From whence, I think,
(though it does not become a mortal man to speak confidently in such cases) that
it follows, That there is not really in the great and glorious God, any such
distinction betwixt goodness and justice, as has been objected against. Again,
referring to the same point, and to what I had been briefly saying about
atonement, it is subjoined -- Though by the way, these things are not said by me,
but with an high veneration for those many wise and excellent men, who either
have, or seem to have, different conceptions of this matter. p. 65. Was not
this peaceable, modest and candid; though you may call it 'bold and dogmatical'?
Had I not a right to speak my sentiments upon these points? If you disliked
them, could you not content yourself with preaching your own? Or if you must
needs publish them; would it not have been more decent and expedient for you to
do it, without engaging in a personal controversy with me? Would not any
valuable end which you could propose to yourself, have been answered as well,
though you had never mentioned my name? There was, as I am well informed, but one
copy of my sermons in your parish; and that in such hands, that there was no
danger of its being lent about to corrupt your parishioners -- Or if you
thought the care of all these churches was upon you; and that it was incumbent
on you, I say, upon you! to stand up in defense of the most important
principles of religion against me, (while our divines of indisputable ability
were silent) should you not at least have paid a strict regard to truth,
decency and moral honesty? --

Moreover: this furious attack appears to have proceeded from malice prepense:
it was a deliberate piece of wickedness. Your libel, by the many references,
quotations, misquotations, and studied perversions which it contains, shows a
great deal of malicious pains in the author; and, as confused and immethodical
as the composition is, (I scarce ever saw one more so) I conjecture it must
have employed a person of your abilities near half a year in the writing. And
even after it was finished, it lay by several months, before you could get
either man or angel to help this lame offspring of your brain into the pool, I
mean the press; there having been, as I am informed, but one subscriber for
your libel in Boston. Here you had time for recollection: And this want of
subscribers was an hint to you, though you would not take it, to desist from your
wicked purpose; as it showed that you had not the public approbation. Besides:
there were extracts from my sermons published in the same paper with your
proposals; plainly showing the iniquity of your undertaking, as to the main
point -- But persist you would and did; even though you was forced to come under
obligation yourself, to take off about half the whole impression, (for want of
subscribers) before you could persuade the printer to undertake this dirty job.
A charge which, I suppose, you was ill able to bear; though possibly your prudent
intention was, to sell these copies to your parishoners at a moderate advance;
I know not -- In the mean time, it is said, you took a journey of more than 200
miles, into Connecticut, in order to get a degree from that College, in which,
for some nameless reasons, it was thought improper for you to stay the usual
time; -- that you might gratify your vanity, and recommend your libel, by
annexing A. M. to your name. But failing in this design, you was resolved to go
on, and take your revenge, by adding three letters to your name (V. D. M.)
instead of two; which might answer the end as well, perhaps, with most of your
readers. And indeed, I must own, there are some Arts, of which you have shown
yourself an undoubted Master in this performance, without a degree; though such
Arts as entitle a man much less to academical honors, in my opinion, than to
something which I shall not mention -- But not to digress farther; all these
things show, how deliberate and resolute you have been in the perpetration of
this piece of wickedness; which is a great aggravation of it.

I may take the hint of another aggravation, from the three great Capitals
aforesaid, annexed to your Name, with the following title, Pastor of a church
-- Such gross falsehoods, misrepresentations and forgeries as your libel
contains, would have been highly criminal in any man; But, in a pretended
minister of Jesus Christ, in whose mouth there was no guile; -- in a man, who
should not only preach truth and righteousness, but be an example thereof to
others; -- in one who pretends to extraordinary zeal and sanctity; -- an
uncommon concern for the purity of religion; -- in one who, in his first page,
expressed his apprehension that my doctrine was not only subversive of the
orthodox faith, but even of morality, or true virtue; -- in such a man, I say,
this conduct is so inconsistent, impudent and abominable, that words are
wanting to express the foulness and infamy of it! Bishop Tillotson, whom you
doubtless think a grand heretic, speaks of some persons who have got a scurvy
trick of lying for the truth. And if the truth of God will the more abound
through any man's lies, I will not deny but that you, Mr. Cleaveland, may prove a
very eminent instrument of promoting it -- But can you think it proper to
oppose those whom you think heretics, by such wicked arts as you have used? Is
orthodoxy, supposing you to be in possession of it, to be defended and
propagated by defamation, slander and forgery? Have these methods any tendency
to put supposed Arminians out of countenance? or are they any credit to the
cause in which they are employed? Does it not show the most consummate
effrontery, impiety and hypocrisy, for any one who sets himself up as a zealous
champion for the cause of God and his truth; and pretends a great concern for
the salvation of precious, immortal souls, to be so regardless of his own, as
to do such things under the cloak of religion, as a common heathen would blush
at? Let me tell you plainly, Mr. Cleaveland, I had much rather my soul should
be in a pagan's soul's stead (even a very immoral one's) than in yours, if you
allow yourself in such wicked practices in other respects, as I have proved you
guilty of in this, notwithstanding all your supposed orthodoxy, gospel light,
or any other light. It will doubtless be more intolerable in the day of
judgment, for those who live and die with a LIE in their right hand, under the
gospel dispensation, than for wicked heathen. I hope this will not be the case
with you. I do not despair of you: For I am told, one excuse you made to the
printer for not coming seasonably to take off the copies of your libel, which
you stood engaged for, was, that many people in your parish were under great
spiritual awakenings; so that you was obliged to attend upon, advise and
comfort them. It may therefore be hoped, that it will soon be your own turn to
be awakened, convinced and brought to repentance. Conversing with persons under
great concern of soul, and deep impressions of the evil and danger of sin, may,
by the blessing of God, be one means of bringing you to a proper sense of your
own sins, in so slandering and abusing me; and when you are a true penitent
yourself, you will doubtless be better qualified to comfort and strengthen your
brethren. -- I do not condemn you as a wicked man on account of your opinions,
though I think some of them very absurd; nor presume to judge your heart, in a
way unauthorized by scripture, as many persons of your stamp used to do some
years ago. No! In whatever I say of you, I observe the rule -- 'By their fruits
ye shall know them.' You came among us in sheep's clothing; which being turned
a little on one side, no sheep, but a ravenous animal is seen under it. I have
plucked and examined some of the fruit which you bear; and found it to be
corrupt and evil -- sour grapes: What then must the tree, what the vine be?
When the grapes are grapes of gall, and the clusters so bitter; probably the
vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha --

You are in the opinion of many people, the more inexcuseable in writing and
publishing such a wicked libel against me, on account of the time when it was
done -- when I was engaged in a public controversy of great importance to the
churches of New England, as well as to the American heathen, and those British
colonies which are almost destitute of the administration of God's word,
worship and sacraments: and when I was employing my mean abilities to the
utmost, to serve them -- A work which I was repeatedly solicited to engage in
by several Divines of the first reputation among us, some years before that
incident took place, which finally determined me to undertake it. At this very
time, you was planning or publishing mischief against me, as an enemy to the
most important principles of the protestant religion; and consequently, not
only to these churches, but to christianity itself! You have joined your
slanders to those of my anonymous episcopal defamers; you have brought the like
accusation against me, and made use of the like dishonest arts to hurt my
reputation. By publishing your libel at such a time, you have, to the utmost of
your power, defeated the design of my writing on the subject before referred
to; and thereby disserved, as far as your influence reaches, the good cause I
was laboring to promote; in which you was also interested yourself. Some, I
know, are of opinion, that episcopal influence had a share in bringing out your
scandalous pamphlet at this time; and that either you, or those with whom you
have close connexions, have been tampered with, set on, and encouraged in the
prosecution of this wicked design. I particularly remember that in one of the
many libels published against me by that party, there is something said about
you and your then proposed pamphlet, apparently with this view. -- And what
reward do you expect from that quarter, for this furious attack upon me? --
Perhaps to be made a BISHOP in America! --

If you suppose you are likely to gain any credit with 'our Divines of
indisputable ability,' by this wicked piece of work; I have good reason to
think the contrary. Some of them, ( Calvinistical Divines) have spoken of you
and your libel to me, with great contempt and indignation; and seemed quite
astonished at your assurance in setting up for an author; but more especially
at the infamous arts which you had used to injure my reputation. Some of them
said, they did not own you nor your orthodoxy. Even your Rev. friend (or
patron, shall I call him?) in Boston, who corrected the press for you; a
gentleman who has finallized his zeal against some ministers accused of
arminianism* who has encouraged the calling of counsels against them, and had a
principal hand in their ecclesiastical death; and, let me add, who has more
than once, in a pretty public manner, discovered his particular spleen against
me; even this Rev'd gentleman, I say, was something shocked at your unfairness
at least, before your libel got through the press; when he came to perceive how
grossly you had misrepresented and falsified my sermons; particularly in that
most remarkable instance which has been taken notice of -- Some persons of a
more delicate conscience, or nicer sense of honor, would probably have had
nothing to do with you or your libel, after such a discovery as this; but
immediately put the affair out of their hands, lest they should be considered
as accessaries. This Rev'd gentleman, however, went on with the honorable
employment which you had assigned him; not having, as I am informed, either so
much concern for his own reputation, or so much real friendship for you, as to
send you word what he had discovered, in order to prevent the disgrace that was
likely to come upon you -- But, that even this warm gentleman is now no
advocate for your libel, or the most distinguishing principles of it, I can
assure you upon good grounds. -- Judge then, what Credit you are likely to gain
among people in general, clergy and laiety; whether they do, or do not agree
with me in certain points of doctrine. -- The zealous gentleman, to whom I
referred, who has such a thirst for unorthodox blood, (I do not mean literally)
would doubtless have highly extolled your performance, it being against me, had
it been but tolerable; but it was too gross an abuse to go down even with him!
-- So that I do not think you will, on account of this Essay, very speedily
have a call to preach the Convention-sermon before 'our Divines of indisputable
ability;' as you very probably expected: For I know not what a man of your
consummate vanity, may not be supposed to flatter himself with the hopes of!

I am sensible, it is the opinion of many, that you had not the principal hand
in composing the libel to which your name is prefixed. Many suppose it to be
chiefly the work of a certain lay-gentleman, unhappily bewildered for many
years past, with law, military affairs, polemic divinity, metaphysics,
superstition, politics and platform, all crowding on his brain at once! -- a
man of a wily, jesuitical head and heart, at least in some respects; -- full of
whimsical designs and notions; and one who, to all his other unaccountable
fancies, it is said, has added this strangest of all delusions, That he is an
eminent saint, and that the churches of this country stand in great need of
such an able pilot as himself, to steer them a right course! -- It is known
that, as distinguished and candid a writer as he has been against ministers, he
labors under some small inconveniences as an author, never having learnt to
spell; much less to put any thing into tolerable method -- Now it is supposed
by some, that this truly extraordinary person, not being able to contain
himself, and yet laboring under the trivial disadvantages aforesaid, put his
written, but unspelt, unconnected lucubrabrations into your learned hands, to
have those defects supplied: In consequence of which, and some additional
strokes of your own, they appear to the world in such a wonderful order and
method as is observed in the libel; it having been previously agreed that, as
the reward of your pains, you should have the whole honor of being the author
of it. -- No small piece of self-denial, to be sure, to the said original
draughts-man! This may be all mere conjecture, for any thing that I know; but
some are confident it is not. And one thing that affords ground of suspicion,
is, that the said modest person extols the libel much more highly than it is
supposed, he would extol any man's performance, except his own. Now, Mr.
Cleaveland, if you have really been led into such a praemunire; if you have been
made what the vulgar call a cat's-paw, and persuaded to father the
ill-favored, sinful child which you did not beget, but only fostered; it may
perhaps be most for your honor to confess the truth, and to bring out this
whole piece of roguery. And if you should do so, you may be sure of one
advantage on your side; I mean, that though you are not better than you should
be, yet one will, on this occasion, apply to you the old proverb, That the
WORST KNAVE has turned King's evidence. But at present I must take it for
granted, that the libel is yours; since you declare it to be so. It is upon
supposition that you spoke the truth in this respect, that I have proceeded in
the reproof already given you. If I have not handled you very tenderly, or
delicately, it was only because your case required some severity: You appear
not a little hardened. Though I abhor falsehood and villainy, and have been
treated so injuriously by you; yet I would not have you imagine, that my
reproofs proceed from a spirit of malice, or unchristian revenge. According to
my principles, you know, chastizement should always have good for its proposed
end, either private or public, or both. And although that which I have
administered to you, may and must make you smart for a while, unless you are
past feeling; yet, to convince you and the world, that I charitably intend it
for your real benefit, I will now close this epistle (which you may possibly
think somewhat tedious) with a few friendly and salutary pieces of advice.

In the first place, I advise you to humble yourself before almighty God; and
to implore his forgiveness through that atonement, of which you have so wickedly
represented me as an injurious asperser.

In the next place, I counsel you to acknowledge your sin to the world; by
publishing an ample confession of the injustice you have done me, in the
newspapers, or otherwise; and thereby giving me reasonable satisfaction -- It
is my present determination never so much as to read any thing which you may
publish hereafter, unless it is written in the penitential way, now recommended
to you -- After having shown the world the falsehood and villainy of your first
Essay, I shall think my own reputation entirely unconcerned in any thing you
may hereafter say of me or my principles --

Thirdly, I advise you to be diligent in your studies, and to take pains in
composing your sermons; that there may be both useful matter and method in
them; -- instead of preaching in that flashy, rambling and incoherent way, that
I understand you do; and for which our other modern exhorters have been so
famous -- Alas! how much precious time did you mispend in writing your libel!
All which time, the poor people of Ipswich, I believe, fared miserably enough.

Fourthly, Whatever you do, Mr. Cleaveland, beware of mixing metaphysics with
your divinity. Your libel shows that your head is almost turned therewith
already; which is the occasion of my giving you this caution. Preach the plain,
indisputable doctrines and duties of the gospel, in a plain, familiar way. Do
not exercise yourself in things too high for you: Aim at no great refinements,
or very nice distinctions* Meddle as little as possible with abstruse,
controversial points; for which, I perceive, you have a huge appetite, without
a digestion answerable thereto. Your head, if not your heart, is already much
affected and hurt thereby; and the consequence of your going on in this way,
may be right down phrenzy!

Fifthly, Avoid all censoriousness; all rash judging and condemning of others,
whose religious opinions are different from yours. Preach your own sentiments
honestly; but you should not represent all those who dislike them, as
graceless, unconverted men; and enemies to the most important doctrines of
christianity. A most fundamental principle of true protestantism, (for which
you would be thought an advocate) is, that the holy scriptures are a
sufficient, and the only rule of Christian faith; and that all Christians have
a right to judge of the sense of scripture for themselves. In this imperfect
state there will unavoidably be some considerable diversity of opinion, even
among wise and good men; among true Christians and true Protestants; and,
perhaps, still more diversity in their manner of expressing themselves upon
some particular points, than in their sentiments. You should not expect to
bring all men to think and express themselves just as you do, Mr. Cleaveland;
much less pick a quarrel with, misrepresent, abuse and defame them, if they do
not. Even Calvinists differ very considerably among themselves; as appears
particularly by what I cited to you from Dr. Twisse, relative to satisfaction.
Christians should exercise forbearance and candor toward each other; and
Christian ministers (of whom, it seems, you reckon yourself one) ought to set
the example.

Nothing is more unbecoming a minister of the gospel, Mr. Cleaveland, than a
narrow and censorious, a captious and wrangling disposition: And they, in whom
this evil temper prevails, generally promote it among their hearers; inspiring
them with antichristian rage and bitterness against their fellow christians,
instead of the meek, benign and charitable spirit of the gospel. I hope you
will beware of this bad Spirit for the future.

If you put these counsels in practice, I am persuaded it will turn to good
account; -- much better than for you to set up as a writer of controversy. It
will be more for your own credit, and for the good of your parishioners. I say
these things with hearty good will to you and to them; and request you at least
seriously to consider, before you reject, the counsel. I should be sincerely
glad, if by acting a part becoming a minister of the gospel (for the future)
you should grow in the esteem of the people of your charge; and heartily
rejoice to hear that you was serviceable to the cause of pure and undefiled
religion in Ipswich; -- to your present comfort, and future honor. I wish the
divine blessing may attend both my reproofs and counsels, and your labors, so
far as both are honest and laudable, or conformable to the spirit and rules of
the gospel: And am, notwithstanding the injuries received from, and the needful
rebukes given to you,

Your sincere WELL-WISHER, J. Mayhew.

Advertisement.
IT is hinted in the foregoing Letter, that Mr. Cleaveland was formerly
dismissed from Yale-College, in a way not to his credit. The author has heard
this in such a manner, that he has not the least doubt of its truth. But if he
should hereafter find himself in a mistake with reference hereto, he will give
Mr. Cleaveland reasonable and public satisfaction in that respect, even without
being called upon therefore.

THE END.

