REMARKS ON AN Anonymous TRACT, ENTITLED An ANSWER to Dr. MAYHEW'S
OBSERVATIONS. On the CHARTER and CONDUCT of the SOCIETY for the Propagation of
the Gospel in Foreign Parts. BEING A Second Defense of the said Observations.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the WEST Church in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by R. and S. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street; EDES and
GILL, in Queen Street; and T. and J. FLEET, in Corn hill. 1764.

REMARKS ON AN Anonymous TRACT, etc.
THE Author of the Tract before me, has thought proper to conceal his name and
quality, in common with others who have written against the Observations: So
that whatever may be his real dignity, I cannot with propriety speak of him
under any higher title than that of gentleman. He is doubtless a person of
excellent sense, and an happy talent at writing; apparently free from the
sordid, illiberal spirit of bigotry; one of a cool temper, and who often shows
much candor; well acquainted with the affairs of the Society, and, in general,
a fair reasoner. To say this, is but doing justice to the merits of an
opponent; a species of justice too seldom found in controversial writers. And
all this I acknowledge with much more pleasure than ever I had in exposing the
contrary qualities in an adversary: It being far more agreeable to me to
praise, where praise is due, than to blame, even where blame is highly deserved.

It is not my intention, in the following pages, to examine every thing which
this respectable writer has offered in opposition to my Observations. Some,
which I thought did not very materially affect the merits of the cause, are
passed over for the sake of brevity. Others are left unnoticed, because the
same things in effect were sufficiently considered in my Defense of the
Observations, published in Boston some time ago. I have neither so much leisure
or health, nor such an itch for altercation, as to protract a dispute upon
circumstantial matters. Nor do I conceive that an argument increases in
strength, by being frequently repeated, as a snow-ball does in magnitude, by
being often rolled over and over. If what was offered in my Defense against a
certain Examiner and Letter-writer, was valid, it will be equally so against
this gentleman, so far as their objections are alike: If not, it would be no
advantage to me to say the same things over again. For these reasons I request,
that it may not be supposed, or taken for granted, that I concede to every
thing in the Tract before me, which I do not take a particular notice of; or
that I pass any over, that are material, from a consciousness of my inability
to answer them. Not these, but those which I have already assigned, are the
true reasons of my conduct in this respect.

I must observe, though with reluctance, that there are some passages in this
Answer, which I do not well know how to reconcile with that candor and
ingenuity, which have already been allowed to the author. The first paragraph
is one of them. He is there pleased to say, that my book was written, partly
against the church of England in general; partly against the conduct of the
Society, and partly against appointing bishops for America. He indeed grants,
immediately after, that the first of these three, was not formally proposed by
me as one head of my work. By which distinction he plainly leads his reader to
suppose, that both the other points were formally proposed by me, as coming
within my design: Whereas the affair of bishops was not, but altogether as
incidental as what relates to the church of England in general; respecting
which latter, I said expressly, 'It was by no means my design in this
publication, to enter into the controversy 'betwixt the church of England and
us' Observe. p. 126. -- N. B. As the gentleman has all along referred to the
London Edition of the Observations, I shall do the same, whenever I have
occasion to refer to them: I shall also refer to the Land. Edit. of his Answer.
Notwithstanding this declaration, and the gentleman's own confession, he
begins with a formal defense of the church of England against some of my casual
remarks thereon; saying, If satisfaction be previously given to candid persons
on this point, they will be better prepared for considering the other two P 3.
Still suggesting that there were two other points, formally discussed by me,
contrary to fact. In him let this pass for an instance of inadvertence only:
Aliquando bonus, etc. But had some other persons set out in the same manner,
multiplying one design into three, representing it as having been in my view
throughout the whole of my book, Ibid.
, to oppose the church of England, and undertaking to give previous
satisfaction to candid persons on this point, that they might be the better
prepared to consider the other two: Had some other persons taken this method,
it might naturally have been considered as a mere piece of craft, or an
unworthy artifice, to prepossess their unwary episcopal readers in favor of
their design to prejudice them against me and mine, and thereby to render them
very partial judges of the true and only point which I undertook to debate. Did
his readers, who are probably almost all of them episcopalians, need to be thus
prepared for considering the argument respecting the Society? But I am very
unwilling to suppose, this gentleman had a design that would be so little to
his honor, and would make my encomiums have the appearance of flattery. The
reader is therefore desired to put the most favorable construction he can, on
this conduct; and by that means, if possible, to justify my commendations: For
I would not have any one construe them into adulation, equally to the dishonor
of my worthy Answerer and my self.

In pursuance of this design, duly to prepare his readers for considering the
main point, he proceeds to a vindication of the church of England, and of the
hierarchy, in opposition to certain expressions which I occasionally made use
of. Some of these might perhaps be too harsh and irritating. Had episcopalians
in general shown the same love to religious liberty, and the same moderation
toward non-conformists, that this gentleman has, I am confident he would not
have thought, that he had any ground of complaint in this respect. I have the
honor to agree with him in what he says in different places, concerning the
intolerant spirit that formerly prevailed, even among protestants of almost
every denomination, and the better spirit of mutual forbearance, that has for
some time been growing among them. Would to God that they may continue to
cultivate the latter, without abating in a zeal that is according to knowledge,
for the great, indisputable doctrines and duties of christianity, or
degenerating into a state of indifference and skepticism about all religion;
the opposite extreme and not a more innocent one, though less pernicious to the
peace of society, and common rights of mankind, than bigotry and persecution.

But my real sentiments concerning the constitution, worship and discipline of
the church of England, are no ways altered by any thing which this gentleman
has said. If the Lutherans prefer her communion to the Calvinistic, the
Calvinists to the Lutheran, and the Greeks to both, (which, by the way, is
asserted without proof;) or if most, or even all of them blame the English
dissenters for separating from it Page 4.
; yet this carries no proper ground of conviction with it, that her communion
is the best. A true protestant judges, not by the majority of votes or numbers,
but by scripture and reason. The Gentleman says, I seem to entertain the worse
opinion of the church of England, because the members of the church of Rome
likewise esteem it more than they do others. Truly I can hardly think any
church a very pure or scriptural one, which has the esteem of so corrupt and
antichristian a church as that of Rome, the mother of harlots, and abominations
of the earth. He immediately subjoins; But we have to reply, that they hate it
more also, as the most dangerous enemy to their cause, and strongest bulwark of
the reformation. P. 4.
So that this gentleman seems to draw an argument for the excellency of his
church, not only from the esteem, but from the hatred of that of Rome: Neither
of which considerations has any tendency to make me think the better of her.
Because this esteem of the church of Rome on one hand, and her hatred on the
other, are most naturally resolved into such causes, as are rather
dishonorable to the church of England, than the contrary; her esteem, into the
remaining similitude between them, and her hatred, into a rivalship for power,
worldly splendour and pre-eminence. What the gentleman thinks the church of Rome
esteems that of England for, whether her excellencies or blemishes, he has not
told us; I am satisfied, it is on account of the latter; and have others to
conjecture as they please. But he himself has observed, that the
Roman Catholics hate the church, of England, considered as the most dangerous
enemy to their cause. It is as natural for them to do so, as for one
gaily-attired lady to look with an evil eye upon another; especially
considering that the church of England has a mighty King for her head, and lays
claim to some of the highest powers and prerogatives asserted by the other;
power to decree rites and ceremonies, and authority in controversies of faith
Article 20.
Here is a foundation laid, broad enough to support almost any superstructure,
though as enormous an one, as that which is raised on the supposed infallibility
and power of St. Peter's successor. Who then can wonder, if the church of Rome
hates that of England, as a dangerous enemy and rival?

And has not the church of England acted as if she were really possessed of
this extraordinary power and authority, respecting rites, ceremonies and
controversies of faith? The gentleman indeed allows, that the said church has
some appointments in it, which the scripture does not require. This is
heartily, though very cautiously said. But when he subjoins, a little after, Ours
has not many things of this kind, nor lays great stress upon them P. 4.
; I am a little surprised: Though, to return one of his compliments to me, One
must suppose that he believes himself, and as far as possible, I would believe
him also p. 8.
. But it is no easy matter for a person who duly considers the offices of
baptism, confirmation, the Lord's supper, ordination, matrimony and burial; the
numerous fasts and festivals, saints days and sinners, the creeds, the liturgy
and the canons of said church in general, to think that appointments of the
kind he speaks of, are not many, or that no great stress is laid upon them. Can
any one live in regular communion with that church, without submitting to many
such? Can people come into the World, tarry in, or go out of it? can they be
born, live or die, without them? And for how many things which, to
nonconforming understandings at least, appear extremely trivial, do the canons
still in force declare, that people shall be ipso facto excommunicated, and not
restored till they retract their said wicked errors?

The gentleman seems to think that appointments of this nature, if they are not
such as the scripture expressly forbids, though it does not require them, ought to
be complied with. In which I cannot agree with him; because, though they may not
be expressly forbidden, yet they are implicitly, and by natural construction.
The law of God may be in a great measure made void by the traditions, and
numerous inventions of men in his worship, not one of which is perhaps directly
repugnant to any particular precept. And it is said, partly with reference to
appointments of that kind, which some think so innocent, comely and expedient,
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
Some of our English episcopalians have shown a laudable zeal in this respect,
against the church of Rome; for departing from the scriptures as the only rule
of christian faith, worship and discipline; not perhaps considering how justly
this charge might be retorted upon them, in a degree, by protestant dissenters.
For example; The thing I would recommend to the consideration of all papists,
says a learned and able writer, is their departure from scripture. Why do they
command abstinence from flesh, on so many days in every week? Why abstain from
meats, which God has ordained to be received by all with thanksgiving? Why is
such a fast enjoined, as may be kept with drinking of wine, and other, even
stronger liquors? I do not charge them with allowing of excesses in liquors,
but with enjoining so many fast and meagre days, on a spiritual, not a
medicinal account; and this, without authority from Christ or his apostles See
an excellent, and very important Tract, entitled An Enquiry how far the Papists
ought to be treated here [in England] at good subjects etc. By the late Dr.
Sykes.
-- If such reasoning as this will hold good against the church of Rome, as
doubtless it will, let it be fairly considered, whether it will not be
unanswerable, if applied to another church; and fully justify a secession from
her; especially if many of her appointments, on which great stress is laid, are
apparently superstitious, and not only unscriptural, but antiscriptural.

I humbly conceive, the gentleman goes a little too far, when he intimates that
there are similar appointments in all the churches in the world: P. 4
I know of some churches at least, in which there are none such. But if this
were fact, it would be no justification of them; but rather a proof, that all
churches and nations have drank too deeply of a certain poisonous cup, and
departed from the simplicity that is in Christ, and which was in the truly
apostolical churches. Very great corruptions were introduced much earlier than
many are willing to allow; and were confirmed even by general councils. For, to
use the words of the same learned episcopalian divine, (to whom I just now
referred) in another important tract, What have general councils been (I speak
of all universally from the council of Nice to the council of Trent) but the
meetings of corrupt, ambitious, intriguing, contentious men; who never once
attempted to serve the cause of Christ, but themselves: Who have ever, by fraud
and craft, and cunning, aimed at superiority and power over those whom they had
a mind to oppress, and who never attempted to establish truth as it lies in
Christ: Who have endeavored to gain a majority by art and power, without
regard to the bible, or what is there enjoined: Who have always contended for
some addition or other to the gospel, but never to leave the word of God to its
own native simplicity: Who, lastly, have wrested and perverted the scripture,
but never have taught it pure and uncorrupted? See The Reasonableness of
mending and executing the laws against Papists, p. 21.


But to proceed to other matters: Speaking of the hierarchy, the gentleman
says, that in my favorite comparison of the churches of England and Rome, I
quite mistake the matter; because, not one, but two prelates preside over the
church of England; and this, he says, greviously spoils the similitude. p. 5
I should have thought that an episcopalian would rather have supposed the
disparity to consist in the pretended powers of his Holiness, and those of an
English Archbishop: Does the difference lie principally in this, that Rome has
but one such great prelate, and England two? I think not. And the gentleman
would doubtless have spared this critical remark, had he recollected that I
made use of Mr. Apthorp's expression, who spoke of the Archbishop of Canterbury
only as presiding: -- the excellent prelate, who now so worthily presides over
the church of England, and the Society itself Consid. On the Charter, etc.
It is enough for me to be answerable for my own mistakes and inaccuracies. As
my Answerer has undertaken that gentleman's defense in some other respects, it
is at least as incumbent upon himself, as it is upon me, either to justify, or
to apologize for that expression. The gentleman adds, that I knew the
Archbishops preside in subordination to the king;' though he is pleased to say,
that I disingenuously hint a doubt of it. Ans. p. 5.
I indeed well knew, that the King is the legal Head of the church of England,
that all her bishops and clergy take the oath of supremacy, and that they
solemnly disclaim all spiritual power and jurisdiction, but as under, and
derived from him. Of these things I intimated no doubt; but only whether the
said bishops and clergy were always consistent with themselves, in reference
thereto; or whether they have not often claimed such an independency on the
crown and state, as to show them very insincere in their oaths and
subscriptions. And let those who are acquainted with the writings of many
high-flyers, and their jure-divinopretensions, judge whether there was any
disingenuity or not, in hinting a doubt in this respect. Besides, the gentleman
is mistaken if he supposes, I meant to draw an exact parallel between the
churches of England and Rome. And if any person of a tolerable capacity, could
be supposed so ignorant and presumptuous as to undertake this, he would not,
surely, compare an English archbishop to his Holiness: An Archbishop in the
church of England, is not equal even to a Cardinal in that of Rome. Another
person might, with much more plausibility, be compared to the Pope, however
absurd the comparison would appear upon due examination. For is it not
declared, (37. Hen. VIII) That archbishops, bishops, archdeacons, and other
ecclesiastical persons, have no manner of jurisdiction ecclesiastical, but by
and under the King's majesty, the only undoubted supreme Head of the church of
England, to whom, by holy scripture, power and authority is given to hear and
determine all manner of causes ecclesiastical; and to correct all vice and sin
whatsoever; and to all such persons as the King's majesty shall appoint
thereunto --? And is it not also declared (1. Ed VI. chapter 2.) That all authority
of jurisdiction spiritual, is drawn and deducted from the King's majesty, as
supreme Head -- and so justly acknowledged by the clergy of these realms? And
have not the Romancatholics maliciously reproached the English nation with
setting up, in effect, another Pope, in opposition to him, whose supremacy they
renounced? But I am far enough from making any such odious comparison myself;
being very sensible how unjust it would be in many respects, whatever malice
may suggest. -- To the gentleman's surmise, that I would deny it to be in
subordination to the King, that I preside over the West-Church in Boston, P. 5.
I shall at present only say with the Apostle, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers; and that I endeavor to conform to the true spirit of that
christian precept, Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God
the things which are God's.

The gentleman goes on to speak of our right reverend Lords the bishops.
Amongst other things he says, those with whom they live, find not that they are
so high as, by their elevation, to do harm, or cause fear: and that they wear
no mitres. He adds If they are styled Lords, it is because, by the ancient
constitution of our country, they sit in the upper house of parliament; where,
I believe, they are thought as useful members as the rest. And I know not
whether the Doctor's modesty would propose, that our constitution should be
altered in this respect, or whether a much wiser man could foresee the
consequences of such an alteration. P. 5. 6.
As to their being as useful members as the rest, I am very far from being a
competent judge. It is however, pretty evident from our history, that in
arbitrary reigns, and foolish and wicked administrations, the bishops have
commonly been the most useful members, or instruments, that the crown or court
had, in establishing a tyranny over the bodies and souls of men. But yet when
Kings have crossed their ambitious and avaritious designs, they have been as
forward as any men, if not more so, to give them disquietude. In the words of a
spirited writer, well versed in matters of this sort, 'Loyalty is not confined
to the mitre. Bishops have given more disturbance, and occasioned more
distresses to princes and people, than any other set of men upon earth. This I
can prove. Our own bishops, for near an hundred years before the revolution,
were in every scheme for promoting tyranny and bondage.' I can assure the
gentleman, however, that my modesty is much too great to propose such an
alteration in the constitution, as he speaks, of; though I know it has often been
wished by much wiser men; and, that such arguments have been used, as might
perhaps puzzle one near as wise as himself to answer The old cry, No bishop, no
king has indeed been of mighty efficacy in times past. 'This solid argument,
says one, was used with royal success, by King James the first, when he sat
deputy for the clergy, and disputed with the puritans, at the conference of
Hampton Court. It was indeed the best he could use; however he strengthened and
embellished it with several imperial oaths, which he swore on that occasion, to
the utter confusion of his antagonists, and the great triumph of the genuine
clergy, and the Archbishop; who bestowed the Holy Ghost upon his Majesty, for
his zeal and swearing on the church's side.' Few, I believe, can see the
absolute necessity of bishops having a seat in parliament, except bishops
themselves, and such as hope to be so. I am far from pretending to such
sagacity, as to be able to foresee all the consequences of that alteratian in
the English constitution, which this gentleman speaks of. I fully agree with
him, that a much wiser man, could not; but even one who is so simple, might
pretty easily foresee and predict some of these pernicious consequences: I mean
particularly, that certain grave and venerable personages would think
themselves much injured, and, in resentment, endeavor to throw the nation into
a flame; that they would probably be for introducing a popish pretender, or for
any other measures, however destructive to liberty and the protestant religion,
in order to regain their former dignity: Which they might also claim
jure-divine, with as much propriety as they do some other things. But if not,
yet after there has been such a solemn, sacred ALLIANCE between the church and
the state, as has been most profoundly argued; this alteration in the
constitution would probably be considered as a notorious violation of treaty;
such a breach of it, as would give the church a right to resume her supposed
natural independence and supremacy, and refuse any longer to confer on the
state the application of the efficacy of religion, and put it under the
magistrate's direction. And who can tell which would be the greatest looser,
the church or the state, by a total dissolution of this ancient and famous
Alliance? from which each of them in its turn has received so many important
advantages; and by means of which, both have been the better enabled to crush
the proud, dangerous spirit of liberty and faction, heresy and schism. -- See a
particular account of this Alliance between the church and the state, and the
reciprocal advantages which the high contracting Parties receive from it, in a
Treatise upon the subject, by a profoundly learned critic, divine and
politician, now a bishop also, Dr. Warburton.


I agree with the gentleman in almost every thing which he says in several
pages afterward, relating to the bigotry and persecutions of former times; and
therefore pass the whole over without any particular remarks, notwithstanding
some harsh censures of myself, which I find in this part of his performance. He
comes to the main business, or to speak about the conduct of the venerable
Society, page 9th. And it is perhaps more than time, that I should come to it
myself.

The gentleman is under some mistake in saying I own that in three districts of
New England, i. e. NewHampshire, Rhode Island and Providence, much less care
has been taken for the support of a public worship, than in the rest; and that
a few missions from the Society might be needed in these. P. 9.
-- Now Rhode Island and Providence together, make but one district; I mean but
one colony or government, and that, a very small one; there being in all but
four in New England. In that, it was indeed acknowledged, some missions might
be needed. As to New Hampshire, another small government; though I spoke of it in
the former part of the Observations, as a government in which less care had
been taken for the support of God's worship, than in the Massachusetts and
Connecticut; yet I formally corrected my own mistake herein, page 135. Where it
is said, that in NewHampshire there is a legal provision made for the support
of a public religion, similar to that in those two other New England
governments. So that in the four N. England colonies, where the Society have so
many missions, only one very small one was actually destitute of a legal
support for protestant ministers. And it seemed proper to set this matter in a
true light, lest it should be supposed, from the gentleman's representation,
that the greater part of the New England missions were in places, where I had
myself acknowledged in effect, they were proper and needful: whereas there are
near ten times so many in those three governments, in which I supposed them
needless, as in the small colony of Rhode Island, in which it was owned, there
might be occasion for them N. B. There is one mission also on the eastern
frontier of the Massachusetts, about 300 miles from the capital, Boston, which
is not objected against by me.
.

The gentleman is displeased with me for attributing to the Society a design to
root out presbyterianism, etc. from the colonies, and to introduce episcopacy
on the ruins thereof; and for intimating, that it is partly at least with this
view, that they have been fending missionaries to New England [Vid. Ans p. 10,
11, etc.] Now I conceive, that I produced clear and sufficient evidence of such
a design. One thing alleged by me to this purpose, was a standing Instruction
of the Society to their missionaries, viz. That they frequently visit their
respective parishioners; those of our own communion, to keep them steady in the
profession and practice of religion, as taught in the church of England; those
that oppose, or dissent from us, to convince and reclaim them. -- Upon which I
made the following remarks: This clearly shows what they are after. It will
also be observed here, that WE are considered as parishioners of the
missionaries, no less than professed episcopalians: And we are often spoken of
as such by them, in their letters to the Society, as appears by the abstracts.
How assuming is this! -- On which occasion the gentleman exclaims, How unfair
is this! The Instruction plainly relates, not to missionaries settled in
presbyterian or congregational parishes, -- but for (doubtless he means to)
incumbents of episcopal parishes, tho with a mixture of dissenters Page 11.
But, with submission, I had a right to understand this as a general
Instruction to all the missionaries, settled where there were any
nonconformists to the church of England: As for other reasons, so particularly
for this, that I found the New England missionaries understood it so
themselves, and spoke of non-conformists here, as their parishioners. But the
gentleman intimates a doubt, whether they have done so. He says, I quote no
instances of this, and that he remembers none; allowing that, if they have done
so, they have expressed themselves improperly, etc. p. 12.
Though I before made no formal citations, to show how assuming the
missionaries were in this respect, he may perceive by the following, that this
was not said without grounds. In the abstract printed 1739. p. 46. are these
words: The reverend Mr. Usher, minister at New Bristol writes, Sept. 22. 1738.
That in obedience to the orders of the venerable Society, he sends a true and
faithful account of the spirtual estate of his parish; there are in it a
hundred and fifty families, reckoning about four to a family, and fifty of
these families are of his congregation -- The other hundred families consist of
dissenters of various names. [N. B. New-Bristol was then reckoned to belong to
the Massachusetts, but since to Rhode Island government; both of them being in
New England.] In the same abstract and page, it is said, The reverend Mr.
Johnson, minister of Stratford in Connecticut [N. E.] writes, Oct. 20. 1737.
That since his last, he has -- one good family added to his church. That there
are above three hundred families in his parish, of which sixty-one are of his
congregation, the rest being generally independents or congregationalists, etc.
It is needless to quote other abstracts for my vindication in this respect,
though it were easy. The missionaries certainly knew, that there were no legal
episcopal parishes in New England; and yet they write in this manner about
their dissenting parishioners. Let me also remark, that the Society, by quoting
with apparent approbation, such extracts from the letters of their New England
missionaries, seem themselves to consider us as their parishioners, and
therefore among those persons, whom they are instructed frequently to visit, in
order to convince and reclaim them. The impartial are now left to judge,
whether this gentleman had good reason to accuse me of unfairness, either for
saying that the missionaries were assuming in this respect; or for arguing from
the aforesaid Instruction, compared with such letters, and the use made of
them, that the Society as well as they, had it partly in their design, to
proselyte the New England congregationalists, etc. to the church of England. To
charge me with a mistake, is one thing; to charge me with unfairness, is
another; which I take unkindly; and, I conceive, he had no good reason for
either, in the present case.

To prove that the Society had the design aforesaid, I also produced a passage
from the historical Account of the Society, 1706, which I considered as little
or nothing short of a formal declaration from themselves, that what they had in
view, in sending missionaries into these American colonies, was not merely
providing for the people of their own communion, (as this gentleman would
persuade us) but also making proselytes to the church of England. The gentleman
says, he has not been able to procure this Account, or to learn by whom, or
whose order it was compiled. p. 12.
This is somewhat strange, from a person who sometimes speaks as a member of
the Society, and one who has had recourse to its books and records on this
occasion. The said Account itself is so very advantageous to the Society, as to
leave but little room for doubt in this respect. It appears to have been
compiled and published by order, and in the name of the Society; particularly
from the last page -- Thus have WE given a true and faithful Account of the
Society -- And WE publish it to the world, not for ostentation of what has been
done, -- but to show what a mighty trust is committed to US; how sincerely WE
have endeavored to discharge it; how willing WE are to labor in the
prosecution of it; and how much WE want a farther assistance and supply from
all good and pious christians, who may depend on a just disposal of their
charity, in promoting the best design in the world, that of the conversion of
souls, by the propagation of the gospel, etc. Besides, the Society formally
adopted this Accout six years after its publication. For in the abstract 1712.
p. 44. they say: The Society apprehending that nothing would more effectually
tend to justify their good endeavors, and to promote the success of them, than
to inform the world of their foundation, establishment and continual progress;
did agree, That the book called An Account of the Society for propagating the
Gospel, etc. 1706, 4to, should be reprinted, with a continuation down to the
present time.

But the gentleman thinks that the passage to which I referred, in this
Account, is not to my purpose. He assigns two reasons for this, of the force of
which the reader will judge, after I have cited the passage more at large, as
follows: -- It was the unhappiness of New England and the adjoining parts, to
be first planted and inhabited by persons who were generally disaffected to the
church by law established in England, and had many of them taken refuge or
retirement in those parts, on account of their suffering for nonconformity
here at home. So that they fell there generally into independent congregations:
And there was no face of the church of England till about the year 1679, when
upon questioning the charter of that country, the lord bishop of London, upon
an address from several of the inhabitants of Boston, did prevail with his
Majesty, that a church should be allowed in that town, for the exercise of
religion according to the church of England, toward the maintenance of which,
his late Majesty King William was pleased to settle an annual bounty of one
hundred pounds a year, which is still continued, and two ministers are now
supported in it. Several other ways of division and separation did so much
obtain in other of our colonies and plantations, that this made it more
necessary to think of providing for a regular and orthodox ministry to be sent
and settled amongst them; to remove those prejudices, under which the people
generally labored, and to promote, as much as possible, an agreement in faith
and worship, in order to the recommending our holy religion to unbelievers.
Account, p. 10, 11.
The gentleman's first objection against the argument which I drew from this
passage, relative to the design of the Society, in sending missionaries to
New England, is, That it expressly speaks, not of independent or any
congregations in New England, but of other ways of division and separation in
other colonies, and therefore is nothing to my purpose. Ans. p. 12.
Now if that part of the passage, which I before quoted in form, does not speak
expressly of New England, or of independent, or any other congregations here;
yet surely the gentleman will not deny, but that as it is here more largely
cited, it speaks expressly of these also: Let the reader review the former part
of it, if he doubts. The gentleman's other objection is thus expressed:
Besides, that as much agreement as possible, in faith and worship, might be far
less than a general conformity to the church of England; which it might be
impossible to obtain etc. Ibid.
How very acute and subtle a way of reasoning is this? Because it might in fact
be found impossible, or impracticable, to reduce the people in these colonies
to a general conformity to the church of England; therefore the Society had
never any design to do this; but to do just so much as, and no more than, was
possible! Nothing but making the trial, and seeing the event, could show them
whether it was, or was not possible, to effect a general uniformity of religion
in these colonies. Surely this might be in their view and design, while it
remained, as it still remains, doubtful whether it be practicable or not. And
the expression used in the passage aforesaid, to promote, as much as possible,
an agreement in faith and worship, most naturally conveys the sense which I put
upon it: Especially when the words immediately preceding, are considered; -- a
regular and orthodox ministry to be sent and settled amongst them, to remove
those prejudices, under which the people generally labored, and to promote,
etc. And does not this plainly relate, not only to other ways of division and
separation in other colonies; but also to the way of the New-Englanders, who,
as it was before observed, were generally disaffected to the church, and fell
generally into independent congregations? It cannot be reasonably doubted.

Besides, Dr. Bearcroft, the secretary of the Society, and who is supposed to
have been thoroughly initiated into all its mysteries, does in effect avow this
design which I am speaking of, in his sermon before the Society, published by
its order. He laments, that though the government in New England had indeed taken
care for God's public worship, and erecting schools for the education of
youth; yet this was not according to the true orthodox principles of the church
of England. And, after speaking of their charity in attempting to bring back
their brethren in America to good manners, etc. how does he glory in it, that
the word of God mightily grows and prevails in New England, according to the
liturgy --? Both the conduct of the Society's missionaries here, and many of
their letters published in the Abstracts, clearly show that they consider it is
one principal part of their business, in compassing sea and land, to make
proselytes from among us. And though it were allowed, that the Society had it
really much at heart, that we should be convinced and reclaimed, and all become
epispopalians; yet it would not be easy to show what methods they could have
used, more adapted to, and more clearly declarative of, such a design, than
those which they have actually taken. Neither Mr. Apthorp, nor my very candid
(N. England) Examiner, so far as I can at present recollect, pretended to
disown that the Society actually had this design; but seemed rather to justify
it, as what the Society had a right to attempt, if not by the most obvious
scope of their charter, yet by virtue of the discretionary power therein
granted. And it is well known that many episcopalian among us, have asserted
this to have been one primary, original design of the Institution; being, as I
suppose, ashamed either to deny a thing so manifest, as that the Society were
actually endeavoring to accomplish it, or that they had not good authority to
do so, by their charter.

Now, can it be supposed that my unknown Answerer's assertions, that the
Society have not been endeavoring to promote a general conformity among us to
the church of England, sufficient to counter-balance the evidence of such a
design, arising from the words of their own Account, from the Instruction
aforesaid, from Dr. Bearcroft's sermon, from the practices of the missionaries,
and their letters to the Society, by which it appears that they look on the
making proselytes, as a material part of their business, if not the greatest of
their merit? In such a case as this, the assertion of an unknown person will
not be sufficient with impartial men. Nothing short of the Society's direct,
formal disavowal of such an intention, is sufficient to over-balance the joint
evidence of it, resulting from all circumstances. And indeed, this evidence is
so strong, that I do not believe they will ever risque any part of their
reputation, by declaring that they have not had this, at least partly in their
view in sending so large a proportion of their missionaries into New England.

But the gentleman (after mentioning something which Dr. Johnson and Mr. Beach
have said upon this subject) adds, that a very respectable missionary uses the
following words, in a paper not printed, but which he has seen viz. I believe
very few instances, if any, can be produced of any missionaries beginning with
any dissenter, with a view of reclaiming him to the church. I have long known
the affairs of the Society, and know of no such instance. Ans. p 15.
The paper here cited, and said not to be printed, is doubtless the same that
was published in Boston some time ago, under the title of A letter to a friend,
containing a short vindication of the Society, etc. By one of its Members; and
annexed to a rather more virulent performance, called, by a usual catachresis,
A candid Examination: For the passage which the gentleman cites, is in page 82d
of that abusive pamphlet. Whoever the very respectable missionary was, that
wrote said Letter, it seems he had too much regard for his reputation, to
prefix his name to, or subscribe it, when published here. My remarks upon this
Letter, and particularly upon this passage, may be seen by those who think it
worth while, in my Defense of the Observations, Sect. 12. Where there is a
brief account of Mr. commissary Price's managements, in order to build up the
church of England at Hopkinton. It is really astonishing that any gentleman
will pretend to say, the missionaries do not endeavor to make proselytes from
our churches; though it would not be strange if they were, if possible, even more
solicitous than they are, to conceal the mean and scandalous methods which they
sometimes take to that end; and, I believe, not seldom. The aforesaid
commissary's behavior is a flagrant example. And since publishing that
account, I have received such farther informations as render it almost
impossible not to believe, that the Society knew something of that unhappy
man's vile conduct, even when they confirmed him as a missionary at Hopkinton;
though I can truly say, it gives me great pain to make a supposition, which
appears so highly dishonorable to that venerable body.

Let me now add, upon good authority, though not upon my own knowledge, that
other New England missionaries have received, not to say courted, to their
communion, persons under censure in our churches for their disorderly and
unchristian practices, before and without any satisfaction given: And that
being applied to, and expostulated with by the congregational ministers of
these churches, the said missionaries have answered to this effect, that they
received these persons as never having belonged to, or been subject to the
discipline of, any christian churches; they considering us as very little, if
at all better than mere heathens. And one of these zealous missionaries, as I
am credibly informed, went to preach to some people at a distance, who were
inclining to the church of England, but still commonly attended the public
worship and ordinances in our way: But there being no episcopal church then in
the town where they lived, the congregational minister and people very readily
obliged them, on this occasion, with the use of the meeting house, in which
said missionary accordingly preached. And on his taking leave of them, to make
a suitable return for the civility shown him, and to discover what spirit he
was of, he advised the people aforesaid, by no means any more to attend the
public worship with dissenters, as they had hitherto done; but rather to tarry
at home upon the Lord's day, when there was no episcopal minister to preach to
them. If I am called upon, I intend to mention names; and give a more
particular narrative of these transactions -- If these are real facts, can it
be pretended that the missionaries do not endeavor to make proselytes from our
churches? or can it be thought strange, if we are much disgusted at such
uncharitable and unchristian behavior toward us?

The gentleman dislikes what I said of the church newly set up at Cambridge;
particularly, that scarce ten families in that town usually attend the service
of the church. This was strictly true; and I challenge any person to mention
more such families, on penalty of his being publicly exposed. But then the
gentleman says, it was represented to the Society that 50 families in the town
and neighborhood were desirous to attend it. Page 16.
He speaks to the same purpose respecting the number of petitioners to the
Society, in other places, in opposition to what I intimated. And indeed I have
reason to think, it has been the common way, to get as many names as possible
to the petitions sent home; the names of persons living at 20 or 30 miles
distance from the proposed seat of the missions; and of some, who lived in
towns where there were already episcopal ministers; as in the dirty affair of
commissary Price at Hopkinton. So that the Society has been greatly imposed on,
being made to believe that all at the petitioners lived within such a distance,
that they could ordinarily and conveniently attend the service of the church.
As to Cambridge, the case was briefly and plainly this: There were five or six
gentlemen of figure, each of whose income, it is commonly supposed, was so
large, as to have admitted of his maintaining a domestic chaplain; there not
being as many more episcopalian families in said town. Those gentlemen used
sometimes to come to Boston to church, in their coaches or chariots; at others,
to attend the public worship in the congregational church in Cambridge, I
presume without hurting their consciences by doing so. But preferring the
church of England, for what reasons I will not guess, lest I should not hit
right, they were desirous to have a church built, and a missionary fixed there.
Subscribers were to be procured; and, very opportunely, there was a
disagreement in a neighboring town, Watertown
about the place of setting up a new Meeting House: This difference was the
means of procuring some; where or who the rest were, I know not. But I am well
informed, whatever was represented to the Society, that there are not commonly
at that church, in the winter season, more than 20 persons, sometimes not more
than 10; and in the summer, not more than 30 or 40, except upon some
extraordinary occasions. If I am misinformed in any of these points, I am
willing, and even desirous to be set right: If not, let the world judge,
whether fixing a church and missionary at Cambridge, one of the most ancient
towns of New England* and within about a quarter of a mile of the
congregational meeting house, is conformable to the true intent of the
Society's charter; or whether, supposing them to be apprised of the true state
and circumstances of things, their continuing to support a missionary there,
would not discover a design different from that, which this gentleman would
have us think the true and only one; -- a design to encourage, strengthen and
increase a party.

The gentleman thinks I had no just cause for saying, that the episcopalians
affect to reproach us under the name of independents. He says Mr. Neal, himself
an independent calls us so; that it is 'proper, and not reproachful at all. p.
17.
Whatever Mr. Neal might be, or say, our churches have all along disowned that
title. Their platform of church discipline expressly disclaims it: See the
attestation to Dr. C. Mather's Ratio disciplinae fratrum Nov-Anglorum.
And while we declare our dislike of it, we may well consider it as a term of
contempt and reproach, at least as it is often used by episcopalians. But
enough of this.

I see no reason, from any thing this gentleman has said in several pages, p.
18 -- 22.
to change my opinion about the motives which generally induce people among us,
to go over to the church of England: And I know who, and what sort of persons
they are, at least as well as he can be supposed to do. However, I never
denied, but that some of them could truly plead conscience in the case. He says
I extend the possibility of this no farther than to allow, that there may be
some things or circumstances [in our way of worship, etc.] which they cannot
entirely acquiesce in or approve of. This language I made use of, as being in
effect the same that the present Archbishop of Canterbury used in his sermon
before the Society, as quoted by Mr. Apthorp. For one thing which he summoned
his Grace to bear testimony to, was, that in the least exceptionable of our
christian assemblies, there were some things which the consciences of many
could not 'acquiesce in.' [Vid. Considerations, London Edit. p. 162.] The
gentleman says, Without maintaining they [the people of New-England] have no
gospel ministers, or sacraments, or ordinances, or churches, we may apprehend,
whether justly or not, is not to be now disputed, that episcopacy is of
apostolical institution. etc. It is true, they may apprehend so; for what are
not people capable of supposing, however groundless. He adds: We may apprehend
that after the ceasing of extraordinary spiritual gifts, forms of prayer were
also used, more or less, throughout the church of Christ, and are needful for the
observance of the scripture rule. Let all things be done decently and in order.
This also they may apprehend. But if those extraordinary gifts ceased as early
as Dr. Middleton, and many others suppose, I presume the gentleman can bring no
proof, that forms of prayer were introduced from that time, or even 'till long
afterward. As to the scripture rule which the gentleman speaks of, respecting
decency and order; if forms of prayer may be supposed to come under it, so as
to be needful for the observance thereof; why may not the sign of the cross
also? Why may not square caps, or any usages in the worship of God, which
fanciful men think conducive to order and decency? Where will people stop in
introducing their own inventions, in this lax way of expounding scripture
rules? Or what bounds will be set to their censoriousness, if they allow
themselves to censure those, who decline the use of any uninstituted modes and
forms, which they conceive to be decent and orderly? I am, indeed, myself far
from being zealous against all forms of prayer, as such: But to suppose they
are necessary, that God cannot be orderly and decently worshipped without them,
or that it is sinful to decline them, is highly unreasonable and superstitious.

I do not think myself concerned particularly to consider the several causes,
to which the gentleman ascribes the growth of the church of England among us.
He mentions one, however, which I cannot but take a cursory notice of. He says,
that when the epispopalians among us were attacked and reproached for their
religious principles, it was natural that they should endeavor to defend
themselves, and procure such books as would enable them to do it better. He
immediately adds; Some of the more candid and inquisitive among the
presbyterians and congregationalists adventured to hear their defenses, and to
read their authors; were convinced by them, and became churchmen Page 22.
. So that, according to this gentleman, the proselytes to the church of England
here, have been some of our most candid, inquisitive and bookish men; such as
have taken the most pains to understand, the merits of the controversy!
Doubtless he takes his information in this respect, from the good missionaries,
who had a right to speak as they though it. I have the same right; and accordingly
declare, from what I have observed, that I suppose very few inquisitive
persons, or studiers of this controversy among us, have become churchmen in
consequence thereof. Some such there may have been; but, I believe, these
proselytes have much more generally been young and thoughtless persons; the
volatile and unstable; such as had but a very moderate share of understanding,
or but little sobriety; and who hardly ever read a book in their lives, really
with a view to inform themselves about the true state of this controversy --
But it is not worth while to dispute about such things as do not, in their
nature, admit of a decision on either side; especially such as have little
relation to the present argument.

Wherefore,

To come directly to the main point; the gentleman acknowledges that the case
of the New England episcopalians, is not particularly described and provided
for in the [Society's] charter Page 23.
. I conclude he means, what is certainly true, that the charter does not
expressly make provision for supplying with episcopal ministers, persons in such
circumstances as they are; or people who live scattered here and there, in
towns of non conforming protestants, where due provision is made for the
administration of God's word and ordinances, after the presbyterian or
congregational mode. I cannot suppose he intended only to acknowledge, that
New England and the episcopalians here, are not mentioned by name in the
charter; or that their case is not very largely and particularly spoken of
therein. This would be saying nothing of consequence: For neither is any other
particular colony, or country, or the people therein, thus provided for in
express terms. But then the thing insisted on, as I conceive with great reason,
is, that though the charter does not distinguish the colonies by name, saying
that the episcopalians in this or that, shall be provided for, but not those in
others; yet it is so expressed, as to amount to the same thing. For it
describes the religious circumstances of those places and people, which were to
be relieved, as destitute of the administration of God's word and sacraments,
etc. Now, if the episcopalians in some of the plantations are actually in such
a state; but those in others of them, whether the New England colonies, or any
other, are not; it may be properly said, that the charter expressly makes
provision for the former, but not for the latter; not even by implication, or
any just construction. That the New England episcopalians were not in such a
destitute condition, is evident: Nor can this gentleman consistently say they
were. Whatever he may think about the apostolic institution of episcopacy, or
the antiquity and usefulness of liturgies; yet he does not speak of these, as
essential to the being of christian churches: He has far too much candor and
good sense, to suppose them so. And speaking of us congregationalists, he says
expressly, Without maintaining that they have no gospel ministers, or
sacraments, or ordinances, or churches, we may apprehend, etc. We have a right
to consider this as a concession from him, that though we reject episcopacy, the
liturgy, and peculiar rites and usages of the church of England, yet we have
still truly gospel ministers, sacraments, ordinances and churches. And if so,
no persons inhabiting these parts, whether episcopalians or others, can justly
be said to lack, want or to be destitute thereof; and for that reason, in
danger of falling into atheism or infidelity, or popish superstition and
idolatry. So that, by his own concession, it appears that the charter makes no
provision, whether expressly or implicitly, for supporting episcopal
missionaries in these parts, for the sake of the few episcopalians living among
us.

The gentleman, having acknowledged that the case of the New England
episcopalians is not particularly described and provided for in the charter,
endeavors to guard against any use that might be made of this concession, to
the prejudice of his argument; which is not strange. But I a little wonder at
the method he has taken, to this end: For he immediately subjoins -- But so
neither is the case of any other Indians, than such as are the King's subjects,
and people living in his plantations and colonies; for to these only the letter
of the charter extends. etc. And yet the gentleman says, I am so far from
blaming the Society for applying part of their benefactions to the instruction
of such Indians as only border on his Majesty's dominions, that I blame them
greatly for not applying more of it (he meant them) to that use. He goes on to
argue, that the case of the N. England episcopalians may much more be looked on
as comprehended within the intention of the charter, than the case of the said
bordering Indians Ibid.
But these cases are by no means so nearly parallel, as they are supposed to
be, by this way of reasoning. For though neither these episcopalians, nor the
said Indians, are in terms provided for, or even mentioned in the charter, (in
which respect they are on the same footing) yet the Indians very fairly, and
most obviously come within the intent of it; but the others do not. These
Indians are unquestionably destitute of God's word and sacraments; many of
those only bordering on our colonies, have actually professed themselves, and
been for a long time treated with, as the King's subjects; and besides, the
charter expressly authorizes the Society to use their best endeavors to
propagate the gospel in those parts, where the King has any plantations, etc.
Which clause has all along, and on all hands, been considered as having a
special reference to the Indians, not only within the limits of the British
colonies, but bordering on them. There is then, no room for doubt, but that the
Society act conformably, not only to the true design, but even to the
expression of the charter, in using means in order to their conversion: Since
though these Indians themselves are not particularly mentioned, yet their case is
expressly provided for. This is not applicable to the episcopalians among us:
Neither themselves are mentioned, nor their case provided for, either expressly,
or by just implication; they not being destitue of the administration of God's
word and ordinances. And, indeed, this gentleman, in order to vindicate the
Society in sending missionaries to them, is forced to have recourse to the plea
of a large discretionary power vested in them; so large, as to allow of their
making alterations in their institution: For this position of Mr. Apthorp he
endeavors to palliate and defend Page 24.
. He says, the rules of law require that grants of princes, and particularly
grants in favor of religion, be interpreted as liberally as may be. Ibid.
Agreed: But still it may be doubted, whether it is not to interpret this
particular grant more liberally than may [justly] be, to suppose the Society
empowered to alter their institution, and to make provision for those, for whom
the charter makes none. And having recourse to this argument, shows a
consciousness, at least that such a conduct is not easily and naturally
reconciled with the charter: For if it were, surely the defenders of the
Society would not plead for so extraordinary a power, or so very liberal a way
of interpretation. Besides, this is really prejudicial, not advantageous to
religion, in favor of which, as is hinted, the charter was granted.

The gentleman himself does not appear to be entirely satisfied with this,
which he calls an argument a fortiori. He therefore attempts, in the next
place, to justify the Society, as to these missions, by the very expressions of
the original charter. Referring to a clause of which, he says; Now must not
they who lack support for such ministers, as they can with a good conscience
attend, want the administration of God's word and sacraments, etc? Ibid.
This he applies to the New England episcopalians, in order to bring them
within the design of the charter. Several things were said upon this point,
first in the Observations, and then in the Defense of them. Let it now be
farther remarked, that if these episcopalians could properly be said to lack
the administration of God's word and sacraments, they would come, not only
within the design, but, in some sort, within the letter of the charter; since
it expressly provides for such of his Majesty's subjects in the colonies, as
lack the administration, etc. Whereas the gentleman, before, seemed at least to
allow, that the charter did not make provision for the case of these people.
But not to insist on this concession at present, I think these people cannot be
properly said to want the administration, etc. upon his own supposition, but to
decline and disapprove of it. For he does not deny, but that we have gospel
ministers, sacraments, ordinances and churches here; of which they might enjoy
the benefit, in common with their christian brethren, if they chose to do so.
How then could the episcopalians among us, though there were no episcopal
churches here, be properly said, in the general terms of the charter, to want,
or lack, the administration of God's word and sacraments? If there had been any
thing in the charter, to show that it meant the administration of God's word,
etc. according to the particular usage of the church of England, in opposition
to, or distinction from, all other protestant churches, as well as that of
Rome; it is readily acknowledged, that this reasoning would be good. But this
is not the case. What may be justly said of these episcopalians, is, that they
dislike, and therefore will not attend on, the administration of God's word and
sacraments in our way: Which is quite a different thing from saying, that they
want, or are destitute thereof. The difference is as great, as between a man's
lacking daily food, and refusing that which is before him, because it is not
cooked and dished up a la mode, or in a manner to please his fancy.

To say that the episcopalians here, cannot with a good conscience attend upon
our ministers and their administrations; and therefore that they want the
administration of God's word and sacraments, is by no means satisfactory. As to
the fact itself, that they cannot in conscience attend upon them; I do not
believe there is one in an hundred of them, who has ever declared, or that will
seriously declare, that he thinks it sinful to do so. They may generally, in
their judgment, be it right or wrong, prefer the worship and communion of the
church of England to ours; and therefore think themselves bound in conscience,
when both are in their power, usually to attend the former, as more for their
edification. This they may be supposed to do, and in that respect be
justifiable in their conformity to the church of England, though it were allowed
that they do not think it absolutely unlawful or criminal to worship in our
way, or to have communion with us in christian ordinances; and could therefore
do so with a good conscience, if there were no episcopal churches in these
parts. I know, some of the weaker, the more bigoted and censorious sort of
them, declare that they could not in conscience do this: But of the far greater
part of them, I have not so ill an opinion. Nor have I any reason to think
that, in their applications to the Society for missionaries, they have commonly
made use of this plea; or gone any farther than to declare in general, their
approbation and choice of the church of England communion, as most for their
edification: Which is a very different thing from supposing ours absolutely
unlawful and sinful.

If I am right in what I have here suggested, this argument, drawn from
conscience, is of no force, being grounded on a false supposition. But allowing
that these episcopalians are generally so simple, bigoted or superstitious,
that they cannot with a good conscience attend upon God's word and sacraments
with us, as this gentleman seems to suppose; though they may be real objects of
pity and compassion, it appears not that they have any right to expect relief
from the Society, their case not being provided for in the charter, nor coming
within the general design of the Institution: Which, plainly, was not the
assistance of protestants of any particular denomination, living scattered
among greater numbers of other protestants, where provision was made for the
support of ministers, and the administration of God's word and ordinances; but
only for persons destitute of these advantages. The Scottish Society is of the
two less limited by its charter, than this in England. And yet if the said
Society should annually expend perhaps a third part of their revenue, in
supporting, I will not now add, increasing, the presbyterian party, in those
plantations where the worship of God is duly provided for, according to the
church of England, and proportionably neglect people who were actually
destitute of God's word and sacraments in every protestant form; episcopalians
would, without doubt, universally exclaim against this, as an abuse and
misapplication of their charitable fund; and as discovering too great a
fondness for a party, or particular sect of protestants. Their pleading that
the presbyterians, provided for by them, could not with a good conscience
acquiesce in, or conform to the church of England, would, I am persuaded, be of
very little weight with episcopalians. Nor can any man show why this way of
reasoning is not as just, when applied to the episcopal Society in England, as
when applied to the presbyterian Society in Scotland. The church of England is
no more the established religion in one part of Britain, than the kirk is in
the other; King William was equally King of both parts; a charter conceived in
the identical terms with that we are speaking of, would have answered as well
for a Presbyterian, as for an episcopal Society, only the names and titles of
the Grantees being changed: though some of these were actually presbyterians.
Nor does it appear that the Grantor had it any more in his royal intention,
that episcopalians in such circumstances as are here supposed, should be
provided for, than that presbyterians should, in the like circumstances. From
whence it may be concluded, that he either designed both, or neither: Let this
gentleman make his choice --

But if there are numbers of episcopalians among us, who cannot with a good
conscience hold communion with our churches in gospel ordinances, it may be
asked, What is to be done? is there no regular way of relief for them? I
answer, the same, and no other than there would be for presbyterians or
congregationalists in the like case. If their numbers and abilities are such,
that they can support episcopal ministers for themselves, they not only have a
right, but ought to do it. Or if they can make such representations of their
case, (which, on the aforesaid supposition, is really an unhappy one) as to
induce charitable people, in their private capacity, to give them assistance,
no one will object against it. But if they can do neither of these things,
there appears no regular way of relief for them; they must patiently submit to
the providence of God, who has placed them in such circumstances; waiting,
either till more light removes their mistakes and prejudices, or till their
numbers and abilities are sufficiently increased, to support such ministers as
they choose to have. A Society incorporated for different purposes, (not for the
support of any particular protestant sect, as such) has no right to provide for
them, to the neglect of such persons as are indisputably the proper objects of
their institution.

But the gentleman, after observing that the Society was incorporated,
primarily, to prevent the King's subjects falling into atheism or infidelity,
or into popish superstition and idolatry, says: Now does not the Dr. think the
episcopalians, when they have no ministers in whose ministrations they can
acquiesce, must be grievously liable to the one or the other Page 25.
? Upon which let me observe, as to those who are episcopalians upon principle,
or those people spoken of by this gentleman, who cannot with a good conscience
worship God with us; that they must be supposed, at least by episcopalians, to
be conversant in the holy scriptures, serious believers of them, devout
worshippers of God in their houses, and real, practical christians. Now such
persons as these, persons of so tender a conscience, cannot surely be thought
in any imminent danger of apostatizing into atheism or infidelity; especially
as they have the common-prayerbook to assist them in their daily private
devotions, and other pious books, not to say the Bible, to read and meditate
on. Can such christians as the gentleman supposes our episcopalians to be, and
living in a christian land, where the public worship of God is upheld, be
grievously liable to turn atheists or infidels, even though they cannot acquiesce
in our way of worship? I think not; and therefore, that the N. England missions
cannot be vindicated upon this footing. I hope this gentleman will not, for the
sake of his argument, deny the episcopalians here to be such good christians as
he has all along supposed them; or say that they have so little knowledge or
sobriety, that they are already on the brink of infidelity and atheism; so
that, being without such ministers as they can attend, they would be grievously
liable soon to plunge into that horrible gulf. This would be, for the sake of
his logic, grievously to reproach those, whose cause he is pleading. Besides,
if they are supposed to be such a profligate sort of people, and so void of
conscience, the argument which he draws from their supposed conscientious
noncompliance with our way of worship, would be at once overthrown: It would
destroy itself, by its own inconsistency; and, indeed, taken any way, his
reasoning is self-repugnant.

But some of these good, conscientious people, it is said, are grievously
liable, if not to atheism and infidelity, yet to popish superstition and
idolatry. 'Particularly,' adds the gentleman, must not those of them be in
great danger of popery who, as he [ meaning myself] tells us, prefer that to
the worship of the prevailing party in N. England Ibid.
? Let me observe, that I did not suppose there was a great number of
episcopalians here, so deeply prejudiced against us, or who think so favorably
of the mass. Supposing there may be 20 or 30 such persons in N. England,
scattered over a country of 3 or 400 miles in extent, can this be thought a
substantial reason for supporting 26 or 30 missions here, at a great expense?
especially when it is considered, that there are here no popish priests or
emissaries known of, further to pervert, and to confirm them papists; but many
people to dissuade them from those errors, and all worldly motives on the other
side. There is no reason to think that the Society ever had the case of these
N. England high-flyers in their mind, or consequently, that they have sent the
more missionaries hither on their account. And if not, this cannot be properly
used as an argument to justify their sending them. I can hardly think the
gentleman is in earnest, or thinks it a solid one. He seems to have laid hold
on what I said of some few of the more bigoted episcopalians among us,
(whether he believed it or not, I cannot tell) as a plausible pretext for
supporting missions here. But the Society have apparently acted upon different
principles, with other views and motives; not to keep the people of N. England
from turning roman catholic, deists and atheists; (of all which there now is
and ever was, much less danger than of the people of London doing so.) but to
support and strengthen the episcopal party, and gradually to bring us into the
bosom of the church; or, in the language of their own Account, to remove those
prejudices, under which the people generally labored and to promote, as much
as possible, an agreement in faith and worship --

Let me add, that this plea of conscience, as it has of late years been used by
the defenders of the Society's numerous missions in these parts, is the less
satisfactory upon this account: There would, in all probability, have been
hardly any of these scrupulous people among us at this day, had it not been for
the Society; and if the missions were withdrawn, it is likely the far greater
part of them might soon return to the communion of our churches. Is it
reasonable that the Society, when there was but a handful of these people, as
one may say, in all N. England, should cherish their discontent, and, by their
conduct at least, encourage them in their prejudices against us, and afford
them assistance, till their numbers became much more considerable: And then
avail themselves of those prejudices, to justify their numerous missions here,
under a notion that there are many people among us, who cannot with a good
conscience worship God with us, and who are, for that reason, grievously
liable, without episcopal missionaries, to become atheists, infidels, or
roman catholics? It may possibly deserve to be considered, (I say it with much
respect and deference to that venerable body) whether it would not have well
become the Society, when applications were first made to them for missionaries
by people here, to hint to them, that their opposition to our way of worship
might be too great; that they had better be content with it, till they should
be sufficiently numerous and able to support ministers themselves, more
agreeable to their principles and inclinations; that many other people stood in
much greater need of the Society's charitable care and assistance, being either
still in a state of heathenism, or wholly destitute of the administration of
God's word and ordinances in any protestant way; and that therefore it ought
not to be taken unkindly, if their requests were not complied with. Had some
such method been taken at first, instead of countenancing a party spirit, the
Society would have had much more money to expend in supporting the worship of
God in places destitute of it, and christianizing the Indians and Negroes; and
there would probably have been but few persons among us at this day, but what
could with a good conscience hold communion with us; in which they would be as
effectually guarded against atheism, infidelity and popery, as in that of the
church of England. But the Society have really contributed much toward
strengthening prejudices against us, and increasing this party; till their
prejudices are grown to such an height, and their numbers are so considerable,
that a necessity is now pleaded for continuing to give them large assistance,
to prevent their becoming roman-catholics, infidels or atheists; because, it is
said, their consciences will not allow them to attend the administration of
God's word and sacraments in our churches. In which way of proceeding and
reasoning, the more missions are established here, the greater will probably be
the demand for them; since it is likely there will be some increase of proselytes
to the church, (to say nothing of its increase by natural, ordinary generation)
and therefore more such tender consciences to be considered: Till, in process
of time, the Society's whole fund may be too little to supply N. England only
with missionaries; unless perhaps, by the episcopal party's becoming a majority
in these colonies, the church of England should also become the established
religion, and a common tax be imposed by law for the support of her clergy, so
as to render any farther assistance from the Society unnecessary. In which
case, the unprovided colonies and the heathens may reap the whole advantage of
its benefactions; of which they have hitherto been in so great a measure
deprived, for the sake of the episcopalians among us, at first but few, and
those not, in any just or proper sense, destitute of the administration of
God's word and sacraments.

The gentleman sometimes argues that the Society has formed no such design as I
have supposed, from this circumstance, that they did not send missionaries
earlier into N. England, when there were but few church people here, and
consequently more need of missionaries than afterward, if making proselytes
had been the point in view Vid. Page 29.
This is more plausible than solid. They may be supposed to have had the said
design before they sent missionaries to prosecute it; waiting only for a
favorable occasion and opening. It would have been a romantic, Don-Quixote
enterprise, for them to send missionaries hither for that purpose, before there
were a number of people ready to receive and embrace them. They must have some
footing, some ground to stand on, in order, by their engines aforesaid, to
shake this part of the earth; and they were not, I conclude, such strangers to
the art and principles of Archimides, as to attempt it without. Nor does it
appear, but that the Society embraced the first opportunity that offered, to
establish missions here. It is, I think, sufficiently plain, that they had the
design aforesaid, as early as their Account was printed, 1706. But even though it
could be proved, that they had it not for several years after the first
missions, it will not follow that they have not formed it since; being
encouraged by the increase of the episcopalian party here. And such a design
might very plausibly be carried on, under the notion of only providing for
those episcopalians, who could not with a good conscience attend on the
administration of God's word and sacraments in our way. But enough of this.

From page 25 to 29 the gentleman speaks of orthodoxy, heterodoxy and heresy,
in opposition to what I said concerning the terms orthodox ministers, in the
charter; which I supposed, stand there in opposition to Romish priests and
jesuits only; but he, it seems, thinks orthodox ministers can mean only those
of the church of England, in opposition to those of all other denominations,
even among protestants. It is only from this sense of the terms, that he can
deduce any consequences to the advantage of his cause. But he had offered
nothing in confirmation of it, which appears to me of any weight: I am
therefore content to submit this matter to the judgment of our impartial
readers, without adding any thing farther upon it. But I cannot but take a
brief notice of one or two personal reflections on myself, in this part of his
performance. He has, without grounds, and very ungenerously, represented it as
my opinion, that whoever dissents from me in any point relative to christian
faith, is an HERETIC Page 28.
. And what a candid use he would make of this remark, appears from his words
immediately following: His N. England brethren, if indeed they will acknowledge
him for a brother, are DESIRED to consider the consequences of this way of
thinking. WE have not so learned Christ. Now, I am very far from thinking all
those heretics or heterodox, who dissent from me in any point relative to
christian faith. I have never given the least occasion for such an aspersion.
There is, I believe, no professed christian, of any denomination, less disposed
to entertain hard thoughts of other people, merely on account of differences in
opinion relative to points of faith, or who has been more remote from censuring
and reproaching those who think differently, as heterodox or heretical; neither
of which opprobious epithets is, in my opinion, properly applied to any, but
those who pertinaciously deny some one or more of the most plain, indisputable
and important doctrines of the gospel. It is thus, that I have learned Christ,
and the spirit of his religion. And whereas the gentleman intimates, that they
of the church of England are not accustomed to censure as heretical, or rashly
to judge and condemn others; let the Athanasian creed, and the cannons of said
church (according to many of which, people are to be ipso facto excommunicated
for mere trifles) witness, how very unlucky he was in setting up those of that
communion, for patterns of christian forbearance, or a catholic disposition;
unless to catholic we prefix another epithet, very often joined therewith. In
this, and several other places, the gentleman insinuates plainly enough, that I
am an heretic myself, and so accounted by my brethren, if indeed they will at
all acknowledge me for a brother. This piece of scandal was taken up, as I
suppose, upon the credit of some of the profligate writers who have lately
appeared against me in N. England: It is no honor to this gentleman to repeat
it after them; nor would it be at all to his advantage if one were, from such
passages only as this, without considering the general tenor of his writing, to
conjecture how he himself has learned Christ. And these reproachful innuendoes
I take to be the less ingenuous, and more injurious, as coming from him,
because, if I have received unfraternal treatment from a few of my brethren, as
indeed I have, this was chiefly because I was supposed, whether truly or not,
to approach too near, in some of my religious opinions, to those of certain of
the most eminent bishops and other divines of the church of England, who were
despitefully treated as heretics by many of their brethren; and whose names
will be remembered with veneration, when those of their [supposed] more
orthodox revilers will either be forgotten through contempt, or remembered with
execration, like those of the Lauds and Sacheverells of former times. These
personal reflections of the gentleman, seem to me quite unworthy of his pen;
especially since I think them unworthy of a more particular reply from so mean
a one as mine -- The gentleman blames me, in the page last refered to, for
intimating that our congregational ministers generally adhere more closely to
the doctrinal articles of the church of England, than even her own clergy do.
'We can only deny the charge', says he. and put him on the proof, as we do. To
which I shall only say at present, that I appeal for the truth of it, to the
sermons, etc. published by them respectively; not thinking it worth while, by
making large extracts from each, to swell this publication, in which I am at
brevity.

In page 20 and 30 the gentleman speaks of Dr. Bray's testimony respecting N.
England, and of some supposed misrepresentations of the missionaries here;
endeavoring to invalidate what I said upon these points. I am willing to leave
our readers to judge, without adding any thing farther upon them. In answer to
what I intimated about the Society's continuing to support missions in N.
England, in places where the episcopalians were able to maintain their own
ministers, the gentleman says: Now the Society has always been desirous to
know, when any congregation became able to support itself without their help --
If their friends have been too slow in giving them intelligence, which may have
happened, and the Doctor will favor them with any, which on inquiry shall
appear to be well grounded, they will both be thankful to him, and show the
world that they are far from wishing to increase the church party by profuse
liberalities. Page 30. 31.
This is very heartily said, and I take the gentleman at his word, though without
flattering myself, that I can ever merit the thanks of that venerable body,
however ambitious I may be of it. -- The people of the church of England in
Newport on Rhode Island, where the Society have long had a missionary, are
numerous, and very wealthy. There are but few churches or congregations of any
denomination in America, so able to maintain a minister as this. I give this
account upon good authority; and particularly upon the credit of a gentleman of
principal distinction, belonging to that congregation, who, since the
publication of my Observations and former Defense of them, gave me this account
in conversation. He also frankly owned, that he looked on the Society's
continuing to support a minister for them, [at Newport] as an evident
misapplication of their charity; and not the only one of the kind, in
New England. Without speaking at present of any of the episcopal congregations
in Connecticut, let me just observe, that the good people of Christ's Church in
Boston, though not so rich or numerous as those of the church at Newport, are
yet, without doubt, more able to support a minister, than diverse of our
congregational churches in this metropolis. And if supporting a missionary for
them, be at all an abuse, considering their own ability, and the exigence of
other places, the abuse is still the greater, because there are two other
churches of England in the same town: Which churches are neither so remote, nor
so thronged, but that the people of Christ's church might be accommodated in
them; if not with such high pews or seats as they might possibly choose, yet
such as, I should think, humble and good christians, would rather take up with,
than either violate their consciences by going to dissenting meetings, or
receive the Society's charity, of which so many other people stand in far
greater need. If the venerable Society should condescend to pay any regard to
these representations, either some other person or myself, may probably be
encouraged to mention other instances of abuse, of a similar nature. But this I
can hardly hope, when I consider what treatment the representations of other
non-conformists have met with in times past: This gives me less ground to
expect thanks, than either silent neglect, or blame and reproof.

What follows, in several pages, relates to the piety and good morals of those
in general, who, from among us, become proselytes to the church; to the
reformation, or better state of religion here, compared with what it formerly
was; and to the extermination of a spirit of persecution in the New-Englanders;
all attributed by Mr. Apthorp, and by this gentleman after him, to the increase
of the church of England here. The whole of which, to one who has a right
understanding of things and facts here, must appear such a jest, that he can
hardly speak seriously about it. And yet I will not now venture to speak
merrily or ludicrously of it, lest I should again displease this good
gentleman, who is already disgusted with me in that respect; thinking it a
proof that I have not a duly serious heart. For it is upon this occasion, that
he says: What the Doctor's countenance is, I know not [none of the most
jocular, I can assure him] but I wish he gave as good proofs of a serious
heart, as the missionaries generally do. p. 33.
And can it be wondered at, if those reverend gentlemen, who received the Holy
Ghost at their ordination, by means of the the hands or breath of a bishop,
should have more serious hearts than a person, who has had only what
thorough-pac'd churchmen account lay-ordination, in one of those unconsecrated
places, in which some zealous episcopal divines have supposed, the Holy Spirit
never was. This was said by a great and zealous churchman, of the dissenting
Meeting Houses.
And yet I cannot think with this gentleman, that speaking jocosely about some
sacerdotal superstitions, rites and forms, is a proof that a man has not a
serious heart. But some men conclude all those profane and impious, who have
not the same reverence for such things, that they have themselves, or that they
would have the common people entertain, for the honor of an establishment and
the hierarchy.

In speaking about a toleration, and the growing esteem of it, the gentleman*
says, he hopes the generality of the missionaries carried that esteem with them
into N. England. P. 35.
If so, I wish they had generally by their meekness and charity toward
non-conformists, given better proofs of it than they have. He adds: Their need
of toleration must recommend it still more to their good opinion, etc. Neither
the clergy nor laity of the church of England here, will, I believe, thank him
for arguing their esteem of toleration, from this circumstance; it being a
plain concession, that the said church is not the established religion of
New England. For certainly those of the established religion in any country,
cannot properly be said to need toleration therein. And many, if not most of
our episcopalians, triumph exceedingly in a presumption, that their church,
exclusive of all others, is established here; and consequently that, not they,
but we, need toleration. The virulent Examiner of my Observations harped long
upon this string, and was very confident: And it is, I suppose, in a great
measure on the same presumption, that the espiscopalians here, especially the
clergy, have been so haughty, disdainful and over-bearing in their carriage
toward us; giving themselves airs of superiority, as if we did not by any
means stand on equal ground with them. 'Tho' I do not intend this as a general
charge, there being persons among them of a very different temper and
behavior; and who are accordingly to be much respected.

The gentleman comes, p. 37, to speak of the supposed neglect of the heathen;
which he thinks a groundless imputation. And here he taxes me with misapplying
bishop Williams's words, in his sermon before the Society. Unhappily for the
Doctor, says, he, bishop Williams does not speak of the Society, in the words
which he quotes, but of the English nation. -- But the bishop's words sounded
so plausibly for a charge upon the Society, that he could not forbear
misapplying them. P. 37.
Now, if the gentleman will be pleased to review the passage in the
Observations (p. 98) he may find himself under a mistake. I did not say, that
the Society had in some sort allowed the complaint against themselves to be
just, as he supposes; nor quote bishop Williams to prove this, but that the
natives had actually been neglected. However, I acknowledge I did, both just
before and after, speak of the Society's neglecting them; so that I can easily
account for the gentleman's thinking, I cited bishop Williams to prove this;
and therefore do not accuse him of wilfully injuring me in this respect. After
citing bishop Williams, I added; It is unnecessary to confirm and justify this
complaint, by an appeal to any of the later sermons before the Society; which
would be no difficult matter. Upon which words the gentleman has put a wrong
construction, by saying that I affirm, it would not be difficult to justify
this complaint by an appeal to any of the later sermons; as if my sense was,
that all, the later sermons might be cited in justification of it. This is the
import of the word any, as used by him; whereas it means only some, as used by
me in the clause aforesaid; as any one who understands the English idiom, may
easily perceive. So that the gentleman has here fallen into a double error in
representing my sense; which, however, I do not impute to any ill design. But
he has perverted my words and meaning in the same page, in a way that I cannot
so easily apologize for: I mean, by saying, that in one place I express a doubt
whether the Society have so much as begun to use methods of converting either
the Negroes or the Indians. Now in the place alluded to in the Observations (p.
135) what I expressed a doubt concerning, was not, whether the Society had
begun to use any methods to this end, as his words plainly imply; but whether
they had begun to study, and to use diligently the most probable methods of
converting, etc. In which sentence the chief emphasis is put upon the words use
diligently; which were accordingly before printed in italics; but which he has
entirely omitted in his representation of my sense: Whether for any better
reason, than that he might make me appear to charge the Society with more
negligence than I did, or thought of, he himself can best tell.

The gentleman goes on, from page 37 to 49, to speak of the endeavors used by
the Society to christianize the Indians and Negroes; of the difficulties and
discouragements attending this good work; and of the supposed injustice done
the Society by me, in accusing them of any negligence in this respect. He has
said many things very judiciously and solidly upon this head. And I frankly
own, that, taking for truth what he has produced from Dr. Humphreys's History
(which I never saw) relative to what the Society have done for the Indians, I
used several expressions, much too diminutive of the pains taken by them in
this department. I am sorry I used any expressions, whether for want of better
information, or through haste in writing, which tended to lead my readers to
think the Society had taken less pains than they actually have, toward the
conversion of the Indians. Their endeavors to this end have been very
considerable, according to the aforesaid History, as cited by this gentleman.
But still I must beg leave to think that, all things considered, much less has
been done in this matter, than might have been reasonably expected; and that
much more probably would have been done, to the spiritual good of the natives,
and the great benefit of the British colonies, had not the Society been so
deeply engaged, and spent so much of their revenue, in supporting and
increasing the episcopal party, as such, in New England. What the gentleman has
offered as to Mr. (now Dr.) Barclay's mission to the Iroquois, his small
encouragement from the Society, and being refused a schoolmaster and
interpreter to assist him, appears to me unsatisfactory. I will not, however,
spend time in controverting that matter; but am willing all should form a
judgment, by comparing the extracts from Mr. Barclay's own letters in the
Observations, with what this gentleman has offered upon the point.

He proceeds, page 49, 50 and 51, to speak of what the Society has done for the
support of God's public worship in the unprovided colonies. I shall not go into
a particular consideration of what he has offered upon this head; partly, to
avoid prolixity, and partly because it is sufficient for my purpose, if those
colonies and the natives have actually had so much the less care taken of, and
the less money employed for their benefit, in proportion to what has been taken
of, and expended for, the New England Episcopalians; which is undeniable, since
this money could not be employed in both these ways at once. Let me, however,
just observe, that I can prove by a substantial living witness, that I received
one account given by me of the repeated ineffectual applications of the North
Carolinians to the Society for missionaries, from a gentleman of principal
distinction of that country; though I did not recollect, when I wrote the
Observations, that I could bring any person to attest to the truth of it, and
spoke with a degree of caution, being unwilling to trust my own memory too far;
at which this grave gentleman is pleased to make himself a little merry. If I
am publicly called on, by any person who has a right to farther information, I
will, for my own justification, mention the name both of my informer, and the
witness to whom I refer; though I flatter myself, that with those who know me,
this will be needless.

The gentleman objects, page 52. against what I said of the sum expended by the
Society in New England; and says, I show the same inclination to exaggerate in
this, as in every thing. Now he knew, because I expressly said, I did 'not
pretend to be very exact as to the quantum.' But yet he has offered nothing, to
show I was under any mistake in this respect; and I am persuaded that I rather
kept much within bounds, than exceeded them. But I own that I was much out, in
saying that 40 or 50 missions might have been comfortably maintained among the
Indians, and in heathenish places, with 35, 000 L. sterling, for more than 30
years past. I know not how to account for this error; but sure I am, that I was
deceived myself, and had no design to deceive others; as may well be supposed,
from the very nature of the error. I willingly stand corrected as to this. But
let it be observed, that this is a mistake, which does not affect the main
argument. For though but half, or much less than half so many missions could have
been supported with the sum aforesaid, as I then supposed; still a considerable
number might, and, as I humbly conceive, ought to have been, for the benefit of
the Indians, etc. The question is not, how much money has been misapplied, or
how many missions might have been supported therewith, where they were most
needed; but whether any considerable sum has been, and whether that might not
have been employed in ways plainly conformable to the charter. Unless these
things are disproved, it is of little consequence to show, that I was mistaken
as to the other points.

The gentleman proceeds to object against what was said respecting the English
dissenters being induced to assist the Society, upon a presumption that their
fund was employed, not for the support and increase of the episcopal party, as
such, but for the common cause of protestant christianity. He says, it cannot
be supposed that they were ignorant what the Society was doing in New England;
that the present Archbishop of Canterbury mentioned the case of the
Episcopalians here, very explicitly, above 20 years ago, in his sermon; and
that it was taken notice of in other of the anniversary sermons, and in the
abstracts. This, he says, is very remote from fraudulent dealing; and that the
dissenters must be presumed to have done whatever they did to assist the
Society, with their eyes open. P. 53. 54.
But from accounts which I have received from England, and from persons whose
characters I am acquainted with, I have good reason to think, not only that
many dissenters, but even many episcopalians there, have contributed their help
to the Society, without any distinct knowledge of the ways, in which the money
was employed; particularly, without suspecting that any of it was expended in
the manner that so much has been, in these parts, where the support of God's
public worship was so well provided for. And if the gentleman is right in his
supposition, that the dissenters, at least for many years past, have
contributed little or nothing; Ibid.
to me this is an evidence, that their eyes are, of late years, more opened
than they were before; and that their withholding their charity, is owing to
their both seeing and disliking the use that was made of it, in building up the
church of England here, in opposition to churches of their own denomination.
This is rendered the more probable, by what the gentleman adds a little after,
supposing him not to be mistaken in point of fact, viz. that some, if not many
of them, have taken great pains to dissuade members of the church of England
from giving on such occasions. If any of them have really done so, the most
natural account and solution that can be given of it, is, that this money was,
in great part, now found to be misapplied, in supporting and strengthening the
cause of episcopacy, to the neglect of the heathen, etc. and to the prejudice
of their brethren in New England. Surely, it cannot be supposed that the
dissenters would have had any objection against the Society's being assisted in
propagating the gospel among the Indians and Negroes, or in supporting the
public worship of God in places destitute of it. There is no reason to doubt,
but that they would have readily contributed themselves to these pious designs,
instead of dissuading episcopalians from doing so. We are well informed,
indeed, that the episcopalians, not to say the Society, lately made great
opposition to our having a charter merely for propagating the gospel among the
Indians, at our own expense; but I do not believe that the English dissenters
have shown the same spirit against the established church, or the Society; though
the gentleman says, with a degree of acrimony, that on the whole, the Society
would certainly come off very well in respect of the dissenters, if they would
neither do it good nor harm. p. 54.


He says farther, in vindication of these missions, that probably much more
money has been given to the Society by the members of the church of England,
on account of the provision which it has made for the episcopalians in the
Massachusetts and Connecticut, than they would have given if it had made none:
That therefore 'other parts have not suffered on their account;' and that,
should these benefactors be brought to think the Society an improper channel
for such their bounty, or should it be forbidden to employ in this manner any
share of what it receives, the consequence might be, that they would withdraw a
proportion of their present liberality -- and establish a separate fund, etc.
Vid. p. 54, 55, 56.
Let it be observed, that however plausible this reasoning may appear, it is
grounded on mere suppositions and conjectures. The gentleman thinks these
things probable, and that they might take place: Others may think them
improbable, and perhaps with greater reason. But even supposing them certain,
though they may be pleaded by way of apology, they cannot be pleaded as a full
justification of the Society, unless it is authorized by its charter, to employ
a part of its fund in this way; which is the main point in dispute. And this
the gentleman does in effect acknowledge, by saying; If indeed the case of the
episcopalians in the Massachusetts and Connecticut does not, by the charter of
the Society, come under its care, bounties to them are at present conveyed
through wrong hands; ibid.
That is, in plain English, then the Society apply a great part of their fund
improperly, and without authority for so doing, or misapply it. So that he
allows the consequence to be just; let others judge of the premises

In the next place, the gentleman expresses his dislike at my supposing, some
would justify these missions under a pretext, that rectifying the state of
religion among us, or, in other words, supporting and propagating the church of
England in these colonies, is one necessary means of converting the Indians. He
says, he questions whether the defenders of the Society have ever applied this
to the New England presbyterians or congregationalists; that the bishop of St.
David's, whom alone I quoted, intimates no such thing; and that I must be
understood to put this plea into their mouths, only as an opportunity of
introducing my wit, and abusing the missionaries Vid. p. 56. 57.
Now, let it be observed, that if such a plea has actually been used, this
gentleman owns it to be a weak one. But Mr. Apthorp cited the bishop of St.
David's sermon, apparently with this view; I mean in part. And though New England
is not particularly mentioned; yet, I think, the expressions quoted by Mr.
Apthorp, will fairly admit of this construction. I therefore took them in the
sense which, I supposed, that gentleman did. Speaking of the Society's care to
remedy the ill state of religion in our colonies, his Lordship says, without
this care, the conversion of the neighboring Savages can hardly be effected.
Mr. Apthorp applied this, as his argument required, to those colonies, against
the episcopal missions in which, objections had been made; and these, all know,
are principally the New England colonies. With the same view he cited bishop
Berkley's sermon, in which it is said, It should seem the likeliest step
toward converting the heathens, would be to begin with the English, etc. And
part of his citation from the present Archbishop of Canterbury's sermon before
the Society, has so much the appearance of being to his purpose in this
respect, that I cannot think it very strange, if he conceived this to be the
real scope of it though it might not be so. For, after speaking of the episcopal
missions in places where there were already christian societies established and
supported; which, as he intimates, had proved happily instrumental to bring
people over to the church, his Grace subjoins; Indeed, unity of profession
amongst ourselves -- will greatly recommend our religion to the infidels; who
else may be tempted to continue as they are, for want of knowing with whom to
join. All these are Mr. Apthorp's authorities, produced by him to justify those
episcopal missions, which are objected against; and these, as was before
observed, are the New England ones. And when the tenor of these passages is
considered, together with his more manifest design in introducing them, am not
I improperly accused of putting a ridiculous plea into the mouths of the
Society's defenders, for the pleasure of laughing at, and exposing it? But what
if the Society have expressed themselves, in their own printed Account, in such
a manner, that it may be well supposed, they judge it a good one? I think they
have actually done so, in the passage cited by me, page 18 and 19 of these
Remarks. For after speaking explicitly of the independent congregations in
New England, as well as of other ways of division and separation in other
colonies, and the need of providing for a regular and orthodox ministry among
them; they express the proposed end thereof, in these words, viz. to remove
those prejudices, under which the people generally labored, and to promote, as
much as possible, an agreement in faith and worship, in order to the
recommending our holy religion to unbelievers. Now, if this is a weak plea, as
the gentleman seems to allow, I leave him to show his own wit, either in making
the best of it, or in excusing himself for insulting me, as if I had invented,
and put it into the mouths of the Society's defenders, as an opportunity to
introduce mine, in exposing it to ridicule.

This respectable gentleman having said thus much, by way of Answer to me,
proceeds very heartily and obligingly, page 57, to answer himself; at least, to
make such concessions, and to apologize for the Society in such a way, as in a
great measure to justify the complaints against its conduct. He says; In all
that I have hitherto said, I am far from intending to affirm, that the Society
has not laid out in the Massachusetts and Connecticut too large a proportion
of the money put into their hands, considering the necessities of other
provinces. It seems then, that the controversy between him and me, is no
longer, whether there has been just cause of complaint given, with reference to
these missions; but whether there has been so much as I have supposed. Again;
speaking of the Society's having a discretionary power within the bounds of
their trust, which I never denied, (though I denied a power to make alterations
in their institution) he says: But still they ought to use their power
judiciously, and in that they may have failed P. 57.
. And the gentleman well knows, I did not impute to them any known, wilful
abuse of their power, or misapplication of moneys; but studiously guarded
against such a construction of my words: So that he has here acknowledged, in
substance, the main point which I labored to prove. He adds, just after, with
a sarcastic air; Even the Doctor's two blameless Societies might possibly
exhibit some tincture of human frailty, if they did not warily keep their
transactions unpublished, whilst those of ours lie open to the world. The
Societies to which he alludes, can never need any defense of mine; especially,
not before he accuses them of any thing, and only insinuates that there might
be grounds for it, if their transactions were made public. But since he speaks
of these, as warily kept in the dark, while those of the episcopal Society lie
open to the world; I cannot but observe, that though Abstracts of their
proceedings are annually printed with the sermons, it is no easy thing for us
non conformists to get a sight of them. It has been taken notice of by others,
as well as myself, that the episcopalians here are often very shy and reserved
as to lending them; as if they apprehended, there were some things in them,
which should not be too narrowly looked into; perhaps the missionaries letters;
I know not. But it was partly for this reason, that in the year 1759, I applied
to a Bookseller in Boston, to send for 25 of the anniversary sermons and
abstracts for me. He accordingly wrote for them to his correspondent, a very
noted Bookseller in London, whose answer is now in my hands, with his name
subscribed. In this he says, that the annual sermons are things which are not
to be bought; that had they been so, money would have purchased them; 'but as
they are' (so he expresses himself) 'it is solicitations that must do it'. He
adds, that he applied to Dr. Barecroft, the Society's secretary, for the
sermons, who told him, he had not the five first sent for; and as for the
twenty last, unless he knew the person they were for, he could not part with
them; for as the Society printed them to distribute, and not to sell, they had
ordered him to do so as to be of service to the Society. If need be, I will
hereafter mention both the London and the Boston Bookseller by name. And from
the foregoing little anecdote it may be inferred, that though some of the
Society's transactions are annually printed, yet they do not lie altogether so
open to the view of the world, that the gentleman had any reason to boast
thereof, in comparison with the wary conduct of the other Societies. And one
who deals in suspicions and innuendoes like his, might hint, that if all of
them did so, this episcopal Society might possibly exhibit some tinctures of
human frailty, even beyond what he has so heartily acknowledged. But I cannot
think insinuations of this nature, justifiable, by whomsoever used.

The gentlemen goes on to excuse the Society's sending so many more
missionaries to New England than was proper, even in his own opinion. He
intimates that the episcopalians here, have been more pressing solicitors than
those in other plantations: That when the earlier applications were made, it
could not be foreseen whether more would follow; so that the missions became
insensibly numerous; and that when many requests had been granted, it was the
harder to refuse others, for which the same plea could be made P. 58.
It is owned that these things have weight, considered as an apology for what
does not, strictly speaking, admit of a justification. It is apparently with
the former view, not the latter, that they are here introduced; and, considered
in that light, I hope no man shall be found more ready than myself, to
acknowledge their pertinence, or to allow them their due force. The gentleman
immediately adds another circumstance of moment, considered in the same view.
Some members of the Society approved this increase [of missions;] others
thought it was going too far. And in all bodies of men, whose opinion differ,
there must be mutual condescensions, and time allowed for one side to come over
into the sentiments of the other, else they cannot proceed together. This is
still apologizing, not justifying. And hence it appears that, not only many
people out of the Society, but a considerable number of its own members, have
long thought its proceedings amiss in this respect. The gentleman ought
therefore, methinks, to judge heartily of the former; especially since it
seems, by what he says, that those members of the Society, who so nearly agree
with us in the main point, have at length convinced the others, induced them to
come over into their sentiments, and thereby ratified the judgment of all, who
though it those proceedings unjustifiable. This is but a natural construction of
the gentleman's words; who adds, a little after: And now, for some time past,
the Society have excused themselves from complying with any application from
that quarter. This, being compared with what was said just before, about
difference of opinion in the Society, and the need of condescensions. and time
for one side to come over into the sentiments of the other, is saying in
effect, that the Society are now generally convinced, that those of their
members, who were against multiplying missions here, were in the right; and
that, in consequence hereof, they have excused themselves from sending
missionaries into these parts. I cannot but be very glad of these important
hints. They at once justify myself and others, who have objected against these
missions, at least in some measure; and also afford grounds to hope, that this
charitable fund will, for the future, be employed in ways more agreeable to its
original design, more beneficial to the world, and therefore more honorable to
the Society. The gentleman adds: Surely this alone is no inconsiderable
argument, that proselyting those two districts to episcopacy, has not been the
point in view. I confess, that if the Society should discontinue their missions
here, it would be a good argument that they are no longer prosecuting that
scheme; but, how it would prove that they never had any such design, is as much
beyond my poor capacity, as to reconcile this supposition with their past
conduct, or with their own Account.

There is so much good fense and candor in the gentleman's next paragraph; such
a plain concession that the Society's conduct has been unjustifiable, and such
clear intimations that an alteration of measures is intended; that,
notwithstanding some blame is laid upon me in it, I cannot forbear citing it at
large, as follows:

What is past, as the Doctor observes, cannot be recalled. But if Mistakes have
happened, they may be avoided for the future, and the Society is not above
altering its Measures. Doubtless it would have liked, and might have expected,
civiler and fairer Treatment, than he has vouchsafed to give it. But however,
fas est and ab host doceri. It cannot desert and abandon the Congregations
which it has taken under its Protection, unless they should become either too
rich to need its Assistance, or too inconsiderable to deserve it. But more Care
may be used to know, when either of these Things falls out. All Forwardness in
Missionaries to molest Persons of other Persuasions, and all Encouragement of
Parties and Factions in order to serve Ecclesiastical Schemes, may be strictly
prohibited, and on reasonable Complaint severely checked. The eyes of the
Society may be turned more attentively to the dark Corners of the Colonies, to
the Methods which promise well for the more effectual Instruction of the
Negroes, and to the openings for doing good amongst the Indians, which his
Majesty's new Acquisitions will probably disclose. A friendly Correspondence
may also be carried on between some of the Members of that Body, and some of
the Presbyterian or Congregational Ministers, whose Dispositions are mild and
ingenuous; and thus Animosities and Jealousies may be Degrees be extinguished,
of which, I am persuaded, the Society is very desirous. Page 58, 59.


One can hardly too much praise the candor, and christian temper, appearing in
the foregoing passage. I am very sorry, however, that the gentleman should
speak of me as an enemy to the Society, for endeavoring to set some of their
conduct in a true point of light. And he had the less reason for this, because
he has plainly conceded in general, that my objections were not without
foundation. I say, in general; for I cannot pretend to the honor of having him,
who appeared so opposite to me in the former part of his Answer, entirely of my
opinion before he got to the end of it. Thus far, I think, we are agreed, viz.
That considering the necessities of the Indians, Negroes, and some of the
colonies, the Society have expended too great a proportion of their revenne on
the New England missions; and consequently, that an alteration of measures in
this respect, was much to be desired. The chief remaining differences, I take
to be these, viz. He thinks one principle on which my argument proceeds, is
false; namely this, That a few episcopalians living among congregationalists,
where the administration of God's word and sacraments is duly provided for in
their way, cannot properly be said, in the general terms of the charter, to
want the administration of God's word and sacraments, merely because they have
it not after the particular mode of the church of England. He thinks they may.
Another disagreement is the necessary result of this; viz. That I suppose all
the money expended by the Society, in the assistance of episcopalians here, who
are in those circumstances, misapplied: Whereas he supposes, that part of it is
applied rightly, though not so much; and though he acknowledges that their case is
not particularly described and provided for in the charter. Page 23.


If the aforesaid principle is right, my conclusion from it cannot be wrong;
both are submitted to the judgment of the intelligent and impartial. But let it
be remembered, that though I lay great stress upon this principle; yet I never
have rested, nor do now rest the controversy, wholly upon the truth of it. In
the Observations I repeatedly put in a caveat to this purpose. And agreeably
hereto, this gentleman, though he disallows the said principle, which I think so
just a one, yet is far from affirming that the Society has not laid out, in
these parts, too large a proportion of their money; and says, that mistakes may
be avoided for the future. If the grounds of complaint are removed, as he
intimates they are likely to be, all ought to be content; though this should not
be done for the same formal reason, that some suppose it ought to be. I am
confirmed in my general opinion, that the Soceity's conduct has been justly
exceptionable, not only by what this gentleman grants, whose judgment has great
weight with me; but by the credible intelligence which I have had, concerning
the sentiments of his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, expressed at a
meeting of the Society the last summer; which, as I am informed, were exactly
agreeable to his gentleman's, in the concessionary part of his performance. And
it may be worth considering, whether these do not come so near to mine at last,
that in case of a third edition of this Tract, some more proper title may not
be found for it, than that of An Answer to me; though I cannot agree with some
who have hinted, that it might nearly as well be entitled, An Answer to Thomas
a Kempis, or to Don Quixote.

The gentleman proceeds, page 59 and onwards, to speak largely of the proposal
for American bishops; of which he is a warm favourer. This is a matter which I
did not undertake to discuss, and only touched upon, en passant. And yet the
gentleman is at once so desirous to have me for his opponent herein, and so
very obliging, that he has undertaken to propose my objections distinctly for
me; because, he says, I was a great deal too vehement to do it myself. Page 60,
61.
How can I refuse, after such a piece of courtesy, and so great an obligation
laid upon me, to say something farther upon this point? But instead of
particularly considering what he has said in answer to those objections, which,
as he intimates, he so kindly put into proper order for me, (some of which, by
the way, I did not so much as think of when I mentioned this affair of American
bishops, I will briefly state his scheme relative to bishops here, and make a
few remarks upon it. And if I should be too vehement, or have my ideas too
confused, to make these remarks distinctly enough, I may well be thought very
happy, in having an opponent of so cool and clear a head, and so benevolent a
heart, as to supply that defect for me, without taking any ungenerous advantage
of it, or upbraiding me with the favor afterward.

The gentleman briefly mentions the good ends proposed, in having bishops in
America. These are in substance the same with those which are more distinctly
mentioned in the Abstract, printed 1715, and which are chiefly these; viz. (1.)
To rule and govern well those people who are desirous to be committed to their
charge. -- (2.) To defend and protect both the clergy and the laity -- (3.) To
unite the clergy themselves, and reduce them to order -- And lastly, to confirm
new converts from schism; -- That the laity who have been initiated into the
christian faith by baptism, may not only have the benefit of confirmation; but
also in conjunction with the rest of the members of the church in those remote
parts, be partakers of the benign influences of the episcopal function; in
ordaining ministers from amongst themselves; in confirming weak brethren, and
blessing all manner of people susceptible of such holy impressions, as are made
by the imposition of the bishop's hands. Abstract 1715, p. 53, 54.
As these are the reasons for bishops here, which the Society has published, it
may be concluded this gentleman approves them all, though he has not so
particularly mentioned them. It might be thought foreign, perhaps presumptuous,
distinctly to examine the force of them; how much the episcopalians here, need
to be well ruled and governed; how much both the clergy and laity need defense
and protection against non-conformists; how much the clergy need to be united,
and reduced to order. I was going to say something about the confirmation of
new converts from schism, and of other weak brethren and sisters; the necessity
of having episcopal ordination here; the benign influences of episcopacy in
general; and of the blessings which all manner of people, susceptible of such
holy impressions, might receive by the imposition of the bishop's hands. But I
forbear; and the rather, because I might problably express myself in such a
manner, as to confirm this gentleman's suspicion about the seriousness of my
heart. For I am so conscious of my own infirmity, as to be almost certain that
I could not speak of these things with quite so much gravity and solemnity, as
he would think proper, in treating of matters so sublime, mysterious and
sacred. They are therefore passed over with a bare mention.

The gentleman, I must own, has, in his scheme, set this proposal for American
bishops in a more plausible, and less exceptionable point of view, than I have
seen it placed in before. For,

First, he proposes that they should have no concern in the least with any
persons who do not profess themselves to be of the church of England. P. 60.


Secondly, he says, it is not desired in the least that that they should hold
courts to try matrimonial or testamentary causes, or be vested with any
authority, now exercised either by provincial governors or subordinate
magistrates, or infringe or diminish any privileges and liberties enjoyed by
any of the laity, etc. Ibid.
But that they should be entirely confined to such religious and sacred offices
as the aforesaid.

Thirdly, as to the place or places of the episcopal residence; he believes no
single person has once named or thought of New England, as a proper place for
the residence of a bishop; but episcopal colonies have been always proposed. P.
66.
And he thinks that such persons should be sent in this character, 'as are
least likely to cause uneasiness.' P. 67.


This, he assures us, is the real and only scheme that has been planned for
bishops in America; and whoever has heard of any other, has been misinformed
through mistake or design. P. 60.


To speak for my self, then, I am one of those who have been thus misinformed;
and I know of others who have been so, in common with me. I did not suppose,
the true scheme was, that American bishops should have no concern, but with
episcopalians; or that they should be wholly confined to the sacred offices
aforesaid. As to the place of the episcopal residence; I thought it not
improbable, that if several bishops were sent, one of them would be stationed
in New England, to confirm and ordain; and to bless all manner of people here,
susceptible, etc. Let me add; since a mission was established at Cambridge, and
a very sumptuous dwelling house (for this country) erected there, that town
has been often talked of by episcopalians as well as others, as the proposed
place of residence for a bishop; which I thought not improbable. And I have
reason to take it amiss that this gentleman, speaking of what I hinted about
Mr. Apthorp, and a superb edifice in a neighboring town, has impeached my
integrity; suggesting that I did not entertain any such apprehension, as I
expressed. He says, with a sarcastic air, on this occasion, So much wit and
archness, how greatly soever the Doctor abounds in it, would have been too
great a sacrifice to make to dull truth and fact. P. 66.
He may be pleased to know, that he casts this aspersion on a man, who, unless
he is quite a stranger to himself, would not sacrifice what he calls dull truth
and fact, for any worldly consideration, not even to be an Archbishop; much
less for the airy reputation of archness. Nor is this the only time by several,
that he has accused me of being witty; a charge, but very little, if at all,
deserved by me. However, I will not retort the accusation; though it is my real
opinion, that if this gentleman never degenerates from good sense into right
down wit himself, he sometimes makes alarming approaches toward it, and shows
at least a strong inclination thereto; in which, I suppose, the escence of the
sin, if it be one, chiefly consists.

But to return: I pretend not particularly and certainly to know, what the real
scheme is, as to bishops in America. But certainly the non-conformists at
least, of all denominations, have great reason to deprecate the appointment of
any such bishops here, as not only I had an idea of, when I transiently touched
upon this subject before, but as I suppose, people here have generally had in
view, when this affair has been discoursed of. The scheme mentioned by this
gentleman is, without doubt, liable to fewer objections; and he speaks of it
with great assurance, as if he were at headquarters, and certainly knew this
to be the real and only one. Possibly this may be the case: But he is not
known; nor has he informed us, upon what ground or authority he goes, in giving
this account of the matter. The declaration of an anonymous writer, how
confidently soever he may express himself, is not, surely, sufficient to
satisfy us, that this is the true scheme planned. How much regard soever he
might justly claim, if he were known to be a person of that eminence and
dignity, which some of his expressions intimate him to be; yet while this is
unknown, he will excuse us if we do not entirely rely upon his word, that no
other scheme has been proposed. This may possibly be only his own scheme, the
scheme of a private man: And, till it comes from better authority, or in a more
authentic way, we may consider it as an imaginary one, calculated to serve a
present turn, or to lull us into security as to bishops here, till, by the
real, and much more fatal scheme's being carried into execution, it is too late
to remonstrate.

But let us for the present take it for granted; that this gentleman's is the
real and only scheme. Let us suppose, that bishops are to be at first sent to
America with such limited powers, to reside in episcopal colonies, and to have
no concern, but with episcopalains: Have we sufficient ground to think that
they and their successors would, to the day of doom, or for a long time, remain
contented with such powers, or under such limitations? in a word, that they
would continue such inoffensive, harmless creatures, as this gentleman
supposes; only diffusing blessings around them, on all manner of people
susceptible of such holy impressions, as are made by their hands on the good
people in England; so that we can reasonably apprehend no mischief from them?
Has this order of men been remarkable for a quiet, inoffensive behavior? Have
they usually been free from ambitious views and projects? from a disposition to
intermeddle in secular, worldly matters, and to enlarge the sphere of their
domination? -- from attempts to encroach upon the rights of mankind, religious
or civil? from intriguing with princes, or the governors of countries, for
their own advantage? from lending their assistance, and joining with them, in
carrying of schemes of oppression? Is it natural to suppose, that American
bishops would long content themselves in a condition so inferior to that of
their brethren, the successors of the apostles in England? -- without any of
their temporal power and grandieur, so as, in the eyes of most people, to
appear of a lower order; and consequently wanting that authority and respect
which, it might be pleaded, is needful? Ambition and avarice never want
plausible pretexts, to accomplish their end. The gentleman says, he cannot
perceive why the people even of New England, might not as safely breath the
same air with a bishop, as their brethren in Old England do. However (as he
goes on) we are unwilling to disquiet any of them; by importing and settling
amongst them a creature, which it seems some of them account to be so noxious.
Only we hope, that his occasionally traveling through the country, cannot infect
it very dangerously. p. 66.
One, of such a disposition as he proposes, might not: But what if, instead of
this, he should be another Sacheverel? (no impossible supposition.) And such a
man would probably be the most acceptable to the major part of the episcopal
clergy, if not of the laity, in New England. Might not He be a very noxious
creature, infect the country in traveling through it, and diffuse plagues
instead of blessings, in his progress? What the gentleman says upon this head,
brings to my mind what I have read of the aforesaid great churchman: When the
spiritual hydra began to belch forth his poison, when the -- priest went his
progress, the air was corrupted with his breath, and the fell contagion spread
itself far and near. The snakes which had lain long in the grass, began to show
their heads, and hiss; they stung many, and did much mischief, etc. A Tract
entitled Priestianity,
etc.

I am very remote from suspecting, that this gentleman would think such a
person a proper one for a bishop in America, or any where else; since he
appears to be of a very different spirit himself. And it is intimated by him,
that we shall have no ground for apprehensions, since bishops here, if any
there are, will be appointed by the crown, and entirely dependent on the
government in England; that the smallest attempts toward an oppressive
enlargement of spiritual power would be immediately crushed with indignation by
the legislature there; and that both the moderation of the clergy, and the
watchfulness of the laity over them [God be thanked, if it be so] are much more
likely to increase than diminish. p. 65.
These are good words, and fair speeches; nor do I doubt, but that the
gentleman speaks his real sentiments. But supposing all this; taking it also
for granted that, in the present administration, there has been a discovery of
so much wisdom and integrity, of such a great regard to the liberties and
privileges of the subject, and, particularly, of such a tender concern for the
interest and prosperity of his Majesty's American colonies, as leaves us no
room to fear an oppressive enlargement of spiritual, or any other power, during
the continuance of it: All this being taken for granted, yet may not times
alter, and administrations change? Who knows what the next reign and
administration may be? or whether attempts toward an oppressive enlargement of
power, may not be as much encouraged, as it is supposed they would be frowned
on, during the present? We are certainly much more secure against such
oppression, in the absence of bishops, than we should be if they were once
fixed here. Obsta principiis, was never thought an ill maxim by wise men.
Bishops being once fixed in America, pretexts might easily be found, both for
increasing their number, and enlarging their powers: And these pretexts might
probably be hearkened to, and prevail, on such a change of times as may be
supposed. To say the least, this is much more to be apprehended, that it is
that, on such a change, bishops should be sent hither at first with such
oppressive powers, or powers that interfere with the present rights and
privileges of the Colonists. People are not usually deprived of their liberties
all at once, but gradually; by one encroachment after another, as it is found
they are disposed to bear them; and things of the most fatal tendency are often
introduced at first, under a comparatively plausible and harmless appearance.
It cannot therefore be thought strange, if we like the aforesaid maxim, as to
opposing the first attempts, in the present case; and are desirous to keep the
apprehended evil at as great a distance as may be. All prudent men act upon the
same principle: Nor can I bring myself to reason as he did, who said, What has
posterity done for us, that we should be concerned for posterity? And should
bishops be once fixed here, to me it is highly probable, that our posterity
will not find it half so difficult as this gentleman thinks it is for us now,
before the experiment is made, to answer his spirited demands, Where are the
persecutors? Where is the dragon? P. 65.
Especially if it be true, as many affirm, that high-church, tory-principles
and maxims are lately revived in England; and favored greatly by some, whose
influence may go far toward bringing them into as much reputation, as they
have been in disgrace, since the death of Queen Anne.

The gentleman considers as perfectly chimerical, the apprehensions which I
formerly hinted, respecting the inconveniences that might result from the
appointment of bishops in America: Particularly, that by the increase of the
episcopal party, they might get a majority in our houses of assembly; that, in
consequence hereof, the church of England might become the established religion
of all these colonies; that a sacramental test, or something like it, might
ensue, to exclude non-conformists from places, preferment, and all civil
offices, as in England; and that taxes might be imposed on us all in common,
for the maintenance of these bishops, and the episcopal clergy. I did not,
however, imagine that these dangers were very near at hand in New England; nor
do so now, considering the small proportion that episcopalians bear to
protestants of other denominations. Should bishops be sent, and the Society
bend its whole force to increase the church among us, it is not probable that
these events would speedily take place. But even remote evils may be reasonably
apprehended, as well as those which are imminent; and are to be guarded
against, as much as may be. That appointing bishops for America, would be a
probable means of increasing the episcopal party here, will not be denied: This
is doubtless one principal reason, why it is so much desired; though neither this
gentleman, nor the Society, so far as I can at present recollect, has
particularly mentioned it. There is, however, something which looks a little
this way in the Abstract before-cited, wherein the reasons for bishops here,
are enumerated; one of which is, to confirm new converts from schism. Abs.
1715, p. 54.
But even supposing a majority of episcopalians in the legislative body, in any
[ I must not say either, because there are more than two] of these colonies;
the gentleman asks, Why should a test law follow? Is there any such law in the
episcopal colonies? Or even though there were, can it be imagined, that if a
prevailing party in New England were wild enough to propose, his Majesty would
ever be advised to pass one for that country? P. 63.
Whether there is any such law already in any of the episcopal colonies, is
with me a doubt. But by what I have observed of the over-bearing spirit of
episcopalians among us, it is strange to me if there is not. The very Candid
Examiner of my Observations, plainly enough intimated his desire of such a law
here: And if there were a considerable majority of episcopalians in the
legislature with a zealous, not to say bigoted and oppressive episcopalian
Governor at their head, and bishops in these parts to countenance and forward
so pious a scheme for edifying the church; I make no doubt, but that the church
of England would soon be established here by a provincial law, and a test-act
speedily passed. Nor am I able to see any ground for the gentleman's great
confidence, that the King would not be advised to allow said test; seeing there
is such an one in our mother country. I presume, the gentleman could assign no
solid reason for a test-law in England, by which protestant dissenters are
excluded from offices there, which would not hold good in favor of a law of the
same tenor here; I mean, on the supposition of such an increase and majority of
the episcopal party. Can what is supposed reasonable and equitable in Old
England, be supposed unreasonable and injurious in New? Or is it to be
imagined, that the Head of the church of England would, at the desire of the
legislative body in any of his colonies, refuse to allow of laws for
establishing said church therein, and for introducing a test? laws manifestly
adapted to the worldly grandieur, if not to the spiritual good of that church,
which is at were his body; and to bring in, if not to convince schismatics? If
the gentleman was able, I could wish he had done something more toward
removing our apprehensions in this respect, than to treat them with scorn;
which is not the most likely method to convince those that think calmly of the
matter.

He treats as still more wild and chimerical, the supposition of our ever being
taxed in common, for the support of bishops and their clergy. Says he, The
terror of being taxed for bishops, etc. -- is yet more chimerical than the
former P. 63.
. But in case of such an increase of the episcopal party, of the government's
coming into their hands, and of the church of England's being here established
by a provincial law, which things must be presupposed; where is the absurdity
of such an apprehension? I can see none, except it lies in the injurious and
oppressive nature of such a supposed tax: But this consideration will never
prevent the doubts and fears of those, who reflect on what has been done in
almost every age and country in christendom, by the prevailing religious party,
for their own ease, and the farther weakening and vexing the minority. The
gentleman observes, that tithes are paid in England to the clergy by virtue of
grants, which laid that burden upon estates many ages before the present
possessors enjoyed them Ibid.
i. e. in the days of popery. He also expresses himself very positively, that
if this had not been done, an act of parliament could not now be obtained, of
this or the like nature, by which dissenters in common with others, should be
taxed for the maintenance of the hierarchy. And having, for aught I can see,
merely by his peremptoriness, completed his victory in this respect, he
immediately begins his triumph, by saying: With what modesty then can the
Doctor suggest, that such a thing might be feared in New England? Page 64.
I am very glad, if the governing part of the nation have so much moderation
respecting protestant dissenters, that such an act could not now be obtained
there; which might, as it appears to me, be justly looked on as a great
hardship, or instance of oppression. It may naturally be supposed, this
gentleman is of the same opinion: Why else could not an act of that nature be
now obtained, if the hierarchy were not already provided for, by virtue of
grants, when popery was triumphant, which laid the burden of tithes on
estates? But I do not pretend to have a thorough understanding of the doctrine
of tithes, as professed and preached in the church of England; never having
made this any, much less a principal part of my study, however important an
article it may be.

Be this matter as it may, while there is a law in force, which bears so hard
on protestant dissenters, as the test does, I shall not easily be persuaded,
that it would be impossible, if the hierarchy was not already provided for, to
obtain an act for that purpose, by which the burden should be laid upon
dissenters in common with others; which, in some respects, might be thought a
less grievance than the other: Particularly as it would be much less
reproachful and ignominious to them, to be only obliged to pay to the support
of a clergy disapproved by them, than to be treated as if they did not merit
the character, and were therefore unworthy to enjoy the privileges, of British
subjects; though it is well known, his Majesty, whom God preserve, has none more
loyal and faithful. But to return: If bishops are sent to America, they must be
well supported; this is beyond doubt. By whom? or by what means? I suppose
there is not yet a fund provided by legacies, near adequate to the support of
one; it not being a small matter, that suffices such dignified and apostolical
persons. The Society will probably think, this burden should not lie upon
them; as they are not able to support a sufficient number of missions among
people, whose necessities are great and urgent. Is it likely then, that the
British nation, so deeply plunged in debt, and in which there is scarce a
possibility of laying any new taxes, will undertake to maintain bishops for
America? No surely. Will the bishops and rich clergy in England do it, out of
their abundance? This is at least as improbable; especially since it is
supposed, that many of them cannot, to this day, be entirely persuaded, but
that it is rather more blessed to receive than to give. Will American bishops
then, trust to the generosity of the people here; depending upon providence and
alms, or, in other words, upon the good will of the Americans? Will they be
content without reaping any other carnal things here, than what the people may
judge an adequate recompense for the spiritual things sown by them;
particularly (since bishops seldom preach) for confirming weak brethren, and
for those holy impressions made by their hands, on all manner of people
susceptible thereof? If this is all, or the principal part of what they
receive, their maintenance will not probably half satisfy them; except perhaps
at first, while wonderful effects are expected from their blessing, and the
benign influence of their function: Nor will they run this risque, unless they
have more faith in God, and less love to the world, than most of their order
have had, since Constantine the Great became a nursing father to the church,
and the pious, maternal council of Nice suckled her with the clear and pure,
the incorrupt and 'sincere milk' of Homoousianity, that she might 'grow
thereby'. Can there then be a more probable supposition than this; That in
consequence of the episcopal party's increasing in these colonies, and becoming
a majority in the legislatures, the church of England would be established by
provincial laws, and the people in common taxed for the support of bishops and
their clergy? Have we reason to think that, from brotherly affection and
tenderness, for schismatics, they would exempt them from bearing a part of
this burden? I wish there was not more reason to apprehend, that they would
oblige non-conformists to bear a double proportion of it; not, to be sure, out
of any enmity, but only as an instance of wholesome severity, and a probable
means of bringing them into the bosom of the church, to their eternal salvation
-- However, if a law for an equal tax upon conformists and non-conformists were
passed in any British colony, for the purpose aforesaid, there is scarce any
room to doubt, but that it would be confirmed by the crown: The Head must take
care for the good of the body, and all its members. Nay, if bishops were
speedily to be sent to America, it seems not wholly improbable, from what we
hear of the unusual tenor of some late parliamentary acts and bills, for
raising money on the poor colonies without their consent, that provision might
be made for the support of these bishops, if not of all the church clergy also,
in the same way.

The gentleman having endeavored to expose to ridicule the aforesaid
apprehensions, as perfectly chimerical, and called my modesty as well as
understanding in question, even for hinting them, immediately adds: Besides,
would it have been a good reason at the revolution, for debarring the
dissenters from the full exercise of their church government and worship, that
if they obtained it, they might perhaps increase till they got a major vote in
both houses, and then enact no mortal knows what. Page 64.
These cases, it is conceived, are much too dissimilar, to argue thus from one
to the other. The church of England had an exclusive legal establishment, at
the time spoken of; the King for her Head, and sworn Protector, and almost all
persons, of interest and power for her members. Conformity was almost, if not
the only path to preferment, civil honors, offices and emoluments. In short,
the constitution both in church and state was so secured, so guarded both by
laws and numbers, and non conformists were so few, and under such
disadvantages, that there was not room for any fear that they would ever
increase so as to become the major and leading part in parliament, or be able,
if they desired it, to over-turn the establishment, and oppress episcopalians.
Apprehensions of this fort, would indeed have been perfectly chimerical at that
time; especially considering the disunion on non-conformists among themselves,
and the moral impossibility of their uniting, in establishing any other
particular form of church government. What parity? what similitude is there
between the circumstances of New England and Old, in these respects? The cases
are so widely different, that it is strange a gentleman of so much penetration
and acumen should, by his manner of reasoning, suppose them parallel. We have
no such ecclesiastical establishment, as that of England; and, I hope, never
shall. Our churches have no royal Head and Protector, in the sense which that
has; -- only ONE in heaven, whom we pray to be the Protector of the other. We
are not an independent people, or sovereign state, but dependent on England,
wherein episcopacy is established, and which we honor and obey, as our
mother country. Our Governor, and all provincial Governors appointed by the
crown, I suppose are, and by law must be, conformists to the church of England.
A considerable number of persons, even in the N. England colonies, are persons
of much wealth, influence and power. In most of the colonies, the respective
Governors have all military offices at their free disposal and the nomination
to civil; and in some, a negative on the choice of counselors. They must also
be supposed, as a thing of course, most to favor episcopalians; so that
conformity, instead of being a bar to preferment here, is perhaps generally
found the readiest way to it. Episcopalians may be, and often are, chosen
members of both houses of assembly in the colonies of New England; nor is there
either law, or any thing else, to prevent this, if, by their qualifications and
good behavior, they can recommend themselves to the electors. And I hope this
gentleman would not have the people obliged by law to choose them, whether they
approve of them or not; though this seems to be the amount of what he some-where
says. Besides, the episcopalians here are more united among themselves than we
are, being of different sects and parties. And should they [episcopalians]
hereafter approach any thing near to an equality with us in point of number,
they will have the advantage greatly in this respect; since they may more
easily unite their strength, in pursuing measures for their separate advantage,
and to our common detriment, than we shall our's, in any particular methods of
opposition to them: So that they may carry their points, even with inferior
numbers; especially being most favored by an episcopal Governor, whose
influence is ordinarily very great out of court, as well as his proper
constitutional power in it.

Our circumstances being such, is there not a hundred, a thousand times, more
reason to apprehend that episcopalians may in time become the major and
governing party here, and enact such laws as I have been speaking of, than
there was at the revolution, that the non-conformists in England might do the
like there? I can hardly think that the gentleman, upon a little reflection,
will disown it. Which being the case, the grand principle on which he sets out,
in speaking of American bishops, is not applicable to the state of these
colonies; at least, not by far, very far, so applicable as it was and is to
that of England. The principle I intend, is this. That all members of every
church are, according to the principles of liberty, entitled to every part of
what they conceive to be the benefits of it, entire and complete, so far as
consists with the welfare of civil government Page 59.
. It is readily owned, that our apprehension of what may possibly or probably
be the consequences of bishops being sent hither, ought not to put us on
infringing the religious liberty of our fellow subjects, and christian
brethren, if they will pardon this freedom: Neither have we any power to do so,
if we were unreasonable and wicked enough to desire it; our charter granting
such liberty to all protestants. But the episcopalians here may enjoy this
liberty, as they now do, without bishops in America, though under some
inconveniences; principally perhaps, for want of holy impressions made by
their hands in the ceremony of confirmation; their lack of which, it must be
owned, is sometimes but too visible in their behavior. We are therefore,
methinks, very excuseable, if we express a reluctance at the proposal of a
scheme, which we really apprehend may bring great trouble and temporal
inconveniences upon us; and be the source of much division, discord and
confusion: Especially, if it be also a scheme tending to promote that
particular mode or profession of christianity among us, which we cannot but
think, on the whole, much less conformable to the gospel, and therefore less
conducive to the eternal happiness of mankind, than that which at present
generally prevails among us.

But one thing mentioned by this gentleman, in order to reconcile us to this
scheme, had almost escaped me. It is this: 'Popish bishops reside here', says
he, and go about to exercise every part of their function, without offense and
without observation. But this has a much less tendency to reconcile us to the
proposal about American bishops, than to give us an alarm for the welfare of
our mother county; with which, we are very sensible, our own is connected. If
popish bishops exercise their function in England without observation, as the
gentleman says, it is not indeed strange, if they do it also without offense.
But I cannot readily comprehend what he means by saying, that they do this
without observation, when at the same time he speaks of it as a notorious fact:
Though his meaning cannot be mistaken, when he says, this is done without
offense. It must be, that it gives no considerable umbrage or jealousy, but
that the people, at least those of higher rank, are contented it should be so.
For he speaks of this as an instance and proof of the mutual candor,
forbearance and moderation, which prevail at this day in England, among
christians of different denominations; and so, as a reason why we should be
well satisfied with having bishops of the church of England in these parts. But
if this proves any thing, it proves too much; viz. that we should be content to
see, not only English, but popish bishops, freely exercising their functions
among us; the latter of which is not agreeable to our charter and laws. And
though I am a warm friend to religious liberty in the largest sense; and though
mutual forbearance cannot be too much recommended, where the differences are
merely of a religious nature, or such as do not affect the liberty, safety and
natural rights of mankind; yet I must own, I hope never to see popish bishops
thus going about without offense, in New England; being persuaded, from the
very nature of diverse popish tenets, that roman catholics cannot be safely
tolerated in the free exercise of their religion, in a protestant government.
And, if I may be permitted to make a sort of digression here, does not the
prevalence of popery in England, afford matter for very serious reflections? The
papists, only in London, were by computation an hundred thousand, in the year
1745. Since which, their numbers are vastly increased there, and in other parts
of the kingdom; the people being, as it is said, perverted by popish bishops,
priests, jesuits etc. by hundreds and thousands, if not ten thousands, yearly.
Nor is this, as it seems, done in secret, and in corners; but openly and
boldly, as this gentleman intimates. And has not a very large mass-house been
built since 1745, in Stanhope-Street, London, contiguous to the house of the
Neapolitan ambassador; which has a door always open to another street, on
purpose to accommodate the public? What is become of the small, old, crazed
popish chapel, called the Sardinian chapel? Was it not burnt two or three years
ago, probably with a politic design, by the papists themselves, presuming that
they had many friends, and but few zealous and powerful enemies? I mean, with a
design to rebuild, greatly enlarge and adorn it. Has not this actually been
done? though, to be sure, not entirely without observation; since the chapel has
now an organ, to catch the attention of the lovers of music. And has not the
said chapel been boldly spoken of in a public advertisement, doubtless by the
papists, to invite the idle and curious thither, as one of the HANDSOMEST
places of WORSHIP about town? Is it not surprising, if these and such like
things are, indeed, transacted in the metropolis, without any opposition from,
or offense to, persons of rank? even the venerable bishops and Society, who are
so zealous to support and propagate the protestant church of England abroad;
and, according to this gentleman, so very solicitous to preserve the British
colonies from popish superstition and idolatry? -- even those colonies, in
which there are no popish bishops or priests, and hardly a papist! While they
are so charitable to us remote Colonists, are these things done before their
eyes without offense? Particularly, do the popish bishops, without giving them
any umbrage, go about to exercise EVERY PART of their function? -- such as
ordaining priests, uniting the [popish] clergy, making proselytes, confirming
new converts from schism, with other weak brethren of that communion; and
blessing all manner of people, susceptible of such holy impressions, as are
made by the imposition of bishops hands; with many et catera's! What? All this,
without offense to such zealous protestants! How can that be? -- Is popery more
harmless in its nature and tendency, and therefore less offensive, now than
formerly? Is it less dangerous, either to the souls or bodies of men? less
perilous to the eternal salvation of its proselytes and professors, or to the
temporal safety of protestant communities? If not, how can we account for these
things being transacted without offense to such good protestants, as the
venerable Society and bishops? How would America be better secured against
popery, by having such bishops here? And if not against popery, how, against
other pernicious errors? Or do their Lordships and the Society love New England
better than Old? or America better than Europe? Are they more solicitous for
our welfare, than for their own, and the safety of the good people of England?
Is the infernal gunpowder plot? are other treasonable and execrable
conspiracies of English papists, forgotten? Is the horrid massacre of the
protestants in Ireland? is that on Black Bartholomew in Paris, one of which at
least was ever applauded by the popes and papists, Le successeur de St. Pierre
et son consistoire ne peuvent errer; ils approverent, celebrerent, consacrerent
l'action de la St. Barthelemi; done cette action etait tres saint; done de
deux assassins egaux en piete, celui qui aurait eventre vingt* quatre femmes
grosses huguenotes, doit etre eleve en gloire du double de celui qui n'en aura
eventre que douze. Traite sur la Tolerance. By M. Voltaire, (according to
common fame) under a disguise.
no more remembered? Are all their diabolical treacheries and cruelties buried
in oblivion? Can they who believe the Pope's supremacy over all Kings, and
consequently deny the independency of the British crown and empire, possibly be
good loyal subjects to King GEORGE, or any other protestant King? (...) there
no laws now in force against papists? or is (...) nobody to execute them? Is
the sword of the law rusted in the hands of the magistrates, as well as that of
the Spirit, where it is said so rarely to come, in the mouths of the prelates?
One would suspect both, from the account this gentleman gives of popish bishops
going openly about, to perform every part of their function without offense!
But how will the gentleman well reconcile this with what he elsewhere says;
that the Roman-catholics hate the church of England more than they do others,
as the most dangerous enemy to their cause, and strongest bulwark of the
reformation? Page 4.
Surely, they have no reason to do so, if such things are transacted in England
without offense. I could wish he had explained himself a little farther, upon
so interesting a point.

Possibly the gentleman, who can be very arch when he pleases, intended by
writing thus, to give a public hint, that there was a blameable remissness in
the protestant bishops and their clergy, if not in some other persons, with
reference to popish bishops going about so freely, and to the great and
dangerous increase of popery in England, without any offense taken thereat. I
can, sometimes, hardly forbear looking on this as a piece of designed severe
and cutting, though disguised satire, on the prelates at least, if not on the
administration. But whatever might be his real design, as to which I am in some
doubt, one would think that, according to the representation he has given,
whether just or not, there was at this day in England great occasion for --
honest zeal,
To rouse the watchmen of the public weal,
To virtue's work provoke the tardy hall,
And goad the prelate slumbering in his stall. Pope.



I am far enough from pretending to know, farther still from presuming to say,
what the true state of things now is in England. But it is sufficiently
apparent, what have in times past been the reasons why the pernicious practices
of papists, and the increase of popery there, have been winked at. At some
times the King and the ministry, the principal bishops, and other ecclesiastic
dignitaries, together with some of the magistrates, have seemed really inclined
to a thoro' coalescence with the church of Rome: Witness some, at least, of the
Stuart-reigns. At other times, it seems, a corrupt, abandoned ministry have
both had occasion for, and by concert received, the parliamentary interest of
the wealthier papists: In consequence of which, and as a grateful return for
the favor, (if such persons can be supposed to have any gratitude) they have
wholly connived at the practices and perversions of papists. The magistrates of
course became less watchful more remiss and inactive. The clergy, especially
those of superior rank, and who aimed at riches or higher preferment, or both,
observing this conduct of the ministry, and the path necessary in commendam,
wholly connived also at the practices of papists, and the progress of popery;
except perhaps they coldly appeared against them on certain days and occasions,
of mere necessity and form. So that, at such times, cruel, blood-thirsty and
rebel-hearted roman-catholics, had hardly any opposition made to them, or any
thing to fear in England, either from law or gospel. A few learned, honest and
active men, who aimed less at preferment in the church, than at the safety and
good of their country, have indeed stepped forth at such times, to oppose this
master-hydra of popery: But being mostly poor, with little influence or
interest, and unsupported by their superiors, who ought to have been foremost
in this opposition, the public received but little benefit from their virtuous
and heroic endeavors, exerted to a certain detriment in their promotion, and
to their personal disadvantage. By suchlike means has the Scarlet Whore, with
whom the Kings and great men of the earth have committed fornication, at
certain seasons got fairly mounted on her borned beast, and rode, with the cup
of abominations in her hand, almost triumphant through England: Seeming to want
only a little more time, and a favorable concurrence of circumstances, by
means of foreign or domestic broils and jarrings, to show her execrable,
infernal face in its most hideous attitudes, and to exert a bloody, fiery,
diabolical strength; the utmost consequences of which, no one could foresee,
but all had great reason to dread! Such has heretofore been the state of things
in England. How it is at present, I pretend not particularly to know. But, as
was intimated before, I could wish that my penetrating and able opponent, who
is on the spot, had explained himself a little farther, when he hinted that
popery was fast gaining ground there, and appeared so boldly; yet without
offense! For this digression, methinks, he ought to be partly responsible,
since he gave the occasion; and I hope he will be so good as to share the blame
with me. It is not, however, I think, entirely foreign, from my subject, as was
hinted before: For, surely, bishops, or other persons who are so little
inimical to popery, as to take no offense at popish bishops going about to
exercise every part of their function in England, if this be really the case,
are not likely to be of much service to the protestant religion, in the
character of bishops in America. I am very sure, there are none of our
unorthodox New England clergy, but what would be both greatly offended and
alarmed at such things; sound a loud alarm to the people of their pastoral
charge, and exert themselves to the utmost, to prevent the fatal effects that
might be apprehended from the practices of his ministers and agents, who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; and whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish. But notwithstanding the great elevation and authority of the
English bishops, this gentleman says: That any of them are so high, as to do
harm, or cause fear, by their elevation, the persons amongst whom they live,
find not. Page 5.
And in this, it is likely, the papists and popish bishops will agree with him,
if it be true, as he intimates, that the latter exercise every part of their
function without offense to them: Which may, perhaps, help to explain his
meaning in the words aforesaid.

Possibly, though I am not willing to suppose, the gentleman may say of me on
this occasion, as he did on another: But why -- such dismal apprehensions? why
such outcries? where are the persecutors? where is the dragon? All the world
must see, the Doctor himself must see, that this declamation is foreign from
the purpose; and on his first recollection, he should have been ashamed of it,
and have struck it out. But paternal tenderness would not let him destroy so
pathetic a rant on so darling a subject P. 65.
. The former, and this present subject, are not wholly dissimilar; I thank God
they are not more nearly alike. With me they are both important, though in very
unequal degrees. But if this gentleman and I had taken each other's counsel as
to striking out, on one side pathetic rants and declamations, and on the other,
I will not say unanimated, but cool, yet inconclusive reasonings, it is
probable that both our Tracts would have been reduced to a much smaller size:
And who, on this supposition, would have had most grief, resulting from
paternal tenderness, I cannot, and presume he will not, very positively
determine.

I have freely and fully laid open my thoughts, such as they are, respecting
the New England missions. I have also explained myself as to the proposition
concerning bishops in America; and though not so fully, yet more particularly
than I intended to do; having been almost compelled to it, at once by this
gentleman's formal attack upon a few expressions, which occasionally dropped
from my pen, and by his great courtesy in attempting to propose my objections
distinctly for me, because he thought I was a great deal too vehement to do it
myself. By what has now been said, he may perceive, at least that he has not
wholly dissipated 'the poor man's fears,' Page 64.
either by his reasoning or rallying on the subject. I have attended to his
serious request, at the conclusion of his argument -- If he is still
dissatisfied, I entreat him to consider, for all men ought, what manner of
spirit he is of. p. 67.
Still dissatisfied I am: and, I hope, from such a spirit as he will not wholly
disapprove, however wrong he may think my opinions; -- from a love to truth,
cultivated in my early days; from a love to what I take to be the most
primitive christianity; from a sincere concern for the welfare of my country;
and an apprehension that this scheme of bishops, if put in execution, will be
greatly detrimental to it, both in civil and religious respects. This, I think,
is the spirit, from which my disatisfaction chiefly arises. The gentleman has
doubtless well considered, from what spirit it is, that he is so much set upon
this scheme of bishops; and it would be very uncharitable in me, to conclude it
a bad one; as I do not, whatever I may think of the scheme itself. However, I
think it but justice to him to acknowledge, that if such a scheme as he has
proposed were to be put in execution, and only such consequences were to
follow, as he professedly has in view, as the ends aimed at, I could not object
against it; except only upon the same principle, that I object against the
church of England in general, and should be sorry, from a regard to what I
suppose a more scriptural way of worship, to see that church prevail here:
Which yet, I solemnly declare, I would not prevent, though it were absolutely in
my own power, by any methods inconsistent with that full, entire liberty in
religious matters, which I desire for myself; and which all men, whose
principles or practices are not inconsistent with the safety of society, have a
right to enjoy. Thus far I have the honor fully to agree with this gentleman.

I hope I have not treated the gentleman with any rudeness or indecency. There
is much good sense, good temper, candor and christian catholicism discovered in
various parts of his Tract. The venerable Society, I believe, never had so
able, and never will have a more able defender: -- Si Pergama dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent.;


He has, I think, once or twice expressed himself civilly even of me, though
never without blaming me at the same time. I would not be wanting in a suitable
return: But if it so happens, that the necessary consequence of attending to
any gentleman's reasoning, is his appearing sometimes in a less advantageous
light than at others, it is not difficult to see where the blame lies. Nor is
the difference small, between going out of one's way, on purpose to give
murderous thrusts to the reputation of a writer, and barely not preventing him
from being too careless of it himself, and using it very unkindly, by
undertaking to defend what is not defensible. This performance is doubtless, in
all respects, much superior to any of those which first appeared against the
Observations in America. And, upon the whole, by what I can learn, it is
written with too much catholicism, and too little rancor against me, to be
generally acceptable to the episcopalians among us: Which are probably the
chief reasons, why there was so much difficulty in obtaining a subscription for
reprinting it in Boston.

But though there is too much charity and moderation discovered in many parts of
this Tract, to please the taste of some among us; yet, methinks, the gentle
author has at times, when off his guard, used me in such a manner as might
almost have satisfied them; and possibly, upon a review of some passages, they
may have an higher opinion of this performance in that respect; among which, I
beg leave particularly to recommend to them the following, all relating to me
and my Observations -- He contents himself with -- reproachful names, and
ludicrous representations; a likely method to please the prejudiced, and lead
the thoughtless along with him. Answer p. 4. What he means -- besides
indeterminate abuse, p. 5. -- had better judge by the experience of others,
than by his own heated imagination. Ibid. -- he has not explained what his own
[trade] is. But certainly reviling his brethren is a very bad one, p. 6. Some
persons are strangely subject to violent gusts of passion -- his malady has a
deeper root in his frame, and influenceth him more constantly -- p. 9. -- an
artful design to procure himself a dispensation for his outrages, Ibid. --
'frequent and copious effusions of a bad spirit in his work,' p 10. -- place
some part of his religion in railing at episcopalians, p. 31. -- according to
the old custom of his party -- of discharging mis-applied texts of scripture in
the faces of such as happened to offend them, p. 55. The poor man's fears, if
you will believe him, run to vastly farther lengths yet, p. 64. -- so pathetic
a rant on so darling a subject, p. 65. -- wit and archness -- would have been
too great a sacrifice [for him] to make to dull truth and fact. p. 66.

These and some other of his compliments, however agreeable they may be to
others, I own, I do not very well relish myself; and the less, because they may
possibly serve, in some measure, to keep in countenance my American antagonists
in this controversy; who have observed no measures in their abuses and
invectives. But I can bear, without returning, such language as this;
especially as this courtly gentleman intimates, that these 'freedoms' should
'not be imputed to any unkinder motive', Page 67.
than that of showing me to myself; and that, if I 'amend upon admonition,' so
tenderly administered, I may be entitled to some respect. I desire to amend all
my faults, which are far, very far, too many. Nor will I deny, but that I am in
some measure desirous to procure respect, by fair and honorable means;
especially respect from a person, for whom I have so sincere alone myself, as I
have for my kind admonisher.

The gentleman, after having spoken of me in such terms as the aforesaid, is so
charitable as to make an apology for me, by observing, that I seem to have
naturally a most vehement spirit, and to have imbibed, perhaps in my early
days, equally vehement prepossessions against the very name of bishops, and
every thing connected with them. -- 'I am sensible,' adds he that these things
plead in his excuse, etc. Ibid.
My natural temper is perhaps too warm: And I own, that early in life, I
imbibed strong prepossessions against diocesan bishops; i. e. if a full
persuasion, the result of free enquiry and reading, that their order itself is
unscriptural, and that they have generally been a pernicious set of men, both
to church and state, may properly be called prepossession. And if these things
plead in my excuse for any unwarrantable expressions used by me, I am much
obliged to the gentleman for his candor in suggesting it. What his own early
prepossessions might possibly be, in favor of episcopacy, and some things
connected with it, I forbear to conjecture; lest I should fall into a mistake
that might be offensive to him: Which I choose to a void. If the gentleman
labors under any natural foible, similar to that which he supposes in me, I am
extremely desirous that he should reap all the advantage from it, as a plea in
his excuse, that he charitably proposes I should reap from mine; and so, while
he is far happier in many excellencies, may also have more cause to glory in
his infirmities. 2 Cor. Xii. 5 and 10.
But if, on the contrary, he is naturally of a cool, dispassionate temper; though
I sincerely congratulate him on his felicity in that respect, yet I cannot but
express my sorrow, that this puts it out of my power to return his civility, by
making as handsome an apology for some expressions that have escaped him, as he
has made for some of mine.

I am indeed, even literally a 'poor man,' as this gentleman calls me, I
suppose, in another sense: And in that respect I have been publicly unbraided
by some of the very decent writers against the Observations; nor has even the
honest, irreproachable memory of my Father wholly escaped their insults.
However, through the goodness of God, and the generosity of his people, I have a
comfortable subsistence, with contentment: Which, if but attended with
integrity and godliness, is all the gain that my soul aspires after in this
world. Let me add, on this occasion, that I had much rather be the poor son of
a good man, who spent a long life and his patrimony in the humble and
laborious, though apostolical employment of preaching 'the unsearchable riches of
Christ' to poor Indians; and One, as I suppose, now at rest from his labors
with 'the spirits of just men made perfect'; than even the rich son and heir of
One who had, by temporizing in religion, and tampering with politics, by
flattering the Great, and prostituting his conscience, made his way to a
bishopric, and the worldly dignity of a peer; how large a bag soever he had
carried with him through a life of indleness and pride, of intrigue and luxury,
or left behind him at death, the black period of all his greatness and glory.

The good gentleman concludes his performance in such a sensible, candid and
charitable way, as does him great honor; and shows the amiable spirit of
christianity in an advantageous light. I can, however, hardly suppose, that if
he had ever seen certain outrageous publications of the American episcopalians
against me, relating to the Society and the church, he would have expressed
himself in so cautious and tender a manner as he has there done, after having
reproved and admonished me, with some severity, though only for my good: Since he
is doubtless as kindly disposed toward them, as toward me. IF any writers on
our side, says he, have been less cool, or less civil, than they ought, and
designed [ to be sure] to have been, we are sorry for it, and exhort them to
change their style, if they write again. P. 68.
Methinks, One that appears partly in the character of a moderator and
peacemaker among warm disputants, ought, not only to abstain from all such
contemptuous and opprobrious language as he blames in them, but to be impartial
in his reproofs and admonitions. For which reason I conclude, this worthy
gentleman was an utter stranger to some late writings of the episcopalians
here; which would, no doubt, if he had seen them, have extorted even from a
person of his mild, meek and gentle disposition, a sharp rebuke, instead of
such a gingerish exhortation.

Though Mr. Apthorp kept to his prudent resolution, 'once for all;' and has been
dead as to this dispute, ever since he began it in form; this gentleman has
revived the remembrance of him, by sometimes mentioning him, endeavoring to
defend diverse of his most unjustifiable positions, and blaming me for treating
him 'unmercifully,' etc. All which I consider as the effect of his great
humanity, rather than the result of his deliberate judgment. And though I have
had frequent occasions, yet I have, as much as possible, avoided speaking of
that gentleman; lest, in my own vindication, I should have been almost obliged
to transgress the old maxim, De mortuis nil nisi bonum.

Plausible colors may be put upon almost any thing, however false or wrong in
itself, by men of great ingenuity, and fine sense. But plain, common sense,
with a competant knowledge of facts and circumstances, (which, to be sure, is
the utmost that I can pretend to) and much more, an equal capacity on the side
of truth and right, will ever have the advantage in an argument. This will,
commonly at least, be able to show, that round is not square, or black white;
to strip a bad cause of the ingenious glosses put upon it; to puff away the
dust, and brush off the flimzy, cobweb reasonings that are spread over it, to
keep it from appearing what it is.

' Spin all your cobwebs over the eye of day!
' The muse's wing shall brush them all away. --
' All, all but truth, drops dead-born from the press,
' Like the last Gazette, or the last Address. --
' Not Waller's wreath can hide the nation's scar,
' Nor Boileau turn the FEATHER to a STAR.' Pope.

'That which is crooked cannot be made strait.' I will not apply this; it will
be done by others, if it is in any measure applicable to the case in hand --
But to draw to a close of these Remarks: Having, for some years, been not
unacquainted with the religious state of New England, nor unknowing to many
transactions relative thereto; I have sincerely aimed at setting things in a
true light, as to the missions here. A child may hold a candle to a man, or a
weak and simple man to a wise one; and thereby be of service to him, while
employed about matters of great importance and difficulty. If any thing has
been offered by me, which, from the nature of it, justly claims attention, I
hope it will not be entirely disregarded, on account of any disagreeable
appendages. If I have said nothing that deserves any regard, I beg the
venerable Society heartily to excuse my well-meant officiousness; as also to
pardon any expressions used by me, which may seem not sufficiently respectful.
I think, whatever faults I may have, (would to God they were much fewer!) I am
not of a temper deliberately to justify any thing, too hastily said or done by
me, after being convinced of the error. Though I may be thought to have said some
harsh things about the members of the church of England, and am often blamed in
that respect by my worthy Answerer; I have repeatedly declared, and again
declare, that I highly respect and honor many of them, as persons of great
probity, piety and goodness; particularly among those who were educated in that
way. Whatever my opinion may be of the constitution and worship of said church,
I should be extremely glad to see a friendly, obliging intercourse preserved
between her members among us, and people of our own persuasion! And
notwithstanding I am taxed with being uncharitable to, and vehement against
them; I can say, with the sincerity becoming a christian, that whenever I
happen to have any concern with any of them, who appear to me to be persons of
principle and candor, not over-bearing and assuming, but willing to treat
non-conformists as their fellow christians and brethren; I take a very
particular pleasure in showing them all the tokens of affection, esteem and
honor. But, I say it at once with grief and reluctance, I have much seldomer
found persons of this character among them, than I could have wished to do; and
contempt and disdain on one side, very often produce the same on the other.
However, I recollect a very just observation of the gentleman, to this purpose,
That people of different religious sects and parties may think much too ill of,
without at all wishing ill to, each other. Both these are faults, which ought
to be carefully guarded against: If I have ever fallen into the first, I hope I
am not chargeable with the second; which is far the most criminal and
inexcuseable. I likewise hope, we shall on all hands, as far as possible, put
on that charity which thinks no evil; which suffers long, and is kind;
which envieth not, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up; which does not behave
itself unseemly; rejoiceth not in iniquity; but rejoiceth in the truth. No one
can read the sacred oracles, unless he is spiritually blind, without clearly
seeing, that though we had all faith, as well as all knowledge, so that we could
remove mountains, as well as understand all mysteries; though we had also the
tongues of angels, as well as of men, and declaimed ever so loudly with them,
either for or against any particular church; and yet had not charity, we should
be but empty, noisy formalists in religion; mere sounding brass, and tinkling
cymbals. And the words with which this gentleman concludes, though he may be but
a layman, are certainly worthy the pen of the most eminent bishop in England,
not excepting even his Grace the Metropolitan and Primate of ALL England; This
being a title commonly given to the Archbishop of Canterbury, may be one reason
why Mr. Apthorp spoke of him only, as presiding over the church of England.
[See page 10, 11, of these Remarks] For this, doubtless, gives his Grace some
preeminence above the Archbishop of York, who is styled only, Metropolitan and
Primate of England. And this seems to have been long a settled point; though in
former ages there was much graceless contention between their Graces
predecessors, for the highest seat in the synagogue, and the uppermost room at
feasts; or for rank and precedence in the CHURCH and COURT.
whose christian moderation is not the least shining part of his respectable
character: 'It is the duty of all men,' says he, how much soever they differ in
opinion, to agree in mutual good will, and kind behavior. Would to God that
all bishops had, and that all protestant bishops at least, would, preach the
same good doctrine, and practice according to it: The former might in a great
measure have prevented uncharitable divisions in the christian church; the
latter might go far toward healing the present animosities among protestants;
and lead them to unite in love, and point their force against infidelity on one
hand, and popery on the other: Both how necessary!

And thus I take leave for the present, I hope forever, of this controversy, of
which I am heartily weary; though not from a conviction that I have been on the
wrong side, in any material point. If any person, without having something that
is both new and weighty to offer upon it, shall write and publish, merely for
the sake of having the last word, I beg to excuse myself from being his
opponent: I will not contend with him for that point of honor; especially if he
will be so ingenuous as to own, that he writes for that end. The author is not
solicitous, on whose side the last word is, if barely the truth is on his. If,
by any thing hereafter published, he should be convinced that he has been
materially in the wrong, he will publicly acknowledge it; and give the
venerable Society all the satisfaction in his power: But One who has written so
much upon the subject already, may surely be contented hereafter with only
thinking himself in the right, without again telling the world his opinion. And
if he had used as much art on one side, as some persons have on the other; and
played the hero as successfully as they seemed very sure They had done, he
might not improperly put a period to this Second, and, as he hopes, Last
Defense, with, -- Hic Victor caestus artemque repono.
But instead of that, he submits the whole, with all proper deference, to the
judgment of the reader.

CORRECTIONS,
Page, line, from, Read, 42, 16, Top, about toleration, 53, 3, Top, opinions
56, 14, Bot. bishops)

THE END.
Advertisement.
THE foregoing Remarks may possibly fall into the hands of some public-spirited
gentlemen of ample fortunes, abroad; who heartily wish well to New England in
all respects, and particularly as to the encouragement and increase of Learning
here. The Author therefore, not without the advice and request of some
gentlemen among us, whose opinion has much weight with him, takes this
opportunity just to mention the very grievous loss which Harvard College in
Cambridge, near Boston, New England, lately sustained in the entire destruction
of one of its buildings by fire, together with the whole and valuable Apparatus
for experimental Philosophy; and also the whole public Library (a very valuable
one) excepting a few books which happened to be out of it at that time. The
friends of Learning and of New England, who may be both able and charitable,
need not be informed how gratefully and respectfully any expression of their
good will to said College, toward repairing so heavy a loss, would be received.

Boston, June 20. 1764. J. Mayhew.


