THE QUAKERS ASSISTING, To preserve the Lives of the Indians, in the BARRACKS,
vindicated: Showing wherein, the Author of the Quaker Unmasked, has turned
King's Evidence; impeached himself, and cleared the Quakers from all the heavy
Charges he has Published against them.

Proverbs 10.23. It is sport for a Fool to do Mischief, etc. But a Fool shall
be caught in his own Folly. The Impudence of wicked Men.
Is Monstrous to behold!
The Offspring of the Lions Den
Are cursed, as we are told.
Wade. NUMBER. II.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year MDCCLXIV.

THE Second Part of the Quakers ASSISTING, etc.
AS I have undertook to Vindicate the Conduct of our worthy Citizens, I think
there remains something more to advance, to Incomomise their Actions; and to
show to the World the darefull Consequences of the others Conduct. We must all
allow, that we are Subordinate to England; our Laws receive their Essence, i.e.
Their very Life and Being from the English Laws; therefore I say, while we are
thus situated, it is impossible to form Laws here Contrary to those Laws: And
where our Legislative body to agree together, form an Edict, and publish it as
such, it could have no more Weight or Force here, then a single Blank; because
there is nothing to support it; yet we derive from the Essence of the English
Laws, a Privelege to make such Acts, as may serve our Necessities or Occasions;
but when they come upon Compotion with the Royal Laws, they must all nuckle
into Subordination. I look upon this nearly a simelar Case with the Quakers and
their Society Rules: Notwithstanding they are satyriz'd by a set of mean
envious Lowliv'd Scriblers, I have Transcribed in the first Place a Law; that
was made in Heaven, and given to Moses, by GOD himself; a Law that is binding
(as I there observed) to all Nations of People; a Law that it is impossible for
Man to be exempt from; he must either submit in mercy, or in Judgment: I say,
this Law is the most extensive and the most binding, for the good of
Indiveduals, in civil Society, of any Law that ever was Published on Earth;
i.e. Whosoever shedeth Man's blood, by Man his blood shall be shed: If a
Stranger or Sojourner live with thee, thou shall love him as thy self. What can
be more binding? Nay the Almighty has been so particularly careful of his
Creatures, that he has stamped the very Image of this Law in the Heart of every
Man, and there it remains (until Men give themselves up to utter Destruction)
that a Man cannot see his Neighbor in Danger of loosing that Life, which GOD
has decreed shall End in the Course of Nature, without making him all the help
in his Power; no more than he can take it from him: But if an Omission of that
sort should ever happen, what can be more convincing to the World, then that
Person is, a party concerned in the murder, or at least consents to that horrid
Crime, which brings him in equally guilty: These are undeniable Facts, and now
I come to consider, the several Denominations of People, respecting worship, as
they have each of them Rules in their Society, suiting their Inclinations to
keep Matters in a good Decorum among their own Members, which is commendable:
Yet when this universal Law calls for immediate submission; it is impossible the
Society, Rules can in any sort interfear, the one is an act in civil Society,
the other only rules in the Religious, the one is Instituted by Christians, the
other has the Prevalance over both Christians and Heathens, throughout the
World. The one is instituted by the great Creator of the Universe, an
Irrepealable Law to the End of Time, for the well-being of his Creator's; the
other is instituted by (sometimes) well thinking Men, to keep their Members
within the Bounds of good order: Then all those Rules, in each Religious
Society, that are good, must be Consequents of this Royal Law, and have such a
near Unity and Affinity with it, that they Contribute mightily to the
Propogation and Promulgation of it, they are so incorporated with it, that its
impossible to set them at Variance. How then can any Man be so wretchedly
blind, as to suppose, that any Society of people can form Rules to bar against
divine Justice? well, that is what this Unmasker asserteth, when he saves; the
Quakers forsook their Principles in helping to save the Lives of their
Neighbors: Then, I say, agreeable to the Import of his Arguments, or as he
would fain have it, and if they had stood Neuter, according to his faint
Opinion of their Principles, they would not only have barred against this Divine
Law, but would have bid open Defiance to it, etc. However I shall now undertake
to show the Reader, wherein this Writer has cleared the Quakers from all the
heavy Charges, he himself has thrown upon them; i.e. He seemingly Evidenceth
against them in a Chain of Satirical invectives, without instancing one single
Fact: Nay, he proves no one Thing against them, wherein a standard by, can say,
ill they have done; therefore I say, the whole Charge retorts upon himself, and
he must un(...) it: there is none else to share with (...) Man seemingly
Charges (...) Justice, with a Breach of some one or more of the Laws, whereby
he looks upon himself injured, the Court will require Facts produced, before
they can give Judgment; and this Accuser not being able to produce any Thing,
more than calumnious Accusations, without ^^^ancing one single fact, whereby
the Defendant has broke any one Law, or even Transgressed the Rules of
Morality, these Defendant is immediately discharged, and cleared of, and from,
all the false seeming Accusations. (I ask what has cleared him?) and answer,
the Accusers own Evidences, given before the Bench, which was upon a strict
enquiry, no other but slanderous and unwarantable Expressions, accompanied with
bitterness of Heart against his Neighbor; Not one single Fact proved; I look
upon this to be a parallel Case with the Quakers and this Enemy to all good,
who has been Stigmatizing that Society with being guilty of party Rage,
publishing inflamatary Pamphlets, asserting many falsehoods to swell the Current
of prejudices, nearly a blasphemer of GOD, and a beliar of the Holy GHOST; but
has proved not one of those Charges: Nay he has not produced one single
position, that has weight enough in it self, to persuade me to forbear
asserting, that they are all positive falsehoods. Well, what follows? Why a
shower of Rain, falling from the Clouds, must lite somewere. So must these
Accusations, that have been uttered, by the Month of one of Baal's priests:
They cannot be lost, they must lite somewere; (I ask were?) He has entirely
cleared the Quakers, and accused none else. I answer they must return to the
Place from whence they came; there is none other place for them; i.e. The Dog
must lick up his own Vomit, and the Hog must still wallow in the Mire: And this
is all I can find his long written Harrangue proves, that he himself is, (and
not the Quakers,) the promoter of party Rage, publisher of inflamatery
pamphlets, asserting many falsehoods, to swell the Current of prejudices, nearly
a Blasfamer of GOD, and a beliar of the Holy GHOST. I think the D -- l. acted
in a very Rascally manner with this poor fellow; I quite pity him; it was that
Serpent set him to work, in the very beginning; dictated his whole writing,
which indeed might seem some Ease or Help to him, for the present, because he
had no more to do, then to write after him, and at that Time doubtless showed a
great deal of Love and Friendship to him; but behold! when his faithful
Servants was like to be detected, and the Villainous Scheme brought to Light,
that old Serpent slipped (as the saying is) his Neck out of the Halter, and
leaves the Unmasker a condemned Criminal to answer for the whole, etc. Well
what remains, but to consider in speculation the Consequence of that Horrid
Act? May not the Hand of Divine Justice afflict this Land of Pennsylvania, for
the guiltless blood that was shed therein; I mean the blood of the Indians,
that was spilt at Lancaster; as he did Israel with Famine or Pestilence, for
the Transgression of Saul, in Slaying the Gibeonites, who were in Alliance with
them. We may read in the 21. Chap. of the second Book of Samuel, that there was
a Famine over the Land of Judea, for three Years; and when David inquired of
the Lord into the Cause of it, the Answer was, it is for Saul and his bloody
House; because he slew the Gibeonites. The King then called the Gibeonites, and
queried of them what he should do for them? In doing of which he might appease
the Wrath of divine Justice.) Their answer was the Man that consumed us and
that devised against us; let seven Men of his Sons be delivered unto us, and we
will hang them up unto the LORD, in Gibeah of Saul: This being done, the Lord
was pleased, to bless the Land again." Here we see that the Inanimate Earth
must bear the Curse of GOD's Wrath, for a Time, until the Blood of Readiness nigh
Relatives made the Aronement, for his Crime. Oh! my esteemed Citizens, if that
should be the Case with us, how would you rejoice in secret, to feel the
unspeakable Peace, that would arise in your Hearts, when Reflecting on that act
of Justice, in obediance to the Royal Law; I mean the saving of the Lives of
your Fellow Creatures. I say, it must afford hearty Satisfaction, to know
yourselves clear of the Blood of all Men, and that you, by your honest
Endeavors, and the blessing of Heaven, has protected and preserved the Lives
of more than one hundred of your Neighbors. One other Instance I shall give;
and that was on our own Continent, in Boston Government, where the Quakers were
used in the most cruel Manner, that the Serpentine Nature in Man could invent,
they bore cruel Whippings, cutting off their Ears, and several were murdered,
and for no other reason, then for their faithful obedience to CHRIST. And this
was all acted by this Unmasker's dear Brethren, viz. Envious, Malicious,
Hard-hearted, Presbyterians. I don't remember ever reading, or bearing tell,
that any one Quaker was ever put to Death, for his Religious Principles, but in
Boston Government: beware, beware, my Countrymen, keepthe Reins of Government
out of the Hands of Presbyterians; for I believe they never had it, but that
one Time, since the building of Babel; and I pray, they never may have it more,
until Time is swallowed up in Eternity. Well what follows? Why the Judgment of
GOD upon their Land, as I have heard one of their Inhabitants say; that the
Land about Boston was as agreeable too, and bore, as good Wheat, as any Part of
the Eastern Colony: But since they had put the Quakers to Death, that same
Ground has never brought fourth any Wheat to persection. This was in the Year
1659, and whether the Judgment will Terminate here, divine Wisdom only knows.
How convincing must these Citations be, to every solid thinking Man, that our
worthy Citizens could have done no one Thing more pleasing to GOD, then their
joining together, as one Man, in Vindicating his Righteous Law, with their
Hands and Hearts, lifted up to implore a Blessing on their concentious
Endeavors; for we see, by the above cited Instances, that there is no
Atonement to be made for Wilful murder, but by sheding the blood of the
Murderer; or the Earth must feel the weight of GOD's Wrath. Althoug King Saul
had been dead a Number of Years, yet infinite Wisdom, in his own Time, made the
firtle Soil of Palastine become a dry and barren Land, for that one Man's cruel
act; and that not parpitrated on a single Isrealite, but on Strangers or
Sojourners, i. e. a Parallel Case with that at Lancaster, only with this odds,
Saul, was King of Isreal, and had the Rule of Government in his Hands, and it
is said, he did it in his Zeal; whereas those Rebels had no Power, but what
they received from Lucifer: nor no Zeal but to vindicate their Masters Cause:
And as to the second Instance, History informs us, that the Judgments of GOD
was evidently manifested, on several of those wicked Men in being brought to
stange and untimely Deaths* Their Governor, John Endicot, was visited with a
loathsome Disease, in so much that he stunk alive, and so died with Rottenness:
Richard Billingham, which succeeded Endicot, some Years after went Distracted,
and so he died: General Aderton was Riding toward his own House, when his
Horse took fright at a Cow, crossing the Way, and threw him down so violently,
that he died, his Eyes being started out of his Head, his Brains out of his
Nose, his Tongue out of his Mouth, and his blood out of his Ears, John Norton,
the high Priest of that infernal Clan had been at his Worship-House, in the
Forenoon, and intended to go again in the Afternoon and as he was walking in
his House, he fetched a great Groan, and leaned his Head against the
Mantle-Tree of the Chimney, and was heard to say, the Hand or the Judgments of
the LORD are upon me; these were his last Words, and died away Those were some
of the Chief leaders of that cruel Tribe of inhuman Butchers, whose
Catrastrophy I have given to my Readers; though but briefly. And I can find no
more good Men among all the Boston Presbyterians, then the Angels found in
Sodom, when they were sent to Destroy it. They found but Righteous Lot; I can
find but Righteous John Cotton whose Principles and Practice I am fond of
publishing to the World: He was a Presbyterian, and I believe the best
Preacher, as well as the best Man they had among them; he ever opposed
Per^^^^tion, and gave his Reason for it in the following Words, viz. I remember
how at our Departure from England, I preached on Acts the 4th v. 11. And showed
from that Text, that there was an inward Grace, which was to be minded, and
that therefore, I will not give my Vote for Persecuting the Asserters of that
Doctrine? I don't see how the Presbyterians can be angry at me, for they may
see how, impartially I deal, between them and the Quakers; and that it is really
for want of Matter that I don't praise them more: Well, at last, those
Persecutors had to give an Account at the Righteous Judgment Seat of Heaven,
and there receive their Sentence, for that cursed Act, and the Land groans (if
the word may be allowed) under the load of that Innocent Blood, to this Day;
yet the same Principels, and Spirit, seems to Rule in that Society; at this
Time, as did in their Brethren I have just been speaking of; (though I believe
'not' all; I believe there is good Men amongst them;) but oh! their Leaders,
their Leaders, cause GOD's People to Err; (observe) the Prophet when speaking
of Israel, saves the Leaders of my People cause them to Err; these I suppose
to be the Priests, and their Adhearants, among the Pharisees; for they in
common had the Rule in Church and State, viz. The Prophet does not say, those
Leaders were GOD's People, o not that they were even his Creation; nay might we
not suppose (did not Reason bar against it) that those very Leaders, whom the
Prophet speaks off, had tumbled out of another Region, into the World, and but
interloped themselves amongst God's People, and their usurped Authority; and
then Endeavored to work out all Sense of God, and godliness, that had taken
Place in the Hearts of the People, by levening them into their own Principels,
inculcating into their Minds Vice, Immorality, Hatred, Envy, evil-speaking
bitterness of Heart, and a perpetual Hatred to the Seaduces and Essences, which
were a better People then themselves: Here is the very Model of our
Presbyterians; but I had liked to have called them Pharisees; and indeed I have
but one Thing to object against it, and that is perhaps In^^ght be puzzled to
prove, to every Man's satisfaction, how those hateful Principles have been
preserved, in such lively color ((...) display) for so many hundred Years;
that as, from the Externation of the Pharisees, to the coming forth of the
Presbyterians, However, I Will give you my opinion freely, which is, that they
have been kept in a warm Clime, in the lower Regions, until Lecipher the Sechim
of that World, and now Chief Ruler of their Society, by long and unwearied
(...), but at length found an openness of Heart in some of their Proginators,
to receive those Principles as freely as the wide Ocean receives the (...);
nay there is no one Thing (...), then that their Leaders, then Advocates, (...)
more then the Destruction of God's (...) into their Minds. Vice Immorality,
Hatred, (...) Evil speaking, bitterness of Heart and a perpetual dislike to all
other religious Societies, though far better then themselves; ot how can it be
otherwise? Don't we see every Week almost a fresh brand, spewed out of the
Mouth of old Crocus, on purpose to scourge the Quakers? But alaas! for them,
they are whipping their own backsides; nay not contented without striping to
the very Buff, and then lay on, Jehu like, by guess: I remember hearing People
say, when I was a Boy, that guess work is best; when it hits right; then this
must be right, and agreeable to Scripture Doctrine, where it is said, he that
diggeth a Pit for another, shall fall into it himself.

The true Born PENNSYLVANIAN.
From my Farm-House this 26th Day of May. 1764. Between the Capes of Delaware
and the Allagahania Mountains. NUMBER II. to be continued if Occasion; The
Reader is desired to Correct some Errors in the first Part.



FINIS

