A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN AT ELIZABETH-TOWN, TO HIS FRIEND IN NEW YORK.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ANDREW STEUART MDCCLXIV

A LETTER, etc.
OF all the Pamphlets you sent me on the Differences in Pennsylvania, none
surpised me so much as that entitled, " A Letter from Charles Read, Esquire to the
Honorable John Ladd, Esquire" -- When I consider this Letter either as the
Production of the Secretary or Judge, I am amazed to think how it came into
print. As Secretary, it was out of his Province to write such a Letter to
Justices; he had nothing more to do, than to signify his Excellency's Orders of
Protection; and had the Governor not thought it necessary to give any Account
of the Disturbances in Pennsylvania, the Letter-Writer should have said so, and
delivered the Governor's Sentiments, and not his Own. -- As a Judge there is no
Excuse; and it grieves me to think that a Justice of the Supreme Court, should
so far forget himself, as to give his Opinion upon Hearsay, and brand People
with the Name of MURDERERS, upon bare Report.

The Letter has a most extraordinary Beginning: I should be glad to know who
the some Persons of good Character in Philadelphia, are, upon whose Application
the Governor so readily granted his License and Protection for some Indians to
reside in this Province; and who those Indians are, that we are told, "have
been always in the English Interest."

The Letter-Writer certainly knows: Why did he not then speak out? I am sure
indifferent Men will think it very strange to endeavor to interest Magistrates
in Favor of Indians, by Invectives against Men they are Strangers to, as well
as to the Motives of their Conduct.

Any Application from private Persons, of ever so good Character, in my
Opinion, was not a sufficient Reason to issue an Order of Government for the
Protection of Indians, charged with high Crimes, by the Inhabitants of the
Frontier-Counties of Pennsylvania. The People will judge for themselves; and
when they know that the Government of Pennsylvania did not apply, but that
these Indians ought to be in the City of Philadelphia, they will naturally
construe this Letter as a premeditated Thing, and an entering voluntarily on
one Side of a Question, and giving a partial Judgment against a Number of Men,
on the bare Word of some Persons who are not known, in favor of some Indians,
who may be Enemies, for ought we know

But to brand a People with the Name of MURDERERS -- to represent them in a
State of Infatuation -- to charge them with Crimes of the blackest Dye, surely
required better Evidence than bare Report; and plainly shows that the
Letter-Writer had inlisted himself as Advocate in a Matter and Measures wherein
the Province was not in the least concerned, but he determined to support.

"Weak Minds are apt to be inflamed," he is pleased to say, "on reading an
Article in the Gazette, of a few Persons being killed by Indians, etc." -- And
no Wonder, as the Indian Mode of War is horrid, and their Cruelty shocking: But
this is the first Time I have ever heard it palliated, and that generous Ardor
that is raised on the Report of Indian Inroads, (which, if properly directed,
would chastise Indian Insolence) styled a Weakness of Mind, and lowered to a
Ferment rather disgraceful to Human Nature. At the same Time he confesses the
Affair at Lancaster has raised his Resentment; whether it is a Proof of the
Weakness of his Mind, I leave to him to determine. This he must allow, that the
People have as good a Right to judge as himself; and it may be feared they will
not impute Weakness to him only.

But he has drawn his Pen not so much to signify the Governor's Orders, as to
write professedly in Favor of Measures that cannot be justified; and has not
hesitated to condemn without Evidence, and to speak of Indians in a Manner none
can approve.

Had he reflected ever so little on the present Affairs, he must have found
that it was not a Time to cry up Indian Numbers, when we are justly arming to
scourge them for their Insolence and Cruelty: He would have found that such
Stories might discourage the inlisting Men for the Campaign; and that when the
People hear, from his Pen, that such are the Indians and the Situation of their
Country, that half a Million of Men (for of so many as least consisted the
Armies on all Sides the last War) are not able to effect their Ruin, might it
not naturally follow that our People may be backward to inlist and dispirited
when led to the Field: Consequently he should have attended to, and considered,
before he blindly espoused a Party, and asserted Facts he can have no Evidence
to support: But his over Zeal has prevented the bad Effects his round Assertion
might otherwise have produced.

There are many other Things in this extraordinary Letter which I would take
Notice of, but I have exceeded the Bounds I prescribed, which nothing could
have induceed me to, but the Regard I have for Jersey, and my real Sorrow to
see the Authority of its Government prostituted, to support a Party in the
Protection of Indians in this Province, which they found themselves unable to
do in their own.

I am, Your Humble Servant, W. P.
Elizabeth-Town, February. 1764.

