COPY OF LETTER From CHARLES READ, Esquire TO The Hon: JOHN LADD, Esquire And his
Associates, Justices of the Peace for the County of GLOUCESTER.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by ANDREW STEUART, at the Bible-in-Heart, in
Second-street (Price 3 old Pennies) 1764.

Copy of a Letter from CHARLES READ, Esquire to the Hon. JOHN LADD, Esquire and his
Associates, Justices of the Peace for the County of Gloucester.
GENTLEMEN,
SOME Persons, of good Character, at Philadelphia, having applied to his
Excellency the Governor, for his License for some Indians, who have been always
in the English Interest, to reside in your Town, he has been pleased to grant
his License, and the Protection of this Government, by his Order of this Day,
directed to all Officers civil and military.

The late Outrage committed in Lancaster, is such a notorious Violation of the
Rights of Government, and a Crime of so black a Dye, that I have not the least
Doubt but that the Perpetrators of it will, in good time, suffer the Punishment
the Law inflicts upon Murderers; for although their Consciences may be hardened,
or they at present in a State of Infatuation, yet the Time must come when these
Heats will subside, and Matters stand on a right Footing, then these
Transactions must be enquired into; and would any Man in his Senses have such a
Cloud hanging over him and his Estate, which would, by his own Rashness, be
subjected to large Demands and Forfeitures to the Crown?

To have fallen on a Town of the Enemy Indians, and to have destroyed them and
it, might have terrified the Indians, and lessened the Number of our Enemies;
but such an inhuman Murder as that at Lancaster, can only serve to convince the
World, that there are among us Persons more savage than Indians themselves. To
be cruel in War, and while the Blood is in a high Ferment, is frequent; but to
assemble at a Distance, to march many Miles with Intent, in cool Blood, to
butcher defenseless People, who were placed where the Magistracy pleased to
order them, was an amazing Depravation of every Sense of Virtue and Humanity.

Would Wars ever have an End, if every Person who had lost a Relative in it
should exercise his own Judgment, and take away the Life of any Individual of
the Nation they had been at War with, whenever (after a Peace) he should have
Strength so to do?

Weak Minds are apt to be in an extraordinary Manner inflamed, and get into
violent Ferments, on reading an Article in the Gazette of a few Persons being
destroyed by Indians; and yet these very Persons will with little or no
Emotion, run over an Article of a Battle between two Armies, where Thousands
fell on a Side. They get heated by the Mode of War, though it is of little
Consequence whether the Scalp or Finger of a dead Corpse is taken off as a
token of Victory, or how many Wounds it has. As a free People, Indians have the
same Right to go to War, as any other Nation. When they become Subjects, they
have the same Right of living on Lands of their own, or of other People's, by
the Owner's Permission. If they remove from one Place to another, the Overseers
of the Poor may demand the usual Security, and the Magistrates deal with them
as with others, for Misbehaviour.

I know of no Law to oblige them to remove from one Place to another; while
they comply with the Laws in Force, their Treatment ought to be the same with
other Subjects in like Circumstances; their Persons and Effects equally claim
the Protection of the Laws; and to murder or assault one of them, is a Crime
equal to the doing of the same to another of His Majesty's Subjects, the Color
of the Skin can make no essential Difference; to have a yellow one in the
present Circumstances, may be a Misfortune, but not a Crime. I confess the
Lancaster Massacre has raised in me a very high Resentment; and whatever the
Indians may have done treacherosly, I really think this Act, and the destroying
in cool Blood three Indian Guides, who undertook to pilot the Paxton Volunteers
(who were starving when they met with them) to Fort-Augusta, and by whose
Assistance the whole Party were undoubtedly saved from perishing by Famine; to
destroy these Persons, who, at their Entreaty, had done them such eminent
Service, and saved their Lives, equals any thing we have met with; nor can any
Person show that Indians have ever done worse; if they have, it has never come
to my Knowledge. Persons who thirst after the Blood of Indians, should go to
the Seat of War to show their Courage. If there were no Crime in it, nothing
that would subject them to Punishment, no Forfeiture of Estate, yet there is
something so very mean in attempting the Lives of a wretched People who have
voluntarily thrown themselves into your Power, that no Man of real Courage or
Bravery would bear the Thought of doing it. Many of the Indians have been very
useful to us, and still may be so. The Nations far back, and whose Intercourse
have been chiefly, if not totally with the French, have been by them persuaded
to enter into a War; and is this to be wondered at, that they should believe
the People they had long traded with, and been long allied to? We should rather
admire their Constancy to their old Friends; and have we not Reason from thence
to conclude, that when they know us, and a Peace is firmly established between
us and them, they will be as firm and constant in their Friendship to us as
they have been to the French. To consider them in a true Light, we should
recollect, that on this Continent their Numbers are very great; that every
Individual will purchase some Article of British Manufacture; that it is Trade
only that enables Britain to maintain Armies, and send forth Fleets, which
terrify the World, and raises the British Name in the most distant Parts of the
Universe; and the Indians will (as soon as they are undeceived, and Peace is
established with them) make us Masters of the most valuable Trade for Furs and
Peltry in the World, and thereby contribute to the Riches and Glory of the
Nation.

There are People so sanguine that, without considering, would wish the whole
Race of Indians extinct, but they show their Ignorance of the real Interest of
the Nation; they would have us set about destroying them Root and Branch -- It
needs but little Reflection to convince them, that while such immense Tracts of
Land lie to the Westward, such Attempt is vain, nor would all the Forces that
have last War taken the Field in Europe effect it. I should join heartily with
the most forward to make the best Incursions we could into their Country, but
to commit no more Slaughter there, than to bring them to a just Sense of their
Misconduct, and make them, for the future, dread our Resentment, and learn to
know that it was their real Interest to behave friendly to us, and cultivate
our Regard for them. Things will, I think, clearly appear in this Light to any
Person who will coolly and deliberately consider the Matter devoid of Passion
or of Prejudice.

There must be many now in your Country, who have heard their Ancestors recount
the Kindness with which the Indians treated them when it was in their Power to
have destroyed the whole Number of English Settlers in a Day. They then fed
them, and gave them all Kind of friendly Assistance; I hope their Descendants
will now let Humanity, let Christianity prevail over them to return the
Kindness, and not say to the Charge of these poor distressed People the Actions
of the remote Nations of Indians, to whom they are as much Strangers as we are.
When the Treachery of the Indians is represented, Circumstances bad in
themselves may be exaggerated (though I have no Doubt but too much is true) I beg
you will guard your Neighbors against taking up Tales they may hear of these
Indians, which, when enquired into, may be found without any Foundation; if
they misbehave, the Mgistrates can punish them; therefore I cannot suppose that
any will be so imprudent, by any Conduct of their own, to involve the
Government into Difficulty, and themselves in invietable Ruin.

I am Gentlemen, Your very humble Servant, CHARLES READ.
Burlington, January 7, 1764.

