Mr. Croswell's DISCOURSE ON Free Justification through Christ's Redemption.

Free Justification through Christ's Redemption.

A DISCOURSE Delivered, in Substance, AT THE FRENCH Meeting House in
School-Street, October 17. 1764. From ROMANS III. v. 23, 24. IN WHICH The NEW
GOSPEL Contained in the Writings of Messirs. Bellamy and Cumming, VIZ. That Men
love God, and truly repent of their Sins before they believe in Jesus Christ;
is weighed in the Balance.

By A. CROSWELL, V. D. M. In BOSTON.

PROVE. XXIII. 23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not.
Veritate dicenda Munere fungor.
BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by T. and J. FLEET, and GREEN and RUSSELL. 1765

Christian Reader,
THOUGH I was earnestly desired to print the following Discourse; and could not
be without hopes that so plain an attempt to magnify Christ, might be followed
with his blessing; what determined me was an apprehension that it might serve,
with some enlargements, in lieu of my Examination of Mr. Cumming's
Animadversions on my letter to himself, and Mr. Bellamy's remarks upon it. The
great design of which was to bear testimony against that doctrine which I had
opposed in the sermon, without the least thoughts of printing, viz. That men
love God and truly repent of their sins, before they believe in Jesus Christ.

THE piece would have been printed in Mr. Cumming's life time, had I not waited
for his second part which he promised the public. The printer's going away last
winter for the small pox, prevented its being published then. Providential
hindrances have had their weight: And besides, though Mr. Cumming was treated
with decency, there were some things in it, that would not read so well as if
he were now living. I never differed with that Gentleman in anger; and when he
died, I mourned for him as a brother. Nor did the death of any one ever so
thoroughly convince me of that solemn truth, viz. that the graves were ready for
me. However, when death has appeared most near I have thought I should sin
against the God of my life, if I did not endeavor to remove the vail which he
has cast over the glorious gospel of the blessed God. They are but poor
friends to Jesus Christ, who are not willing he should be magnified, without
any regard to man. Were the faints in heaven to know what is done on earth,
they would rejoice at the confutation of any tenets, which they once, through
mistake, thought for the glory of the Lamb that was slain. 'Twas hoped, as was
said, that printing this would make the Examination needless; since opposing
the beforementioned doctrine was the only thing that seemed to make it
necessary for me to write at all. My character did not appear to suffer: The
writings of those divines could never convince people that it was blasphemy in
me to hold no man can love God while he looks upon him as his everlasting
enemy. The little odium of my being a separatist is removed in the Appendix.

I have only to add my prayers, that God's blessing may accompany what is
agreeable to his word, and that we all may be heartily convinced of these
truths, viz. That all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; and that
we are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ.

A. CROSWELL.
BOSTON, March 1. 1765.
A DISCOURSE.
ROMANS III. v. 23, 24. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God;
being justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ.


ALL of us stand in need of justification; for, as Paul says, all have sinned
and come short of the glory of God: And then comes in the sweet gospel -- we
are justified freely by God's grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. He knew that he himself was justified freely by God's grace through the
Redeemer; and was forever harping on that divine string. When ministers
believe, and therefore speak; when they know that justification is quite free;
it is sweeter to them than the honey, and the honeycomb, to bear witness for
God, that great sinners, even the chief of sinners, are welcome to
justification through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

IN speaking to these words, I propose to observe the following method, viz.

I. To show that God made man for his own glory. II. THAT all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God. III. THAT we are therefore by consequence in a
state of condemnation. IV. THAT though we are naturally in such a miserable
state, we are justified freely by God's grace through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ. And, V. TO improve and apply what shall have been said under the
foregoing heads; bringing all home to our particular cases, and to our hearts
and consciences too by the blessing of God.
According to this method --

I. I AM to show that God made man for his own glory. It Is implied, that God
made man for his own glory in the text. Coming short of God's glory, is coming
short of the end for which man was made; and God's glory is his end in all
things. He can have no higher end than his own glory. Reasonable creatures
should aim higher than their own glory, even at the glory of God. But God
himself can aim no higher, than that he himself should be glorified. All things
were made to glorify him. For his own glory he made angels, archangels, and all
the hosts of heaven. For his glory he made the firmament, the sun, moon and
stars, the earth and the seas, and all things therein, whether animate or
inanimate; and particularly for this end did he make man the lord of this lower
creation -- that he might show forth his creator's glory. He made him little
lower than the angels, and crowned him with glory and honor, expecting that
man would honor him, the fountain of his honor, and give him the glory due to
his name. Not that man, or any creatures, even the most exalted, can make God
more glorious than he is. For his glory is essential and eternal; and can
neither admit of increase or diminution. And besides, creatures receive their
all from him: For of him and through him and to him are all things, to whom be
glory forever. But man, as other beings, glorifies God by owning him to be such
a glorious being as he is, possessed of infinite excellencies and perfections.
Nor does God want to be praised and glorified by the works of his hands, from
any thing analagous to what there is in man, which makes him pleased with the
praises and acclamations of others; but he would be glorified and praised,
because praise is comely, reasonable and decent; and because glorifying him is
enjoying him: The fruition of God, and giving him glory, are joined together on
earth as well as in heaven. I am now,

IIdly, To show that all have sinned and come short of the glory of God; which
are the very words of inspired Paul. God's creatures, as was observed, glorify
him by owning him to be such a being as he is. So the heavens show forth the
glory of the Lord, and the firmament his handy work: Day unto day utters
speech, night unto night shows knowledge. The invisible things of him, from
the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. The heavenly hosts actively
glorify their maker; by doing his will, and by their ceaseless hallelujahs they
own him to be possessed of infinite wisdom, justice, holiness, power, goodness
and truth. And as those beings honor and glorify God actively, and passively,
who own and acknowledge his glorious perfections; so they come short of his
glory, who will not ascribe to him the glory that is his due. This is the case
of devils, and of the children of men by nature. Both men and devils have
sinned and come short of the glory of God. The angels who kept not their first
estate, but fell by transgression, denied the God above to be such a glorious
being as he is. Our first parents also, by the instigation of the evil one,
sinned against God, and in effect denied him to be infinitely wise, holy, just,
powerful, good and true. And as did Adam and Eve, so do all their posterity, by
ordinary generation. We derive not only guilt from them (by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners) but an impure and sinful nature, a bent
and bias to depart from the living God. As a fountain casts forth its
waters, so our hearts cast forth their wickedness. We rob God of his glory;
instead of glorifying God with our bodies and spirits which are his; we improve
the powers of our souls, and the members of our bodies, as instruments of
unrighteousness unto wickedness: We virtually deny all the glorious perfections
of his nature. This is the case as Paul supposes of all; for he says all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God; and elsewhere that the whole world
are guilty; that God has concluded all under sin; and that every mouth must be
stopped.

III. I AM now to show that having sinned and come short of the glory of God,
man must necessarily by consequence be in a state of condemnation. This is
implied: For if all have sinned and come short of the glory of God; and if we
stand in need of justification by the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, then
man is in a state of condemnation, and obnoxious to the divine wrath. And
accordingly the apostle says, men are all by nature the children of wrath,
Ephesians. II. v. 3. So we read, that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men; and that for such things
sake comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. -- As the
angels who did not keep their first estate, but sinned and came short of the
glory of God, are reserved in chains under darkness, and suffer the divine
wrath; so all men naturally, and without Christ, are exposed to suffer the
wrath and vengeance of God with them. Hence the doom of those who live
according to the bias of nature, and die in their sins, will be, depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. The

IVth POINT is to make it appear that though all have sinned and come short of
the glory of God, we are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ.

OH! this is good news. There is not one of you who has seriously attended to
what has been spoken, but he must have a desire to hear about free
justification by God's grace through the redeemer. Though God had thoughts of mercy
for poor sinners from eternity, he was resolved to be merciful to them in such
a way as might not be injurious to his justice; for justice is essential to God
as well as mercy: He will by no means clear the guilty, without satisfaction to
his justice: He had rather the whole world should have perished eternally, than
any one should be justified and saved in such a way as would in the least
reflect upon his justice. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness,
that he might be just, etc. -- God was determimed to justify and save sinners
so that he might declare himself to be a just God and a Savior. The Father and
Son were equally engaged in the redemption of sinners -- And 'twas determined
that the redeemer should come to Zion, and in a body prepared for him make
atonement for sin by dying on the cross -- And accordingly when the fullness of
time was come, the Son of God became the son of man; being made of a woman and
made under the law, after he had perfectly obeyed the law for us, he was made a
curse for us, by dying the accursed death of the cross, that he might redeem us
from the curse of the law, and reconcile us to God: The blood of one who was
God as well as man, and (hence called the blood of God, Acts xx. 28.) being of
infinite merit. Accordingly we read the Messiah was cut off, but not for
himself; that God laid on him the iniquity of us all; that he made him sin for
us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; that
we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sin, according to the
riches of God's grace. And so in our text Paul says we are justified freely by
God's grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. So that it appears
now, we are welcome to justification for Christ's sake, without bringing any
thing of our own to recommend us to God. We are justified only by Christ; and
though our justification cost him his heart's blood, he having paid the utmost
farthing for it; yet this glorious privilege comes freely to us; it comes of
mere grace; not by the grace that is wrought in us, as papists teach,
confounding justification with sanctification; but by the gracious favor of
God to us, without any worthiness at all.

IT IS said Joseph found grace in the eyes of his master, Genesis xxxix. v. 4. But
there was a reason for it: He saw that every thing that he did prospered. There
was something in Joseph to invite that grace. But the favor of God comes to us
through Christ freely: freely: Freely and grace signify the same thing: The truth
is doubled that it may be the more established. There is not a sweeter passage
in the whole bible; it is enough to make the heart of any one that believes it
leap for joy. That also which I mentioned before is similar: We have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of God's
grace; i. e. according to the exceeding, abundant and overflowing grace and
mercy of God. Agreeably hereto, Isaiah says, chap. lv. v. 1. in the name of
God, Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters -- and in Rev. xxii. v.
17. we read -- Whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely. So that
it is plain that as things now are, as Christ has wrought out redemption
Christ redeems us by power as well as price, but the latter is here chiefly
spoken of.
for us, we are all of us welcome to the pardon of sin, and the justification
of our persons, without bringing any thing of our own to recommend us to the
divine favor. Nor, let any perplex the doctrine of free grace with the divine
decree. We must not blend the grant and the decree together. But consider the
grant abstractedly from the decree, otherwise we shall make confusion,
Accordingly, though the apostles held the divine decree, they preached
justification as freely as if there had been no decree at all. And, in
imitation of them, we may say to every one who comes to hear the gospel, to you
is the word of this salvation sent; through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and the justification of your persons. Nor let any one
think that the gospel is to be preached thus; that men are welcome to be
justified for Christ's sake if they have faith. If they know they have not
faith, they are welcome now, believing our text to be true, to apply to
themselves Great opposition has been made of late, to the appropriation of
faith; and that not only from the Arminian quarter, but from some who most
clearly maintain justification by Christ alone. And yet it must needs be that
there was appropriation in Abraham's faith; and if in his, then in our's. For
Paul insists (Romans IV.) that all believers are justified the same way with
father Abraham But if he appropriated, and we do not; then he was justified one
way, and we another; there is an essential difference between his justifying
faith and our's. If the divinity of our opponents is true, it don't appear that
the gospel of peace will, when believed, bring any rational peace into the
soul. If, as the author of the letters on Thereon and Aspasio says (Vol. II. p.
83.) When a man has justifying says in the highest degree, he sees himself
entirely at the sovereign mercy of God, without any claim on God whatsoever, by
virtue of his promises; what ground will he have for peace? For when a
reasonable creature is in danger, it is but reasonable to be afraid. I will
trust and not be afraid, says Isaiah xii. v. 2. implying, that till a man sees
himself safe, he must be afraid or stupid. It Is observable, that these writers
are so far from treading in the footsteps of the flock, that one may challenge
them to find, if they can, in the writings of any learned divines from the
beginning, their doctrine of perfectly free justification, and yet no ground
for appropriation. They will say, it is enough that it is in the bible. But if
it were really there (as I am persuaded it is not) it would be strange, if it
were to be found only in the bible and in their writings. For it is not easy to
believe that the true gospel of Christ has been hid from so many ages and
generations, but in these last days has been revealed to Mr. Glass and his
adherents. I finish with noting, so great is the force of truth, that the
beforementioned writer is sometimes very friendly to that doctrine, which at
other times he takes such pains to confute. But no where more so than in the
simile (which must be understood as giving his sentiments) of a rich man's
causing to be proclaimed in a time of famine: Whosoever will, let him come and
take corn at my granary freely; and the starving person's seeing himself meant
by the proclamation, and encouraging himself, that he should not starve or
want, because he was faithful who had promised. Vol. II. p. 306. Neither Mr.
Hervey, nor any of us, ever held any other appropriation, than what is
evidently contained in this simile.


the redemption purchased by Christ, or to expect justification from God for
his sake. For all things are now ready; the chief of sinners are welcome; and
him that comes to God for justification, encouraged by God's word, he will in
no wise cast out.

I NOW proceed to improve and apply the discourse, And

I. HENCE we learn the woeful depravity of man by the fall of Adam, for all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God. Indeed God made man upright; he made
him little lower than the angels, and crowned him with glory and honor. But
how is the gold become dim, and the fine gold changed! Man, once almost
angelick, is now become lower than the beasts that perish: For they have not
come short of the glory of God, but praise their maker, and answer the end of
their creation. Some deny this original depravity derived from Adam the sinner;
and say men learn wickedness of one another, and are depraved by examples. And
indeed evil examples are corrupting; but this will not account for the world
lying in wickedness -- Mankind could never have universally corrupted their
ways, had they not derived a vitiated nature from their first progenitor. The
wiser heathens saw this propensity to sin, contrary to the light of nature and
conscience, but were puzzled to find the origin. The scripture informs us, that
being descended from fallen Adam, we are transgressors from the womb, and have
a natural propensity to sin against God, and so to come short of his glory.

II. WE learn hence, the adorable condescension and love of God, that such
depraved and perishing creatures should be redeemed by Jesus Christ! That God
should so love the world as to give his Son to die for us; that he should make
him sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him! That the just should die for the unjust, that he might bring us to God!
Such mercy, love and grace, are amazing and incomprehensible to all the
heavenly hosts. And were it not for the slowness of our hearts to believe, we
should every one of us, before we went out of this house, begin the holy
wonder, and join with the innumerable company of angels and the spirits of just
men made perfect, saying, salvation, glory and honor be to him that sits on
the throne, and also the lamb: for worthy is the lamb that was slain, who has
washed us from our sins, and redeemed us unto God by his blood.

III. IF we are justified freely by God's grace through the redemption that is in
Jesus Crist; then those doctrines which are inconsistent with this free
justification are to be rejected. Though we are told so much of free
justification, through the riches of God's grace in Christ Jesus, in the word of
God, yet the christian world are bewitched with the doctrine of justification
by works, which is the religion of nature. Si pietate meremur, is natural
religion; and it is to be feared the greater part of christians join with
Aeneas, so far as to hold, that it is by our own holiness we are recommended to
the divine favor.
The papists are notorious for this: And would to God protestant countries were
strangers to it! But, alas, there is such a bias to the old covenant in men's
hearts, and the blood of Christ not appearing precious as the scripture says
it is, it is thought safer to preach justification as it were by the works of
the law: So that people are often taught to believe, that if they do as well as
they can, what is wanting in their own righteousness shall be made up by
Christ's righteousness; and having the obedience of two to depend upon,
Christ's obedience and their own, they may with humility expect justification
from God. This divinity is as contrary to Paul's in the text, as darkness is to
light. We may learn hence also to reject that new gospel, which has lately
been maintained from the press, Mr. Bellamy says, a sinner apprehending God's
wrath, looks on the law as amiable and glorious, and consequently loves the
lawgiver before he believes the gospel to be true. Dialog. p. 27. So Thereon,
when converted by Mr. Bellamy the second time, is supposed to love God some
time before he believes. Page 194. And it is his standing divinity in all his
writings, that repentance is before faith. And all the Calvinists who differ
from him in this, must wear the name of Antinomians. As Mr. Cumming preached
love before faith, so this is what he insists upon in his Animadversions. He
says, p. 12. that all true religion begins with men's loving God as an
absolute God, i. e. without any regard to, or dependence on Christ's
atonement. Afterward, p. 14. A person is represented to be reconciled to an
absolute God, and also to be truly penitent, but is not entitled to God's
favor: He sees it needful to be united to Christ by faith; and after some
process, believes, and then God is reconciled to him through Christ, who was
before reconciled to God without Christ. P. 5. Undiscerning persons may deny
this -- But it would be a reflection on the understandings of the judicious, to
suppose they could attentively read his piece, and not plainly see he held the
doctrine of love and true repentance before faith. There are some other divines
who embrace the same divinity.


viz. That men love God, and truly repent of their sins, before they believe in
Jesus Christ. According to this divinity, the first thing the awakened sinner
has to do, is to love God, the next thing he has to do, is to repent of all
his sins; and when he has done these two great works, then he is prepared for
free justification by faith. But what sort of a person is he who has loved God
and repented of his sins, but has not yet believed in Christ? The scriptures
know but of two sorts of persons, saints and sinners. But the patrons of this
divinity are forced to create a third sort, who are neither saints nor sinners,
but between both. Regenerate The scripture speaks only of regenerate saints:
But absurd and unscriptural expressions are the genuine offspring of absurd and
unscriptural doctrines.
sinners is the name given to the beings they have created: Though the pious Mr.
Firmin in his zeal against the absurdity, calls such persons damned saints.
Paul says that all lovers of God have a title to heaven, 1 Cor. ii. v. 9. And
heaven is certainly open to those who truly repent, Acts iii. v. 19. So that
die when they will, heaven must be their portion. And yet as unbelievers, they
must be excluded, Mark xvi. 16. Query, what would become of a man who should
die when he was neither a saint nor a sinner, but one of those middle sort of
persons of whom these divines speak. Mr. bellamy virtually owns, (Rem. p. 28.)
that according to his plan, a man may be in such a situation, that if he died
then, he could neither go to heaven nor hell. But he thinks that when any one
has got so far in religion as to be an holy person; there is a promise that he
shall live long enough to be a believer. If this is not what the schools call
reductio ad absurdum; it will be hard to tell what is.
And as this divinity appears shocking at first view, it is utterly inconsistent
with the doctrine of Paul before us, viz. that we are justified freely by God's
grace through the redemption there is in Jesus Christ. For it makes it necessary
for men to be regenerated, lovers of God, true penitents, i. e. real saints, or
godly persons, in order to their being qualified for justification. It Is as a
slaming sword to keep poor souls from Jesus Christ: It bids the minister cry
out in the language of Sybil in Virgil; Procul O procul este prophani: Away,
away from Christ, all ye who are not yet holy. You must not think of coming to
Christ for justification till ye are sanctified: You must be healed first, and
then apply to the physician: Get holy hearts before you come to Christ, and
then come and welcome -- So that at this rate, the hope set before the sinner
in the gospel, gives no encouragement: Instead of looking out of himself to
Christ the end of the law for righteousness; he must keep looking into his
heart to see whether he is an holy person, and so qualified to believe; and not
being able to find the impossible attainment, he must pine away in melancholy
and despair -- A number of such persons I have seen within a twelve month past,
brought to the brink of this gulf by such horrible divinity: As no doubt
others have been led by it heretofore to choose strangling and death rather than
life. The following line of Lucretius, with the addition of one syllable, is
both innocent and applicable. -- Tantum haec relligio potuit suadere malorum.


O how different is this from the gospel preached by Paul; that God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to them;
that he died for the ungodly; and as in our text, that though all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, we are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ; that we need not bring any holiness with
us, but only our sins and misery, and yet be welcome to justification for his
sake. But so much of Christ and free justification would not serve the cause
such divines are promoting. I mean men's loving God as an absolute God while he
appears as a consuming fire with regard to themselves, With regard to
themselves. For this is a true idea of the divinity of Messirs. Cumming and
Bellamy. Mr. Bellamy in his forementioned conversion of Thereon, represents him
as loving God, though he should perish forever. And he teaches us, that as the
boy is not qualified for his father's favor, till he accepts the punishment of
his iniquity, i. e. is reconciled to his father's whipping him; so neither is
the sinner, till he accepts the punishment of his iniquity, qualified for God's
favor: i. e. till he is reconciled to the thoughts of eternal destruction from
him. Rem. p. 23.35. Some have thought what is contended for, is only that the
sinner should see the justice of God in his condemnation. But this is not the
point: We own that when a sinner believes, he sees the just condemned for the
unjust. And accordingly Mr. Bellamy lets us know (p. 19.) that he don't think
it enough for us to see God just in condemning; because the devils and damned
have such conviction in their consciences. But we must have an accord of heart,
a sort of acquiescence in thinking of our own destruction. So Mr. Cumming tells
us a man will never believe, till he acquiesces in his own destruction, as a
righteous and becoming, and consequently amiable act in God. Animad. page 8. He
supposes there is no material difference between his and Messirs. Hooker's and
Shepherd's doctrine on this head. The reader may see their doctrine in Mr.
Firmin's Real Christian, reprinted about twenty years ago, as I am informed, to
prevent people's running into despair. After all, it is but justice to these
divines and to Messirs. Bellamy and Cumming, to own their doctrine is not that
men should be reconciled to the thoughts of their own destruction, so as not to
desire and seek after salvation; but only upon supposition that God should
leave them, and let them perish for ever; looking on what may be, to be really
their case, they must acquiesce in this as a righteous and becoming act of God,
as a good man acquiesces in affliction, without heart risings, or objections to
the contrary. Nay, Mr. Shepherd argues thus -- Why art thou quiet and still,
when God denies thee any common mercy, but because the Lord will have it so?
And he endeavors to prove, that for the same reason we ought to be quiet with
God's will, if he denies us spiritual mercies, and suffers us to perish
eternally. With Mr. Firmin we may bless God there is no such divinity in the
bible.
and returning to him as such. Christ must be, kept out of sight to make the
work go on. For if the sinner should have the least glimpse of the preciousness
of that blood by which we are justified, he would continue what they call an
impenitent person: nor would it be possible for them ever after, to bring him
to repentance. And I pray God they may always meet with this impediment in the
work they are carrying on: May they be divinely hindered in all their attempts
to bring souls to God without a mediator. Nay, they themselves are not
insensible, that another sort of preaching best promotes their design: And
therefore, instead of the glad tidings of great joy which Paul was forever
harping on, they insist continually on vindictive justice; as if the Almighty's
glory consisted chiefly in pouring out his wrath on sinners; Bishop Beveridge
quoting that remarkable passage in Exodus xxxiv. v. 6.7. where God answers the
request of Moses to show him his glory; says, the jewish writers observe here
are no less than thirteen properties of God, and but one only, and that the
last, vindictive.
and say but little of Jesus who delivers from the wrath to come. I myself have
heard a minister of that way preach a most amazing sermon upon hell and
damnation, without saying one word about Jesus Christ.

I KNOW it is pretended that the impleaded divinity is contained in the
doctrine of those Calvinistical divines who hold regeneration is, in order of
nature, before faith. If I might, with deference to these divines, give my
opinion, I would say that those (and I think the current of the protestant
reformers were of this mind) appear to be nearer to the scripture, who hold
that a man is regenerated in believing. However, the beforementioned divines
who explain this differently, don't hold that a man is regenerated before he
believes, so as actually to love God, and repent of his sins while an
unbeliever. Perhaps there was hardly ever a divine but would disclaim the
doctrine of true repentance before faith: For partial repentance cannot be true
repentance; and the repentance that is before faith is but partial. The damning
sin of unbelief must be unrepented of, while a man is an unbeliever. -- And as
for loving an absolute God before faith, and without Christ, whom the scripture
represents as the medium of love, through whom God loves us, and through whom alone
we dare to love God, Henry's Exposition.
it is so absurd, that though the papists virtually embrace something like it in
their faith formed by charity; Antonia Bourignon, a deistical and
enthusiastical writer of the last century, is the only one I know of, who in a
barefaced manner ever maintained that a man may attain to the love of God,
from a view of his essential perfections, without any regard to Jesus Christ
and his atonement. The learned Blackwell confutes her tenet in his ratio
sacra, which being so pertinent to the present dispute, I shall give it to the
reader in his own words: -- He says, Whatever high and great essential
perfections be in God, rendering him in himself infinitely glorious; yet all
mankind being now guilty, and thereupon being naturally endued with a
conscience in his breast, impressed first with guilt, and next with the
holiness, justice, power and omnipresence of the Deity, as the supreme being
and judge who will certainly render to every man according to his works: I say,
considering these things, it is evident, that till once guilty man is persuaded
of some way to get the essential perfections of infinite justice and power in
the Deity reconciled to him, he can never love God, nor delight in him; but on
the contrary, with guilty Adam, will run trembling away from him. So that it is
clear to reason, that the more excellencies guilty man sees in the Deity, so
much the more terrible, instead of amiable, does God become unto him. It is
true, the doctrine of loving God, absolutely considered, upon the account of
his essential excellencies, displayed in creating and preserving goodness,
would indeed do well for man, were he now innocent Adam, without guilt, or the
least sense of it, and had withal God gloriously displaying his essential
perfections, in an unspoiled and beautiful universe, crowning him as the head
and lord thereof, and transacting covenant with him as such. But to preach the
divine perfections, out of Christ, to be lovely or engaging to guilty,
unconverted man, is plainly to say, that the great wisdom, power and
faithfulness of the judge, commends him so much the more to the guilty
panel: Which how far reason can believe, seems not hard to determine. -- He
goes on -- To set this matter in a clearer light -- let it be considered, that
all mankind is guilty, loves sin naturally, and goes on in it; and on the
other hand, bears an impression of the divine justice and power: So from these
two, there naturally rises a strong enmity in man, against the Deity; as
seeing that he cannot please himself, without incurring at the same time the
displeasure of God, as we are plainly told, Coloss. I. 21. that man becomes an
enemy in his mind to God. And if it be asked how this enmity arises? it is
answered, by wicked works. As if the apostle had said, that man by his natural
love to sin, and daily practicing of it, first makes his conscience guilty, and
then his guilty conscience causes an holy, just and powerful God to become
terrible to him. Upon which, the issue of all is, man, as seeing God an enemy
to him, he thereupon becomes an enemy to God. P. 45.46.




THE truth is, this doctrine, make the best of it, has a deistical aspect; and
it is pity any of Christ's ministers should attempt to christen it. Oh how
revived would Jews and Deists be to find christian divines harmonize with them
so far, as to hold a man may be a true lover of God from a view of his
essential perfections without any regard to that Messiah whom they hate? This
is certainly doing the infidels a pleasure; and they must be very stupid, if
they are not very glad, when such affronts are offered to the Son of God. Here
it is natural to ask such divines a question, viz. Where are men to get that
love and repentance, which they are supposed to have before faith? Not out of
the fullness that there is in Christ, in whom it has pleased the Father that
all sulness should dwell. For they are at a distance from him yet. They have
come to God, but not to Christ: They have honored God by love and repentance,
but they dishonor the Son by unbelief, and yet Christ tells us, John V. v. 23.
That he who honors not the Son honors not the Father: This shows that
what they call love and repentance, before faith, are good for nothing. God is
not honored by them, because his Son is dishonored -- Here again the doctrine
shows its Deistical face!
And as they are supposed to get love and repentance, not from Christ's
fullness; they return to God thereby, without considering him as the way to the
Father. So that Christ is put out of his office.

MAY I be permitted on this occasion, to say with suitable respect to the
ministers of Christ: Arise, this matter belongs to you. Consider and speak
your minds: Now is a time to speak and not to keep silence. The honor of your
Savior is called in question: The dispute is whether he is the way to God or
not: Whether sinners return to God through the Mediator, or without him? We have
a strange gospel obtruded upon us, which tells the sinner, he must have nothing
to do with a God in Christ, but with an absolute God only -- And that when he
has by love and repentance returned to him; it may be said hic Christus nihil
fecit. Alluding to what one subjoined to that proud inscription of a Roman
pontiff -- Trajectum plantavit, Louvanium rigavit; Caesar dedit incrementum --
viz. Hic Deus nihil fecit.
This was all done without Christ, without once looking to him as the way to
the father. Is this magnifying Christ? Is this making Jesus all in all? My soul
come not thou into their secret. Were the same mind in us that was in Paul;
were Christ precious to us as he was to him, how shocked should we be at the
divinity which teaches men to return to God, as if no Savior was provided for
them; without the least dependence on his merits. The spirit of Christ in
ministers, must make them zealous against this Christless divinity: And when
the witnesses of one generation are fallen asleep, others shall be raised up in
their stead: The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall perform this.

But it is time to return --

I HAVE said much more against this doctrine than I intended at first: But I
did not know how to leave off; because it appeared to me that while I was
speaking against that tenet I was speaking for Jesus Christ.

III. HENCE let every one of us be exhorted to examine ourselves, whether we
have been justified freely by God's grace through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. Have we believed this report? Have we received it not as the word of
man, but as the word of God, that though all have sinned and come short of the
glory of God, we are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is
in Jesus Christ? And have we thereupon went to God in our hearts for
justification? All that believed the freeness of justification in primitive
times, expected to be justified for Christ's sake: They had not learned that
language, I am a poor creature, I have got an hard heart, I am afraid such an
one as I, so unfit, so unworthy, cannot be welcome to so great a privilege.
This is thought to be consistent with believing the gospel to be true. But it is
a mistake. As soon as God appears to be the author of it, all this fashionable
humility, which is only spiritual pride, vanishes away, like darkness before
the sun. Then the person sees it is safe for him to come to God as an ungodly
sinner, because Christ died for the ungodly, and God says he justifies the
ungodly for his sake. Romans 4.5. He that never dared to present himself before
God with confidence, as an ungodly person, never yet believed to justification.

AND have our discoveries of Christ and free justification purified us inwardly
and outwardly, making us like unto Christ the righteous; for only he that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous: For if the blood of bulls
and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to
the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge our consciences
from dead works to serve the living God? This precious blood sprinkled by
faith, always influences men to answer the redeemer's end in shedding it, by
dying unto sin and living unto righteousness.

ONCE more: Know we any thing of that divine peace, which justified ones are
the subjects of? Romans V. v. 1. Nay, it is reckoned the common experience of such
persons, that they joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, having received the
atonement. V. 2. I know that now a days persons are looked on as eminent
christians, though they are eminently strangers to that joy which is the fruit of
the spirit: Nay, I once heard it declared by a man of some note, of a certain
woman; that for forty years, she had been looked on as the best christian in
the parish; and that for the whole time she appeared to be cast down and void
of comfort. There is no doubt that a real christian may have an horror of
darkness fall upon him, as fell on Abraham the father of the faithful; and
fresh guilt will bring trouble into the soul. But as for those who go on
habitually under legal darkness, being afraid of hell and the wrath to come,
ministers of the gospel are authorized to tell them, that they do not walk
humbly with God; that their gloominess is the effect of despising the blood of
Christ, by which we are justified; that it is impossible any one should believe
the glad tidings of the gospel to be true, without having some gladness in his
heart at the same time.

IF, according to what has been said, you have reason to think you are
justified freely by God's grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ;
praise God, who by his spirit has influenced you to believe what naturally a
man can no more believe with his heart, than he can make a world, viz. that
there is free justification for ungodly sinners through Jesus Christ. Before you
were divinely enlightened, you could not help stumbling at this stumbling
stone: For it seems impossible to be true. The law says the soul that sins,
it shall die; and reason can see no further than God's justifying the godly.
But God, by raising up his son Jesus from the dead, has given us a new idea of
himself, which no man can heartily be reconciled to, till God who caused the
light to shine out of darkness, shines into his heart by his holy spirit. This
in the apostles time was called the foolishness of preaching: And all who have
faithfully preached it ever since, have been accounted fools for Christ's sake.
If we preach justification only for the godly, the offense of the cross
cease; and men who scorn the thoughts of being justified as ungodly sinners,
may call us rational preachers, and their mouths be filled with our praises.
But the foolishness of God is wiser than men. We glory in the cross of Christ.
The applauses of all the men upon earth are contemned. This is our divine joy,
our glory and honor, that we are counted worthy to suffer shame, for preaching
free justification for ungodly sinners, through the redemption there is Jesus
Christ.

BUT to return: If we are justified freely by God's grace, then let us live
holy and godly lives. Shall we sin because grace abounds? God forbid! Yea,
rather let the abounding of grace be the killing of sin in us. Let us be
jealous over ourselves with a godly jealousy: Blessed is the man who fears
always. The soul is never safe but when afraid; afraid of being left to itself,
and leaning on Jesus Christ for help: When we have this fear, we are strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might. Remember we were made to glorify God;
and let our dishonouring him in times past, and especially since we tasted that
the Lord was gracious, influence us to make it the business of our lives more
than ever to glorify him in the world; whereby we shall answer his end in
redeeming us also; for he gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify us to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. And
it is of such livers, Christ says, I am glorified in them. O how strong this
argument to one who has the love of Christ in his heart! And in this way, be
exhorted to take the comfort that belongs to you: Let the righteous rejoice?
rejoice greatly O daughter of Zion, shout for joy; ye are blessed; and shall be
blessed forever: for whom he justified, them he also glorified. And indeed if
you live lives of holiness; if you live in all good conscience; confessing
Jesus Christ, aiming at his honor and glory; having an holy disregard for your
own; he will send the comforter into your hearts; he will manifest himself unto
you; ye shall eat of the hidden manna, and drink of the water of life; the
peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus; you will not only enter into the joy of your Lord when you
die; but shall have the joys of heaven in you while you live.

I would now address myself to those who have no reason to think themselves in
a state of justification. And here, what shall we say to these things: We have
all sinned and come short of the glory of God. This is our character given by
God; and our consciences must assent to it: Every mouth must be stopped -- But
be astonished O ye heavens at this! We are justified freely by God's grace
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. O may not any of you receive the
grace of God in vain; turn not the grace of God into wantonness. Believe the
heavenly report: Go to God though sinners, though ungodly; and receive the pardon
of your sins, and the justification When a man first flies to Christ by faith,
he don't believe he is justified already, or in a state of justification. Mr.
Cumming and Mr. Bellamy frequently charge me with this tenet: And a Piece
lately printed in New Hampshire, shows I am taxed with it by an European
writer. We hold it no more than our opponents; but preach and print against it
as well as they.
of your persons, as a free gift for the sake of Jesus Christ. There are no
conditions for you to fulfill to make you welcome; you need not trouble
yourselves about coming up to any terms of the gospel; What zealous indignation
would have fired the breast of Paul. had any one of his fellow laborers
preached that the way for sinners to be justified was to come up to the terms
of the gospel? This phrase, though undoubtedly invented by those who held
justification by works, is now adopted by some who deny it: And yet, were it
their real design to teach their hearers to seek justification by the works of
the law, they could hardly do it more effectually any way, than by urging them
to come up to these gospel terms. The expression naturally bears this meaning,
that a number of good works must be done by a man before he can be justified;
and people are led by it to flatter themselves that they have already come up
to these terms in part; and to press forward in the same legal track, that so
they may be perfectly justified.
only set to your seals that God is true, and take him at his word.

BUT some one will be ready to say, must I not get a principle of faith first,
that so I may believe? and is it not my duty to live in the use of means, and
to do all the good works that lie in my power, in hopes of obtaining this
principle? I answer, the apostles tell us, that when a man believes, there is
in him a principle of every thing that is good: But they no where exhort
persons to seek after a good principle first, that afterward they be enabled
to believe. Works of supererogation, and of subordination, are equally
unapostolical. Though a man who knows he is without faith should do good works,
yet he must not think of doing good works without faith, in hopes that hereby
he shall be helped to get faith. When he hears, reads, or prays, etc. he should
consider the divine report of a mediator, and as the Scots divines say, mint at
Christ in everything he does.

PERHAPS another may say within himself, I am afraid I have not been under
convictions long enough; Some writers give such long and gloomy accounts of the
soul distresses requisite to faith, as have made multitudes tremble at the
thoughts of being altogether christians. The preparatory terrors have made them
afraid. For they have been given to understand, that they must be in misery
(which all men necessarily hate and shun) for a long time; that it is probable
the arrows of the Almighty will stick in them, weeks and months, if not years.
Nay, a certain divine tells awakened sinners, they must not think much of it,
if they are under a spirit of bondage ten or twenty years, before they find
mercy, if ever they find mercy. Such evil and disgraceful accounts of the
christian religion are owing partly to a sort of legal zeal against sin: Christ
and his atonement and free grace being out of sight, it seems agreeable to
vindictive justice, that the sinner, especially if he has been a great sinner,
should suffer a great deal for his sins in his own person. But chiefly to men's
making their own experiences the rule, instead of the word of God. For it is as
clear as the meridian sun, from the preaching of the apostles, that they were
ignorant of this preliminary divinity. They knew nothing of the art of getting
people through the several stages of attrition, contrition, and humiliation; of
worrying them* step by step, from lower to higher degrees of horror and
distress: And one may be bold in God to say, that treatises of this kind,
however pious and learned the authors were, serve to guide souls away from
Jesus Christ.
it is but a few days, or perhaps a less space, that I have been in earnest
about religion; surely I am not yet prepared for justification. Conviction of
sin is needful: Were there nothing else, that description of believers would
prove it; where they are said to have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope
set before them. Heb. vi. v. 18. But how long a time were those thousands under
convictions, who were wrought upon by Peter's preaching? How long the woman of
Samaria, the jailor, or Zaccheus? The latter had only a desire to see what sort
of a man Christ was, that he might describe him to others -- How soon did he
believe to salvation? A man may go into a christian assembly stupid and
unconcerned about the one thing needful, and yet go home to his house
justified, and an heir of heaven. The scripture don't at all encourage this
round about way: Today, while it is called today, we are to hear God's voice:
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. Hear Paul -- The
righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, Say not in thine heart,
who shall ascend into heaven? (that is to bring Christ down from above) Or, who
shall descend into the deep? (that is to bring Christ up again from the dead)
-- But what says it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart: that is the word of faith which we preach. That if thou shall confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes
unto righteousness. Believing with the heart, we are justified in a moment.

AND if we begin with believing what the God of truth has said, the foundation
is divine, and our religion will be lasting: Otherwise, it will be as the
morning cloud and as the early dew, which suddenly passes away. Hence it is,
that so many of late years, who made a fair show in the flesh, and even boasted
of their assurance of eternal life, have returned like the dog to his vomit,
and like the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. Nay, too many of
them are some of the most hardened and wicked people in the land. These persons
never knew any thing yet as they ought to know. Their religion was made up of
distracting fears and enthusiastical joys. They never yet believed that Jesus
was the Christ. They attained to what they themselves, and others, thought more
spiritual and sublime. But this low experience they were strangers to --
otherwise they would have been born of God, and have kept the commandments of
Jesus Christ. 1 John V. 1.5. If you receive the gospel as the word of God, it
will work effectually; you will put your trust in Christ alone for
justification; and the lives you live in the flesh, you will live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved you and gave himself for you: Which precious
faith, God of his infinite mercy, bestow on us all, for the sake of Jesus
Christ. AMEN.

APPENDIX.
HAVING shown, in a printed letter to Mr. Cumming, that there was no blasphemy,
in my saying no man can love God while he looks on him as a being that will
damn him: Mr. Cumming owned that was the point in dispute between him and me.
Mr. Bellamy in his Remarks upon it, attempts to prove by four formal
syllogisms, what no body will deny, viz. That God is amiable and to be loved by
us, though he destroys impenitent sinners. And to show the greatness and danger
of my error in differing from him (though I had told him and the world, that in
this point, I was like-minded) he makes the following supposition, viz. -- That
when Christ at the day of judgment, has pronounced depart ye cursed upon the
wicked: after this final sentence, I am admitted to heaven, to hear the
hallelujahs of the blessed; and preach as a Separatist, the same doctrine that
I preached on earth; that hereby I should raise all possible indignation in the
world above; and all heaven would cry out at once, begone you blasphemer, down
to hell, your proper place. Rem. p. 7.8. -- Though it were easy to make many
remarks on this absurd supposition; my design is only to take notice of that
part of it where he represents me as a separatist in heaven, which was no doubt
occasioned by my being in his judgment, a separatist on earth. And inasmuch as
some others, for want of proper information, have run into the same mistake, I
have thought fit to set the matter in a clear light. And for this purpose,
would have it observed, that when my people (the second society to which I
preached in Boston) called me, they declared their design was to be only a
distinct, but not a separate church; and that after some time I gave a public
answer, testifying, that it was in that view, I accepted their call. And (which
showed our design) we applied to two of the churches in town, to assist at the
instalment. The old south church, instead of assisting, chose a committee to
draw up articles to prevent it. It Is natural to suppose, they omitted nothing
which they themselves thought to be of weight: though the main thing they had
against me, was my holding the Protestant and Calvinistical doctrines of faith
and repentance. Any one who knows what the protestant and Calvinistical
doctrines of faith and repentance are, and reads our Narrative printed on the
occasion, will see there is no misrepresentation. Though I hardly think that at
this time of day, they would vote those doctrines to be erroneous, and
dangerous to the souls of men.
A reply was made (and afterward printed) which gave full satisfaction to Mr.
Leonard the moderator, and all the other worthy ministers and messengers of the
council -- as they testified after the instalment in their letter to said
church -- They also let them know that they saw no difficulty in their
proceeding, because the church assured them, That their design was only to be a
distinct church, being desirous of holding communion with other churches; there
being no objection made to the council as to the moral character of any one of
them, or that any of them were under censure; and their articles, and church
covenant being agreeable to the constitution of the churches of this country.
Such was our beginning. And from that period, there has not been the least
appearance of a separation on our side. Nor can I think there is any man who
thoroughly understands the affair, and is withal honest and upright, who will
ever publicly or privately bring the charge of separation against us. It Is not
humility to lie under an odium that don't belong to one: And it appears but
justice to myself and people, to wipe off an imputation, which from the
beginning we took care to avoid.

FINIS.

