TWELVE SERMONS On the following seasonable and important Subjects.

Justification impossible by the Works of the Law. The Question answered,
"wherefore then serves the Law"? The Nature of Faith, as justifying, largely
explained, and remarked on. The Place, and Use, of Faith, in the Affair of
Justification. Human Endeavors, in the use of Means, the way in which Faith is
obtained. The Method of the Spirit in communicating the "Faith, by which the
Just do live". The Inquiry of the young Man in the Gospel, "what shall I do
that I may have eternal Life"?
With interspersed Notes, in Defense of the Truth; especially in the Points
treated on, in the above Discourses.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. And one of the Pastors of the first Church of Christ
in BOSTON.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by D. and J. KNEELAND, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in
Cornhill. MDCCLXV.

PREFACE.
THE making any apology for the following publication would be needless, the
subjects of it are so highly interesting and important, should they be set in a
clear and just point of light: If they are not, no excuse can justify the
Author for meddling with that he had better let alone. It must be left with the
reader to judge in this matter. In the mean time, I may say, in behalf of my
self, that I have endeavored, not without considerable pains, to collect from
the scripture what it says, in different places, concerning the several truths
here treated on; and to place it in one connected view, and in as distinct and
perspicuous a manner as I could. I have purposely avoided all pomp of words,
and all show of learned subtlety by the artful use of scholastic, systematical,
and metaphysical terms; studying to deliver my self so as that I might be
easily understood. If I have wrote in a mystical, perplexed, unintelligible
way, I own it is a fault not to be overlooked; and am willing to submit to
deserved chastisement: And the rather, as it is, with me, a settled point, that
if a man writes so as that it is difficult, if possible, to understand, and
ascertain, his real meaning, his thoughts are confused and unconnected, as they
lie in his mind; or he has been inexcusably careless in ranging and expressing
them; or, what is worse, he has some covered design to serve, by entrenching
himself in darkness and ambiguity.

If any should think it worth while to read these Discourses, I would advise
them to receive nothing, they may meet with in them, as "the truth of God",
till they have impartially examined what is offered in proof of it as such,
from the sacred books; and are thereupon convinced, in their consciencies, that
it really is so. Their faith will now stand on a safe and sure basis, the word
of him, whose style is that, "faithful and true". And this, I would add, is the
only way in which we should always read the writings of others, upon the sacred
doctrines of scripture, however high an opinion we may have of their integrity,
capacity, or superior knowledge in divine things. We shall now use their labors
as "helps", (which we reasonably may) in order to our understanding the just
import of the scripture; and shall found our faith, not on what they say, but
on what we are enabled, by their assistance, to perceive to be the word and
will of God.

It would be extraordinary, if, through carelessness, inattention, or the undue
influence of some wrong biass or other, I have not been led into a
mis-conception of some of the "many texts", I have endeavored to explain: Though
I am not sensible, that this is the case. If I have been mistaken, I have not
knowingly been so. It is owing to the want of more understanding, and a better
judgment, rather than to any fault in my will. The HOLY BIBLE, and not any
"human system", or "fallible composure", has been my governing rule, in what I
have presented to the view of others: Nor have I said any thing but as it
appeared to me, upon a close inquiry, to agree with this ONLY TEST of revealed
truth.

Possibly, there are some, who, upon reading what is herewith emitted, and
perceiving its contrariety to their peculiar sentiments, may be in a temper of
mind, at once, to speak of me, in their zeal, as a perverter of the "truth as
it is in Jesus", and to such a degree as to be in a state of wrath. Such
censorious judging will give me no disturbance, so long as those words are to
be found legibly wrote in the inspired books, "who art thou that judge
another man's servant? To his own master he stands, or falls. -- Why do
thou judge thy brother? -- We shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ". Men's assuming to themselves a right to determine what is "truth", or
"falsehood", and to ascertain the doom of others as they agree, or disagree,
with such determination; especially, if they do it with great positiveness and
assurance, as though they were divinely authorized, and infallible, judges in
the case, may startle weak minds, and powerfully tend to impress on them a
wrong biass: But it can convey no light into the understandings of any. It may
excite a various motion in the passions of those, who despise such airs of
superiority and importance; and seldom fails of doing so: But it can have no
rational aptitude to rectify their mistakes, if they labor of any; or to
effect an alteration, for the better, in their sentiments. It would argue a
more manly, not to say christian spirit, to endeavor their conviction only by
fair and just reasoning from the scriptures. This would be to apply to them as
reasonable creatures; and in no other way can we properly do so.

I shall only say further, the temper of my mind, respecting the following
work, is such, that I find within my self a freedom as heartily to wish, on the
one hand, that it may meet with no acceptance in the world, if fited "to
deceive unwary souls, and turn them aside from the simplicity of the gospel";
as, on the other, that it may be received with approbation, and admited into
the hearts of all that shall read it, if it should exhibit, as I trust it does,
"the truth of the gospel", by which we may be saved.

Boston, May 4th. 1765. Charles Chauncy.

SERMON I. Justification impossible by the Works of the Law.
GALATIANS II. 16. "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
law: For by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified."


THE first and last clause in this verse are express in affirming negatively,
that the method of justification before God is not by "the works of the law".
And the affirmation extends universally; taking in one man as well as another,
mankind without distinction or discrimination. "Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the law". The words are spoken, not of any particular
man, but of man as signifying the whole species, every individual that is of
the rank we call men. So the Apostle explains himself in the other clause of
the verse, "by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified"; that is, no
partaker of human flesh, no man, whether he be Jew or Gentile, no one of the
race of Adam. In this sense precisely the phrase, "no flesh", is used by this
same Apostle, when speaking, in the following chapter, ver. 11. upon this same
subject. Says he, "no man is justified by the law in the sight of God". In
agreement wherewith is that prayer of pious David, Psalm 143.2.
"enter not into judgment with thy servant", as grounded upon this reason, "for
in thy sight shall no man living be justified".

IN further speaking to the text it will be proper to explain the terms
"justify", and "the works of the law". The way will then be clear to
illustrate the truth here affirmed, that "no flesh", no man, "can be justified
by these works".

AS to the term "justify", it is not an original English word, but borrowed
from a Latin one (justificare): Neither is this latin word of ancient use among
the best Roman writers; Vid. Sir Charles Wolseley, on justification evangelical.
but has been introduced since, by christian divines, to express the sense of a
scripture one, often to be met with, particularly in the Apostle Paul's
epistles, especially his epistles to the Romans and the Galatians. It Is meaning
is not, to make just; as to sanctify is to make holy. This may seem to be the
sense of the word, judging by its etymology. But its rarely, if ever, used, in
the inspired pages, as carrying in it this meaning. It Is rather to be understood
in a law-sense, alluding to the acquitance of an accused person upon a legal
process, and his being accounted just in opposition to the charge that was
exhibited against him. It accordingly signifies to approve, accept, vindicate
or adjudge as just. We shall exemplify this in a few instances. The holy God
is applied to in those words, 1 Kin. 8.32.
"hear thou in heaven, and judge thy servants; condemning the wicked, and
justifying the righteous". Where, "justifying the righteous" does not signify,
the making them righteous; but appearing for them in judgment, and vindicating
them as such. It is affirmed, Prove. 17.5.
"He that justifies the wicked is an abomination to the Lord". By "justifying
the wicked" is not meant, the making them qualitatively just: This would be
well-pleasing to God: But it signifies a pleading for them, and defending them
in judgment as just, while, at the same time, they are wicked. Hence that
threatening of the Prophet, Isa. 5.21.23.
"Woe unto them, who justify the wicked for a reward"; that is, vindicate them
in judgment as righteous persons, when the reverse is their true character. And
the word is used in this same sense in the New Testament. "Not the hearers of
the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified"; Romans
2.13.
that is, shall be accounted and declared just in judgment. So it is said of the
Publican, in the gospel of Luke, Chap. 18.14.
that he "went down to his house justified rather than the ^harisee"; that is,
approved by God, and accepted as just. In like manner we read, Rom* 8.33, 34.
"Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that
justifies. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died". By "God's
justifying", we are evidently to understand his acquiting and vindicating in
judgment as just; for it here stands opposed to condemnation. -- But I need not
multiply instances. It Is generally allowed, on all sides, that the word,
"justify", is used in this judicial sense throughout the scriptures; at least
in a sense refering to this, and corresponding with it. Tho it ought to be
remembered, and heedfully remarked here, that no one can, in consistency with
truth, be judicially declared just, unless he really is so in the eye of that
rule, whatever it is, by which he is tried; and, in consequence of this, we may
be sure, that the righteous judge of all the earth will never approve of any
man as just, and pronounce him to be so, if this be not the truth of his
character, when compared with the measure of judgment in his case.

"WORKS of the law" are the other terms to be explained. Now, by "law", the
Apostle sometimes means law "in general", both the "law written in men's
hearts", and in "the books of revelation". Sometimes he uses the word more
restrainedly to signify the "Mosaic law" in special. But whether he
understands by it the "natural" or "revealed law", or law "including both",
works done in conformity to it, when mentioned with reference to justification,
he always sets aside as totally insufficient for the procurement of it.
Accordingly, when he affirms, that, "by the works of the law, no one shall be
justified", the thot he would convey is obviously this, that justification is
not obtainable "upon the foot of law", upon any claim grounded on works done in
obedience to it. As if he had said, no man, whether he be Jew or Gentile, naked
law, law considered simply in itself, being the rule of judgment, can be
accounted, accepted or vindicated as just, upon the score of any works he has
performed in obedience to it: Neither the Jew, upon works he has done in
compliance with the law as published by Moses; nor the Gentile, upon the works
he has done in obedience to the law of nature. And it may be added with equal
truth, neither can the christian be justified in the mere virtue of any works
he has wro't in compliance with the law, as promulged in the gospel by Jesus
Christ, and his apostles. In short, all works, whether of Jews, Pagans, or
Christians, are excluded from justification, law, rigid law, being the rule of
trial. They are totally and absolutely insufficient to procure for any man
living an acquitance in judgment, a vindication as just and righteous.

AND this, the way being prepared for it, I now come to make evident to you: In
the doing of which I shall take the Apostle Paul for my instructor and guide.
He, of all the sacred writers, is the most frequent and peremptory in
affirming, that justification is obtainable by no son of Adam upon a plea of
works, done in conformity to mere law. Nor does he barely assert this, but
greatly enlarges in the proof of it. I shall make use of his arguments upon
this head, and endeavor to set them in a point of light that may be convincing.

IN his epistle to the Romans, he has distinctly and largely proved, that
mankind universally are sinners, and therefore incapable of attaining to "the
justification of life" upon the terms of naked law. The proof he has exhibited
of this is contained in the three first chapters of this epistle; where we
shall find a very melancholy account of the degenerate state, the whole world,
then consisting of Jews and Gentiles, had sunk into. It cannot indeed be
supposed, that the character he here draws of the Jews and Gentiles justly
belonged, in all its lineaments, to either of them INDIVIDUALLY considered.
There were, doubtless, among these bodies of men a considerable number, who had
"escaped the pollutions" that were common in that day "through lust": Nay, there
is no reason to think but that some, at least, of the INDIVIDUALS that
constituted these collective bodies, were really good men, in the sense in
which the inspired Solomon says, "a good man obtains favor of the Lord". But
still, it was true of them all, that they "had gone out of the way": Not indeed
equally, considered as INDIVIDUALS, but in various degrees; some in one degree,
others in another; but the generality in an high degree: insomuch that the
apostle might justly describe them, in the gross, as awfully corrupt. For this
was the real truth of their character; though it might be said of some of them,
in the individual sense, that they were sinners in that view only in which it
is affirmed, "there is not a just man that sins not".

AND that it was the intention of the apostle to give us to understand, that
both Jews and Gentiles, mankind in common, were sinners individually, as well
as in a collective sense, would seem evident beyond all reasonable dispute. Why
else should he use the terms of universality? Why the strongest ones the
language could furnish him with? And why should he, as it were, heap them upon
one another? He is not content with saying, "all have sinned"; but insists that
"there is none righteous, no not one"; that "there is none that does good, no
not one"; and that "all are gone out of the way". Surely, these terms must take
in a^ the individuals of the human kind without exception. Had it been his
design to include the whole world of men, he could not have expressed himself
in words more full to his purpose. Besides, the conclusion he introduces from
the foregoing premises requires, that the terms used in them should be
explained in this universal sense. How else could he say, "we have before
proved, that every mouth is stopped", and that "all the world are become guilty
before God"? How else could he infer, "therefore by the deeds of the law shall
no flesh be justified in God's sight"? And how else could he argue, that we are
"justified freely by his grace," that is, by an act of his mere favor, in
opposition to every plea as grounded on works done in obedience to the law, and
to the utter exclusion of all boasting?

IT should seem indubitably clear, that the Apostle's aim was to prove the
impossibility of justification upon terms of law, and that his long thread of
reasoning* in these chapters, was principally intended to settle this important
point. But if, in consequence of what he has offered, it is not fact, that both
Jews and Gentiles are sinners in the account of law, considered individually
and universally, there is no argumentative connection between the point in
view, and the reasoning used to defend and support it. ^ay, if it were true of
ANY ONE INDIVIDUAL, whether in the Jewish or Gentile world, that he was not a
sinner, judging of his character by mere law, the apostle has left his doctrine
of the "unattainableness of justification upon the foot of law" without any
solid proof; at least in regard of that universality, in which he has asserted,
and endeavored to maintain it. He can, in a word, be looked upon as a coherent
conclusive writer upon no other scheme than this, that Jews and Gentiles,
individually as well collectively considered, were sinners in the view of law,
and therefore not within the possibility of being justified upon a trial by so
severe a rule.

I MAY not improperly remark here, that the apostle's reasoning, with respect
to the unattainableness of justification upon the terms of law, ought to be
considered, as refering, not only to mankind as they existed at the time when
he wrote, but in all after-ages of the world* For the consequence he deduces,
from his method of reasoning, is in those strong terms of universality,
"therefore, by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight". "No flesh", that is, no son of Adam, nor one of the human race. Nor,
unless he is to be understood as taking into his meaning mankind in all ages,
have we, in these days, any concern with his doctrine of "justification without
law": Whereas, he most certainly wrote with a view to after-ages as well as
that in which he lived; designing to affirm and prove, that no son of man, in
any age, till the end of time, could be justified upon law-terms: because, in
the eye of law, they could not but be found guilty before God. And the plain
truth is, his reasoning, upon this head, is as applicable to mankind
universally in these days, as to mankind at the time when he wrote his epistle.
For it is as true now as it was then, and has all along been so, that they have
universally sinned. Not that mankind, in all ages, have been sinners just in
the same degree as in the apostle's days: But they now are, and always have
been, and always will be, sinners in such a sense as that it is impossible they
should be justified by the rule of strict law.

AND this account of his reasoning, it is observable, perfectly coincides with
the representations that are every where else, in scripture, given of this
matter. Says the inspired David, Psalm. 130.2.
"If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand"? And
again, Psalm. 143.2.
"enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight no man living
shall be justified". To the like purpose is the reasoning of Job, Chap. 9.2*
"How should man be just with God? If he contend with him, he cannot answer him
for one of a thousand". To the same purpose still are those words of Solomon,
Eccles. 7.20.
"There is not a just man upon the earth that does good, and sins not".
Agreeable whereto the Apostle John assures us, Epist. 1.8.
that "if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us": Yea, he declares Ver. 10.
that "if we say we have not sinned, we shall make God a liar, and his word is
not in us".

I MAY pertinently add here, this scriptural account of our being universally
sinners, in the eye of law, most evidently accords with the experience of every
man living. Who can lay his hand upon his heart, and say, that it is clear of
all sin? Who can look into his life, and declare with truth, that it has not,
in a less or greater degree, been stained with "the pollutions that are in the
world through lust? If any are thus pure in heart, and have given proof of it by
their "holiness in all manner of conversation", they must be those good men,
who, with pious David, "have walked in their integrity". And are there any
among these who have never deviated from the path of duty? Not one. They "have
all sinned, and come short of the glory of God". And they are deeply sensible
of it, and herefrom in readiness to exclaim with the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.12.
"Who can understand his errors"! and to join with him in the prayer to God
which follows, "cleanse thou me from secret faults". Far from imagining that
they are perfect, and able, on account of their innocence, to stand a trial at
the bar of strict law, they adopt the words of upright Job, Job 9.20.
humbly confessing, "if we justify ourselves, our own mouths would condemn us:
If we should say we are perfect, it shall also prove us perverse". And, with
Eliphaz, their language is, Job 15.14.
"What is man that he should be clean, and he that is born of a woman that he
should be righteous"? In a word, there is no son of Adam, be his seize in
goodness ever so high, but feels within himself the truth of what the Poet
says, Video, meliora proboque:
Deteriora sequor.
I see the right, approve it too,
Condemn the wrong, and yet the wrong pursue.


OR of what is expressed in still more striking language by an inspired pen,
Romans 7.15, 19.
"What I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do. The good that I
would, I do not; and the evil that I would not, that I do".

NOW, if all men are sinners, as having transgressed the law, how can they be
justified upon the foot of law? It is not possible. Law, strict law, being the
rule by which they are tried, condemnation, and that only, must be the judicial
result of a procedure upon their case. Should they be declared legally just,
the sentence would exhibit a manifest falsehood; it would be the effect of
perverted judgment. For nothing short of obedience without a failure, in any
instance of duty, respecting either heart or life, could entitle them to an
acquitance as righteous persons. Could it be pleaded in their favor, that they
had in some instances yielded obedience to the law, this would be of no avail;
because, in other instances, they had violated it, and the law demanded
obedience in these violated instances as truly as in the other. He that would
be justified by his works, upon the terms of law, must not have one bad work
among them all; for one bad one only, though it should be attended with a great
many good ones, would as certainly, if not in so high a degree, expose him to a
sentence of condemnation, as if his works were all bad, with the exception of
one only that was good. Law, simple naked law, shows no favor. That is its
language, "this do, and thou art righteous. If thou do it not, thou art a
sinner." The consequence wherefrom plainly is, that every man in the world, as
he is a transgressor of the law, whether he has transgressed it in all
instances or many, in a few or one only, is, on that account, in a state of
guilt, in the eye of the law, and therefore incapable of being justified by it.
For it is a plain case, the law can fasten guilt upon no man, and at the same
time acquit him as innocent. It Is impossible a sentence of approbation and
condemnation should be the legal issue of a process upon the same law, at the
same time. This would be a glaring contradiction.

THUS I have dilated upon, and explained at large, one of the arguments the
apostle Paul has used in proof of his assertion, "that no flesh", no man, "can
be justified by the works of the law". And it carries with it the strongest
conviction. It Is indeed an absolutely conclusive one; and the more closely and
strictly it is examined, the more clearly it will appear to be so.

ANOTHER argument of this same Apostle, in proof of this same point, and
coinciding with that we have been considering, is to be met with in his epistle
to the Galatians. Says he, Chap. 3.10.
"As many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse". As if he had
said, they who expect to be justified upon the foot of works done in conformity
to the law, be they as many as you will, they are all cursed by the law. And
why? The reason follows in the next words, "for it is written, cursed is every
one that continues not in all things written in the book of the law to do
them". As if he had said, the scripture writes those accursed, in the
estimation of the law, who had not done, and gone on to do, all things that are
enjoined by it. He does not proceed in a formal manner to prove, that no man
has ever thus answered the requirements of the law; but leaves it with the
conscience of every man to declare to him the truth of this fact. And as every
man has a witness within himself, that tells him this truth, he is
constructively told likewise the consequence from it, namely, that he is cursed
by the law. And if the law curses him, it cannot justify him; if it convicts
him of sin, it cannot acquit him from guilt; if it condemns him as a
transgressor, it cannot vindicate him as a righteous person.

THE Apostle again argues, that we cannot be "justified by the law", or any
works done in obedience to it, because "by the law is the knowledge of sin"
Romans ^.20.
The law sets before men's view, in a less or greater degree of light, what God
commands, and what he forbids; and every man, by comparing himself with the
law, may know, and cannot but know, that he has been a transgressor of it,
either by omitting what it required, or by commiting what it prohibited. Even
those, who have no law but that which is "written on their hearts", may know,
if it be not their own fault, "that they have done those things which are
worthy of death". Much more is this the truth in regard of those, who, in
addition to this "natural law", have had the law "revealed to them from
heaven". By this clearer discovery of what is duty, and what is transgression,
they may be more fully convinced in their consciences that they are sinners in
the eye of the law. And if they know by the law that they are sinners, they
must know also that, being such, they are by the law incapable of
justification. To suppose that any man could be accounted and declared just by
that law, in the estimation of which he is a sinner, is highly absurd. As
certainly therefore as every man knows, or may know, by the law, that he is an
offender, so certainly does he know, or may know, that by the law it would be
utterly vain to expect a vindication as righteous.

THE Apostle yet further argues against our being justified by the works of the
law, from the absurd consequences that would follow from such a supposition:
Two of which I shall particularly mention; and the rather, as they are matters
of serious and great importance.

ONE is, that we should not be indebted to grace, if we were justified by
works. For "to him that works", so as to be entitled to justification on the
score of his works, "the reward would be reckoned, not of grace, but of debt".
Romans 4.4.
And is this the scripture-way of men's being justified? No; says the apostle,
"we are justified freely by God's grace". Romans 4.24.
And "if by grace, then not by works". Ver. 27, 28. Chap. 11.6.
And of such consequence is it, in the judgment of this apostle, that we should
depend upon "grace", and not upon "works", in the affair of justification, that
he declares to the Galatians, Chap. 5.4.
"Whosoever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace".
Justification upon a plea grounded on works done in obedience to the law, and
justification upon the foot of grace, the free favor of God, are subversive of
each other: Insomuch that if we are justified by works, we cannot be justified
by grace; and if we are justified by grace, we cannot be justified by works.

THE other consequence of our being justified by works is, the dishonor it
reflects on Christ. It renders his mediatorial interposition a needless thing,
counter-acts the design of his coming into the world, and nullifies his death;
making it of little or no importance in the business of salvation. To this
purpose the apostle reasons, Gal. 3.21.
"If righteousness comes by the law, then Christ is dead in vain". Agreably
whereto he again argues, Romans 4.14.
"If they which are of the law are heirs, faith is made void, and the promise
made of no effect". As if he had said, if they that will be justified by works
in obedience to the law, may obtain the heavenly inheritance, then faith in
Christ as the end of the law for righteousness is needless, and the promise by
grace through him is bro't to naught.

THESE are the genuine consequences of the doctrine of justification upon the
terms of law, if we may trust to the reasoning of the apostle Paul. And it was
upon this account, principally, that he was so frequent and zealous in his
opposition to it. He had been made to feel the absolute insufficiency of law
and works in the great affair of the sinner's justification, and knew that it
could be effected in no way but that "of grace through Christ". This therefore
was the way he carefully pointed out both to Jews and Gentiles, that is, to
mankind universally. And he was abundant in his labors relative hereto;
particularly in taking men off from their dependence on the law, as knowing
that, if they sought to be justified on the score of their works in conformity
to it, they would frustrate the grace of God, and render the whole work of
Christ a thing needless, and to no purpose.

I HAVE now said what may be though it sufficient, without any further enlargement,
to make it evident, beyond all reasonable dispute, that "no flesh", no man,
"can be justified by the works of the law".

BEFORE I proceed to make what has been discoursed practically useful, I would
interpose a remark, which I esteem an important one. It is this. The apostle
Paul no where suggests, It Is true, he brings in Moses thus describing the
righteousness which is of the law, "the man that does these things shall live
by them", Romans 10.5. He does the same, Gal. 3.12. "the man that does them shall
live in them". It may seem, at first sight, as though the apostle supposed, in
these texts, that the Jews might live upon the terms of their law, as a
covenant of works; and that it was given them by God to this end. And in this
sense he has sometimes been interpreted. The great Mr. Lock thus explains him,
in his note upon Romans 5.20. But we should make him flatly contradict himself,
should we understand him as intending to say, that life might be obtained by
the Mosaic law, merely as such. For he expressly declares, Romans 4.13, 14. "that
the promise was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is
made void, and the promise made of none effect". To the same purpose he teaches
us, Gal. 2. ult, "if righteousness comes by the law, Christ is dead in vain".
When therefore he says, in a way of reasoning, "the man that does them shall
live in them", he is to be considered as arguing with the Jews upon their own
principles. Their law, as they interpreted it, promised life, life beyond the
grave, eternal life in heaven, upon the SOLE CONSIDERATION of their obedience
to it. The apostle, from this construction which they, not he, put upon the
Mosaic law, points out to them the impossibility of their obtaining life, by
opposing the curse to the promise, "cursed is every one that continues not in
all things written in book of the law to do them". It will be found, I believe,
upon the closest examination, a difficult, if not impossible task, to make this
apostle a consistent coherent writer, upon any other scheme of interpretation.
I shall add here, there is a sense, in which the words, "the man that does them
shall live in them", is strictly true; and this is, by viewing the law in its
"spirit", and not according to the "letter"; that is, as refering to the
promise revealed to Adam, and afterward repeated to Abraham, and connected, in
the divine intention, "with the gift through Christ". A man, in this sense of the
law, might "live" in consequence of his obedience to it; though it is impossible he
should considering it as naked "law". And this, in fact, was the way in which
the pious Jews, all along under the Mosaic dispensation, obtained life. And,
interpreting the law in this sense, that is, considering it in connection with
grace and Christ, Moses and Ezekiel might with truth say to the Jews, "ye shall
keep my statutes, which if a man do he shall live in them"; though, perhaps, such
declarations refer, not to "eternal life", but that "temporal one in Canaan",
which, by a national covenant, was promised to the Jews, and could be enjoyed
by them, only upon the foot of their obedience.
that mere law, law separated from grace and Christ, was ever since the lapse,
whatever it might be before, Possibly, the rule of trial the first father of
men was under, in his innocent state, was a "covenant of grace, revealed by
Christ", then in "the form of God", though when he appeared in our world, it was
"in fashion as a man". Perhaps also, "faith in Christ", the revealer of this
law of trial, was the only spring of conduct upon which the life promised could
be obtained. But however this might be, which I only mention en passant, thus
much seems plain, that the original promise of life was not suspended upon
"perfect obedience" to what is commonly called "the natural or moral law of
God". In contradiction hereto, I know, it is said by most christian writers, that
the first man was so placed under this law, as that he must work his way to
life by perfectly doing all things commanded by it; insomuch that he could not
have obtained it, but by persevering obedience in every point of duty, without
the least failure. But this is said entirely without book. The scripture no
where insinuates, that he was under "such a covenant of works". It suggests, on
the contrary, that God, in favor to him, did not put him upon so severe a trial
for life. His trial, if we may believe the sacred record of it, was in a
"single instance", and this, not of doing, but of forbearing to do. Life and
death were suspended upon his regard or disregard to a divine restraint laid
upon him in one article only. This is the account the inspired Moses has given
of the matter; and he has done it in words too plain and express to need any
comment, or to admit of dispute. Read Genesis 2.16, 17. It Is observable, that which
was made the test of Adam's subjection to God, was a command, not of the moral,
but positive kind; a command, not deducible from reason, but knowable only by
revelation from heaven. It could not therefore be obeyed but from FAITH IN GOD,
the revealer. Upon which it may, with all freedom, be affirmed, that our first
father, while innocent, as really as any of his posterity, though not in the same
sense, was to LIVE BY FAITH. And it was owing to his UNBELIEF, however this was
effected, that he "eat of the tree", concerning which God had said, "thou shall
not eat of it", thereupon incuring the threatened penalty "thou shall surely
die". If Adam, from faith in the divine revelation, which put him upon a trial
for life, had abstained from eating of "the forbidden tree", he would, without
all doubt, have had God for his instructor, guide, and constant assistant, so
as that he would, in all instances, have obeyed "the natural moral law" as
perfectly as one, of so low an order in the scale of being, can be supposed to
have done. But his "thus obeying" was not the trial God put him to f^ life, but
a special one by immediate revelation, in which FAITH was the only governing
principle that could have secured him from death. It would be the exact truth,
should I say, that the first parents of men, while innocent, in common with
their posterity since the lapse, could have obtained life in no way but that
"of grace through faith". It is readily owned, as the posterity of the first
pair, in consequence of the lapse, are under a sentence which has doomed them
to death, there must be the discovery of "abounding grace" in delivering them
from death, that they may live; and, as the life opened to their view is not
life in an earthly paradise, but in God's eternal kingdom, by a resurrection
that will make them incorrup^ble and immortal, there must be the display of
"super-abounding grace": especially, as this life is obtainable,
notwithstanding the "many offenses", however aggravated, they may have been
guilty of in their own persons. It is acknowledged also, that the "object" of
their faith is different. They must believe in God as "reconcilable to sinners
through Jesus Christ", and as "reconciling them to himself not imputing to them
their trespasses". But still, it was grace in God to man, while in his innocent
state, to make the promise of life; and faith in God, as the revealer of this
promise, was that alone upon the foot of which he could have obtained this
blessing. It may be worth remarking here, "the covenant of works" contrasted,
in the sacred books, with "the covenant of grace", is not any covenant of works
God ever made with Adam; but "the Sinai-covenant" made with the Jewish nation.
This is accordingly the covenant always meant, when we read of the "old
covenant", the "first covenant", in opposition to the "new covenant", the
"second covenant", which ought to be heedfully minded in reading the
scriptures; particularly the epistle to the Hebrews*
a divinely constituted method for the obtainment of life; or that life could
be obtained upon the foot of law, in this sense, by any works done in
conformity to it, whether perfect, or imperfect. Far from saying thus, he
declares, with great pe^emptoriness, that the supposition of coming to life by
bare law would totally frustrate the grace of God, and nullify the death of
Christ. The case was plainly this. The Jews, in his day, had essentially
corrupted the Mosaic law in their use of it with reference to eternal life.
They considered it as a "covenant of works", depending on their legal
observances, merely as such, for a title to life. It was this fundamental
mistake of their's that gave rise to a great part of this Apostle's epistles to
the Romans, and the Galatians; in which he labors to take them off from this
use of the law, by showing the impossibility of their ever being justified in
this way. And he so manages his argument, as to make it equally conclusive,
whether applied to Jews, or Gentiles. His reasoning, in its real force, and
just consequence, extends universally; leaving every son of Adam destitute of
any claim to life, as grounded on law only, or any works done in conformity to
it. It was to illustrate this grand point, (which may be worthy of our special
notice) that he introduces what he says upon the lapse by the "one man" Adam,
with it is consequences relative to all his posterity. And it gives his argument
a most striking force. For if both Jews and Gentiles, mankind universally, are
subjected to "death" by means of the original lapse, and, in consequence of
this subjection, are in such a state, as that they will certainly commit sin in
violation of the law, Subjection to death, and upon this such a liableness to
commit sin, as is inconsistent with the obtainment of life by law, without
grace and Christ, are the TWO GRAND THO'TS, the Apostle would communicate by
those words, Romans 5.12. "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned".
The lapse of the "one man" Adam is here evidently represented as the original
source both of SIN and DEATH. The Apostle not only affirms, that "death", in
consequence of this lapse, "passed upon all men", but that "all have sinned";
speaking of that which certainly will be, as though it actually was: a mode of
diction not unusual in the scripture. So it is said concerning our Savior, Heb.
2.8. "Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet"; though it follows,
in the latter part of the same verse, "we see not yet all things put under
him". In like manner, it is here declared concerning the whole human race, though
vast multitudes of this race had not then come into existence, that "death
passed upon them", and that they "have all sinned". And it is with real truth the
apostle thus speaks, because, in consequence of the lapse, both "death" and
"sin", sin as well as death, will be certain fact with respect to them all.
They will all; after they have been in being, fall by the stroke of death; and
they will all as certainly, when they become capable of moral action, become
chargeable with sin, so as to be beyond the possibility of justication upon the
foot of law. It Is accordingly observable, mankind, judging of their character by
mere law, are ever considered by this apostle as "sinners". Hence that
universal affirmation, Romans 3.9. "all are under sin". And again, ver. 19. "all
the world are become guilty before God". And yet again, ver. 23. "all have
sinned". The apostle means precisely the same thing in the above cited words,
that he does in the passage we are upon, "all have sinned". Only, he goes
further here, and lets us into the true rise, the occasional cause, of this
universal defection, namely, the lapse of the "one man" Adam. But then, it
should always be particularly minded, as "sin" and "death" are essentially
different, the one being a natural, the other a moral evil, this lapse of the
first man is to be considered as the source of these evils in different ways,
corresponding to the difference in their natures. And this leads me to exhibit
a version of the latter clause of this 12th ver. which, should it be new, may
notwithstanding serve to convey clear and just sentiments concerning this
important matter. I would read the verse (droping its comparative form, that I
may the more easily be understood) after the following manner, "by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men,
((...)) UPON WHICH all have sinned". As if the apostle had said, by the "one
man" Adam, sin entered into the world, and death by his sin in eating of the
forbidden tree; and thus, by this one offense of this one man, death, in the
sense Moses has given of it, has come upon all men, WHEREUPON, UPON WHICH, IN
CONSEQUENCE OF WHICH they have all sinned, speaking of that which certainly
will be, as though it now was. The apostle had it in his view, as I imagine, not
only to represent "death" and "sin", with respect to the whole human race, as
taking rise from the lapse of the one man Adam, but to suggest the different
ways in which this is done. The judicial sentence of God, occasioned by the one
offense of this one man, is that which fastens "death", with all its natural
causes and appendages, upon the human kind; and it is IN CONSEQUENCE of this
sentence, UPON men's coming into existence under the disadvantages arising from
it, that they "sin" themselves. It Is observable, the apostle having said, "by
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin", this sin of his, does
not go on to say, "and so death and sin have passed upon all men"; but "death",
in this way, "passed upon all men", (...), UPON WHICH, IN CONSEQUENCE OF WHICH,
they have sinned themselves. It is with great exactness the apostle has here
expressed himself. And he purposely did it, as I conceive of the matter, to
carry our tho'ts up to Adam as the true original source of SIN as well as
DEATH; and to give us to understand, at the same time, that he is the source of
these evils in different ways: Of "death", by the sentence of God, taking rise
from the one offense of this one man; and of "sin", UPON or IN CONSEQUENCE of
this, by reason of that frail, mortal, unhappy state, to which we are subjected
in this world of vanity, toil and sorrow. It would be easy to point out the way
in which mankind become "sinners" UPON, or IN CONSEQUENCE OF, their subjection
to death through the lapse of their first father, and to do this under the
guidance of the Apostle Paul, whose MODE OF DICTION, in numerous passages in
his epistles, is emphatical upon the above interpretation of his words, but
scarce intelligible upon any other supposition; -- but to say any thing upon
these points would oblige me to digress too far. I shall only add, the
preposition, (...), joined with a dative case, is scarce ever used, in the
new testament, but in the sense I have given it. I have now by me at least
seventy texts, wherein it stands to denote the OCCASIONAL CAUSE of the things
spoken of, or that by which, through which, upon which, in consequence of which,
they are as they are represented to be. Nor is it an objection of any weight,
that I don't make the relative (...), in my way of construction, to agree with
either of the foregoing substantives, but take for its antecedent the
immediately foregoing sentence. Every one, in the least acquainted with the
rules of language, must know, that a foregoing sentence may properly be, as it
often really is, antecedent to a following adjective. And it is remarkable, the
phrase, (...), is used by the Apostle Paul in three places besides this we have
been illustrating; and, in all of them, the preposition, (...), has the same
meaning I have given it here: And, what may be worthy of special notice, the
relative, (...), grammatically agrees, not with a preceding substantive, but
sentence. The places I refer to, as in the original language, not in the
english translation, are 2 Cor. 5.4 Philip. 3.12. and 4.10. This same Apostle
has once used the phrase, (...), the plural of (...); and in the same sense
still, and in the same way of ^rammatical construction too, Romans 6.21. I could
easily have placed these criticisms in a clear and strong point of light; but
the hints I have given must suffice for an occasional note.
it is from hence demonstrable, that the doctrine of justification, upon the
foot of law, in oppositito grace and Christ, is an imaginary notion only. The
great point in view with this Apostle was, to disengage sinners from "working
for life", as though they could obtain it upon the score of any works they could
do to this purpose. He never once called any son of Adam to work in this sense,
or gave him encouragement to hope for life, should he work ever so perfectly.

LET us then, as the improvement of what has been said, fi^ it in our hearts as
an indisputed truth, that we cannot be "justified by the works of the law" And
as we would hope, for an acquita^e at the ba^ of God's judgment, let our view
be to the free favor of God, and the atoning blood of his son Jesus Christ.
For, if we are ever vindicated in judgment, it must be "by grace, through the
redemption that is in him". And blessed be God we may, in this way, obtain "the
justification of life". It Is the way God has provided for us, and revealed to
us; and he was pleased to reveal it even from the day of the lapse of the first
progenitor of men. And, in truth, had not the father of mercies intended to
have dealt with the posterity of Adam in a way of grace, or gospel, he would
not, I believe, have suffered them to come into being* He would rather have
prevented this, by the execution of death upon the first man, so soon after his
lapse as to have left no room for his having posterity. It was owing to grace,
that he did not cut him off immediately upon his disobedience in the special
article wherein he was tried. And, perhaps, no good reason can be assigned, why
grace should continue him in life so as to have posterity, if it had not been
the intention of God, that his posterity should be within the possibility of
acceptance with heaven, upon the plan of mercy through Jesus the Savior. And
that this was really the intention of God seems very evidently suggested in the
sacred writings. For, it is remarkable, "the sentence of condemnation",
occasioned by the lapse, is spoken of as posterior to the promise of a Savior.
God first declared, "the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head",
and after this pronounced the judicial sentence, "dust thou art, and unto dust
thou shall return". This promise, without all doubt, was intended as a remedy
against the disadvantages which Adam had bro't upon himself, and
consequentially upon his posterity, by means of his "one offense"; and by it
they were all put into such a state as that, through the "promised seed of the
woman", it became possible for them to be justified and saved. The Apostle Paul
certainly viewed the matter in this light. Hence, In the 8th Chap. of his
epistle to the Romans, ver. 20.
he declares, "that the creature, [by which phrase he must needs include
mankind] was made subject to vanity in hope". (...), in consequence of some
previous ground for hope. This interpretation perfectly falls in with the
proper force and meaning of the preposition (...), joined with a dative case.
And it is an interpretation grounded on the truth of fact: For man was not
judicially "subjected to vanity", till after a door of hope had been opened to
him by express revelation from God.
Of what? It follows in the next verse, "that So the particle (...) is rendered
a thousand times in the new testament; and so it ought to have been rendered
here.
the creature itself The original words, (...), are emphatically strong; as
meaning, "even the self-same creature" that had been subjected to vanity.
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the children of God"; which would have been impossible upon the plan of law,
but is easily to be accounted for upon the scheme of grace through the promised
Savior. He very obviously leads us into the same way of thinking upon the
matter, when he says, In his 5th Chap. 8th ver.
"as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so
by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification
of life. The original words, answering to the english ones, " all men", are the
same in both parts of the comparison.
What intelligible meaning can be given to this text, if the posterity of Adam,
through the righteousness of one, were not within the possibility of attaining
the justification of life? I may add here, it is the express declaration of him,
who is "head over all things", "that all that are in their graves shall hear
the voice of the son of God, and come forth". John 5.28, 29.
It Is put beyond all doubt, by these words, that mankind universally shall be
raised from the dead. But how is this possible according to the course of law?
Law, as such, knows no mercy. According to law, if mankind are once dead, they
must be forever dead. It Is nothing but the interposition of grace can deliver
them from the power of the grave. And as they shall be thus delivered, and this
universally, it is as certain that they are herein dealt with upon the foot of
grace, as that death passes upon them, If any should object and say, a
resurrection from the dead is no argument of grace in God, because it will be,
to many, "a resurrection to damnation, and not salvation"; the answer is
obvious: Is it no favor to live under the light of the gospel, rather than in
pagan darkness, since many, through their abuse of the gospel, will be the more
miserable in another world? Are the bounties of common providence no proof of
the goodness of God to men, because, by their misimprovement of them, they may
"treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath"? The race of Adam,
by an absolute grant of God, delivering them from the power of the grave, are
put within the possibility of a glorious immortality after death: And if, by
their own folly, in misimproving this advantage, they expose themselves to "a
second death", shall the grace of God be reflected upon? It Is highly
unreasonable, and basely ungrateful.
death would otherwise everlastingly reign over them. Those who imagine, that
any of Adam's posterity are so under law, as not to be at the same time under
grace, might do well to turn the though it in their minds, how it is possible, upon
this scheme, that they should, after they were once dead, be bro't back to life
again? I shall subjoin yet further, the scripture give us reason to think, that
men's condition, in another world, shall be determined, at the great day, not
according to the rigor of law, but the gospel-plan of grace. Ought not those
observable words of the Apostle Paul, Romans 2.16.
to be interpreted to this purpose, "In the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men according to my gospel"? That is, the mercy revealed in that
gospel, I, in an especial manner, have been commissioned to preach to the
world. It may be worthy of remark, the apostle had been speaking, in the
foregoing verses, of Gentiles as well as Jews, which then comprehended the
whole world of mankind, and affirms in this text, with reference to them all
indiscriminately, that they shall be hereafter judged "according to his
gospel". And if they will be thus judged, it must be according to the
revelation of the grace that is in Jesus Christ.

THIS view of the state of Adam's posterity at once cuts off all occasion for
murmuring and complaint, though our condition is such, that if law should be the
rule of our trial, we must unavoidably fall under a sentence of condemnation.
For we may be "saved by grace through Christ", though salvation is impossible upon
the foot of law. Shall we then any of us be so unadvised, as to seek to be
justified by works done in conformity to the law? This has all along been the
great folly of mankind. Though conscious to themselves that they are sinners, it
has been their way to betake themselves to doings of their own, in one form or
another, to procure the favor of God, and their acceptance as righteous in his
sight. It Is said of the Jews, in the days of the Apostles, who "followed after
the law of righteousness", that they "attained not to the law of
righteousness". And why? The reason follows, "because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the law". Romans 9.31, 32.
And it may, with equal truth, be said of most christians so called, that
neither have they "attained to a justifying righteousness"; and for the like
reason, "because they have sought for it in virtue of the deeds they have done
in imagined conformity to the law." Law, as we have heard, is rigidly severe;
making no abatement, admitting of no excuses, and showing no mercy. The man
that fails in his compliance with its demands, though it should be in one article
only, instantly comes under condemnation. We cannot therefore take a more
effectual method to fasten ruin upon ourselves, than by seeking to obtain
deliverance from it upon the terms of law. Our case indeed is absolutely
desperate, while law, or any works we have done in obedience to it, is what we
depend upon for an acquitance in judgment. No son of Adam, in any age, in any
place, or under any dispensation of God, was ever justified in this way, or
could have been For, in the eye of law, "the whole world is guilty before God".
Let us be so each one of us in the view we have of ourselves Instead of
"trusting in ourselves", with the proud Pharisee, "that we are righteous", let
us be abased before God in a sense of our manifold weaknesses and defects, not
to say the gross miscarriages we have too often been betrayed into. Surely, we
have no cause of pride on account of our works of righteousness. They have been
attended with so much frailty and imperfection, even the best of them, that if
God should examine them with rigor, we could not stand so severe a trial. Let
us, with the Apostle Paul, "count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord"; yea, let us "count them but dung that we
may win Christ, and be found in him, not having our own righteousness, which is
of the law; but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith". And we may now, upon a just foundation, hope for
acceptance with God here, and an acquitance at the bar of judgment hereafter;
to be pronounced blessed, and to be bid to enter into the joy of our Lord,
which God grant, etc.

SERMON II. The Question answered, "wherefore serves the Law"?
GALATIANS II. 16. "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law: -- For by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified."


IF it is impossible, that any of the human race should be "justified by the
works of the law", as the Apostle Paul affirms in my text, and as we have
abundantly proved in a former discourse from it, it may naturally be enquired,

WHY then was the law introduced among the Jews? What was the special view of
God in revealing it to them from Sinai, in the days of Moses? Nor may this be
esteemed a question of trivial importance. The apostle Paul, having discoursed
to the Galatians upon the unatainableness of justification "by the deeds of the
law", though it it proper to put the question, "wherefore then serves the law"? As
if he had said, if it be true, as I have been proving it to be, that the Jews
could not be acquitted as righteous persons upon the score of works done in
obedience to the law, it may, with great pertinency, be asked, why was the law
given to them? Why did God, in so solemn a manner, promulge it from heaven, and
put them under the obligations of it? To this important question the apostle
has given a direct and positive answer. But, before I come to mention his
answer, and dilate upon it so as to make it easy and familiar, I would
previously remark,

THAT the posterity of Abraham, 430 years before the giving of the law, were
put, by God himself, into the way of "justification without law", or in other
words, upon the foot of "grace through the promised seed". This was the main
thing intended, when he repeatedly said to Abraham, "I will be your God, and
the God of your seed. In thee shall all nations of the earth be blessed". The
"gospel" was now summarily preached to Abraham, as it had been before to Adam;
that same gospel which has since been particularly explained in the writings of
the new testament. And the "mercy" hereby promised to him lay at the bottom, as
the true and great basis of the whole scheme of the divine conduct with
reference to the jewish nation. It was owing to this mercy in particular, and
to this only, that it became possible for them to obtain acceptance with God in
this world, and admission to glory and immortality beyond the grave.

THE introduction of the law among the Jews must therefore be considered, not
as intended by God to oppose, much less to set aside, the covenant he had made
with their father Abraham; but to subserve, in some view or other, the
obtainment of the blessing promised in it. If, by the covenant with Abraham,
the Jews were put into a way, in which they might be justified and saved, it
was impossible the law should be given to counter-act this intention of divine
mercy. "The law", in such a view of it, "would be against the promise", which
the apostle Paul rejects, with a "God forbid"; Gal. 3.21.
and with good reason, for it would be so against the promise as to "disannul
it"; which, as the same inspired writer assures us, would be highly absurd to
suppose. Gal. 3.17.
The law was certainly introduced among the Jews as an instance of favor to
them. God designed by it to promote their good; and had they regarded it in
subserviency to the promise, with which it was connected in the divine
intention, it would have turned out to their spiritual and eternal advantage.

I AM not insensible, that the apostle Paul expressly speaks of the law, 2 Cor.
3.7, 9.
as "the ministration of death", and "of condemnation". And I am fully
satisfied he has herein given an accurately just account of the law. But then,
it ought always to be remembered, when he thus speaks of the law, he
understands by it "mere law", law "separated from grace and Christ". It was by
the law, in this sense, that the Jews expected "the justification of life".
This, to be sure, was eminently their fault in the days of the apostles: For
which reason, even those among them who professed faith in Christ, contended
earnestly for an adherence to the law, as what was necessary in order to their
obtaining the favor of God. But they were herein egregiously mistaken. And it
was this mistake of their's that gave occasion for numerous passages in Paul's
epistles, from which it may with certainty be collected, that justification was
obtainable even while the law subsisted. But how? Not "through the law", but in
virtue of "the promise founded in Christ", with which it was connected in the
view of God. To this purpose he argues, Romans 4.13.
"The promise was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the
righteousness of faith". That is to say, the promised grant of life was not
made upon "terms of law", but in quite another method here signified by "the
righteousness of faith". He adds, in the words that immediately follow, "if
they which are of the law are heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made
of no effect". Parallel whereto is that text, Gal. 3.18.
"If the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise; but God gave it
to Abraham by promise". And that the law did not exclude the promise; but that
the Jews, notwithstanding the law, were still to have their dependence on the
promise for life, he argues from this, that "the covenant with Abraham was
confirmed in Christ", unalterably settled and established with a view to him,
"430 years before the law was given by Moses"; so that the law could not be
introduced in the room of the promise, or to set it aside, without making void
a solemn contract, after it had, in an authentic manner, been confirmed. His
reasoning runs thus, Gal. 3.15, 17.
"Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a man's covenant,
yet, if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or adds thereto. -- And this I
say, that the covenant which was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law,
which was 430 years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of
none effect". It Is abundantly evident from these texts, that "the justification
of life", though unattainable by the law, was yet attainable under the law, in
virtue of the abrahamic covenant, which it neither did, nor could, set aside.
It is evident also, that it was not the intention of the law to frustrate, or,
in any measure, oppose, the operation of the promise, but that it was rather
designed to promote it by its actings in subserviency to it.

IT may, I think, be justly collected from what has been thus previously
remarked, that the "Mosaic law", merely as such, was not intended by God as a
"covenant of life". His view herein was not to let the Jews, or any of the race
of men, know, that perfect innocence was the way in which they were to obtain
the favor of God to eternal life; or that, unless they were thus innocent, they
should be "cast into prison till they had paid the utmost farthing". Had this
been the design of God in publishing his law from Sinai, it would have been
absolutely inconsistent, not only with his promise to Abraham, "I will be your
God, and the God of your seed"; but with that more ancient one to the first
father of men, "the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head". The law
of God, it is true, being a perfect rule of righteousness, always did, and
always must, require perfect innocence. And God's setting it before the world,
as he does in the promulgation of it, may powerfully tend to lead them into
just apprehensions of their duty, and convince them from thence of their
unhappy condition, should they be dealt with according to the requirements of
law: But it could not be designed to let them know, that they could find
acceptance with heaven in no way but by "perfectly" keeping the law. This would
be to substitute the law in the room of grace, and, in reality of sense, to
alter the method the wisdom of God, excited by his goodness, has contrived for
the justification of sinners.

AN obvious corollary now presents itself. It is this. That sinners ought not
to be told, that they must be "perfect", This is what the author of the
"letters on Thereon and Aspasio" tells those, who, while destitute of "the
salutary truth", would do any thing that they might obtain life. "If they
attempt to do in any sense, they bind themselves to do all". The requirement of
them is, " every thing, or nothing", page 285. He accordingly sums up what they
have to do in these words, page 387. "Be perfect, keep the commandments, and
thou shall live. The obligation of the law is eternal, so can never be loosed".
If the "obligation of the law is thus indissoluble", why does he speak of
himself, page 10. "as ready to show, that all objections and impediments have
been, by a particular divine edict for the purpose, removed and dispensed with
in favor of all, who are sincerely disposed, whenever they shall be found"? Why
does he bring in the blessed God, page 90. assuring every man, who shall
sincerely repent, or turn from his evil way, and do that which is lawful and
right, that he shall be happy [that is, as he means here, in the sole virtue of
his repentance and righteousness, without any view to Christ] and no mention
made of his former faults; and confirming all ^his by his oath, that there
might be no remaining doubt or hesitation in the minds of men, about their
acceptance with God, as soon as they are reformed? If our author can reconcile
"this particular edict", and "assurance from the God of truth", with a
"law-obligation that is eternally indissoluble", he may claim the honor of
doing that which no man has ever yet done, that is, of making both parts of a
contradiction true. Besides, if the law requires perfect personal obedience,
and "its obligation can never be loosed", how came Christ to be admitted to do
and suffer in the sinner's stead? This principle strictly adhered to, will
nullify the whole scheme of grace through Christ. It is indeed a flat
contradiction to the revealed character of God. But to pass these things. If
one should put the question to our author, what law of heaven ever required men
perfectly to keep the commandments IN ORDER TO LIFE? he would, perhaps, find
himself greatly puzzled to give a just answer. Was it the law man was placed
under in paradise? It Is as evident as words can make it, that life, even in
man's innocent state, was a matter of grace, and suspended upon a single
article of forbearing to do; and this, from a principle of faith in a
revelation from God. See a preceding note, page 18, 19, 20. -- Was it a law
given to man immediately after the lapse? The all-merciful God, even before he
pronounced the sentence, dooming man to death, summarily revealed "the grand
salutary truth", by promising, that "the seed of the woman should bruise the
serpent's head". And by promulging this promise, a constitution of grace was
erected, conformably to which eternal life became obtainable by Adam, and all
his posterity. How? Not by "perfectly doing"; but by "believing in the seed God
had promised". And as this method of grace was established immediately upon the
lapse, it has all along been, now is, and always will be, the one only way to
life for sinful man. -- Was it the law published from Sinai? If we consider
this law as a "national covenant", containing the terms upon which the Jews
should hold the land of Canaan, and live in the quiet happy possession of it,
no other people had any concern with it. Though it ought to remembered here, this
law, so far as its precepts were of a moral nature, being founded in reason,
and not positive injunction, was obligatory upon all others as a rule of duty,
wherein they might come to the knowledge of it. It ought also to be very
heedfully minded, this political law, or national covenant, was so constructed
as to be, in the design of God, a figure, type, or emblematical representation
of that GOSPEL, which had been preached to Abraham, and has since been preached
to all the world, and is the only foundation upon which eternal life is
obtainable. God has promised it in no other way; and to go to work for it in
any other way, whether by perfect or imperfect obedience, no matter which,
would be, virtually and in reality of sense, to set up a method for obtaining
life in direct opposition to that, which God has already established. This was
the great fault of the Jews, particularly in the times of Christ and his
apostles. They entirely mistook the "true spirit" of their law, as it related
to eternal life. In their observance of it, they regarded the "letter only",
overlooking its ultimate intention, which was its very "life and soul". It
accordingly became "a ministration of death" to them, and not "of life". And
why? Not because they did not perfectly obey it; for if they had, according to
"the letter", it would still have been "the ministration of condemnation",
because their obedience would have been without "spirit", that is, it would
have been obedience detached from "gospel", which was the "life and spirit" of
the law. No perfection, could we suppose it angelic, separate from grace and
Christ, could have given a Jew a ti^e to life, because that God, whose gift it
is, had not promised it in that way. -- There is no law now left that can
require "perfect doing" IN ORDER TO LIFE, unless it be that which is commonly
called, "the law of nature". But what law is this? Is it a law naturally
imprinted on men's minds, which tells them, either directly, or by the exercise
of the powers they are endowed with, what God's requirements are, at the same
time ASSURING them, that, upon their compliance with them, they shall LIVE
FOREVER? Nothing is more certain, than such a law of nature never existed but
in imagination only. -- Is this law that rule of right, which God knows to be
the measure of men's duty to him, and of what it is fit he should do for, or
inflict upon, them, as they are either obedient, or disobedient? There is,
without all doubt, such a rule of men's duty toward God, and of God's conduct
toward men in a way of reward, or punishment, according to their works. But
yet, none of the sons of Adam, by the mere exercise of their natural powers,
ever yet attained to a perfect knowledge of this rule. Most certainly, they are
unable, after all their reasonings, to say, what punishment, as to kind, or
degree, or duration, would be their due in case of sin, or what reward it would
be proper for God to bestow upon them in case of obedience. God alone is
absolutely and fully acquainted with "this rule of right"; and we can be
clearly and certainly acquainted with it only by revelation from him. And such
revelation man has all along, from the beginning, in his innocent and lapsed
state, been favored with. This revealed law therefore is the only one we have
any concern with AS THE WAY TO ETERNAL LIFE. In short, whatever law of nature
be supposed, it is superseded by revelation; which is the "only rule" God will
observe in the bestowment of life after death. And yet, our author, instead of
directing men to exert themselves, in the use of means, to obtain that "faith"
in the revelation of God, without which it is impossible they should inherit
life, points their endeavors another way, boldly telling them, if they will do
any thing, they must "be perfect". And why? Because truly this they are obliged
to by a supposed "law of nature, whose obligation is eternal, and cannot be
loosed". It Is upon this fond conceit of his, that he has, with so much profane
levity, perverted the sense of a great part of the bible; making the calls of
God, which are all founded on the plan of grace through Christ, not calls of
mercy, but to obey "his imaginary law"; hereby turning the grace of God, in
reality of construction, into a wanton insult on his poor sinful creatures.


"Our author", in the following no^es, always means "the writer of the letters
on Thereon and Aspasio". The pages referred to, in these letters, agree with the
second edition, printed at Edingburg, 1759.


that they must "unerringly keep the commandments of the law in order to their
obtaining eternal life". It may be proper to set the law before their view, in
its absolute purity and perfection, to point out to them the misery of their
condition, while law is the rule of judgment in their case. But to tell them,
that they must be "perfect" in their regards to the law, or that damnation will
be the consequence, is to apply to them as though God had provided no Savior,
and had made no revelation of his grace toward sinners; yea, it is, in true
construction, to overlook the whole gospel-scheme of mercy, and to make void
both the life and death of Jesus Christ.

WE may accordingly lay it down for certain, that, when the holy God is
introduced, by the prophet Ezekiel, as swearing by his life, "the soul that
sins, it shall die; but if a man be just and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live", his meaning (whatever it was) could not be to put
the Jews under the law, as "a covenant of life". As the promised life, and
threatened death; in the 18th and 33d chapters of Ezekiel, are supposed, by our
author, (whether justly, or not, I shall not now dispute) to refer to the
eternal world, and to mean happiness and misery there, it is strange he should
first understand, by "the righteousness required", that which would, on its own
account, save from the one, and give a title to the other. It Is more strange, he
should then speak of "repentance", as what would serve, instead of perfect
righteousness, to deliver the sinner from death, and in its own proper virtue
too. It Is most of all strange, beyond mea^re so, that he should introduce the
faithful God, not only declaring to the Jews, that he would bless them with
life upon these terms, but solemnly giving his oath to the truth of this
declaration, page 90. If the calls, in these chapters, to "turn from their evil
ways", and to "do that which is just and right", are interpreted, as they ought
to be, as so many exhortations, upon the plan of grace through the promised seed,
they would be at once intelligible in themselves, and consistent with the
common language of the bible, and the grand scheme the father of mercies has
had in prosecution from the beginning of the world. But to explain them, as
this author does, as commands, a compliance with which would, in its own
virtue, give a claim to life; and to bring in the holy God swearing to the
truth of it, is at once to abuse the scripture, and impeach the divine veracity
and purity. Will that God, who is as just as he is good, admit sinners to his
favor upon the sole consideration, either of obedience or repentance, perfect
or imperfect? What an aspect has this upon the great atonement by the blood of
Christ? How will it consist with the character, under which God has all along
revealed himself from the day of the lapse? Is it in itself a truth, or
falsehood, to say, that doing or repenting, separated from grace and Christ,
will avail to give the sinner a title to eternal life? Surely, no one, knowing
what he says, will affirm it to be a truth. It Is indeed impossible it should be,
if what the inspired writers unitedly declare, in the sacred books, may be
though it worthy of regard, And yet, our author makes the infinitely true God a
voucher to its truth, and by a solemn oath too. He will, perhaps, say, there is
an IF in the case. Life is connected with "doing or repenting", which will
never come into event; because no sinner can either do or repent in the sense
intended. But what a pitiful shift is this! How dishonorary to the father of
mercies, and God of all sincerity! Notwithstanding this IF, the supposition
that is the ground of it, is a REAL FALSEHOOD; because a direct contradiction to
the revealed method of God's admitting sinners to his favor. And shall "the
holy one of Israel", who is infinitely removed from all guile, be introduced as
connecting THIS FALSEHOOD, absolutely so in itself, with an IF, that it might
not too visibly carry with it the face of downright deceit? Far be it! The true
purport of our author's comment on God's words, by the prophet Ezekiel, to the
Jewish nation, and indeed to sinners in general, is plainly this, "though it is
IMPOSSIBLE, as you are sinners, you should have a title to life, in the mere
virtue, either of turning from your sins, or doing righteousness; yet, I
solemnly say to you, and swear by my life to the truth of what I say, this
IMPOSSIBILITY notwithstanding, if you will do ANOTHER, that is, thus turn from
sin and do that which is right, which you can no more do than you can create a
world, you shall assuredly obtain life". I have not done the least wrong to our
author in this paraphrase of his meaning. It Is the very thing he intends,
however impious and absurd it may look, at the first glance, thus set in its
true light. And his conduct hereupon, placed in the like point of clear view,
will make the like appearance. Under the specious pretext of guarding sinners
against the heinous crime of "self-justifying labor", he zealously discourages
them, however distressed about their spiritual state, from doing any thing,
sending up so much as a cry, in the bitterness of their souls, to the God of
all grace, in order to obtain "the salutary truth"; though the obtainment of this
truth, according to his own way of thinking, is that alone which is connected
with life. And yet, he very loudly calls upon them to exert themselves with all
their might in as truly "self-justifying labor", by another sort of doing and
repenting, while he knows in his heart, at the same time, that neither their
doing or repenting, in the sense he would urge them to it, will any more avail
to their obtaining life, than if they sat still and did nothing. That is, in
plain words, he peremptorily forbids their making the least attempt toward the
obtainment of the only thing which can interest them in life; while yet, he
would put them upon doing that, the doing of which would be as sure a path to
hell, as "that devout one" of the popular preachers, he sometimes speaks of.
This is the plain english of what he says. One can scarce think him serious. If
he is, he very seriously says a great deal to no purpose, unless to set the
scriptures in a ridiculous light: Especially, is there reason to think thus, as
it is not his intention, by turning men to the law, to awaken in them a sense
of sin and guilt, that, seeing their danger, they may be in a more prepared
frame of mind for the reception of "the salutary truth". This kind of
"law-work" is, with him, page 292. "an idle process". He frankly owns, page
293. that he sees no more difference between a careless and convicted sinner,
than there is betwixt a felon ranging his round at large, and one newly
apprehended by the officers of justice; and thinks it would look liker an
impertinent sarcasm than any thing else, to tell either of these last, that he
was now in a very hopeful way. What he ^ans is, that the impious, profligate,
hardened sinner, who has all his days lived in rioting and wantoness, stupidly
tho'tless of God, and unconcerned about the requirements of religion, is as
much in the way of obtaining mercy as the sinner, who, from a distressing sense
of the perishing need he stands in of help, is roused to the utmost diligence
in "seeking God, if perhaps he may be found of him". The "merciful truth", as
he thinks, "needs no preparation for its reception". -- It "prevents the most
hardened rebels"; and they are in as fair a way to become possessed of it, as
any sinners whatever. But these sentiments stand in direct opposition both to
the letter and spirit of numerous inspired texts, which speak of sinners as in
"a better", or "worse state", with respect to their salvation; as being in a
"more" or "less likely way" to obtain the salutary truth: As I shall have
occasion, particularly and largely to show, in a more proper place hereafter.
In the mean time, it may be worth observing, what our author has said above
naturally and stongly tends, whatever his design might be, to encourage men in
wickedness. For he has denied all difference between sinners as to their
finding "the salutary truth"; very plainly insinuating, that it is as likely it
should be communicated to them while hardened in iniquity, as when awakened to a
deep sense of their guilt and danger; while impiously contemning God and
sneering at religion, as when with the greatest solicitude they are attending
the instituted means of grace: Nay, it should seem, by what he has sometimes
suggested, as though the vilest debauchees stood, even, a better chance for the
obtainment of the saving truth, than those who take care to escape the
pollutions that are in the world through lust, and are serious and earnest in
their use of the means of salvation. He may think this a laudable zeal for the
honor of free and sovereign grace; but it is, in reality of sense, "turning it
into lasciviousness". I know of no man, who is more heinously chargeable with
"making Christ a minister of sin", by using him, and the grace of God through
him, to encourage sinners, while "walking in the way of their own heart, and in
the sight of their eyes", to imagine they are in as fair a way to find the
saving truth, as when they are seeking God for it in the best manner they are
able.
For he had, many hundreds of years before this, as solemnly swore that he
would be a "God to them" to all saving everlasting purposes, in a way quite
opposite to this of perfectly conforming to the requirements of law. The
obtainment of life by law, and the obtainment of it by grace, are absolutely
incompatible with each other. The Jews could not therefore be put upon
obtaining life by works done in obedience to law, while, at the same time, they
were put upon obtaining it upon the plan of grace through Christ. "The law", in
this view of it, "would be against the promise", and "the promise against the
law". Two opposite and inconsistent dispensations would be in force at the same
time, and in regard of the same persons, to suppose which would be highly
dishonorary to God. Besides, it is observable, the holy God is bro't in, by this
same prophet, as declaring, "if the wicked shall turn from all his sins that he
has committed, and keep all his statutes, -- he shall surely live, he shall
not die. All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned to him: In his righteousness that he has done, he shall live". But
how could one that has been a transgressor live by his after-righteousness,
upon the terms of law? To suppose such a thing, even though his
after-righteousness should be perfect, would be to suppose, that the law might
acquit and condemn the same person, at the same time. For no righteousness,
when the law has once been violated, can make any man righteous in the eye of
the law* If therefore God should declare he would make it the rule of his
conduct toward sinners, "not to mention their former transgressions" in case
of after-perfect obedience to the law, but to grant them life upon the score of
this righteousness, it must be by the interposition of grace: But the scripture
knows of no such grace; and it would indeed reflect dishonor on the divine
character, as revealed in the new testament, to suppose the exhibition of it:
Yea, it would virtually make void the whole work of Christ as Savior, by
introducing a rule of conduct toward the sinner, by which he might be saved,
without any relation to him. The plain truth is, sinners for whom a Savior has
been provided, and a method contrived and revealed conformably to which they
are within the possibility of obtaining life, cannot be supposed to be under a
dispensation of mere law, or in such circumstances as that they "must die if
they sin", and cannot live but by "their perfect righteousness" i^ obedience to
the law. This would be to suppose it both possible, and impossible, for them to
be saved. It would be to place them under dispensations quite opposite to, yea,
absolutely subversive of, each other.

LAW therefore, whether published in the days of Moses, or Ezekiel, or at any
other time since the lapse, must be considered as subservient to the plan of
mercy through Christ, or otherwise it will be inconsistent with it, and
destructive of it. And this is the view, in which the apostle Paul teaches us
to consider it, as we would entertain right apprehensions of the intention of
God in it: Which brings me

TO take some special notice of the answer he has given to the question,
"wherefore serves the law"? And it is sumed up in the two following particulars.

THE first is contained in those words, Gal. 3.19.
The law "was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to
whom the promise was made"* -- The second is thus expressed, Ver. 24.
"The law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be
justified by faith".

IN the first place, the apostle, in answer to the question, "wherefore serves
the law"? declares, that it "was added because of transgressions, till the seed
should come to whom the promise was made". As if he had said, the law of Moses,
in its complex view, made up of ceremonial institutions, and moral precepts,
was added as an appendix to the abrahamic covenant, "because", or for the sake,
"of transgressions"; that is, either to prevent the commission of them, or, if
they should be committed, to make them an occasion of spiritual service. And
the Jews were to be under this dispensation, "till the seed should come", till
the appearance of the Messiah, "the promised seed" of Abraham, to erect another
and better dispensation in its room. This I take to be the sense of the apostle
in these words. He means, by the law, both the "law-ritual", and the
"law-moral", and would be understood as affirming concerning the law, in both
these senses, that it was introduced among the Jews, as the dispensation they
should be under till the times of Christ, "the promised seed", BECAUSE OF
TRANSGRESSIONS. Accordingly let it be said,

THE "law-ritual" or ceremonial was introduced among the Jews "because of
transgressions"; that is, to secure them from those superstitions and
idolatries, then every where prevalent in the world, which were subversive of
true piety, and an inlet to all manner of vice and wickedness. Some think, that
the ceremonies of the Jewish law were added because of their transgression in
making and worshipping the "Golden-calf", and that God would not have enjoined
on them these burdensome rites had it not been for this folly of their's. But
though it was after their sin, in this special instance, that the Mosaic rites
were instituted; yet it does not appear, that they would not have been
instituted had they not thus sinned. It Is far more reasonable to suppose, that
the wisdom of God saw the fitness of such a dispensation to answer his own
purposes, and that it was, particularly, a well adapted means to keep that
people from transgression, by restraining those rites to the one true God,
which they would otherwise have been in danger of converting to the worship of
gods, falsely so called, after the manner of the idolatrous nations. The law of
ceremonies was therefore given them "because of transgressions", that is, to
preserve them from committing those transgressions which had corrupted the
whole earth. A more simple way of worship might, in an absolute view, have been
more perfect; but, considering the then state of the world, and of the Jewish
people, ritual institutions might be better for them, and a more likely means
to restrain them within their duty, and preserve them from those ways of false
worship which were then in universal practice. What though the ceremonies of the
Jewish law were numerous? Perhaps it will be found, the more closely the matter
is examined into, that they were, for this very reason, so much the better
fitted to correct the proneness in that people to the idolatrous superstitions
of the heathen, at least to guard them against being carried away with their
abominations: Especially, if it be considered, that the "ceremonial rites",
which they had appointed them, were such as had a special aspect on the
idolatrous rites of the Pagan nations, and were purposely fitted to prevent
their being seduced by them. This has been shown, by learned men, to have been
the case with respect to many of them; and it would doubtless appear to be the
truth with respect to them all, were we sufficiently acquainted with the state
of things in that distant age of the world.
Very observable to our purpose are those words of Maimonides, They are quoted
by Dr. Whitby, note on Gal. 3.19.
which are a just comment on the apostle Paul, though wrote long before his birth
into the world, or the coming of Jesus Christ. Says that most learned and
judicious Hebrew Doctor (as the excellent Mr. Lowman styles him), When God sent
Moses to redeem his people out of Egypt, it was the usual custom of the world,
and the worship in which all nations were bred up, to build temples in honor of
the sun, moon and stars, and to offer diverse kinds of animals to them, and to
have priests appointed for that end: Wherefore, God knowing, that it was beyond
human nature at once to quit that, which it has long been accustomed and
powerfully inclined to, would not command that all that worship should be
abolished, -- but that HE ONLY should be the OBJECT of it, that these temples
and altars should be built to HIM ALONE, these sacrifices offered to HIM ALONE,
and these priests be consecrated to HIS SERVICE ONLY. Thus he. And the wisdom
of God, in these "ritual institutions", will shine still brighter, if it should
appear (as it very evidently will by and by) that they were so contrived, as to
be a proper "schoolmaster to bring the Jews to Christ", at the same time that
they guarded them against the idolatrous transgressions that then defiled the
earth. I go on to say,

THE law, considered as "moral", was given the Jews "because of
transgressions". And in the following senses.

"IT was added because of trangressions"; that is, because, by transgressions
of the law of reason, persisted in from generation to generation, mankind had
obscured the light of their understanding, and disabled themselves from
discerning in many instances, at least, with clea^ess and certainty, the
difference between vir^ue and vice. To prevent therefore the entire loss of all
sense of moral good and evil in the earth, God was pleased to publish the
law-moral to the Jewish nation, containing a rule of duty, simple and pure,
clear and full, and, in a word, admirably f^ted to direct their conduct both
toward God and man.

"IT was added because of transgressions"; that is, that the Jews in special,
and other nations through them, might be better able, having a promulgated law,
containing a clear and certain rule of duty, to know wherein they were
chargeable with transgression. Hence those words of the apostle Paul, Romans 3.20.
"by the law is the knowledge of sin"; that is, a more clear and certain
knowledge of it, and, in some instances, a knowledge of it, when, had it not
been for the revealed law, men would have been in total ignorance in this
respect. To this purpose we read, Romans 7.7.
"I had not known sin but by the law", that is, I had not known it at all in
some cases, and in none so clearly and fully, had it not been for the revealed
law.

"IT was added because of transgressions", that is, that their malignant
destructive nature and operation, as transgressions, might be more readily and
fully apprehended. Hence that language of the apostle, Romans 7.9.
"when the commandment came, I died". So in the words that next follow, "the
commandment I found to be unto death". And yet again, Ver. 11.
"sin taking occasion from the commandment, slew me".

IN fine, "it was added because of transgressions", that is, that the Jews,
discerning more thoroughly from the law, the criminous nature, and awful demerit,
of their transgressions, might be led into an affecting, convincing,
constraining apprehension of the desireableness, greatness, and glory of divine
grace in their pardon and salvation. Hence the apostle Paul, after he had said,
Romans 5.20.
"the law entered that sin might abound", immediately observes, in the
following words, "but where sin abounded, grace did much more abound" As if he
had said, by how much more sin, in its evil nature, and destructive tendency,
is made to abound by the introduction of the law, by so much the more is grace
rendered conspicuous and glorious in delivering from it. For so it follows,
Ver. 21.
"that as sin has reigned unto death, (that is, through the law, that being the
strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6.) even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". It Is certain, a clear and full view
of the malignity and guilt of sin, as it is made to abound by the promulgated
law of God, is powerfully adapted to set off the riches of the glory of divine
grace. And one of the chief things intended by God, in giving the law to the
Jews was, that they might, in this way, be bro't to entertain in their minds
exalted tho'ts of his grace, and be engaged to place all their dependence on it
in the bu^siness of salvation. And it was happily suited to such a purpose.
They might, from the law, be easily led to see, in a strong and full light,
their need of the mercy of God, the supreme lawgiver and king, and that they
could be saved in no way but that of grace, and the abounding of it toward
them. It Is true, they did not generally make this use of the law; but the fault
lay with themselves, and not the divine law. This was very powerfully suited to
give them such a sense of sin and wrath as to put them upon flying to grace, as
to that only which could give them hope of an acquitance before God, and coming
to the enjoyment of him in a better state and world.

THE other reason, the apostle gives for the introduction of the law, among the
Jews, is, Gal. 3.24.
"that it might be their schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, that they might
be justified by faith". What he means is, that the law stood connected, in the
scheme of God, with the promised Messiah, and was a preparatory dispensation
for the more perfect state of things under the gospel-oeconomy; as childhood is
introductory to the more mature state of manhood, and a previous season
suitably making way for it by tuition and discipline. The apostle explains
himself, upon this point, in the beginning of the next chapter, where he
considers the Jews as "children under age", in comparison with christians under
the gospel; and "the law", as their "tutor and governor till the time appointed
of the father", that is, the more perfect state this was introductory to, in
the times of Christ. And it is true of the "law", whether we consider it in
regard of its "ceremonial institutions", or "moral precepts", that it was
designed by God as a kind of "school master to lead the Jews to Christ".

THE "law ceremonial" was introduced among them with this view; that is, it was
a lower kind of state (like childhood in compare with manhood) appointed by God
for their tuition and instruction, or to prepare them for, and suitably
inroduce them to, the more perfect state of things, which was to take place by
the erection of the gospel dispensation. This seems to be the meaning of the
apostle. The like account is given of this matter elsewhere, in the
new-testament-writings. Says this same apostle, speaking of the Mosaic
ceremonial institutions, Col. 2.17.
"which are a shadow of good things to come, but the body is Christ"; that is,
their substance or reality is to be found in him. In like manner, the law of
rites is characterised, in the epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.1.
as "having a shadow of good things to come". It is indeed the main design of
the writer of this epistle, to point out the analogy there is between the less
perfect state of things under the law, and the more perfect one under the
gospel, and to lead us, at the same time, into the though it, that the former of
these states was, in the intention of God, emblematical of the latter, and
preparatory to it. According to his sense of the matter, the temple, the holy
of holies, the priesthood, the sacrifices, and, in a word, the whole jewish
ritual, were types or figures of some future awswerable good things, designed
for the instruction of the Israelites, though in a lower degree, till the good
things themselves, which they represented, should take place in the times of
Christ. It will, perhaps, be found impossible to make a great part of this
epistle intelligible, upon any scheme of interpretation but that, which
considers the jewish ceremonial as a pattern, type, or emblematical
representation of that state of things, which was to be established in the
Gospel-day.

I AM not insensible, "the doctrine of types" has been abused by some, and
objected to, by others, as unworthy of regard.

IT has been abused by some, who have unhappily indulged to vain imaginations
upon this subject; giving out their own fancies for the meaning of God's law.
This has been too often done, not only by jewish writers in the times of the
law; but by christian writers, since its abolishment. The enemies of revelation
have taken occasion herefrom to treat the things of God and religion with sneer
and ridicule. But the doctrine of types ought not to be though it the worse of upon
this account. It may be the doctrine of scripture, though men of strong
imaginations, and weak judgments, may have pointed out an analogy between the
law and the gospel, which never had existence but in their own fancies; and
though designing men may herefrom have taken occasion to speak of such analogies
with contempt. Both our Savior himself, and his apostles, do certainly
consider many things under the jewish law, as prefigurations, shadows,
emblematical patterns of answerable better things under the
gospel dispensation. There can be no reasonable dispute as to this. And if we
take them for our guides, instead of giving an unrestrained scope to
imagination, there will be no danger of exposing religion by a mere fanciful
application of the things contained in the writings of Moses and the Prophets.

THIS doctrine has also been objected to, as not worthy of regard; but upon
reasons that are not convincing.

IT is said, the things that are called ancient types and figures cannot be
applied to any afterevents, with sufficient certainty and precision. I answer,
though the application be not precise and certain in all instances; yet it is in
so many as to exclude chance, and put us upon having recourse to design. And
herein, it is observable, there is an analogy between natural and revealed
religion. We prove the divine wisdom and goodness from the harmonies and
fitnesses we see in the works of nature; and we are satisfied with the evidence
arising from hence, though these harmonies and fitnesses have never yet been
certainly and precisely made out in all instances. In some, far from being made
particularly and distinctly to appear, they are attended with difficulty; yea,
with seeming incongruity And yet, we think it reasonable to argue from them,
they are so many, and so clearly point out design, notwithstanding the
obscurity in particular instances. And the same may be said, with equal reason,
in the case before us. The analogy between ancient things under the law, and
answerable events under the gospel, is, in so many instances, capable of being
made out with such precision and certainty, as to exclude all probability of
chance, and to render it highly reasonable to admit design. That we may
perceive this in a clear point of light, let us try to apply the scripture
types and prefigurations, as we call them, to other persons and events, than
those they are applied to in the new testament. If design be excluded, Dr.
Hartley, on man; whose tho'ts on the Mosaic types, are well worth reading.
these ought to be equally, or nearly so, applicable to other persons and
events; which yet, I think, no serious, considerate person can affirm. Now, if
chance be once excluded, and the necessity of having recourse to design be
admitted, we shall instantly be compeled to acknowledge a contrivance greater
than human, from the long distance of time intervening between the type, and
the thing typified, with other suchlike reasons.

IT is said again, the things which we call types had their "literal meaning",
and "literal use", in ancient times; and it is unreasonable to assign to them a
"double meaning and use". The reply is, if there really is an analogy between
"jewish rites" and "gospel-events", greater than can be supposed to result from
chance, or human foresight, and such as obliges us to have recourse to God; and
this can be evidently made out in a good number of instances: Our being able to
show, that these instituted rites had their "literal meaning and use", in
former days, will be so far from destroying their nature as types or
prefigurations, that it will rather argue the necessity of a "double sense and
use" of these things, and that it was in the actual view and design of God in
the institution of them. All the works of God -- (as Dr. Hartley expresses it)
have various uses and subserviencies in respect of each other; and, if the
scriptures are the word of God, analogy would lead one to expect something
corresponding hereto in them.

IN fine, it is still objected, how was the law, when it referred to Christ, by
the acknowledgment of all, only in a typical, figurative, emblematical way, a
suitable "schoolmaster", or tutor, to lead the Jews into a true knowledge of
him, or the gospel dispensation that was to be erected by him? Did they
understand the meaning of their "ritual institutions", considered in their
typical reference? Did they use them with this reference? Did they look beyond
them to the things said to be represented, or prefigured, by them? In answer
whereto, I will not affirm, that the Jews had, or that it was intended by God
that they should have, a clear and full understanding of the things shadowed
forth, in their law, by types and emblematical figures. The supposition of such
knowledge is inconsistent with that "mode of instruction" they were under. As a
late excellent writer well observes, Lowman, in his jewish ritual.
What was prefigured of the times of the Messiah, either in the ancient
prophets, or types of the "jewish ritual", was, in the apostle Peter's just
account of it, 2 Pet. 1.19.
as a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star
arise in your hearts". Yet, dark as it was, it gave some light, and such as was
of great advantage to the principal ends designed by it, and for which a fuller
light was not necessary. It will be little to our purpose to inquire, how far
the Hebrew nation in general did actually understand their own ritual, and what
it taught concerning the Messiah, his person, character and offices. It is more
to the purpose to consider, how it might have been understood, if they had
rightly applied themselves to the understanding of it. And though we cannot say,
particularly, how far their knowledge might have extended; yet we may say, in
general, that they might have made considerable discoveries of the more secret
meaning, at least, of their more important rites. As the last quoted author
observes, The mysteries of Hieroglyphics, and instruction by symbols, in use
among their neighbors, became a part of study and science; and they learned
many things by them, not obvious to common observation. The moral meaning of
sacrifices, for instance, was of easy understanding. Why might not the Hebrews,
from a general understanding of that part of their ritual, be taught to expect
a greater high priest, better sacrifices, a better covenant, better promises
and blessings, in the times of the Messiah, who was to perfect all things
wanting in their law? Especially, when their own ritual showed its own
weak^ess, that it could not take away sin.

BUT of however small use, the "law ceremonial", in its typical sense, might be
to the Jews BEFORE, it was highly serviceable AT THE TIME OF THE COMING OF THE
MESSIAH, to prepare their minds both for a more ready understanding of, and
complying with, the method of salvation through him.

IT was of great use, as a "schoolmaster", to lead them more easily into right
conceptions of "the things pertaining to the kingdom of Christ". For, as it was
a dispensation, which really, though in figures and shadows only, represented the
work and office of the Messiah, and that salvation with which he was to "bless
all nations of the earth", it could not but prepare their minds, unless they
were stupidly inattentive, the more readily to take in just notions of these
things, after his incarnation, death, resurrection, and exaltation to heaven.
However obscure their "ritual" might be, in former days, as to its typical
meaning, it was now opened and explained; insomuch, that if they understood it
formerly in no other than its "literal use and meaning", they would be now
under advantage to understand the things that were figuratively signified by
it. The plain truth is, "law" and "gospel" mutually illustrate each other. "By
the gospel it might be seen, that the law had a typical reference; and by the
law, the mind was prepared more readily and justly to conceive of the gospel."
The Jews, for instance, by having long seen and known the "literal" use and
meaning of the "legal sacrifices", might more easily have understood, by parity
of reason, the nature, design and efficacy, of the "one sacrifice", which
Christ 'offer'd of himself to God", to "make reconciliation for iniquity";
arguing with themselves, Heb. 9. 13, 14.
"If the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the
unclean, sanctified to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who offered himself to God without spot, purge your conscience
from dead works to serve the living God"? In like manner, by their seeing and
knowing, that "the high priest, once every year, entered into the holiest of
all, not without blood, both for himself and for the people", their minds were
assisted to understand more easily and clearly the things hereby meant, namely,
"Christ's appearance for us in heaven", in virtue of "his blood shed for us" on
the earth. And the same may be said of their "whole ritual", as it was a shadow
of better things under the dispensation of the Messiah.

IT was also of very important use to "facilitate" and "strengthen" their faith
in Christ, and the gospel-revelation; especially taken in connection with the
predictions of their prophets. For these, and the accomplishment of them in
Christ, did so correspond to each other (as in water face answers to face)
that those, who believed the law and the prophets, were under great advantage,
by means hereof, to believe in Christ also. It Is therefore observable, our
blessed Lord, when he would satisfy his disciples, that he was indeed the
Christ, and that his death, which had occasioned, at first, some staggering in
their faith, was a matter of necessity, "he expounded to them, in all the
scriptures, the things concerning himself, beginning at Moses, and proceeding to
all the prophets". Luke 24.27.
In like manner, when the apostle Paul labored to convince the Jews, at Rome,
of the truth of christianity, the method he took, esteeming it the most
effectual, was that, Act. 28.23.
"he appointed a day, and many came to his lodging, to whom he expounded and
testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the
law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morning till evening". And it may
be worthy of special remark, our Savior himself ascribed it to "the want of
faith in Moses", that the Jews did not "believe in him". Says he, Joh. 5.46, 47.
"had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me: But if
ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words"? To the like
purpose is that passage, in a discourse of the apostle Paul's, recorded in the
book of the Acts, Act. 13.27.
"they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not,
nor yet the voice of the prophets which are read to them every sabbath day,
they have fulfilled them in condemning him".

NOR was the "law ceremonial", taken in connection with the prophetic parts of
the old testament, of use to the Jews in our Savior's day only, to beget and
strengthen in them a belief of christianity, but to Gentiles also; yea, it was
then, and has ever since been, and always will be, singularly useful, in this
respect, both to Jews and Gentiles, though in a different way to the one and the
other. "The Jews believed in Christ, because prefigured by Moses, and
prophesied of by the prophets; the Gentiles believed these prefigurations and
prophesies, because so exactly and wonderfully accomplished in the appearance
of Christ, and the offices he sustained and executed as the promised Savior".
And the plain truth is, the the more than human correspondence between the
types and prophesies of the old testament, and the state of things erected by
the coming of Christ in these gospel times, is a standing public reproach to
the jewish people for their infidelity, and a standing public justification of
the reasonableness of their faith, who embrace christianity. We may, even at
this distance from Christ, and much greater distance from Moses, vindicate our
reception of Christ and his gospel, from the verification of so many ancient
types and figures, as well as prophesies, in his person, office, and the
spiritual kingdom he has set up in the world. For it is impossible, so many
incidents in the jewish dispensation, so many instituted rites, so many
prophesies, should bear such a correspondence with the character, work, and
kingdom of Jesus Christ, without having recourse to design; and no design but
that of God could take in a compass of time, extending through ages and
generations, from the times of Moses to the times of Christ: Yea, I may say,
from the days of Adam to the end of the world. For it is evidently one uniform
design that has been in prosecution from the beginning of the world, and will
be prosecuted till time shall be no more.

THE "law-moral" was, in like manner, "a schoolmaster to bring the Jews to
Christ". And, with great propriety, it is thus spoken of, as, by its prohibitions
and threatenings, it was adapted to lead them into such a knowledge of sin, as
had a powerful tendency to dispose and influence them to repair to "the mercy
of the promise", and not to depend upon a claim to life founded on their own
doings in conformity to law, simply as such. It was well fitted, in this sense,
to tutor and discipline their minds. They could not, if they were faithful and
impartial in comparing their hearts and lives with the demands of the law, but
be conscious to themselves of many omissions of duty and commissions of sin;
and when, with like faithfulness, they attended to the denunciations of God
against sin in every kind, they could not but be bro't to look upon themselves
as standing in absolute need of mercy, and under absolute obligations to fly to
it by "faith", as ever they would entertain the least hope of "justification"
in the sight of that God, whose law they had thus violated. It was "by the
commandment", as written in the divine law, "that sin became exceeding sinful"
to the apostle Paul. Romans 7.13.
And it was by this sight and apprehension of sin, through the law, that the law
became an instructor, tutor, or schoolmaster to him; teaching him not to
depend on works in conformity to law, but to place his hope on the mercy of God
through Jesus the redeemer. And the "law-moral" was given by God, to the Jews,
that it might, in this way, be of spiritual service to them. He intended it
should be, as it were, "a schoolmaster" to show them their deserts by reason
of sin, and in this way to disengage them from trusting in their own doings for
life, and put them upon repairing to "the promise" through the "seed of Abraham".
And it probably had this good effect upon multitudes of the Jews, in their
successive generations, from the days of Moses, till the coming of Christ, the
promised seed.

AND now, from what has been discoursed, we are naturally and obviously led to
entertain in our minds honorable tho'ts of the jewish law, in regard of its
"ceremonial rites", as well as "moral precepts".

WE may, perhaps, have been ready to think contemptuously of the jewish
constitution, on account of those "numerous rites" with which their worship was
encumbered. And, possibly, what the sacred writers of the new testament have
sometimes said, with reference to these "ceremonial observancies", may have led
us into such tho'ts about them. But it ought always to be remembered, that
these "rites", however numerous, or burdensome, were appointed by the wisdom
and authority of God; who never would have appointed them, if it had not been
reasonable, and, for the best, all things considered, that the Jews should be
placed under such a religious constitution. We may therefore be sure, the
inspired writers of the new testament do never speak contemptuously of these
"rites", or of the "jewish dispensation," on account of them, but in a
comparative view; that is, setting them in competition with the better state of
things under the gospel. In compare with the gospel-institution, since the
coming of Christ, the jewish constitution was "weak, and beggarly, imperfect
and unprofitable". And it is in this comparative sense, that it is thus spoken of
in the new-testament-writings. It would be a dishonor to God, and a barefaced
reflection on his governing wisdom, to speak, in a contemptuous manner, of it
in any other sense. For though it was not so perfect an institution, as that
which has been erected by Jesus Christ, in the gospel-day; yet, it was such an
one as the wisdom of God though it best for that age of the world, and the
circumstances of the jewish nation. And, perhaps, it was as good and perfect an
institution of religion as could have been contrived and erected, for that
people, in that day. It was, as we have seen, well fitted to guard them against
that "idolatrous worship", which had corrupted the whole earth. And so far as
it was a suitable means to answer so good an end, there can be no reasonable
room to complain, either of the wisdom or goodness of God, though their ritual
observances were many and burdensome; especially if it be remembered, that he
had it in view, by these Mosaic ceremonies, to put them under tuition, that
they might be prepared for higher expectations, than they could reasonably have
from the law, simply in itself. If when we have read the scripture-account of
the numerous rites of the jewish saw, we have confined our view to their mere
"literal use and meaning", no wonder we have been disposed to entertain an
unbecoming notion of ^he dispensation they were placed under; imagining it
scarce worthy of so great and glorious an author, as the one true and living
God. But our view has been too narrow and confined. The all-wise God appointed
the use of these "ceremonial rites', as prefigurations, emblematical
descriptions, of that only way to life, which has been clearly and fully
opened, since the coming of Jesus Christ. And the jews, by means of those
"ritual institutions", as truly enjoyed the GOSPEL in their day, as we do now;
though more darkly- and obscurely. Their sacrifices, their priests, their temple,
their whole manner of worship, were the gospel in type and figure. And
considering their circumstances, together with the way in which it was
determined Christ should come into the world, and accomplish the work of man's
redemption, this lower and more imperfect method of instruction might be best
suited to answer the purposes of God, and the good ends he had in prosecution.
It might not be proper, they should know too much of the gospel-plan; and this
method of instruction, by types and figures, might be well adapted to let them
into all the knowledge, it might be necessary or proper they should then attain
to. And the more piously considerate, among the Jews, might know more of the
"typical sense" of the law, than we may be ready to imagine. I don't say, or
think, that their knowle^ge, with respect to Christ and the gospel, was any way
to compare with our's, whose lot it is to live since the revelation God has
made of himself by Jesus Christ, and his apostles; but they might know a great
deal in general, and so much as to be disposed and prepared to look beyond the
"literal meaning" of the ceremonial rites appointed by their law. Moses
himself, the jewish legislator, under God, "by faith" looked beyond the law to
Christ, and beyond Canaan to heaven; and it was owing to this faith of his,
that he was enabled to surmount the difficulties he was called to meet with,
"enduring affliction with the people of God, rather than enjoying the pleasures
of sin for a season", Heb. 11.25.
as we read in the epistle to the Hebrews; where we are presented with a long
list of jewish worthies, after the establishment of the Mosaic ritual, who, "by
faith" looked beyond the "literal use of their law", and were influenced
herefrom to behave so as to honor God, and be "accounted worthy of a better
resurrection", of the better things of the coming world. And the "ceremonial
institutions" were all along, during the continuance of the Mosaic dipensation,
as a "schoolmaster to the Jews; and the more serious and inquisitive among
them were taught to expect some higher and better state of things; though they
might not particularly know what it was, or how it would be accomplished. And
the Jews, who lived when Christ made his appearence in the world, could scarce
have had a better "schoolmaster to bring them to him, that they might be
justified by faith", than the types and figures of the law. They might have
seen their ritual, in its most important articles, accomplished in Jesus Christ;
and it was owing to strange blindness and perverseness, that they so generally
rejected the evidence, herefrom arising, that Jesus was the promised and
prefigured Messiah. Let us view the ceremonies of the jewish law, in their
typical reference, as well as literal use; and while we consider them, as
designed by God to be "a schoolmaster" to them, to teach them to depend on
Christ, instead of their law, for salvation, let us admire his wisdom, rather
than find fault with his conduct; being in readiness to break out in the
language of the apostle Paul, "Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out"! Romans 11.33.


AND let us also entertain in our minds becoming thoughts of the wisdom and
goodness of God, in the "moral precepts", whch he was pleased to give to the
jewish people. These were certainly adapted to very valuable purposes. It was,
perhaps, greatly owing to this summary rule of duty, that other nations,
besides the jewish, became acquainted with the nature of virtue and vice in so
many instances, and were not lost to all sense of the distinction between moral
good and evil The various nations of the world might be more indebted to the
law, which God gave to the Jews, by the hands of Moses, than we may be ready to
imagine. What we are apt to ascribe to the segacity and strength of mere
natural reason, may, possibly, with greater justice, be attributed to the
knowledge which learned men might have, in one way or another, of this Mosaic
delineation of the law of reason.

TO be sure, we, whose lot it is to live since the coming of Christ, and the
explanation of the "Mosaic moral precepts,", by him and his apostles, and their
adoption into the christian scheme, may reap all the advantages, it was
proposed the Jews should reap by them; and in a much higher degree. The "law
moral" is not turned out as a "schoolmaster", but still sustains this office,
though Christ is come. Nay, so far is the "moral law" from being useless, as a
"schoolmaster", under the gospel dispensation, "to lead men to Christ, that
they may be justified by faith", that it is of stronger influence to this
purpose, than it was before he came into the world "for the redemption of
transgressors". For "this law", under the gospel dispensation, and as
introduced into it, more fully commands duty, and prohibits sin; and does both
under the sanction of death, beyond the grave, more clearly and certainly
revealed, in case of sin. It is therefore more powerfully fitted to convince of
sin and guilt, and show men that they must die in their sins, unless they
repair, by faith to grace and gospel, that they may be pardoned and saved. For
christians can no more be justified by law, than the Jews could of old. A
serious truth this! And we should all lay it to heart; making use of the law,
even under the dispensations of the gospel, to discover sin, and learn our
danger, that we may from hence be awakened to flee from law to grace; depending
on Christ, and not upon law, for justification in God's fight.

SERMON III. The Nature of Faith, as justifying, particularly ascertained.
GALATIANS II. 16. "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ".


TWO ways of justification are here pointed out. One, "by the works of the
law"; the other, "by the faith of Christ". The former i^ declared, not to be
the gospel-way of justification; and we have, in a former discourse, proved it
to be impossible, that sinners, as mankind all are, should be justified "by
their works". The latter way of justification, here spoken of, is "by the faith
of Jesus Christ". And the apostle Paul accordingly says, with respect both to
himself, and the Galatians to whom he writes, that they "had believed in Jesus
Christ"; and to this end, that they "might be justified by the faith of
Christ". What therefore I have more especially in view, from this text, at this
time, is to point out to you, in as plain and easy a manner as I am able, the
meaning of faith, as connected with justification.

IN order whereto, I shall neither trouble myself, nor you, with those
discriptions of this faith, which are to be seen in books wrote upon the
subject. They a^e almost as numerous as the books that contain them And if one
were to judge, from the differing accounts they give of this first and great
principle of christianity, he would readily be led to imagine, it was as
perplexed a point as any in religion. Whereas, if we consult the bible only, and
take our idea of faith from this sacred book, we shall meet with no difficulty.
The precise meaning of this word, as used in the new testament, and connected
with justification, is easy to be understood; as indeed it might reasonably be
expected it should, faith being a matter not only of essential, but universal
concern.

FAITH and knowledge, both agreeing in the assent of the mind to apprehended
truth, are sometimes, less acurately speaking, used for one and the same thing:
Whereas, they really differ The assent of the mind, in faith, is gained one
way; in knowledge, another. Faith is the mind's assent upon testimony; and upon
the testimony of God, if the faith is christian. And it is this that
distinguishes faith from knowledge, which is an assent grounded on the
perception of the bodily senses, or the operation of our reasonable powers.
External objects strike our senses, and we at once know what impressions we
receive from them. And we have an ability of mind to reason upon things,
comparing them together, deducing consequences from them, forming a judgment
how far this or that is true or false, and giving or withholding our assent
accordingly. In this sense, there are many things, which, though invisible,
literally speaking, may yet, in the language of the apostle Paul, Romans 1.20.
be said to be "clearly seen, being understood". We know them to be truths by
our reasonings, without information from others. But the faith we are treating
of is not of this sort. It "comes by hearing", as the scripture-expression is.
It is the assent of our minds to what has been testified to. The ground of this
assent is not like that of knowledge, but herein differs from it, that it is
bottomed on "the witness of God". His word, and that only, in the final result,
is the proper adequate ground of our faith.

ACCORDINGLY, two things are to be considered in the faith that is connected
with justification, "the object about which it is conversant", and "the
persuasion or assent of the mind with reference to this object.

AS to the "object" of faith; -- this is the report of the gospel, or, in other
words, "the truth", as revealed by Christ and his apostles. Hence that
affirmation of our Lord, "he that believes", that is, "the gospel", he had
commissioned his apostles to preach, "shall be saved". Mark 16.16.
Hence also that passage in one of Paul's epistles to the Thessalonians, where
speaking of their being "chosen to salvation", he immediately subjoins, "through
belief of the truth", the truth "as it is in Jesus", the truth as contained in
the apostolic writings. 2 These. 2.13.


THE object of faith is often summarily expressed in some capital article only;
sometimes one, sometimes another.

SOMETIMES the comprehensive object of faith is "God". So we read of Abraham,
that he "believed God, and his faith was counted to him for righteousness".
Gal. 3.6.
And our Savior affirms with a double vehemence, "verily, verily, he that
believes on him that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation". Joh. 5.24.
In like manner, the apostle Paul, speaking of those who were "justified by
grace, that they should be heirs according to the hope of eternal life",
describes them in that language, "they which have believed in God". Tit. 3.7, 8.


SOMETIMES "Christ" is the specified object of faith. Hence that apostolic
direction to the trembling jailor, "believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved". Acts 16.31.
Consonant whereto are those words in my text, "Knowing that a man is justified
by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ".
Accordingly, the sum of Paul's preaching at Ephesus, in which he had "kept
nothing back that was profitable to them", is expressed in those words,
"testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ". Acts 20.21.


SOMETIMES Christ viewed as the "Messiah", pointed out by Moses and the
prophets, in the writings of the old testament, is the object of faith. Hence
that profession of Martha, "I believe that thou art Christ that should come
into the world". Joh. 11.27.
Agreeable whereto is that noble confession of Simon Peter, in the name of the
apostles, "we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ", Joh. 6.69.


SOMETIMES Christ considered as the "Son of God" is the object of faith. Hence
the grand discriminating characteristic of one that is "born of God, and
overcomes the world" is that, "he believes that Jesus is the Son of God". 1 John 5.5.
And it is universally affirmed of every one "that shall confess that Jesus is
the son of God", that "God dwells in him, and he in God". 1 John 4.15.
And, as our Lord himself says, "God gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". Joh. 3.16.
And John baptist declares, "he that believes on the son has everlasting
life". Ver. 36.


SOMETIMES Christ, as "dying and shedding his blood", is the object of faith.
Hence the apostle Paul, speaking of Christ, and redemption through him, says,
"whom God has set forth to be a propi^ation through faith in his blood", that
blood of his which is the great atonement, and was shed for the remission of
sins. Romans 3.25.
And one special article, this same apostle had preached to the Corinthians, as
that by which they should be saved, and which he would have them keep in memory
unless they would believe in vain, was, "that Christ died for our sins
according to the scriptures". 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3.


SOMETIMES, in fine, Christ, as "risen from the dead", is the object of faith;
as in that observable passage in Paul's epistle to the Romans "if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in him that God has
raised from the dead, thou shall be (...)" Romans 10.9.
And well might this be reckoned among the capital articles; ^or, as this same
apostle argues, "if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your
faith is also vain, ye are yet in your sins". 1 Cor. 15. 14, 17.


IN these, and a great number of similar texts, I might easily have turned you
to, one point only is mentioned as comprehending the object of faith. But then
it should be particularly minded, whenever the truth to be believed is thus
summarily expressed it ought to be understood, not merely in consistency with
other revealed truths, but rather as resolving itself into them by fair
implication and natural deduction. To believe that Jesus is the Christ, or that
he died for our sins, or that he rose again for our justification, if believed
in their true sense, and just latitude, will amount to the same thing with
believing the whole doctrine of the gospel; for the doctrine of the gospel is
really nothing more than these truths unfolded by Christ and his apostles, and
set forth in a full point of view. Our faith therefore in these, or the like
capital articles, cannot be that which is connected with justification, if we
leave that out of their meaning, which subverts their true import; or mix that
with them, which essentially counter-acts their proper design, and genuine
tendency. In either of these cases, we believe a lie, instead of the truth;
"wresting the scriptures to our own destruction".

ONLY, it should be heedfully observed here, if the faith of those who profess
themselves christians has, in our apprehension, no other essential defect than
an imagined mistake, relative to the truth to be believed, great care should be
taken that we don't too hastily, and peremptorily, heighten this mistake into
such an inconsistency with the gospel, as shall be subversive of it; ranking
the persons, who are chargeable with it, among those who "shall be damned for
not believing the truth, but having pleasure in unrighteousness". For it is not
every real error, in point of belief, that will give just occasion for so
severe a judgment. Who is there, among the professors of faith in Christ, that
has in his mind an unerring perception of all the truths of the
gospel-revelation? Who, that does not labor of some positive unhappy mistake,
in this or the other instance? There is not a believer on this side heaven,
whose faith is perfectly pure, having no mixture of error in it. It Is true, the
error, if he is a justified believer, cannot so oppose the mission of Christ
into the world to be the Savior of it, either directly or by just consequence,
as to nullify his death, or make it of little or no importance. And whenever
the faith a man possesses is of this sort, it is essentially faulty, and stands
connected with condemnation, rather than justification. But then it should
always be remembered, there is a great difference between its being thus
connected, in the reality of the thing, and in our apprehension of it. God only
is the proper judge in this matter, as he only is unerring in his judgment. No
man living, be his abilities what they will, can form any other than a fallible
judgment in the case: For which reason, it may differ from the truth, and God's
judgment with reference to it. God may see, in this and the other instance,
where ignorance and error are mixed with truth, though men, who are partial in
their views, may not, that neither the ignorance nor error are such, as will
defeat its design, or destroy its operation to the absolutely needed purposes.

THE apostle Peter was doubtless in a justified state, when he made that
profession, "Thou art Christ, the son or the living God" Matthew. 16.16.
For our Lord's answer is, "blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed it to thee, but my father which is in heaven". Ver. 17.
And yet, at this time, he had no notion of Christ as "the propitiation for
sin" Far from it, he even rebuked our Lord for "showing to his disciples, how
that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and chief
priests, and scribes, and be killed and raised again the third day". Ver. 21,
22.
And the other apostles, though in a justified state also, (Judas excepted) as
believing that Jesus was the Christ, yet had no idea, any more than Peter, of
the necessity of his dying to make atonement for sin. For when our Lord told
them, that he should be "delivered unto the Gentiles, to be mocked, spitefully
entreated, spit upon, scourged and put to death, and that he should rise again
the third day", what he said was so remote from any apprehensions they had of
this sort, that "they understood none of these things, they were hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken". Luke 18.31. to the 35th.
Nay, so destitute was their faith in Christ of any imagined connection with
his dying and rising again, that they seem, upon his death, to have given up
all hope with reference to his being the promised Messiah. Say they, "We
trusted it had been he which should have redeemed Israel". Luke 24.21.
And besides this ignorance, relative to the great work of Christ as Savior,
their faith was mixed with positive error of no small importance. For they were
full of the notion prevalent in that day, concerning the Messiah, that he was
to be head and Lord of a kingdom in this world, and that one of the main
designs of his coming was to set up such a kingdom. It was, as influenced by
this though it, that they discovered great vanity in their imaginations, and an
undue temper of mind in regard of one another, while they were concerned who
among them should be the greatest minister in this worldly kingdom. See the
account at large in Matthew. 20.20. to the 29th. Mark 10.35. to the 45th. Luke
22.24. to the 30th.


HAD our Lord been of the temper of some, who, we would hope, are his real
disciples, he would have pronounced the faith of his apostles, at this time, an
empty profession, as bewraying total ignorance of the true character, both of
the father, and of himself: And he might the rather have been disposed to this,
as his sufferings, death and resurrection had all been foretold in the
prophesies of the old testament; and as besides, he had plainly and
particularly said it himself, that "the son of man ought, according to the
scriptures, both to die and rise again". But, instead of telling them their
faith was vain, and that they notwithstanding all their professions of regard
to him, were in a state of damnation, he meekly condescended to "expound to
them the scriptures, concerning himself"; Luke 24.27.
and he did it with such light and love as to make "their hearts burn within
them, while he talked with them in the way, and opened to them the scriptures."
Ver. 32.
And in consequence of these instructions, whereby "their understandings, as
well as the scriptures, were opened", Ver. 45.
a once dead, but afterward risen, Jesus became the great object of their
faith. Their faith, before, embraced all the truth that was absolutely
necessary, in their then circumstances, in order to its being connected with a
state of justification: But, being now differently situated, having the
advantage of clearer light and more perfect instruction, the object of their
faith was enlarged. They not only believed in Christ, as first crucified, and
then glorified; but made this the delightful subject of their preaching, though
it was "to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness".

WE cannot place before our view a better pattern of conduct toward those,
whose faith in Christ, as we apprehend, is mixed with ignorance, or error, or
both, however dangerous, should it be persisted in, than this of our Savior.
In imitation of him, we should, with kindness and candor, make all reasonable
allowance for their special situation in life, their temptations,
disadvantages, yea, their prejudices, whether arising from education, the books
and company they have conversed with, or from whatever other cause; and instead
of magisterially pronouncing their faith a lie that is connected with
damnation, we should rather endeavor, in all proper ways, within our sphere,
to set the truth before them in the strongest point of light, that their
understandings being opened, they may renounce their errors, and "receive the
truth in the love of it."

AND this, I may particularly suggest here, is the proper office of christian
charity or love. And, if it reigns in our hearts, as it ought to do, it will
put us upon exerting ourselves, as we have opportunity and ability, to
enlighten our ignorant or mistaken brethren, and in proportion to the danger we
think their ignorance or error are attended with: Whereas, it is no part of the
duty of charity or love to do that, we are neither qualified for, nor
authorized to, that is, to sit in judgment upon our fellow christians, and
determine, if they don't believe just as we imagine they ought to do, that
damnation will be the consequence. The apostle Paul, in his description of
charity or love, says, among other things, "charity vaunteth not itself, is not
puffed up". 1 Cor. 13.4.
It does not make men conceited and vain, fondly imagining, upon their
believing the truth, as they think, that they are at once infallible, and
properly qualified to judge the spiritual state of others. It is indeed
concerned for the truth, and that all should believe it in its native
simplicity; but it is, at the same time, candid in its constructions, and ever
accompanied with a becoming modesty and humility. It will not put a man upon
assuming airs of superiority, as though he were an apostle of Christ, or rather
Christ himself. It will not make him think himself fit to take the chair of
judgment, and pronounce the anathemaes of God upon those, who differ in their
sentiments from him.

THE truth is, "one is our master, even Christ"; and "we must all appear,
before his judgmentseat". He only is the constituted judge of men's state; nor
does he allow his disciples to exercise this judicial power, which the father
has put into his hands. The command is, "judge nothing before the time, until
the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the counsels of the hearts". 1 Cor. 4.5.
And again, "there is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. Who
art thou that judge another"? Jam. 4.12.
It Is a plain case, I have no more right to judge another, than he has to judge
me. If he differs in his sentiments from me, I differ as much from him. And, as
there is, on earth, no appointed infallible judge, to determine on whose side
the truth lies, I am equally at liberty to pronounce damnation on him, as he
has to pronounce it on me; that is, we have neither of us any right or
buisiness to do it. Christ is the judge, and we must both, either stand or fall
as he judges. And if this easy and undoubted truth of the gospel had been
thoroughly believed, and practiced upon, there would not have been that
anathamatising among christians, which has been so common in all ages, and
among all parties; while yet, it has answered no end, unless to promote that
"bitterness and wrath, that clamor and strife", which, if we may rely on the
word of an inspired writer, are "works of the flesh, not of the spirit". Gal.
5.1^.


THE short of the matter is, the truths contained in the revelations of God,
considered in one collective view, are the proper object of faith. And he that
is a believer, if his belief is such as bespeaks his being in a justified
state, astents to all these truths, so far as his understanding extends, and in
opposition to his rejecting any one of them, under the notion of its being a
divine truth, or while he has an apprehension of it as such. He cannot, if he is
a justified believer, in contradiction to the light of his mind, oppose or deny
any one thing, be it what it will, that has been taught and published in the
revelations of God. Not but that he may fall into mistakes, not apprehending
the mind of Christ, so as to admit that for a truth of his, in this and the
other instance, which is really a falsehood: Though it must be said, at the same
time, he cannot so far misapprehend those truths, that are of essential
importance, as to subvert their design in the scheme of salvation. But then to
say precisely, what the truths are that are thus important, at least what the
nature and degree of that misapprehension of them is, that will totally pervert
their design and proper operation, so as to apply it to particular persons,
must be left with him, who is the only fit judge in the case, and has
accordingly been authorized to judge upon it, and will certainly do so in the
day God has appointed for this work. In the mean time, instead of assuming the
character of Christ, and judging one another, we should continually live in the
exercise of christian love toward each other; forbearing one another in candor
and goodness: while, at the same time, we suitably endeavor, in all proper
ways, to enlighten one another in the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, that
we may all, so far as is possible, be of the same mind, and of the same
judgment, as we all have the same common hope, and are accountable to the same
common Lord and Judge of all.

I NOW go on, as was proposed, to consider the faith that is connected with
justification, in regard of "the mind's assent to gospel truth", its proper
object. For this essentially enters into the idea of its nature. There cannot be
faith, where there is not the assent of the mind; and wherever this assent is,
there is faith also: Though, I must add, not always the faith that will argue a
justified state; which ought very carefully to be remembered. It Is not simply a
man's being persuaded, the report of the gospel is true, that will denominate
him a justified believer. A persuasion of a special kind In speaking of a
"special kind of faith", I shall not please our author, as I don't discover an
"aversion to the epithets" that are usually given, by the popular preachers, to
faith; "as a true, sincere, lively, manly, generous, triumphant faith, etc".
Upon the use of these epithets, he says this "one thing is general", namely,
that where the faith necessary to justification is described, every epithet,
word, name, or phrase, prefixed or subjoined to faith, not meant as descriptive
of the truth believed, but of some good motion, disposition, or exercise of the
human soul about it, is intended, and really serves, instead of clearing our
way, to blindfold and decoy us; to impose upon us, and make us take brass for
gold, and chaff for wheat; to lead us to establish our own, in opposition to
the divine righteousness; even while our mouths and our ears are filled with
high sounding words about the latter. -- Page 329. Surely this passage was
wrote, not upon mature consideration, but in that haste which is too common,
when men are under the influence of zeal that boileth over. It is designed as a
rebuke to the popular preachers, but it ^'s beyond them, and affects even the
inspired teachers of the faith of Jesus Christ; constructively charging them
with "blindfolding and decoying" the souls of men. When Philip said to the
Ethiopian eunuch, "if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may" be
baptized, Acts 8.38; when Paul speaks of Abraham, as "being not weak, but
strong in falth, giving glory to God", Romans 4.19, 20; when this same apostle
thanked God for the Thessalonian christians, "because their faith grew
exceedingly", 2 These. 1.3; when he expressed his hope concerning the
Corinthians, "when their faith should be increased", 2 Cor. 10.15; in fine,
when he says, "the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, --
and faith unfeigned", 1 Timothy 1.5: -- Were these epithets, or words, prefixed or
subjoined to faith, as meaning "to describe the truth believed"? The inspired
writers intended, by these adjuncts to faith, no more than the popular
preachers, any such description. The epithets, weak and strong, will have an
easy and important sense, if applied to the mind's persuasion with reference to
truth believed; but if applied to the truth itself, as descriptive of it, they
are unintelligible. And what is the difference between the true and sincere
faith of the popular doctrine, and the unfeigned faith, and believing with all
the heart, which the scriptures speak of? These epithets do all of them refer
to something in the human soul, to some disposition or exercise of the mind
with regard to the truth, and are not meant "as descriptive of the truth"
simply in itself. And the most natural obvious meaning of a growing and
increasing faith is, a persuasion of soul that continually gathers strength and
vigor, becoming more and more a lively, strong, and well-established principle
of action. These names, words, or phrases, can relate to truth, the object of
faith, no otherwise than as this truth lies in the mind, and is, more or less,
fixed there. If now the sacred writers "prefix or subjoin to faith, names,
epithets, words, or phrases", as descriptive, "not of the truth believed", but
of the persuasion of the mind with reference to this truth, the popular
preachers, in doing the same, do but copy after the pattern they have set them.
And as they have so good authority to keep them in countenance, they have no
occasion for blushing, though our author sees fit to charge them with "imposing"
upon their hearers, and making them, with "high sounding words", to take "brass
for gold, and chaff for wheat".
is necessary to entitle to this character; and this only will do it. Wherever
there is this "discriminating persuasion", the man is justified; wherever it is
not, though he may be persuaded of the truth, he may notwithstanding perish
beyond the grave.

THE new testament very frequently and plainly teaches us to distinguish
between believers that are in a justified state, and a state of wrath; or, in
other words, between that assent of the mind to gospel truth, which is
connected with justification, and that which has no such connection.

IT IS recorded of "many of the rulers", in our Savior's day, that they
"believed on him"; Joh. 12.42.
while yet, they were in a state of condemnation. In like manner, our Lord
says, that "many, while he was at Jerusalem, believed on him, when they saw the
miracles which he did". Joh. 2.23.
But, from what follows, it appears, that they were far from being believers
that were justified. And the apostle James largely treats of a "dead faith,
that is of no profit" in the business of justification. Chap. 2.


IT IS observable, the special reason, in all these instances, why the faith
spoken of was essentially faulty, is fetched, not so much from error cleaving
to the object believed, as from the mind's persuasion with reference to this
object.

THERE is indeed nothing said concerning "these rulers", from whence we are led
to think, that their faith, in their then circumstances, was totally misplaced
in regard of its object. To besure, it is not suggested, that they mixed so much
falsehood with the truth, as that the truth, by that mixture, was entirely
subverted. The fault rather lay in the persuasion of their mind, which was not
so rooted and enlivened as to overbalance the fear of man with the fear of
God, and the praise of man with the praise of God. For so our Savior's account
of the matter runs. "Among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but,
because of the pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be put out
of the synagogue: For they loved the praise of man more than the praise of
God". They had been wro't upon, by what they had seen and heard of our Savior,
to assent to it as true, that he was the promised Messiah; but the fear of
loosing honor from men, and exposing themselves to their displeasure,
overpowered the influence of this persuasion, it was so poorly settled in
their minds.

THE same may be said of the "many at Jerusalem, that believed in his name". It
does not appear, that they erred concerning the object of faith; at least, that
they erred essentially. They were persuaded, from the miracles which they saw
our Lord do, that he was the Christ. But this persuasion was so feeble in their
minds, that our Savior, who "knew what was in man", knew that it was not
sufficiently powerful to make it safe for him to commit himself to them. Had
this truth so firmly possessed their hearts, as to engage them to adhere to
him, in whom they had believed, in opposition to all difficulties and hazzards,
our Lord, who "knew all men", would have readily "trusted himself with them".
Our author says, page 302. If any man's faith be found insufficient to save
him, it is owing to this, that what he believed for truth was not the very same
thing the apostles believed, but some lie connected with, or dressed up in the
form of truth. So this faith can do him no good, because, however seriously and
sincerely he believes, yet that which he believes is false, and therefore it
cannot save him. It does not appear, that the abovementioned chief rulers, and
common Jews, did not believe the same truth the apostles themselves, at that
time, believed: Nor is there any thing said, with reference to them, from
whence it can be collected, that their faith did them no good, ONLY because
what they believed was false. What they believed concerning Christ was, no
doubt, mixed with error; and so was the faith even of the apostles, at that
time. But this mixture of error was not the ONLY, or indeed the principal,
defect of their faith. It rather lay, as has been said, in its not being an
enlivened, firmly-establisht spring of action. They might, for aught any thing
that is said to the contrary, have had the same idea, essentially, with the
apostles, of the Messiah-ship of our Lord; which, by the way, was then a very
poor, low and imperfect one, in compare with the truth. It may therefore be as
necessary to inquire, "how a man believes"? as "what he believes"? For should
he believe the truth, unless he so believed it, as that his faith would
certainly "work by love", that love which is "the fulfilling of the law", he
would as surely be in a state of wrath, notwithstanding his faith, as if he
"believed a lie instead of the truth". Our author further illustrates what he
had affirmed by saying, page ibid. The saving truth which the apostles believed
was, that Jesus is the Christ." The apostles had one uniform fixed sense to
these words, and the whole new testament is writ to ascertain to us in what
sense they understood them. Every one who believes that Jesus is the Christ, in
a different sense from the apostles, or who maintains any thing in connection
with these words subversive of their real meaning, believes a falsehood; so his
faith cannot save him. What is here offered is partly true, and partly false.
The apostles, far from having always had "one uniform fixed sense" to this
proposition, Jesus is the Christ, certainly entertained, in different periods
of their apostolic life, widely different tho'ts about it. As has been said,
page 77, 78. before the death and resurrection of our Lord, and yet after the
apostles were justified believers, the obedience of Christ to the death of the
cross, as the great atonement for the sins of men, was not included in their
idea of his being the Christ. They had then no conception of him in this view
of his character; which, I am ready to think, our author would make a damning
fault in the belief of those, who should now profess faith in him as the
Christ, because it would leave out of these words one of the most essential
truths contained in them. Nay, after the death and resurrection of our Lord,
the meaning of this capital article, in its full latitude, was but gradually
opened to them. Even Peter himself, a considerable number of years after the
descent of the Holy Ghost upon the apostles, needed a vision from heaven to
instruct him in this truth, that is now easily understood by every one, namely,
that there is "no difference in Christ Jesus between Jews and Gentiles", as by
"his cross he has broken down the partition wall", and placed mankind, without
distinction, upon the same foot in point of acceptance with God. Without all
doubt, the apostles themselves, and other believers in their day, put more or
less into the meaning of the above proposition, according to the measure of
their knowledge in the things pertaining to the kingdom of Christ. And
believers, justified ones I mean, have all along done so; and they do the same
now: Though, I would add, it was certainly a truth in the apostles days, and in
every age since, and always will be in ages yet to come, that whosoever mixes
with these words, Jesus is the Christ, errors that are essentially destructive
of the grand truth intended to be conveyed by them, believes with a faith that
cannot save him. And the same may be said of those also, who leave out of this
proposition, in their conception of it, those ideas, without which it would not
include the truths, that are fundamentally necessary to the justification of
life. But then, it should be remembered, neither our author, nor any other
fallible man, however self-sufficient, can run the line, with such precision,
between what may, and may not, be le^t out of the above grand article, as to
say, with any manner of certainty, applying what he says to particular persons,
that they must believe it in just such a sense, or their faith will be a "lie",
or "essentially mixed with falsehood", and "so cannot save them". The
omniscient God, who only knows men's capacities, situation in life,
opportunities, advantages, and the like, which are infinitely various, is the
alone infallible judge in this matter; and he ought accordingly to be
considered as such: Nor should any presume to take that work into their hands,
which is properly his, and he only is fit for.


THE apostle James's believers were faulty in the same sense still. For ought
any thing we know to the contrary, they believed the truth with respect to the
great doctrines of the gospel, but their "faith was dead". It did not show
itself to be a living powerful spring of action; as it would have done, if the
persuasion of their minds had been of the right kind; what I mean is, if it had
been that assent which is always the case, when faith is connected with
justification. It may be added to what has been said above, our Lord, in his
explanation of the parable of the sower, expressly declares, that the
stony-ground-hearers "received the seed", that is, the word of truth as it had
been preached to them. Their fault therefore was, not that they believed a lie,
instead of the truth; but their persuasion of the truth was slighty and
superficial, and for this reason insufficient to bear the trial of hard
treatment for the truth's sake. The same thing he says of the thorny
ground-hearers: They also "received the seed", that is, the pure word of God.
What they believed was the truth; but their faith, not being a well-rooted and
deeply fixed persuasion of mind, was overpowered by "the cares of the world,
and the deceitfulness of riches". And it is observable, the special reason our
Lord gives, why the good-ground-hearers bro't forth fruit, and in plenty, is,
not merely that they believed the truth, which the others did not; but, having
"heard the word, they KEPT it"; that is, they retained the word, the truth, in
their hearts by frequent recollection, and through consideration. In Matthew,
the words are, "he that received the seed into the good ground, is he that
hears the word, and understands it". Our author puts an emphasis upon this
word UNDERSTANDS, printing it in capitals, page 305. as though the reason of
the fruitfulness of this kind of hearers, in opposition to the unfruitfulness
of the other, lay in this ONLY, that they UNDERSTOOD the truth, and precisely
in the sense that he is pleased to put upon it too; while the other mistook it,
or so corrupted it with falsehood, that they really believed a lie instead of
the truth. But it should be remembered, the original word, (...), may as well
be rendered CONSIDERS, as understands. So it is rendered, Mark 6.52. And this
translation is certainly the most proper in the passage we are upon, as Luke
uses another word, which very plainly ascertains the meaning of our Lord.
"Having heard the word, they KEPT it"; which certainly implies recollection,
attention, consideration: How otherwise was it morally possible, the word
should have been "kept", retained in their minds?


AND this likewise is the great fault of the faith of christians at this day.
It does not lie, as I imagine, unless in here and there a detached instance, in
fatal mistakes about the truth. The incarnation, life, death, resurrection and
exaltation of Christ, and the great articles connected herewith, and dependent
hereon, stand true in the minds of most christians, at least in this part of
the world: Nor do they, as I conceive, commonly mix falsehood with them, at
least in so gross a sense as to be justly chargeable with wholly subverting
their real meaning. And yet, they are far from being the subjects of a faith
that justifies. And the reason is, because the assent of their minds to the
report of the gospel, is not of the right kind. It Is the produce of education
and tradition, rather than the testimony of God. It Is a feeble inoperative
persuasion, little affecting their hearts, or influencing their lives. They
receive the great doctrines of christianity as speculations, not important
realities. They don't exist in their minds, truths of God in which they are
deeply concerned. This, as I take it, is the faith of most christians, so
called. It nearly resembles that dead faith, which, in the apostle James's
account, is of no value to the purposes of salvation.

NOT but that there are some, whose persuasion of revealed truths may have a
very powerful influence upon them, though they are yet in an unjustified state.
They may herefrom be excited to a care of amending their lives, and may go a
great way in the reformation of them. So it was with those to whom the apostle
Peter writes, who, "having escaped the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, were again entangled therein,
and overcome". 2 Pet. 2.20.
They may herefrom also have their passions and affections strongly put into
motion. This is often the case in regard of the passion of fear, which may
occasion very painful sensations in the breasts of sinners, from an
apprehension of the wrath of God due to them on account of their sins. And
their other affections likewise may be sensibly wro't upon. They may gladly
attend the institutions of religion, hearing the word with joy; as was the case
of some in out Savior's day, who, "not having root in themselves, were by and
by offended". Matthew. 13.21.
Yea, they may have raised in them desires, hopes and joys, which, to all
appearance, are like their's, whose faith is accompanied with justification.
This seems to have been the case of those, spoken of in the epistle to the
Hebrews, who, though they had been "enlightened, tasted of the heavenly gift,
partook of the Holy Ghost, and tasted of the good word of God, and the powers
of the world to come", yet afterward "fell away", so as that it was
"impossible", extremely difficult, "to renew them again to repentance". Heb.
6.4, 5, 6.
It Is past all doubt, that the truths of the gospel, where men's persuasion with
reference to them falls short of that which is saving, may produce very
considerable effects in them, and these so like to the effects of that faith
which is precious, and will endure the trial, that it may be difficult, if
possible, to distinguish between them: Nay, the very subjects these effects may
be deceived by them, imagining they are possessed of a faith that will save
them, when in reality they are not.

THE faith that will save a man, is of a "special kind". It Is a persuasion of
soul, the properties of which quite differ from those of the other persuasion
we have been speaking of. Three properties are inseparable from it. The first
respects "the ground or reason of it"; the second, the "object about which it
is conversant"; and the last, the "operation of it". Each of these I shall a
little dilate upon, that I may make my meaning plain and intelligible to you.

SERMON IV.
WITH respect to this persuasion, which is connected with a man's being in a
saved state, the "ground" or "reason" of it is the witness of God. He sees God
speaking in the sacred scriptures, and admits the doctrines, there contained,
into his mind, as undoubted verities, because testified to as such by the
faithful God. Hence that description of saving faith, "he that receives his
testimony [the testimony of Christ] has set to his seal that God is true; for
he, whom God has sent, speaks the words of God". Joh. 3.33, 34.
Hence also the apostle Paul, giving an account of the faith of the
Thessalonians, for which he "thanked God without ceasing", does it in that
language, "when ye received the word of God, which ye received of us, ye
received it not as the word of man, but (as it is in truth) the word of God". 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
When the faith men are the subjects of is justifying, the true bottom of it is
the testimony of God. They have a view of God, as speaking in the sacred books,
different from what they had before. They don't now read the scriptures merely
as the writings of apostles, or prophets, but as the writings of God; and God
as truly appears to them in these writings, as though he spoke the things that
are here wrote. And herein the persuasion of believers, that are in Christ,
differs from that of others, who are not. Others are persuaded of the truth of
christianity, as the Mahomitans are persuaded of the truth of the Alcoran: They
were told it for truth by their fathers; it was so handed down to them, by
tradition: Or should their persuasion be better grounded, as being the fruit of
enquiry into the evidences upon which christianity is established, they may
still want that lively perception of God, as testifying to the truth of the
gospel, which is always the true reason of the faith of those, who shall be
saved. Perhaps, as Dr Owen represents the matter, I was at the pains, more than
twenty years ago, to make a summary abstract of the Doctor's arguing upon this
point, as contained in a short treatise of his, on "the authority or
inspiration of the scriptures". It is in the following words. "The sacred
scripture carries with it its own evidence; and this, in so clear and full a
manner, that there is no need of any thing, besides the scripture itself, to
prove its divine original. It has such visible signatures of a divine hand,
that it is but looking into it, and we may be sufficiently convinced, it had God
for its author. It Is with the words of God, as with his works. There is no need
of any foreign help, of any extraneous evidence, to prove that the works of God
are his works. They carry along with them evident demonstrative marks of a
divine hand. It Is but viewing them, and we may behold that in them, which will
assure us, they had God for their author. In like manner, it may said of the
words of God; they carry along with them such evident traces of majesty,
wisdom, holiness, justice and goodness, that it is but considering them, and we
shall know they are not human, but divine. Not that all are able to see the
marks of a divine hand in the holy scriptures. But then, this arises, not from
their not being to be seen there; but from that ignorance, with which "the god
of this world has blinded men's minds"; as is sometimes the case, in regard of
the works, as well as words of God. Some men have so "darkened their hearts",
that they can see nothing of God in any of his works, neither his wisdom, nor
power, nor goodness; though these things are so plainly visible, that it is, one
would think impossible, but they should be discerned by all: and the same
perfections of God are so fully manifested by his words, that if they cannot be
perceived, it must be because men have not eyes to see; or, "in seeing, they
will not perceive". The bible, wherever it goes, carries along with it, its own
evidence. It has that in it, which will forever discriminate it from all human
writings. So much of God is visible in it, that whoever reads it, and is free
from prejudice and passion, will and must own it to be of God. As God, when he
created the world, and the things that are therein, left such characters of
"eternal power, and Godhead" on them, as evidently point out their author; and
so suited them to strik conviction into the minds of all rational creatures,
that, without any other testimony from himself, or any thing else, under the
naked consideration of what they are, they fully declare their creator;
insomuch that they are wholly without excuse, who will not learn and know him
from thence: So in giving out his word to be the basis of the new creation, he
has, by his spirit, implanted in it, and impressed on it, such evident marks of
the glories of his nature, that, without any other witness, it declares itself,
at all times, and in all places, to be his, and so makes good its own divine
authority, as that the refusal of it, upon its own evidence, brings unavoidable
condemnation on the souls of men". This reasoning of the Doctor will not appear
triffling to considerate, well-disposed persons. Perhaps, the more closely it
is attended to, the better fitted it will be found to strike the mind with
conviction. It perfectly falls in with the experience of those, who are
"believers unto life". They behold the scriptures in this light.
God has impressed on his revelations, contained in the scriptures, such
signatures of his wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, truth and
faithfulness, with all the rest of his adorable perfections, that, at all
times, and in all places, they are capable of declaring themselves to be his,
and of being perceived to be so, and in such a light as to become the strongest
ground of assent to the mind. -- But however this be, the man, whose faith is
saving, has this view of them, and actually sees and hears God speaking in
them; which is not the case, where the faith is only common.

THE next property of this persuasion, which is connected with life, respects
the "object believed". And this appears in a peculiar light. Some, it may be,
before they were the subjects of this persuasion, had, by the help of reason
and revelation, formed conceptions of the attributes of God that were right and
just; and had been led also into sentiments concerning the mediatorial
undertaking of Christ, and the several offices he has sustained and executed as
redeemer, that had no essential mixture of falsehood with them. Those, whose
belief of the gospel is not justifying, may yet be men of considerable
seize in christian knowledge. They may be well acquainted with the
doctrines of faith, and embrace them in their simplicity, as "once delivered to
the saints", at least without construing them in a sense destructive of their
real meaning. Doubtless, many among the justified, before their being endowed
with the faith by which they were justified, were persons of this character.
But they did not, till they were possessed of this faith, apprehend these
truths as they do now. They were then matters of speculative opinion, rather
than solid belief; but now, they have a real and lively existence in them.
Light has shone into their minds, and cast such a luster on these truths, that
they see them in their divinity, glory, and constituted connection with men's
everlasting well or ill being. They don't now entertain them in their tho'ts,
as matters of science only, but truths of the nearest and most solemn concern.
They are ready to wonder they could be so little influenced by them, they have
now so clear and full a view of their certain reality, and infinite importance:
Or if their perception of these truths awakened their fears, or raised their
hopes, or put them upon religious endeavors, they were not such as gave them,
what the scripture calls, a "spiritual discerning of spiritual things".

AND this perception of gospel truths is, perhaps, the chief thing intended by
that "illumination of the spirit", on account of which sinners are said, in the
new testament, to have their "understandings enlightened", their "eyes opened";
to be "turned from darkness to light", and the like.

THOSE indeed who were in heathenish darkness, when the gospel was first
preached to them, (as was the case of the greatest part of the world, in the
apostles days) might p^operly enough be said to be "of the day, and not of the
night", as the truths of the christian religion, which they were before totally
ignorant of, were now externally revealed to them. They might well be amazed to
think of their former ignorance, in comparison with their present knowledge;
and those who were thus "darkness", might, without a figure, be said to be
"light in the Lord"; yea, to be "called out of darkness into mavelous light".
But still, in regard even of these heathen, the truths of the gospel, however
manifested externally to them, were insufficient to their being "transformed by
the renewing of their mind", but by their being accompanied with an internal
influence of the spirit, whereby their eyes were opened to see them in such a
light as to convince their consciences, affect their hearts, awaken their
powers, and become a powerful principle of action in them.

AND this is that influence of the spirit which is now principally needed, and
wherein principally consists his work in enlightening the minds of sinners. It
does not lie, as some may be ready to imagine, in giving them new revelations,
in suggesting to their tho'ts new truths, which the world knew nothing of
before; but in setting those old truths, which are contained in that public,
standing, authentic revelation of the divine mind, the holy bible, before their
view, in such a convincing commanding light, as that they see them in their
reality, and importance, and so as to be powerfully excited by them. Thus it is
with all justified believers. They see the truth in this divine and spiritual
light; which is not the case with others, whose faith comes short of that which
is saving.

THE last property of this justifying persuasion respects its "influence," or
"operation". Our author says, page 301. "the question about faith must be set
aside, where the inquiry turns upon, how a man is affected by a testimony of
what he believes"? It Is undoubtedly true, the effects of faith are not faith;
and to move a question that would turn upon this point, would be to ask,
whether the effect and the cause are the same thing? Which would be to invert
the order of nature. But still, it may be highly proper to inquire, how a man
is affected by his faith? And this, in order to his knowing whether his faith
is saving. He cannot indeed, in any other way, attain to this knowledge. Our
author very justly observes page 303. "that a difference often takes place
between the confession of the mouth, and the belief of the heart, which time
only can discover". He says again p. ibid. "what a man believes in his heart,
will certainly influence his conduct in life. God bare witness to the apostles,
as having unfeigned faith as influenced by the spirit of it in their lives". It
may therefore be affirmed, with the permission of this author, if he will be
consistent with himself, that that belief of the gospel-report will not save a
man, which will not influence his conduct in life. How then is it "to set aside
the question about faith" to inquire, how a man is affected by what he
believes? Must he not thus inquire, if he would, upon solid grounds, be
satisfied, that his faith is unfeignedly that, which the scripture connects
with the justification of life? His faith may be this saving one in the view of
God, as it lies a naked persuasion in his mind; but it must show itself to be
such by its effects, or the man himself cannot justly entertain this though it of
it. In describing the faith therefore that is saving, it is really necessary to
speak of it, not only as a persuasion of the truth, but such a persuasion of it
as will show itself in works. This is the grand criterion of its nature as
saving; by this it is distinguished from all counterfeits. It is the root,
seed, or first principle, from whence proceeds all that a man ever is, as a
christian, in deed and in truth; and it ought therefore to be represented, not
merely as a persuasion of gospel truth, but a persuasion of this sort or kind.
And this is of such a nature, as that the man possessed of it will be quite
altered from what he was. A new being is, as it were, given to him. He is
furnished with new springs of motion and action. He has that within him, which,
with the concuring influence of the Spirit, always in readiness to be afforded
to him, will change the bent of his heart, give a new turn to his affections,
and dispose him to walk in newness of life. Nor will it fail of producing these
effects. His faith indeed is, seminally and virtually, the "new man in Christ";
the "workmanship of God, created again to good works". It is, in embrio, the
"gospel penitent"; the "christian convert"; the "newborn creature"; the sinner
"quickened, who was dead in trespasses and sins"; the man "transformed by the
renewing of the Holy Ghost", so as to be not "conformed to this evil world". It
is, in one word, every thing in the root, principle, and first beginning, that
is any where connected, in the bible, with that eternal life, which is the
great promise of the gospel.

IT may accordingly be observed, this account of that persuasion of the truth,
which is connected with salvation, perfectly coincides with the descriptions
that are frequently given of it in the sacred scriptures. It Is a faith that
purifies the heart. "Purifying their hearts by faith". Acts 15.9.
It Is a faith that is accompanied with the new birth. "Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ (that is, in the saving sense) is born of God". 1 John 5.1.
It Is a faith that will sanctify the man that possesses it. "Which are
sanctified by faith in me", in Jesus Christ. Acts 26.18.
It Is a faith that works by love. "Neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith that works by love", love to God and man, "the two
commandments on which hang both the law and the prophets". Gal. 5.6.
It Is a faith that overcomes the world. "This is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Son of God"? 1 John 5.4, 5.
In a word, it is a faith that will show itself in all gospel good works. "Will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? For as the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead". Jam. 2.20.26.


IT will, perhaps, more strikingly, and at the same time more familiarly,
convey to you an idea of this persuasion of mind, as a principle of the
powerful influence we have described, should it be exemplified to you by some
signal instances. The first I would mention shall be that of ABRAHAM. And I the
rather choose to begin with him, because he is represented by the apostle Paul,
Romans 4.11, 12.
as "the father of all that believe", whether under the jewish or christian
dispensation; that is, their father, so as that they must resemble him in
faith, in order to its being "imputed to them also for righteousness".

AND what is the idea the scripture gives us of the faith of Abraham? Evidently
this, that it was a practical principle, or, in other words, such a persuasion
of the existence, perfections, moral government and revelations of God, as
disposed and influenced him to honor the divine authority, by cheerfully
complying with its commands, wherein they were made known, whatever difficulty
might attend an obedient regard to them; illustrious patterns of which are set
before our view, by the sacred penmen.

HE received a command from heaven, in those words, Genesis 12.1, 2.
"get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's
house, unto a land which I will show thee. And I will make thee a great nation,
and will bless thee, and thou shall be a blessing". Great things, it is
acknowledged, were promised to engage his obedience to the heavenly call; but
still he must quit his country, forsake his friends and relatives, yea, and
leave his father's house, that he might go whither he knew not. We cannot make
his case our own, and not perceive the difficulty of the trial he was now put
to. And what was the result? Why, his faith in God inclined and enabled him to
a ready submission to the divine pleasure. So we read, Heb. 11.8.
"by faith Abraham, when he was called to go out unto a place, which he should
afterward receive for an inheritance, obeyed".

A LIKE, but far more severe, command was that, Genesis 22.2.
"take now thy son, thine only son Isaac whom thou love, and get thee into
the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering, upon one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of". What an amazing gradation is this! It
seems calculated, in its manner of delivery, to engage all the softer passions
of the human mind, against a compliance with it. It must be "his son", his own
flesh and blood, himself existing in the person of his offspring. It must be
his "only son Isaac". There is a singular emphasis in this. For "Isaac" was the
son given him in his old age, beyond the ordinary course of nature, and in
fulfillment of a divine promise. And it was this son in special, this son only,
through whom "his seed", according to the express word of God, "could be
reckoned". This "son Isaac" might well be the delight of his heart, the dearest
to him of any object in this world. It Is therefore said, "thine only son Isaac
whom thou love". And what was he to do with this son of his love? It follows,
"get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering". A
most extraordinary command! God never before called Abraham to so severe a
trial, and the like he has never since put any other man to. It Was not eno' that
he must part with this son by death; it was not eno' that he must part with him
in a bloody manner: But he must, in his own person, with his own hands, "slay
him for a sacrifice to the Lord"; yea, and after he had slain him, he must
consume his body in the fire": Otherwise he could not have offered him for a
"burnt-offering", according to the command he had received from God. Let any
man that is a father look within, and attend to the working of his own bowels,
and this will tell him, beyond all language, the dreadful severity of the
service Abraham was now called to. And what was the effect? The account of it
is given in these words, Ver. 3.
"and Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took Isaac his son, and went to
the place of which God had told him". Far from disputing the will of God, he
was instant in his obedience to it. He did not make excuses, a variety of which
were ready at hand; he did not put off the matter for the present; but takes
the first opportunity to fulfill the divine pleasure. What a miracle of
self-denied obedience was this! The blessed God though it fit to signify his
special approbation of it, in those words, Ver. 12.
"I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine
only son, from me". Now, all this reverence of the divine majesty, all this
submission to the divine government, was the fruit of faith. So we are taught
to think of the matter, by the author of the epistle to the Hebrews. Says he,
Chap. 11. ver. 17.
"by faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only begotten son". To the like purpose,
the apostle James, refering to this same affair of Abraham's "offering his son
Isaac upon the altar", makes that appeal, Chap. ver. 22.
"see thou how faith wro't with his works"? And its thus operating, gave
abundant proof, that it was a practical principle, a persuasion of soul that
powerfully influenced his whole inner and outer man.

SUCH was the faith of Abraham, that faith of his which was "counted to him for
righteousness". And it was the same kind of faith that was "counted" to his
posterity, under the Mosaic dispensation, "for righteousness" also. They could
not have been believers, so as that their faith would have been connected with
justification, unless, like the faith of their father Abraham, it had been a
powerful principle, habitually influencing their hearts and lives. For, as the
apostle Paul observes, Romans 4.11.
they only who "walked in the steps of the faith of their father Abraham,"
could have "faith imputed to them for righteousness", as he had. Not that all*
under the law, who were in a state of justification, as Abraham was, kept pace
with him in his "walk of faith": But they were all, in a measure, followers of
him in the same way of faith. They all trod in his steps, though not with equal
exactness. To speak plainly, they were all, like him, the subjects of an active
faith; a faith that was an abiding principle, disposing and enabling them, as
occasions were offered therefore in providence, to like exercises of love to
God, dependence on him, submission to his all-wise pleasure, and obedience to
his righteous commands; though not in the same eminent degree: Nor could they
otherwise have been "of faith", so as to be "blessed with faithful Abraham".
Gal. 3.11.
They could not have been his children, in the spiritual sense; for as our
Savior observed to them, Joh. 8.39.
"if ye were Abraham's children, then would ye do the works of Abraham".

AND it was by this same faith, I have been describing, that all the
Patriarchs, even from Adam to Abraham, were justified and saved. The writer of
the epistle to the Hebrews, has put this beyond all doubt.

SAYS he of Abel, one of the sons of Adam, Genesis 11.4.
"by faith he offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which
he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts". He
believed in God, and, it may be, in the promise of God, that "the seed of the
woman should bruise the serpent's head". And it was under the influence of this
persuasion, that he made choice of "the fatlings of his flock, and the fat
thereof" Genesis 4.4.
to offer in sacrifice to God; and when he offered the sacrifice, this same
persuasion put him upon yielding to God, together with the external offering,
the inward homage and devotion of his soul, and, at the same time, his entire
trust in the divine mercy for acceptance. It was owing to this faith of Abel,
showing itself by works, that he "offered a more excellent sacrifice than
Cain", and "by it he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of
his gifts".

IN like manner, it is observed of Enoch, the seventh from Adam, Ver. 5.
that "by faith he was translated, that he should not see death"; that is, by
faith that was a powerful principle of action. For it wro't both on his heart
and life, and in an uncommon degree; making him an extraordinary instance of
piety toward God, and righteousness and goodness toward men. Moses declares
concerning him, Genesis 5. 21, 22.
that he "began early to walk with God", and that he "went on walking with him
for three hundred years together". And it appears, from the epistle to the
Hebrews, that this was the fruit of a firm and unshaken faith. Both his
entrance on a religious course of life at first, and his afterward going on in
it for so long a space of time, was owing to his faith. This was the ruling
principle of his life. In consequence of this faith, "he had, before his
translation, this testimony, that he pleased God", and "by it" he was
distinguished from the rest of mankind, by being taken to the other world,
without passing through death.

AND it was by the same kind of faith that Noah also, an antediluvian Patriarch
"became heir of the righteousness which is by faith". Heb. 11.7.
He not only gave credit to the notice God had given him of an approaching
deluge; he not only looked upon this event, though in futurity at present, and
greatly distant too, as what would certainly, in time, be the truth of fact;
but his faith, in this revealed truth, was an inward, powerful spring of
action. It had a just and reasonable influence both on his mind, and on his
conduct. For, says the scripture, "by faith, being warned of God, of things not
seen as yet," he was "moved with fear", and set himself "to prepare an ark".

HIS faith wro't upon his "fear". Not that he was in anxiety, lest he should be
involved in the general destruction by water; for the same revelation that
assured him of this amazing judicial procedure of God, assured him likewise
that he should suffer no harm by it. But his faith in God's resolution to drown
the world, awakened in him an holy awe of the divine justice, holiness and
power, and such a reverential regard to the authority and government of God, as
was a mighty restraint to him from sin, and a powerful incentive prompting him
to the discharge of duty and particularly that branch of it, "the building an
ark", as God had commanded. The apostle therefore observes, after having said,
"Noah was moved with fear", that he "prepared an ark for the saving of his
house". He was so persuaded of the truth of what God had said, notwithstanding
the contrary appearances of second causes, notwithstanding the improbabilities
arising from the unlikelyhood of the thing in itself considered, that he began
upon the work of "building the ark"; and he went on steadily, and in an uniform
course, notwithstanding the universal infidelity of the age in which he lived,
and the ridicule of many an unbelieving scoffer, till he had finished it;
evidencing the reality and greatness of his faith by his punctual obedience to
the will and pleasure of God. Such was the faith "by which he became heir of
the righteousness which is by faith".

IN fine, it was this same kind of faith, that was "reckoned" to even Moses,
the founder of the jewish law, "for righteousness". For the faith he was
happily the subject of inclined and enabled him to prefer an "afflicted state
with the people of God", before the honors and pleasures of "Pharoah's court".
Heb. 11.25.
It carried his views beyond this present world, to the coming "recompense of
reward", and influenced him to "esteem the reproach of Christ, greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt". In a word, it was a persuasion of soul, that was
sufficiently powerful to take off his "affections from things on the earth",
and to fix them "on things that are above", and to engage him in a steady care
to approve himself, in his whole conduct, to the will of him, who is the
supreme "lawgiver, king and judge".

YOU have now seen, that the faith of Abraham, and those ancient worthies, who
lived and died in favor with God, was an inward, powerful spring of right
affection, and right conduct, toward God and Man. And our faith must be of the
same kind, if we would hope, upon good grounds, to "inherit the promises". Our
faith in God, and Christ, and the great truths revealed in the gospel, must
have a governing influence on our hearts, and whole external behavior of
ourselves in the world. It must "work by love", love to God, and Christ, and
one another. It must "show itself in works", in works of piety, in works of
righteousness, in works of sobriety. It must be, in a word, such a persuasion
of the truth, as shall be effectual to conform our hearts and lives to the will
of God, and the example of our Savior and master, Jesus Christ.

NOR unless we explain this persuasion of soul, as thus virtually comprehending
in it the whole christian character, can it be the faith, in consequence of
which, a man may, with truth, be denominated a justified believer. For it is to
be remembered, the justified person is a pardoned one, if we may believe the
apostle Paul, who introduces David, when describing "the blessedness of the man
to whom God imputes righteousness without works", as saying, "blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord will not impute sin". Romans 4.7, 8.
But whoever is not virtually, or in true estimation, a "gospel-penitent", is
in a state of guilt, and actually liable to the wrath of God. So we are taught
to think by the apostle Peter, whose direction to his hearers is, "repent for
the remission of sins". Acts 2.38.
And again, "repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out". Chap.
3.19.
And a greater than this apostle has said, "except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish". Luke 13.4.5.
It Is to be remembered also, the justified sinner is one that shall be
glorified, according to that express declaration of the inspired Paul, "whom he
justified, them he also glorified". Romans 8.30.
But it is most peremptorily affirmed, and by our Savior himself, that "except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God", his kingdom in its state
of heavenly glory. Joh. 3.3.
And an apostle of his, speaking in his name, and as guided by his spirit,
positively declares, that "they who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of
the Lord, and the glory of his power". 2 These. 1.8, 9.
Unless therefore a man can be in a justified state, and a state of wrath; in a
state in which he may be admitted to heaven, and can have no entrance into this
holy and happy place, and this at one and the same time, the faith which
denominates him a justified believer, must contain in it, in God's estimation,
repentance, the new birth, and gospel-obedience; that is to say, it must be
considered as the root, seed, or first elements of the whole christian temper
and behavior: Or, in other words, it must be explained to mean, as it really
does mean, "the word of truth", so dwelling in the heart, as that it may
properly be called "the seed of God", that "incorrupible, abiding seed", which,
when it comes, by time and growth, under the influence of the divine spirit, to
be opened, dilated and expanded, will appear to be "the man of God", adorned
with his image, and "thoroughly furnished to all good works".

IN this view of the faith, that is connected with justification, beauty,
strength and harmony, run through the whole new testament-writings, with
reference to this important affair: Whereas, if we explain it in any other
opposite sense, we shall make them perplexed, I may say unintelligible, if not
self-contradictory.

MEN may, if they please, perplex the most clear and easy truth; rendering it
unintelligible, while, at the same time, it is far from being "hard to be
understood". And this, perhaps, has been as much done in the article we are
upon, as any in the whole christian revelation. But such a method of conduct is
of no service to religion, or the souls of men; but a great hurt to both. If we
keep more closely to the scripture, and pay less regard to metaphysical
niceties, our notion of faith will not be involved in difficulty, nor shall we
be puzzled to understand that, which is so closely connected with our eternal
well-being in the coming world. It will, probably, be though it by some, that I
have been greatly deficient in not making the essence of faith, as justifying,
to consist in the soul's relyance on Christ, or trusting in his righteousness,
as the only pleadable title to life. This, with them, is the principal thing
the scripture means by the faith that justifies. In answer whereto I would say,
I know of no text, in all the bible, that gives this idea of faith; and there
is this good reason to think, there is no such text, namely, that trust in
Christ, relyance on his righteousness, is always consequent upon faith, and a
fruit of it, as truly as love, repentance, humility, or any other christian
grace. Wherever there is faith, there will be this trust. They are inseparable
from each other. But then, this trust must be considered, not as faith itself,
but the effect of faith. And, in truth, how should a man trust in Christ for
righteousness, before he believes he has wro't out an all-sufficient
righteousness for sinners? If he first believes in Christ, as having "finished
transgression, and bro't in an everlasting righteousness", he may, in
consequence of this faith, place his entire trust in him. His relyance on
Christ, and the righteousness of Christ, as consequent upon faith, and one of
its fruits, is perfectly agreeable to the order of nature; otherwise, an
inversion of this order. It Is indeed impossible, a reasonable creature, acting
reasonably, should trust in Christ for righteousness, till he is first
persuaded, upon the testimony of God, that there is such a righteousness to
trust in him for. Having faith in this righteousness, he may now place his
entire dependence on it. And, as I said, if his faith is of the right sort, it
will certainly show itself to be so by its operating in this way.


I HAVE now said all that I intended, to let you into a clear idea of the faith
by which "the just do live". It only remains to make what has been offered upon
this head, still more useful, by some important reflections.

SERMON V.
I. IT IS quite easy to collect, from the account we have given of faith, that
there is no contradiction, not the least inconsistency, between the apostles,
Paul and James, wherein they may seem to oppose each other, with respect to the
affair of justification. The apostle Paul says, Romans 3.28.
"a man is justified by faith, without the deeds (or works) of the law". The
apostle James says, Chap. 2. ver. 24.
"by works (or deeds) a man is justified, and not by faith only". The apostle
Paul says again, Romans 4.2.
"Abraham was not justified by works". The apostle James says, Chap. 2. ver. 21.
"Abraham was justified by works". This seeming contradiction between these
apostles, has strangely puzzled expositors, and other christian writers; many
of whom have rather left their readers in confusion, than satisfaction,
notwithstanding their learned and laborious disquisitions. It does not appear
to me, to require any great degree of attention, to perceive, that these
apostles were perfectly of the same mind, and spoke precisely the same thing,
however it may look, at the first glance, as though they differed, not only in
words, but in sentiment.

WHEN the apostle Paul says, "we are justified by faith without works", he
cannot be supposed to mean, that we are justified by a faith that will not be
productive of works. Should we put such an interpretation on his words, we
should make him contradict himself. For he elsewhere affirms of the faith that
justifies, that it will "work by love", both to God and man; that is, in other
words, that it will show itself by works. When the apostle James says, on the
other hand, "a man is justified by works, and not by faith only", the idea he
would communicate, is evidently this, that we are justified, not by a "dead
faith", but a faith that will be the source of evangelically good works. For
this was the point he had in view to prove; and he accordingly illustrates it
by leting us know, that a "dead faith", a faith that is not followed "by
works", would be of no more profit in the buisiness of justification, than good
words would be to an "hungry and naked man", while we afforded him "no
charitable relief". Hitherto these apostles, instead of contradicting,
perfectly agree with each other, and indeed with all the sacred writers.

BUT the apostle James says, "Abraham was justified by works"; whereas the
apostle Paul says, "he was not justified by works". Neither is there any
contradiction between them here, unless we attend to the found only of their
words, and not the ideas intended to be conveyed by them. When the apostle Paul
says, "Abraham was not justified by works", what he intends is, that he was not
justified upon the score of works, in consideration of any thing he had done in
conformity to the divine law: In which sense, no man, any more than Abraham,
was ever yet justified, or ever will be. And is he herein contradicted by the
apostle James? Can it be supposed, when this apostle says, "Abraham was
justified by works", that he designed to affirm, that it was upon a plea
grounded on their agreement with the law, as the rule of judgment? Had he meant
to declare this, he must have bewrayed ignorance of the whole gospel-scheme of
redemption; yea, he must, in true construction, have "made void the death of
Christ". And yet, he must be interpreted to mean this, to make out a
contradiction between him, and the apostle Paul. The exact truth is, the
apostle James, in saying, that "Abraham was justified by works", really intends
nothing more nor less, than this, that he was justified by a faith that was not
"dead", but "showed itself by works". And herein he perfectly coincides with
the apostle Paul, whose doctrine, upon this head, is precisely the same.

IT may be worthy of special remark here, both the apostles, Paul and James,
argue from the case of Abraham, in proof of the points they respectively had in
view. And, by briefly considering what they say upon it, we shall easily be
convinced, that their sentiments, upon the affair of justification, were
exactly the same.

THE apostle Paul proves, Romans 4.2, 3.
that "Abraham was not justified by works", from that scripture-declaration,
Genesis 15.6.
"Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness". As if he
had said, so far is it from being true, that Abraham was justified for his
works, upon the account of his good deeds, that the way in which he was
justified, was this; "he believed God", and God was pleased, upon the plan of
grace through Christ, to accept of him as righteous. But then, it ought to be
particularly rememered here, this faith, which was "counted to Abraham for
righteousness", was not a "dead faith", but a "working" one; that is to say, it
was such a persuasion concerning God, and the revelations of God, as was a
powerful spring of obedience to him, an inward principle that disposed and
enabled him to do, or suffer, any thing at the divine call. Abraham was in fact
the subject of such a faith as this; and this faith, thus influencing his
heart, and operating in his life, was the very faith that God, in grace or
favor, "counted to him for righteousness".

AND this is the very thing meant by the apostle James, when he says, "Abraham
was justified by works". He did not intend to suggest, by these words, (as he
must have done to contradict the apostle Paul) that "law" was the rule of
Abraham's justification, and that he was accordingly "justified by works", in
conformity to this rule. Nothing could be more distant from his design, through
the whole course of his reasoning, in this chapter. He had been treating of
"the faith" by which men, upon the gospel-plan of mercy through Christ, are
saved, and showing that it was not an empty "dead faith", but a faith that
discovered its reality in "works" of evangelical obedience. And, in order to
illustrate this great point he had in view, he introduces the case of Abraham,
and says, ver. 21. "he was justified by works"; that is, by a "working faith",
not a fruitless one; by a faith that was not "dead" and "alone", but alive, and
accompanied with "(...)", in conformity to the divine will. The c^ection of
these words, with the argument he is pursuing, evidently determines this to be
his meaning, and that he could have no other. And, that we may be convinced of
it, I shall place before your view, the whole paragraph here relating to
Abraham. It stands thus, Ver. 21, 22, 23, 24.
"Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he offered Isaac his son
upon the altar? See thou how faith wro't with his works, and by works was
faith made perfect? And the scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; and he was called
the friend of God. Ye see then how by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only". As if he had said, I have been showing you, that an empty faith, a
faith that is "dead", and "alone", not operating in "works" of obedience to the
gospel, will never avail a man to salvation. Let me illustrate this important
point, by bringing your view to the case of Abraham, our father, according to
the flesh. Was he justified by a "dead faith", a faith that did not "show
itself by works"? Is not his offering Isaac his son, upon the altar, a plain
proof of the contrary? Don't you perceive, by this illustrious "work",
evidencing his submissive obedience to the pleasure of almighty God, that his
faith, instead of being "dead", "wro't together with works"? Don't you
perceive, that his faith, by its not being "alone", but thus operating in
"works", was completely fited to the purpose of his justification? Don't you
perceive, in this way of his justification, through an operative faith, the
fulfillment of that text of scripture, which says, "Abraham believed God", and
his "faith" in God, thus showing itself in "works" of obedience and submission
to his governing authority, was "counted to him for righteousness", in
consequence whereof, he "became the friend of God"? You may then, my brethren,
both easily and plainly see, in this example of Abraham, I have set before you,
that "a man is justified, not by faith only", not by a faith that is "dead",
and "alone"; but by a faith that shows itself in "works" of obedience, as
occasions are offered therefore, in the providential government of God.

THIS explanation of the apostle James makes out a connection, and consistency,
in his whole discourse, upon this head of faith and justification. Upon this
plan of interpretation, it runs smooth and easy, and appears to be strongly put
together. And, taking this to be his sense, (as it unquestionably is) wherein
does he differ from the apostle Paul? Far from contradicting what he says, he
really means the same thing: Nor can his words be understood, so as to oppose
the apostle Paul, unless they are interpreted in a sense that will destroy the
coherence of his discourse, and make him a loose, weak and unconnected writer;
which would be far from reflecting honor on him.

IT will, probably, be objected against this reconciliation of these apostles,
and indeed against the idea I have given of faith, that they set up "works" in
the affair of justification; for if we are justified by faith, and faith i a
work, we are then justified by "a work of our own", and not by "the work of
Christ". We shall see at large, in the next discourse, that this objection is a
mere pretense, having no real solidity in it. However, I would so far prevent
myself, as to say at present; though, instead of denying faith to be a work, I
avow it to be one, yet I utterly deny, at the same time, that it is a work, in
the sense in which works are any where, in the bible, excluded from
justification.

THAT faith should be viewed as a work, in the affair of the sinner's
justification, is vehemently opposed by some; Our author will tell us, that
faith, in this view of it, is not "a work", but a mere "passive reception of
the truth", in which there is no labor, not the least activity of the human
mind. This is a leading sentiment in his letters. But it is unhappily attended
with this great difficulty, that it exhibits an idea of faith, that the
scripture knows nothing of. The scripture-faith always includes in it human
activity; and it is otherwise a useless, worthless thing. See what is contained
in some of the pages that immediately follow.
but in evident contradiction to what is said in the sacred books. It Is there
obviously spoken of as "a work required", a "duty commanded", as truly so as to
love God, or our neighbor. When our Lord "preached the gospel of the kingdom,
saying, BELIEVE", did he require nothing of his hearers? Did he command no
duty? Did he only exhort them to set still and wait, till the salutary truth"
was conveyed into their minds, without any though it, motion, action, or endeavor
of their's, in any shape or form? It would be highly absurd to make him speak
thus; especially, as he has himself taught us to look upon faith, as "a
required work", in those words of his, in answer to a question that was put to
him by some of the Jews, "this is the work of God", the work God commands you
to do, "that ye believe in him whom he has sent", John 6. 28. Our author says
upon this text, page 369. "The Jews were plainly inquiring, how they might be
qualified to do the works God requires, in his law, in order to justification.
The answer of Jesus plainly imports, that they would be possessed of the whole
work God required, in knowing that God sent him to work it, without their
working more or less". It is allowed, Jesus was sent to work the whole work
that God required as the consideration upon which, that in the virtue of which,
the sinner is justified, "without his working more or less", in this view of
working. But still, the question recurs with as much force as ever, did not
Christ require these Jews to believe that God had sent him thus to work? If he
did, as the words directly affirm that he did, there is then something
required, a duty commanded, with which they were obliged to comply. One can
scarce read this text, and not be necessitated to think, that some work was
here enjoined them. The Jews themselves entertained this though it of the matter.
For they are introduced still asking, ver. 30. "what sign show thou, that we
may see and believe thee? What do thou work"? That is, what evidence give
thou of thy divine character, what miraculous work do thou do, that we may
attend to it, and be persuaded to believe that God sent thee? Surely they
imagined they had something to do, some work to perform, in consequence of our
Lord's direction: Nor can it be supposed, he would have directed them to the
duty of believing in him, if no motion, action, or exercise of their souls were
necessary in order hereto; but the work was God's, to the exclusion of any
exertments of their's, in any sort or kind.
Observable also to the like purpose is that passage in the apostle John's
first epistle, Chap. 3. ver. 23.
"this is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another". Do we believe in Jesus Christ? Our faith, if the
authority of God is therein regarded, is a compliance with his command, and, as
such, "a work done", a duty performed, as truly as when we "love one another"
in obedience to God, who has required us so to do. It is not my buisiness to
inquire, at present, how we come by an ability to believe. Be this as it may.
Whenever we do believe, if we therein have our eye to God (as we must have, or
our faith will be of no value) we pay religious honor to him, by doing a duty
he has required of us; and, by thus doing a duty, we do that which is a work,
and may, with as much propriety, be so called, as any other act of obedience
that we perform. Nor can we indeed, as intelligent moral agents, believe in
Jesus Christ, upon the testimony of God, and in compliance with his command,
but by the exercise of our reasonable powers. The capital truth, comprehensive
of the whole object of faith, is this, "Jesus, who is the Christ, died for our
offenses, and rose again for our justification". I would hereupon ask, can this
truth exist in our minds, as a truth we give credit to, without the use of our
intellectual capacities? In order to its standing true in our minds, must we
not discern the connection of the terms in which it is expressed? Must we not
know its just import? that is, have in our minds distinct ideas of, at least,
all the essential truths that are contained in it? Must we not perceive the
evidence upon which it comes testified to us? Must we not be satisfied, that
this evidence will justify us, as reasonable creatures, in yiedling to it? In
fine, must we not have such a view of God, as, in our believing this truth, to
do honor to his faithfullness and authority? And is there, in all this, no
exercise of our intellectual and moral powers? No action, no motion, of the
soul in any shape whatever? Nothing is more indub^tably clear and certain, than
that faith partakes of all the properties of a work, and is as truly such, as
love, humility, or any other christian grace: Nor is it possible it should be
otherwise.

BUT then, it is utterly denied to be a work, in the sense in which works are
excluded in the affair of justification. For which reason there may be, and
actually is, a perfect consistency in saying, that "no man can be justified by
works", and that "every man that is justified is justified by faith, which is a
work"; because faith, though a work, is not a work in that sense, in which works
are excluded from justification. It is an indisputed maxim, that, in explaining
the scripture, regard is always to be had to the MEANING of words, and not
their mere sound. Upon which, the question is, what does the scripture mean by
"works", when it says, "no man can be justified by works"? Look where you will,
and you will always find, that it means works recured to as a title to
justification; works that justify in their own virtue; works that are the
consideration upon which justification is claimed; works that are opposed to
grace and Christ, and depended on instead of these; in fine, works that give
occasion for boasting in ourselves, rather than glorying in God through Jesus
Christ, when we are justified. This is the scripture-meaning of works, when it
declares, that "no flesh can be justified by them". In this view of works, it is
easy to see there is no need to deny, that faith is a work, when we connect it
with justification. Nor will its being spoken of as a work, infer the least
inconsistency with those words of the apostle Paul, which are bro't by our
author to prove it to be such, "to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness", Romans 4.5.
That we may have a clear understanding of these words, and their perfect
consistency with what has been said of faith as a work, let it be considered;
the apostle, in the 2d ver. of this chapter, argues that Abraham was not
justified upon the foot of law, in consideration of works done in conformity to
law, because he would then have room for BOASTING; which he had not. His words
are these, "If Abraham was justified by works, he has whereof to glory
[boast]; but not before God". As if he had said, If Abraham had been justified
upon a claim founded on works done in obedience to the law, he would have had
matter of glorying, he might have boasted of his justification, as what was his
due; but before, or in the sight of God, he had no such reason for boasting.
And why? It follows, as an illustration of what he had thus argued, ver. 3, 4,
5. "What says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him
for righteousness. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of
grace, but of debt. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness". As if he had
said, it is evident from the scripture, that Abraham had no room for BOASTING in
the affair of his just^fication, because it assures us, that "he believed God",
and that God, of mere grace, "counted his faith to him for righteousness". Now
there would have been no need of this "gracious counting", if, by his works, he
had attained to righteo^ness in the esteem of the law; for, when a person is
righteous in the eye of the law, in consideration of the works of righteousness
he has done in conformity to it, "the reward is not counted a gift", but
"adjudged to him as his due": Whereas, if he does not work at all, with a view
to attain a righteousness, that will make him righteous, in the account of the
law; but, instead of such working, believes in God, who, of his mere grace,
justifies those, who, at the very time he justifies them, are UNGODLY in the
eye of the law, to him faith is "counted for righteousness", so as to remove
away all ground of glorying or boasting. This, I am persuaded, will be found,
upon the strictest examination, to be the real meaning of the apostle. The
works, he here speaks of, as giving occasion for boasting, and therefore
excludes from having any thing to do in the affair of justification, are
evidently such as are wro't to support a claim to the reward, in the eye of the
law; they are such, as, when a man has performed them, places him beyond the
need of grace, in order to his being "counted righteous"; they are such as he
may produce as his righteousness, and demand their being accepted, in this
view, by the rule of law; they are such, in a word, as lay him under no bonds
to "grace", in the affair or his justification, but, instead of ascribing it to
"grace" that he is justified, he may attribute it to "his own works", and
"glory" in them, "boast" of them, as the just ground and reason hereof. Need I
now say, that faith, should it be considered as bespeaking the use of
intellectual faculties, and the exercise or activity of the human mind, is yet
far from being a work, in the sense that works are here excluded by the
apostle? How should faith be a work to be gloried in, and boasted of, as though,
in its own virtue, it would give a title to justification, when it is not
possible a man should have faith, and not see that he is absolutely undone
without the interposition of grace. The very supposition, that he may be
justified upon the foot of faith, eternally excludes all boasting; because he
could not be thus justified, but of the free favor of God. He cannot indeed
believe so as to be justified, without believing that he is UNGODLY, and a
SINNER, in the eye of the law, and, as such, deserving of damnation, at the
time when he is justified. And will such a faith, whatever activity it may
carry in it, afford the least conceivable ground for boasting? Far from this,
the more active and vigorous a man's faith is, the more effectually it will
guard him against that glorying the apostle is so jealous of.

Another text urged against faith's being considered as a work, is Romans 11.6.
"If by grace, then it is no more of works: Otherwise grace is no more grace.
But if it be of works, then it is no more grace: Otherwise work is no more
work". But what has been above offered, is equally applicable here. I shall
therefore only add at present, that it concerns our author, and those who think
as he does, to reconcile the just recited words of the apostle Paul, and those
also, Ephesians 2.8, 9. "By grace ye are saved, -- not of works, lest any man should
boast", with the doctrine they teach, page 356. that it shall be rendered to
believers "according to their works"; yea, and that it is a "point of justice",
that it should be thus rendered to them. Perhaps, the reconciliation of their
own doctrine, with the above texts, will enable others, in the same way, to
reconcile their notion of faith, as a work, with the same inspired words. I may
venture to rest the whole upon this issue.


And according to this meaning of works, no man ever did, or ever will obtain
"the justification of life", in consequence of his doing them. But faith is so
far from being a work, in either of the above senses, or in any sense that will
oppose "the grace of God", or "the finished work of Christ", that it
principally operates in doing honor to them both: Nor can it be conceived,
wherein God could have taken a more effectual method to exalt his own grace,
and the merits of his son, than by giving faith, considered as a
working-principle, a necessary place in the affair of the sinner's
justification. This will be distinctly and largely illustrated in what may
hereafter follow.

II. IT IS a just remark, from what has been said of the "faith that justifies",
that the evidence in proof to a man, that he is possessed of it, cannot be full
and strong, till his faith has "wro't by love, and discovered itself to be of
the right kind by its genuine fruits. His faith, previous to this, that is,
before it had produced the meet effects, may be of the justifying kind; and God
may know it to be so. For which reason, should he be called out of the world
(as it is possible he may) before he has had opportunity to "show his faith by
his works", it would be no hindrance to his admission into the heavenly
kingdom. For, being possessed of faith in its truth, God knows that he really
is, in the first rudiments, that penitent and convert, that new-man in Christ
and partaker of the divine holiness, which the scripture points out as the
proper "meetness for the inheritance of the saints in light". We judge of the
cause by the effects, of the state of men's minds, by the tenor of their
actions: But God, who is "greater than our hearts, and knows all things", can
judge of effects by their cause, and know what a man's temper and conduct will
be, by the springs and principles he is endowed with. Consequently, as faith,
when of the right sort, is all and every thing, in the root or seed, whoever is
the subject of it, in the view of God, whose judgment of it, while lying naked
in the mind, is infallibly true, will be owned by him as one, marked out, in
the gospel-revelation, for the joys of his presence. But this is not the way,
in which we are to judge of the faith, we may suppose ourselves to be endowed
with. We cannot be assured, Our author's way to assurance does not appear to m^,
after all he ha^ said in illustration of it, to be more scriptural, or less
puzzling, than their's he finds so much fault with. He distinguishes between
"the assurance of faith", and "the assurance of hope". But this, as it respects
the main thing in question, is to distinguish, and upon his own plan too, where
there is really no material difference. For no man, according to him, can be
assured that his faith is genuine, or, in words he will, perhaps, like better,
that what he believes is the "simple truth" that justifies, but by its
operation. And, if the fruit of faith must be attended to, before a professor
of faith can know that his faith is of the right kind, it comes at last to the
same thing, whether this assurance be called "the assurance of faith", or "the
assurance of hope": To be sure, he cannot have "the assurance of hope", without
having "the assurance of faith". He may be vainly confident, that he is in a
state of acceptance with God, while yet he is not assured, that the "salutary
truth" dwells in him. But he cannot, upon scripture-grounds, be assured of his
being in this accepted state, any further than he is assured, that he believes
the truth; and of this latter he can be assured in no way, but by the effects
his faith produces. A man's hope therefore, must keep pace exactly with his
faith. If he has not "the assurance of faith", he cannot have "the assurance of
hope". His latter assurance must always be proportioned to the former. -- Our
author seems likewise to think, that "peace with God", and "rejoicing in
Christ", as flowing, under the influence of the comforting spirit, from
self-deny'd obedience out of love to the truth, is one of the principal grounds
of "the assurance of hope". The difference here between him, and others, lies
chiefly in a point of order; in which, as I apprehend, the mistake is on his
side. But be th^s as it may, the grand question to be decided is, how shall a
man be assured, that his joy is true, and not false? Our author's way to an
assurance of this is, when placed in a just and clear light, much the same with
their's, which he rejects: Nor is it either shorter, or less perplexed. He must
have, according to his own way, if I may use the language he has done, without
being though it to speak profanely of a matter of such serious importance, as
"long-winded and dreary a story" to tell, as any of those he opposes. For he
can never know, according to his own principles, whether his joy is true or
false, genuine or counterfeit, but by examining, not only into his "self denied
obedience", but "the love of the truth" it must proceed from; and being
thereupon assured, that his obedience took rise from this source. Perhaps, upon
trial, this will be found as difficult and puzzling a buisiness, as he has made
it, upon the scheme of the popular preachers. He says, page 395. "No professor
of the faith can form a proper judgment of his state, merely by "poring on his
own heart", and examining whether his religious tho'ts are of the right kind,
or not; for, if he is not engaged in the practice of the peculiar precepts of
christianity, or in doing those works which are the proper fruits of faith, he
has no occasion for self-examination; as there is, in that case, no room for
any doubt concerning his state". I freely concur with him in what he here says;
but then I would observe, on the other hand, neither can he, upon his own
scheme, form a proper judgment of his state, most certainly not an assured one,
merely by examining whether he is "engaged in the practice of the peculiar
precepts of christianity"; for, as he says, page ibid. "men may be engaged in
the practice of the same works. from VERY DIFFERENT MOTIVES, of which every
man's own conscience is best judge". And let it be remembered, the MOTIVE to
practice, in the present case, must be found to be "the love of the salutary
truth". Belief of this truth must inspire love to it, and this love must
produce this obedience. This is a leading sentiment in this writer's plan. And
are we not now unavoidably led to that "poring on the heart", which he speaks
of in so sneering a way? "Love" is, most certainly, an affection of the soul.
Consequently, if we must know that our religious practice flows from "love",
and love to "the simple truth", we must look within, and very narrowly too, or
we may place vain confidence, as thousands have done, in the room of
gospel-assurance. It Is a plain case, our author, if he would, in his own way,
attain to an assurance of his being in a good state toward God, must repair to
that same sort of exercise he lightly calls "heart-work", and be through in it
too; otherwise he may, as "the heart is deceitful", delude himself into ruin.
-- I shall add here, faith, in his account, is a mere pretense, a vain
profession, unless it is "a principle of life and action", producing, among
other things, "that change upon a man, which is called repentance unto life",
page 408; "that change likewise which gets the name of self-denial", page 409;
"that change also which is called conversion, regeneration, new creation, or
the new creature; putting off the old man with his deeds, and putting on the
new-man; walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit", page 412. Now, if
faith is such a principle as this, no man's joy, under the profession of faith,
can be any other than "the joy of the hypocrite", unless it is productive of
these fruits; and consequently no man can be assured, that his faith is
genuine, till he finds, upon trial, that it has actually bro't them forth. Upon
which, I cannot help admiring, that he should speak, as he sometimes does, with
such an air of merriment, upon that change in men, which is signified by
repentance, conversion, and the like. If some, through mistake, have though it, that
this change is previous to faith, in the order of nature, though not of time;
will such a speculative error subvert the reality of the thing itself? May not
a man be the subject of this change, though he should not think just as our
author does about the order, or way, in which he became possessed of it? Is it
the manner of real christians to make a sarce of so serious and interesting a
matter, turning it into ridicule and banter? Does the language he has used look
like their's, whose love of the truth has transformed them into new men in
Christ? He would have acted more in character as a professed disciple of Jesus
Christ, and served his cause too much better, if he had spoke upon this head in
words of sober gravity. His manner of writing, it may be feared, has been the
occasion of leading some "unwary souls" into contemptuous tho'ts of the
moral-change, meant in scripture, by CONVERSION; which yet, is so necessary a
one, that no man can enter into the holy heaven without it: Yea, should a man
make the highest pretenses to the assurance, both of faith and hope, he would,
notwithstanding, if his faith did not operate to effect this CHANGE, be
certainly bid, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, to depart away from him, among
the workers of iniquity, whom he knew not.
upon just grounds, that it is of the right kind, but by its operation. The
effects it produ^s, are the principal evidence, in proof of its being the faith
that justifies.

AND this, it may be proper to observe here, is the true scripture-method of
attaining to "the joy of faith", the meaning of which none can know, but by
their own inward sensations. Not that this "comfort of the holy Ghost" is
derived, either from faith itself, or any of its effects, in their own proper
virtue. The work of Christ, as Savior, is its only ultimate ground. It finally
terminates in this, as its true cause or reason. Men may, it is acknowledged,
place an undue dependence upon those exercises, internal or external, which
they imagine are owing to the influence of faith; substituting them in the room
of Christ, and fetching their consolation from them, instead of him. But this
does not argue, that we ought not to look to the workings of our hearts, and
the actions of our lives, as produced by faith, in order to our enjoying that
"peace of God", which belongs to those who are believers in Christ. The
influence of faith, that is to say, the effects it produces, both in the inner
and outer man, must be heedfully attended to, in order to our knowing, whether
our faith is of the justifying kind, or not. This can be known, with sufficient
certainty, in no other way. The effects of faith are the proper
scripture-medium, by which we prove its distinguishing nature, and become fully
satisfied, ti^ the "faith by which we may live". And, consequently, it is by
these effects, that we attain to a state of spiritual peace and comfort.
"Perceiving about us these fruits of faith", we justly and strongly conclude
from hence, that our faith is of the right kind; and, if of the right kind,
connected, by the gospel-plan, with "the justification of life": And if we are
"justified by faith", we may, upon the most solid foundation, enjoy "peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ". It is Christ, or, what means the same thing,
the work of Christ as the redeemer of sinners, that is ultimately the ground or
reason of this "peace"; but still, the "working of faith", the fruits it
produces, are the "medium" by which we come to the enjoyment of it: Nor can any
man give a good scripture-reason for his rejoicing in hope", but from his being
able to "prove his faith by his works". For this is the only strong and full
evidence, that can be given in proof of its being of the right kind. And unless
it be of this kind, it is certain we cannot be justified in consequence of it;
and if we cannot be justified, should we have "peace in our minds", it must be
upon a false foundation. And this leads me,

III. IN the next place, to put both you and myself upon the proof of our
faith, that we may know, upon just grounds, whether it be of the right sort;
what I mean is, whether it is the faith by which "the just do live"? And, from
what has been discoursed concerning the properties of faith, especially that
never-falling one, its "showing it self by works", we may, under the conduct of
the spirit of truth, attain to a fullness of satisfaction respecting this
interesting and important point.

DO we believe in God, as he has revealed his character in the inspired books?
We shall be influenced by our faith, if it is justifying, to love him with our
whole souls, to fear him above all that are called gods, to trust in him as the
alone all-sufficient help, to resign ourselves up to the disposal of his
all-wise and righteous pleasure, and to behave toward him with all dutiful
obedience; rendering to him the homage of our hearts, and the worship of our
lips.

DO we believe, that "God has sent his son into the world, not to condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved"? We shall, in consequence
of this faith, be filled with the highest admiration of his "good will toward
men", and be in a temper of mind to fall down before him in humble adorations,
and grateful acknowledgments. That will be our language, and we shall express
it with a truly thankful soul, "blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he has
visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up for us an horn of salvation
in the house of his servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy
prophets".

DO we believe the great things that are spoken, in the new testament, of Jesus
Christ, his person and office, what he has done and suffered for sinners, and
is now doing for them in heaven, in consequence whereof he is "able to save to
the uttermost all that come to God by him"? Our faith, if genuine, will dispose
and excite us to rerepair to him as the "one mediator", through whom alone we may
hope for acceptance with God to eternal life: And we shall accordingly commit
our souls, and their everlasting concerns, into his hands; trusting in the
atoning virtue of his obedience to the death, and his consequent exaltation to
all power, that he might complete the designs of God's grace toward an
apostate world.

DO we believe the scripture-declarations concerning the holy spirit of God,
and the part he bears in forming men to a "meetness" for the future glory,
honor and immortality? We shall hereupon put ourselves under his guidance,
depend upon his aids, cherish his motions, follow his directions, and make it
our constant care, and earnest prayer, that we may, under his influence, be
preserved blameless to God's heavenly kingdom.

DO we believe the odiousness of sin, in its nature and guilt, especially as
set forth in the sufferings of Christ, when he shed his precious blood on the
cross to "make atonement for it"? Our faith will set in motion our passions of
grief, shame and hatred. We shall "mourn for our transgressions, as a man
mourns for his firstborn son". We shall blush and be confounded at the
remembrance of our past iniquities. Sin will appear to us, in the strongest
point of light, "the abominable thing which God's soul hates": And we shall
"hate it with a perfect hatred", and avoid it as the most deadly evil; no more
allowing ourselves in practice of it, at any time, or in any instance whatever.

DO we believe that "the commandment", according to the revealed representation
of it, "is holy, just and good"? We shall herefrom be formed to an obedient and
submissive temper of soul. We shall be reconciled to the government of God, and
willing in all things to do, or suffer, as he would have us. That will be the
inward sense of our minds, "we esteem all thy commands concerning all things to
be right. O how love we thy law! It is our meditation all the day. We prize thy
commands far above gold, and have chosen them for our heritage forever. O give
us understanding, and we will keep all thy righteous precepts. Thy law is good,
therefore thy servants love it".

IN short, whatever we believe, as contained in the revelations of God, by
Jesus Christ, and his apostles, will, if our faith is of the right kind,
operate in us, and have an influence upon us, answerable to the nature of the
object believed; either exciting our love to God, or trust in Christ, or care
to do honor to the divine government and authority, by our submission and
obedience in this, or the other instance, as occasions are offered therefore in
providence.

IF our faith does not thus operate, it is that "dead faith" the apostle James
speaks of, which can be of no profit to us in the buisiness of salvation.
According to the apostle James, let a man make ever so sound a profession of
the faith, and talk of ever so many illuminations and experiences, if we find
him seeking to pass these upon us as proofs of his being a christian, without
showing his faith in the works of love, commanded by Jesus Christ, we may
safely repel his confidence, by telling him, the devils also believe. Thus
speaks our author with exact truth and justice. I would add still further,
whatever illuminations and experiences, internal feelings and religious
motions, any may pretend to, wherein they are excited by, or take rise from,
the "artful address" of some admired speaker, instead of the pure word of
truth, they are not worthy of being so much as mentioned in proof of the real
being of faith: They ought rather to be looked upon as the operation of
animal-nature. This is certainly the case, when gospel truths have no power to
excite these sensations, but as borrowed from the voice and action of some
popular preacher. If persons have no relish for revealed truths, no disposition
to hearken to them; or if these truths are insufficient to move their hearts,
touch their consciences, set in motion their affections, and produce any good
impressions on them, unless they are enlivened by "the wisdom of words", that
is, the eloquence of man, it may be taken for granted, without further
consideration, that such experience "stands in the wisdom of man", not "in the
power of God". The word of the eternal God, simply and nakedly proposed, is
"able", under the influence of the divine spirit, "to make men wise to
salvation". It needs no human art to give it force and energy. And if what men
experience is the effect, not of the "word itself", but the "manner" in which
it is dispensed, it is wholly a mechanical motion, and of no more profit, in the
spiritual sense, than that which is caused by the "sounding of brass", or "the
tinkling of a cymbal". It may be worthy of special remark, the apostles "sought
not glory of men". They despised the though it of gaining applause by artful
addresses, purposely contrived to move their passions. Their manner was, by a
simple, plain "manifestation of the truth, to commend themselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God". They knew, though their hearers gloried in them,
they would reap no saving good by their ministrations, unless they "heard God
speaking" in the messages they bro't to them. Their dependence therefore for
success was grounded on the "power of God's word, merely as such", and not on
the force or virtue they could give it by any art, or craft, they could use in
the delivery of it. The latter might have secured votaries to them, and the
profitable, as well as pleasing advantages, connected with popular admiration
and acceptance; but it would have been of no spiritual profit to their hearers:
It might have tickled their fancies, but would not have saved their souls. The
apostle Paul, though learned in all the wisdom of that day, that is, in all the
arts that were fitted to gain admirers, by working upon animal nature, esteemed
it a reproach to the infinitely interesting truths of the gospel, to deliver
them in a theatrical worldly-wise mann^ though they needed human art and help to
gain admitance into the minds of men. Says he to the Corinthian-christians, 1
Cor. 2.4. "My speech, and my preaching, was not with enticing words of man's
wisdom; but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power". But why did he
converse, and preach, in a simple plain manner, to the neglect of that art and
eloquence, which were commonly prevalent in that day? The reason is given in
the words that immediately follow, "that your faith should not stand in the
wisdom of men; but in the power of God". And if this was a good reason for this
conduct then, it is so now, and will always be so to the end of the world.
Whereas, if it "shows" its reality and power, by such good effects as has been
described, we may be sure it is of the right sort, and will be accompanied with
the "justification of life".

LET us then prove our faith by our works. And let us be faithful and critical
in the trial of it; putting ourselves under the guidance of that God, who
"knows our down-sitting, and our up-rising, who compasses our path and our
lying down, and is acquainted with our tho'ts, and all our ways". We may, by
thus proving our faith, "have rejoicing in ourselves"; yea, we may, upon just
grounds, "rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory".

SOME of us, it may be, have no need to be at the pains of this trial. We know
at once, without any labor to prove it, that our faith is nothing more than a
pretense, a profession without fruits, unless such as evidence its falsehood.
We "name the name of Christ"; but take no care to "depart from iniquity". We
"say unto Christ, Lord, Lord"; but "don't do the will of his father which is in
heaven". We "come unto God as his people come, sit before him as his people,
and hear his words; but we do them not: with our mouths we show much love, but
our heart goes after our covetousness". We wear "a form of godliness", and, it
may be, a specious one too; but we "deny the power of it"; being "lovers of
ourselves, covetous, proud, disobedient, unthankful, unholy, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God". If this is the just character of any of us, and we are
conscious to ourselves that it is so, we are, without all doubt, in a state of
wrath; and must know that we are so, if we have only a common faith in the
revelations of God. And is this a state in which we may, as reasonable
creatures, sit down in quiet? We must be stupidly inattentive, or we should be
deeply concerned to think, what a dangerous situation we are in. "The god of
this world" must have "blinded our eyes", and "scared our consciences", or we
should anxiously enquire, How shall we be "delivered from the wrath to come"?
Let us "consider, and show ourselves men", by endeavoring, in the gospel-way,
to obtain this deliverance.

SOME of us, it may be, have proved our faith by its fruits, and the result has
been "peace of conscience" and "joy in the holy Ghost"; as knowing herefrom,
that we are interested in the favor of God, and the purchases of the redeemer's
cross. If this should be the happy case of any of us, we have infinite reason
to bow the knee, in humble grateful adorations of the rich grace of God, that
has been manifested toward us, through Jesus Christ. We should principally
ascribe it to God, and not to ourselves, that we are what we are, and can
"rejoice in hope of the glory to be revealed to us". Let us do nothing to
darken the evidence of our being in a justified state, "through the redemption
there is in Jesus Christ", or to obstruct the lively actings of the hope we
have of being hereafter crowned with immortal glory. And the stronger our hope
is, the more vigorous let our endeavors be, to "glorify the name of God, and
of our Lord Jesus Christ". And as we know, that we are "the ch^ldren of God by
faith in Jesus Christ", let it be our care to be "followers of him as dear
children". And as, in virtue of our being children, we are "heirs, heirs of
God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, to an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away", and have an assured hope that it is
"reserved for us in heaven", let us walk worthy of such a blessed hope;
"purifying ourselves even as Christ is pure"; aiming at, and endeavoring
after, the highest degrees of conformity to the example he has set us. Let us
not "think, that we are already perfect"; but make it our daily care to get the
better of our corruptions; to become more ready, cheerful and constant in doing
the duties of the various relations we sustain in life; to grow in love,
meekness, humility, patience, resignation to the divine pleasure, and all those
graces that adorn the christian's character. Let us be more and more contented
with the condition it shall please God to a lot to us, in the present world;
finding no fault with him, though he should call us to conflict with trials,
grievous to bear; as knowing, that if we meet with evil things here, we shall
be comforted hereafter. In a word, let us live above the world, having our
heart in heaven, and "our conversation in heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ", who, "when he appears a second time without sin
unto salvation", will "change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like
to his glorious body": And we shall then be ever happy with him, in the kingdom
of his father.

IN fine, some of us, it may be, though we have tried our faith, and have so done
again and again, are yet full of fears and doubts, as not knowing, after all,
whether it is of the right sort. If we cannot peremptorily determine, on the one
hand, that we have no other faith than that which is common to those professors
of christianity, to whom our Lord will finally say, "I know you not, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity"; so neither, on the other hand, can we, with
desirable satisfaction, say, that "we have believed in him that raised Jesus
from the dead", with a faith that has been "imputed to us for righteousness".
And we accordingly live sometimes hoping, sometimes fearing; always doubting,
but never rejoicing in an assured hope of our being interested, through faith, in
the purchases of the redeemer's cross. And this, perhaps, is the truth of fact,
with respect to the generality of believers in Christ, those of them, I mean,
whose faith is connected with that "eternal life", which is "the gift of God
through our Lord Jesus Christ". It may seem strange it should be thus, when so
many, in the days of the apostles, were, in consequence of their faith, the
happy subjects of "peace with God", and "rejoicing in Christ Jesus";
especially, as the way to these "comforts of the holy Ghost" is the same now,
that it was then; and christians, in these days, are favored with the same
revealed means, and advantages, christians were then, in order to their
attaining to the "joy of faith". But the principal reason of this is to be
fetched, from the slothful inactivity of the present christians. They don't
take due care to show to themselves, any more than to others, that they have
faith, by the exercise of those graces, which, "by Jesus Christ, are to the
praise and glory of God". If they are possessed of these graces, they have made
no great improvements in them. They have not "grown in grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ", as might be expected and wished. "The work of God may be
begun in them"; but it has not been carried on, in any considerable degree.
They have not attained to the "stature of men in Christ"; but may rather be
esteemed "babes": And their exertments, in the christian life, are accordingly
feeble and lanquid, and too often interrupted by the influence of temptation
and corruption. And what wonder is it, if they live in uncertainty about their
spiritual state; and, instead of enjoying true serenity of soul, are perplexed
with fears and doubts.

WOULD we attain to "the full assurance of hope", and to "joy in God through our
Lord Jesus Christ", in consequence hereof, we must, as the apostle Peter
directs, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.
"give all diligence to add to our faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance,
patience, godliness, brotherly-kindness, and charity"; and not only so, but "to
abound in these things". The apostle's view is, to engage our zeal and care in
attaining to the greatest eminency in these graces, which at once "adorn" both
the christian's character, and "the doctrine of our Savior Jesus Christ". Nor
can we take a more scriptural, or effectual, method to "make our calling and
election sure". For it is by the graces o^ God's spirit, thrown into exercise
upon all proper occasions, that our faith is shown, not to be "dead", but to
exist in us as a real principle of life. And the higher we rise in the actings
of our love to God, trust in Christ, hatred of sin, weanedness from the world,
and the like, the stronger and brighter will be the discovery, our faith makes
of its reality and power in us. It now shows itself by its proper fruits; and
by these, under the influence of the divine spirit, we may certainly know, that
it is the "faith, by which the just do live": and in consequence of this
knowledge, we may, upon the most solid grounds, "joy in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement".

THE best remedy, after all that can be said, against spiritual darkness and
distress, and the best way to get spiritual peace and joy, is to rouse
ourselves up to those "labors of love", which are the "work of faith"; to
quicken our pace in the paths of righteousness; to be more earnest in our
cares, respecting our souls, and another world; to strive more resolutely
against sin; to be more watchful against temptation; to love God more entirely;
to pray to him more fervently; and to be more constant and devout in the
services of piety, and more circumspect in ordering our conversation among men,
that, "as we have received how we ought to walk and please God, we may abound
daily more and more".

OUR faith should be productive of good dispositions, and these should be
continually strengthened, till they become well established principles of
action. And so shall we find, from our own experience, that the wise man spoke
the truth, when he said, "the path of the just is as the shining light, which
shines more and more to the perfect day. Prove. 4.18.
As we thus, by the operation of faith, under the blessing of heaven, improve
in holiness, we shall find our doubts and fears will disperse and vanish, and
our hope grow into assurance. We shall know, by the abounding fruits of our
faith, that our state is safe, as "there is no condemnation to us, being in
Christ Jesus". And "the peace of God will now rule in our hearts". We shall
feel serenity in our tho'ts, tranquillity in our consciences, and joy in our
breasts that is "unspeakable and full of glory". We may now solace ourselves
under the heaviest weight of outward affliction; yea, we may "rejoice in
tribulation", as we are chastened because we are children, and under discipline
for our spriritual and eternal profit, To those, who are "lovers of pleasures
more than lovers of God", it may be a paradox to say, that believers may
rejoice when called, in providence, to endure afflictive trials; looking upon
them as proofs of the love and kindness of their heavenly father, and his using
a wise and proper means with them to promote their advantage. But this is a
truth plainly and particularly revealed in the gospel of Christ. Says the
apostle James, chap. 5. ver. 11. "Behold, we count them happy which endure".
And again, chap. 1. ver. 2. "Brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into
diverse temptations". And why? The reason follows in the next words, "knowing
this, that the trying of your faith works patience"; and, as another apostle
expresses it, Romans 5.4, 5. "patience, experience; and experience, hope: And
hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in your hearts
by the holy Ghost". -- There is no school, like that of affliction, to train up
christians to a "meetness" for heavenly glory, in its highest degrees. And,
among those who "name the name of Christ", there are ordinarily none so eminent
for their meekness; patience; humility; contempt of the world; the lively
actings of faith, hope, trust in God, and a profound submission of soul to his
alwise, righteous, holy and sovereign pleasure, as those who have passed through
the heaviest trials. It Was with a special view to their making eminent
proficiency in these, and the like christian graces, and to give opportunity,
and occasion, for throwing them out into ex^mplary acts, that God, in order to
their "greater reward in heaven", put them upon enduring these things, which,
"for the present, were not joyous, but grievous". Those good christians, who
suffer most here, are commonly those, who shall be most happy hereafter. Not
but that believers may "adorn" their profession, and "the doctrine of their
Savior", in a prosperous state. Hence that remark in the book of the Acts,
chap. 9. ver. 31. "Then had the churches rest, -- and were edified, walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost". Neither the "truth
of faith", nor "the comfort of it", are confined to a suffering condition in
this world: Though "suffering with Christ" is the more common way to glory; and
those, who have been most tried with sufferings, are ordinarily those who are
best prepared for the brightest crown, in the heavenly and eternal world. Our
author best knows, how far what is here said, will consist with his notion of
"the sufferings, good christians are called to pass through." I have given above,
as I imagine, a true and just representation of the gospel-account of them.
and may "know that all things shall work together for our good", as they do
for their's who "love God, and are the called according to his purpose". In
fine, we may now have confidence toward God in the hour of deaths, and triumph
in the prospect of those immortal joys, which the father of mercies has
provided, and laid up in heaven, for all true believers in his son.

GOD grant we may all so "believe in him whom God has sent", as to enjoy
inward ease and peace while we live, and to be in the exercise of an assured
hope, when we are called to depart hence, of going to be eternally happy in the
kingdom of God, and of Jesus Christ! AMEN.

SERMON VI. The Place and Use of Faith, in the Affair of Justification.
GALATIANS II. 16. "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ" --.


I HAVE already, in several discourses from this text, endeavored to let you
into the true meaning of the faith that is connected with justification. What I
now principally design is, to point out to you the "reason" of this connection,
or to lead you into the scripture-notion of the proper "place", and "use", of
faith in this buisiness of infinite importance to us all.

IN order whereto, it will be needful to observe, that several things are
particularly mentioned, in the sacred books, as bearing their part in the
affair of the sinner's justification; each of which have their "distinct use",
and are, in their "proper place", absolutely necessary in order to our
partaking of this blessed privilege. The first, relates to "God"; the second,
to "Christ"; and the third, to "ourselves".

THE first thing to be considered in the affair of justification, and that
indeed which gave rise to it, is the "grace of God", his free favor, good will
and kindness toward men. The infinitely benevolent being was not excited,
either to purpose, or contrive, or reveal, or execute the gospel-plan of
salvation, by any motive extraneous to himself. Mere goodness was the source,
and the only one, from whence it originated. Even the blood of Christ was of no
consideration, in a way of motive or argument, to persuade the blessed God
hereto. For the intervening mediation of Jesus Christ, and all that he did and
suffered on earth, or is now doing in heaven, are to be looked upon as means
only in the execution of the purposed scheme of redemption; not the incentive
that prompted the all-merciful God to come into it. This is the point of view
in which the scripture represents the matter. The gift of Christ to become
incarnate, and humble himself to death, even the death of the cross, is spoken
of as the great astonishing instance of the moving of God's heart in compassion
toward sinners. To this it was owing, that he sent his son Jesus into our
world, to sustain and execute the office of its Savior. The new testament is
particularly express upon this point. "In this was manifested the love of God
toward us, because that God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we
might live through him". 1 John 4.9.
And again, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life". John
3.16.
The language, in these texts, is emphatically strong, and does, in the fullest
manner, express the original essential benevolence of God; ascribing it to
this, as the true and only spring, that Christ was sent into the world, "not to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved". Had he not
been moved by the infinite goodness of his own nature, he would neither have
purposed, or contrived this wonderful expedient for our everlasting benefit: It
proceeded from love, antecedently to all considerations whatever. And to the
same love it was owing, that this scheme, when purposed and contrived, was
revealed to Adam, to Abraham, to Moses, to the Prophets, and more fully, in the
times of the gospel, to the Apostles, and through them to the whole world. The
inspired Paul therefore says, "we are justified freely of God's grace". Romans
3.24.
And, speaking of justification, he calls it a "free gift"; "the gift by
grace"; "the gift" emphatically; and again, "the free gift". Romans 5.15, 16.
And he might, with all propriety, speak of it in this language; for it is, in
regard of its original source, an absolutely free favor. We were indeed, in the
eye of God, "without strength", "enemies", "ungodly", "sinners", when he
purposed and contrived the gospel-method of justification. Grace therefore, and
that only, could be the excitement to it.

I NEED not now say, that faith, in this view of justification, is of no use,
of no influence, in any sense whatever. The part it has to act is subsequent
to, and wholly dependant on, the grace of God, that grace of his, which,
previous to all consideration of faith, works, or worthiness, in any kind or
shape, made this blessed privilege an obtainable one; and this, for all sorts
of sinners: for the openly profane, the hypocritically devout, the stupidly
tho'tless, the hardened in infidelity and an universal debauchery of manners,
as well as others less odious and guilty. It was indeed, while viewing sinners
in all their various degrees of sinfulness and unworthiness, that the
infinitely good God found within himself an heart, disposing him to purpose and
reveal the merciful plan, in consequence of which they might obtain the
justification of life.

THE next thing, in the affair of justification, relates to "Christ". For the
scripture not only declares, that we are "justified freely by God's grace", but
"through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ". Romans 3.24.
We are accordingly said to "have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins"; Ephesians. 1.7.
and to be "justified by his blood". Romans 5.9.
And "his blood", which "declares God to be just in being the justifier of the
sinner", is emphatically mentioned as one of the great truths, which are the
object of that faith that is accompanied with a justified state. Romans 3.25, 26.
In agreement with these apostolic representations, "the gift by grace" is said
to be "by the one man, Jesus Christ". Romans 5.15.
And "by the righteousness of this one man, the free gift is come upon all men
to the justification of life". Ver. 18.
-- But I have no need to multiply texts. It Is abundantly evident, from the
general run of the new-testament-writings, that our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, while in our world, "in fashion as a man", and "form of a servant",
both did and suffered every thing that was necessary in order to a WORTHINESS,
a RIGHTEOUSNESS, on account of which God might, in consistency with the honor
of his perfections, and the authority of his law and government, manifest his
mercy toward sinners, even the chief of them, in saving them from wrath, and
admiting them to the joys of his presence in the kingdom of heaven.
Accordingly, this righteousness of Christ, in the reflection on which he could
appeal to his heavenly father, saying, "I have glorified thee on earth, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do"; and thereupon pray, "now, O
father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was": John 17.4, 5.
I say, this finished work of Christ is that, with a view to which, for the
sake of which, in consideration of which, the sinner is justified and saved.
This is the expedient, this the moral mean, the wisdom of God, excited by his
infinite benevolence, has contrived for the righteous and holy display of his
grace toward the sinful sons of men, in discharging them from the demands of
his law and justice. And whoever are made partakers of this grace, the
obedience of Christ, and eminently that finishing act of it, his willingly
submiting to die on the cross, is the only meritorious ground of its
bestowment. It Is not for the sake "of any thing the sinner has about him" that
he is acquitted from guilt, and accepted into favor. This is done by grace,
through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ. The true reason of it is to be fetched
from that astonishing love, which gave the only begotten son of God, that
sinful men might be saved from perishing, and this in a way that would be
honorary to that glorious being, who is as just and holy, as he is good and
merciful.

IT IS now easy to see, that justification, as it respects Christ, whose
character was perfect, and the only one that was so, and, as such, well
pleasing to God, excludes even faith, as well as works, from being, in whole,
or in part, the CONSIDERATION upon which the sinner is freed from the curse of
the law, and instated in a right to eternal life. Christ's work was finished on
the cross, and needed neither faith, or any thing else that could be found in,
or done by, us, to render it more complete, as a reason for justifying the
sinner, than it would be without them. Faith therefore, though necessary in order
to justification, and though it operates to the obtainment of this privilege, is
yet wholly useless, as the ground or reason of its bestowment. This is a
blessing, the grant of which was made solely with a view to Christ, and upon
the account of his obedience, the last and greatest act of which was, his
making his "soul an offering for sin".

THE last thing relating to justification is "faith", the scripture-connection
of which, with this gospel privilege I am now naturally bro't to make easy and
familiar to you.

AND, in general, its office, from what has been already said, must be
considered as not only subservient to grace and Christ, but as grounded on
them, subordinated to them, and receiving its virtue from them, in its whole
operation. It has a quite different use from that, which the inspired writers
assign to the grace of God, and the atonement by Christ. For which reason, we
shall entertain wrong sentiments of its use, if we substitute it in the room of
that which is allotted to either of the former; or so mix its use with their's,
as to ascribe to it the part which belongs to them, and not itself. The special
operation of these several requisites are preserved distinct from each other,
in the new-testament-books; which ever represent them as jointly concuring in
the affair of justification, but yet in different and duly subordinated
respects. These requisites must not therefore be misplaced in our tho'ts, or
the use of any one of them so confounded with the use of the other, as to break
that harmonious wisely subordinated order, in which the sacred penmen speak of
them as unitedly operating, though in different views, to the production of the
same good effect. To be sure, if we give faith the part of grace, or Christ; or
so mingle it is use with their's, as to destroy its subserviency to them, we
shall grossly misapprehend the matter, and incur the danger of transfering that
glory to ourselves, in the buisiness of justification, which is due only to
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Faith, as well as works, may be opposed to
Christ in the affair of a sinner's being justified; and should we view it as
the consideration, in the virtue of which we are instated in this privilege, we
should be justly chargeable with that "establishing our own righteousness", in
opposition to "the righteousness of God", which is so frequently and pressingly
cautioned against by the apostle Paul. For "if life could come by faith", in
its own virtue, that is, as the consideration entitling hereto, then is the
righteousness of Christ rendered needless, as truly as in the case of works,
and he "died in vain". -- But to come more directly to the point.

FAITH is connected with, and operates toward, the justification of life, as
it is that character, mark, or qualification in us, without which we cannot,
conformably to the gospel-plan, be instated in the enjoyment of this benefit.
What is here offered directly opposes the doctrine taught by our author. He
tells us, page 96, "that if we imagine we possess, or desire to attain to any
REQUISITE to our acceptance with God, either aside from, or in connection with,
THE BARE WORK OF CHRIST, -- Christ is become of no effect to us, -- Christ will
profit us nothing". This work of Christ, he accordingly calls "THE SOLE
REQUISITE"; and gives it this name "with the more pleasure, as it readily puts
him in mind of that significant saying of Jesus, one thing is needful". This
same though it, in words of like import, he frequently, if not needlessly, repeats
in all his letters. Upon which I would observe, by a REQUISITE, in order to
justification, may be meant the meritorious ground of its bestowment, the
consideration upon which, for the sake of which, the sinner becomes interested
in it. In this sense of the term, our author will not say, cannot with truth,
or justice, say, that those, he writes against, deny " the work of Christ" to
be the SOLE REQUISITE, THE ONE THING NEEDFUL, in order to acceptance with God.
They have ever taught this doctrine, and are indeed earnest advocates for it,
as one of the essential articles of the christian faith. By a REQUISITE, may be
meant also something previous to the sinner's actual interest in that
"justification of life", which is the sole procurement of Christ; something
necessary to its bestowment on this man, in distinction from another;
something, without which it can no more be thus bestowed, than if it had not
been purchased. And this is the sense, in which our author must understand the
term REQUISITE, if there is any meaning in the charges he would fasten upon the
popular preachers. Upon any other supposition, his invectives against them are
nothing more than railings against a phantom of his own imagination. Now,
understanding the term REQUISITE in this only sense, in which it was ever used
by those our author complains of, he has himself very often, however
inconsistently, joined with them in speaking the real truth upon this head.
Though he has peremptorily made "the bare work of Christ" the SOLE REQUISITE to
justification; yet, he has as peremptorily bro't in ANOTHER REQUISITE, that is,
something, without which no man, notwithstanding "the work of Christ", shall
ever be accepted of God. And he has often done this, and with as much freedom
as those he would represent as enemies to "the finished work of Christ". He has
affirmed over and over again, in one place and another throughout his letters,
that "the simple truth" (by which he means the same thing with "the bare work
of Christ") must be believed, possessed, become a truth to a man; must be a
truth that he knows, must be found by him to be the truth: Otherwise, it will
be no benefit to him, he can reap no comfort, no advantage from it. If now it is
necessary, we should believe the truth, admit it into our minds as the truth,
before we can be justified, this admission of the truth into the mind, is as
real a REQUISITE, in the sense above explained, in order to justification, as
the truth itself: Nor can the sinner be justified without the one, any more
than without the other. And this indeed is the scripture-account of the matter.
It Is as true as the express declaration of the son of God can make it, "that he
that believes not", that admiteth not into his mind the gospel as the truth of
God, "shall be damned": Nor will "the finished work of Christ" prevent it. To
common understandings, that, I am ready to think, will appear a requisite,
without the actual being and existence of which, damnation will be the result.
If every one will certainly perish, who don't believe the truth, in whose mind
it don't exist as the truth, it is impossible "the truth simply in itself",
merely as such, should be the SOLE REQUISITE in order to life. Our author, if
he pleases, may call it so; but it will be a sole requisite of such a peculiar
sort, as that, unless another is connected with it, we shall surely be made
miserable in the hell that is provided for unbelievers.
It is very expressly, as well as frequently, declared, in the sacred
scriptures, that sinners at large, sinners without distinction or limitation,
are not in a justified state; and that neither the grace of God, or the
atonement by Christ, operate, or were intended to operate, to the putting them
into this state, till such a change has been wro't in them, as will justly give
them a new and distinguishing character. It Is true, the infinitely good God, of
his rich grace, has absolutely made the gift of justification an obtainable
one, by sinners of whatever kind, be the degree of their vileness and guilt as
great as can be supposed; and it is tr^e also, that the atoning blood of Christ,
is a sufficient moral ground or reason for the bestowment of it upon them: But
then, there is another truth as plainly revealed in the bible, which it highly
concerns us all seriously to consider, and this is, that justification does not
proceed, either from the grace of God, or the obedience and blood of Christ, so
as to prevent the damnation of any but those, who possess a character which
distinguishes them from sinners in common. On the one hand, unbelieving
impenitents, so living and so dying, instead of being delivered from the wrath
of God, shall surely be "hurt of the second death": Nor will the grace of God,
however infinite, or the obedience of Christ to the death of the cross, however
perfect and meritorious, be any security to them herefrom. For it is written,
"he that believes not, is condemned already". John 3.18.
And again, "he that believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abides on him". Ver. 36.
On the other hand, it is as clearly and peremptorily written, "whosoever
believes in the only begotten son of God, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life"; Ver. 16.
yea, it is written again, "he that believes the son has everlasting life",
Ver. 36.
has it in actual possession in the beginings of it. The sinners therefore
that are in a justified state are those only, who are distinguished from others
by being believers in Christ. Their faith gives them a discriminating
character, which character is connected, by the appointment of God, with that
deliverance from wrath, and right to life, which are the gift of grace through
the atonement by Christ. They are, notwithstanding this character, as viewed by
the law, without relation to grace and Christ, in the same guilty undone
condition with other sinners, having no claim to mercy any more than they: But,
taking into our view the connection God has been pleased, upon the plan of
manifesting his grace through the redemption there is in Christ, to constitute
between this character, and a justified state, it becomes a most interesting
one, and makes ^he difference between these and other sinners as great, as the
difference between a state of freedom from wrath, and one of continual
exposedness to it.

THE plain truth is, the justification of life, though the gift of God's grace,
and his gift through the obedience of Christ to death, is no where, in the sacred
writings, said to be bestowed upon sinners in common: Neither are the sinners,
upon whom it is bestowed, pointed out by their names; but by this grand
characteristic, "faith in Jesus Christ". They are distinguished from all
others, by an appointed mark or sign, "their believing in him whom God has
sent". Upon whomsoever therefore this character is not found, they are liable
to the curse of the law, and the wrath of God, notwithstanding the life and
death of Jesus the Savior; and they will accordingly be pronounced cursed, in
the day of the appearing of that man, whom God has ordained judge of the world:
But on whomsoever it is found, it may be assuredly said of them, they are "the
blessed ones whose sins are forgiven, to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity";
and to whom the redeemer and judge of men will say, "when he comes in the glory
of his father, with the holy angels, come, ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world". Not that they are
thus favored and distinguished, upon the score of their faith, for the sake of
their character as believers; but, having this character, they have the
divinely constituted mark, pointing them out as the persons, whom God has been
pleased to declare, shall reap the benefit of that deliverance from wrath, the
source of which is his own free grace, and the reason of its bestowment, the
worthiness of Christ, his perfect character finished on the cross. Their faith
is the instituted medium, by which they become interested in the redeemer, and
the virtue of what he has done and suffered for sinners. God has appointed a
connection between faith, and the benefit of the Savior's obedience and blood;
insomuch, that what he has done and suffered is placed to the account of
believers. His righteousness is, to all saving purposes, the same thing to
them, as if they had wro't it out themselves.

NOR was this constituted connection between faith, and the benefit of God's
grace, through the atonement of Christ, an arbitrary appointment; but a wisely
contrived part in the plan of redemption.

THE apostle Paul, speaking of this matter, says, "it is therefore of faith,
that it might be by grace". Romans 4.16.
And so far is faith from counter-acting the grace of God, or the righteousness
of Christ, in the buisiness of justification, that it highly exalts them both;
ascribing the glory to them, and not taking it to itself. The believer in
Christ assents to it as true, that it is not for the sake of any worthiness he
has about him, that he is justified and saved; but for the sake of another, on
account of the worthiness of him, who has been "the propitiation for our sins".
He "receives it as a faithful saying, and accounts it worthy of all
acceptance", that it was of grace that Christ was thus made a propitiation; as
it was love, pure unmerited love, that sent him into the world to do the work,
which he finished by dying on the cross. And it equally stands true in his
mind, that his faith is of no value in itself simply considered, and that it
derives all its virtue from the appointment of heaven, which has made it a
necessary qualification in him, in order to his partaking of the benefit of
grace through Christ. And whosoever believes thus, exalts the grace of God, and
does honor to the redeemer's obedience and blood. His faith, though connected
with life, totally excludes all boasting. And, in truth, the connection was
purposely made, that "no flesh should glory in God's presence"; but that "he
that glories might glory in the Lord"; as all believers do, being, by means of
their faith, "in Christ Jesus, who of God is now made unto them, wisdom, and
righteousness, sanctification and redemption." 1 Cor. 29, 30, 31.


IT ought to be considered still further, it was a fit, proper thing, in point
of true wisdom, that there should be a "subjective capacity" in the sinner, for
the enjoyment of the blessedness he will have an immediate right to by being
justified, before he actually is so. Those who are justified have an immediate
actual right, not only to deliverance from wrath, but to the joys of God's
presence; insomuch that, should they be instantly called out of the world, they
would be admited into heaven. But how incongruous would a right to heavenly
happiness be, where the temper and bent of the mind is such, that there would
be a total incapacity for the enjoyment of it? And yet, this would be the case,
if faith was not previously necessary to our being vested with this right. It Is
this that makes the grand subjective alteration in the sinner. He is no sooner
possessed of faith, but he has that seed of God in him, which contains in it,
virtually, the whole christian temper, which is the true scripture capacity for
all spritual enjoyments and employments. He is now, in the first rudiments, a
man of that "pure heart", and those "clean hands", which fit him "to ascend
into the hill of the Lord, and to stand in his holy place", whether we mean
hereby his sanctuary on earth, or presence in heaven. There is, as the apostle
speaks, a "meetness for the inheritance of the saints in light". Col. 1.12.
And it would be to little purpose to have a right to this inheritance, if we
were, at the same time, incapable of enjoying it; not having been fitted
herefor in the frame of our hearts. Such a right ought not to be supposed. And
this shows the wisdom of God in so contriving and revealing the method of
justification, as that this gospel privilege cannot be had without "the faith
by which the just do live".

I MAY not impertinently add here, it is by faith, as enlivened and actuated by
the holy Spirit, that "redemption through the blood of Christ, according to the
riches of God's grace", is carried into effect. Faith, operating under the
divine agency, forms the sinner at first into "a babe in Christ"; and by the
same faith, under the conduct of the same influence, he gradually grows to "the
fullness of the stature of a perfect man in him". Says the apostle, "of his own
will begat he us with the word of truth". James 1.18.
Agreeable whereto are those words of another apostle, "being born again by the
word of God". 1 Pet. 1.22.
And this same word of truth, by which the sinner is "begot", and "born again",
is still made use of in carrying on this new workmanship of God, till it is
"complete in Christ". Says our Savior, "sanctify them through thy truth, thy
word is truth". John 17.17.
And the apostle Paul says of Christ, "he loved the church, and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify it by the word, -- and present it to himself a
glorious church without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing". Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
You see it is by the truth, that the new creation is both begun, and carried
on; begun in the new birth, and carried on in progressive sanctification. But
then it is to be remembered, it is by the truth as existing in the mind by
faith. For if it lies in the bible only, and is not received into the heart, it
can have no effect. By believing the truth, it has a real being in the
christian, and becomes capable of use as a principle of operation. And by the
truth, thus existing and operating in him, he makes, under the guidance of the
holy Ghost, all his seize, in conformity to the image, example, and will
of Jesus Christ Of such importance and use is faith in the scheme of redeeming
grace, through the blood of Christ. And no wonder therefore it is distinguished,
by being made the grand characteristic, without which we shall have no benefit,
either by the life or death of Jesus Christ.

THE short of the matter is, we cannot be too much concerned, that grace and
Christ may have all due honor in the affair of the sinner's justification; but,
under the notion of magnifying grace, and exalting Christ, we must take care we
don't reproach that wisdom of God, which has so contrived the plan of life, as
to make faith in us a necessary requisite in order hereto. Grace, Christ, and
faith, are all necessary; and the latter as truly so, as the former, though in a
different view. Without grace, we should never have heard of this gospel
privilege; without the worthiness of Christ, his finished character, as having
been obedient even to death, there would not have been an adequate moral ground
for the bestowment of it; and without faith, we should be wanting in that
character, qualification, or distinctive mark, which the all-wise appointment
of God has so connected with freedom from wrath, as that, while destitute of
it, he has most solemnly declared, that we are in a state of condemnation. Thus
faith, though necessary, is made so in due subordination to the grace of God, and
the perfectly meritorious obedience and blood of Jesus Christ. There is a most
beautiful and harmonious agreement in their respective operations, in order to
our being put into a justified state.

IT will, perhaps, be said, Christ's work finished on the cross, was the
fulfillment of all righteousness This gave him a character perfect in itself,
and perfectly pleasing to God; and this is the sinner's justification: He is
justified by this, and nothing else. This obedience of Christ to death is
eminently, the truth, the simple truth, that justifies.

IF I know my self, I would always be in a disposition to love and thank
Christ, for the great and gloriously benevolent work he finished on the cross;
and next to the grace of God, it is, without all doubt, the grand requisite to
justification: Nor can we be justified without it. It Is an essential part in the
merciful plan God has laid to save sinners from the damnation of hell. And it
would be base ingratitude to the blessed Jesus, to say any thing that would
take from the glory due to him, when he has done and suffered so much, that we
might be justified and saved in a way that might be honorary to the perfections
and government of God. But still, no truth of God, however great and important,
ought to be explained so as to set aside any other truth of his. Perfect
harmony subsists among all divinely revealed truths. And if we interpret one,
so as to oppose another, we may discover zeal for God or Christ, but it will be
zeal without sufficient knowledge. We cannot do too much honor to the redeemer's
blood, while we view it in the true point of revealed light: But if we would
put it to a use it was never intended for, instead of honoring, we shall
reproach it.

THE question here is, not whether Christ has perfectly done the ^ork assigned
to him as mediator and Savior? This is thankfully acknowledged to be a most
glorious truth The question is not, whether this work of his is essentially
necessary in order to the sinner's justification: This is readily owned also.
There is no way in which we can escape wrath, there is no way in which we can
obtain life, but by the obedience and blood of Jesus Christ. It Is always with a
view to him, for his sake, and in consideration of his work finished in the
days of Tiberius, that the sinner is justified. But the true and only proper
question is, whether the sinner, in consequence of this finished work of
Christ, can be in a justified state, without faith? If he cannot, faith must
have its use in the buisiness of justification; and is of such use, that the
sinner will in vain expect justification without it.

THAT no sinner shall ever enjoy the benefit of Christ's finished work, who is
not a believer in him, is a gospel truth; and it is as simple and plain a
truth, as that Christ finished his work by dying on the cross. Few, it may be,
will venture to deny this. If any should be disposed to do so, it would be
sufficient to confront such denial with those words, our Savior commissioned
his apostles to preach to all the world, "he that believes not shall be
damned"; Mark 16.16.
or those similar ones, which he preached himself, "he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten son of God". John 3.18.
If these words contain any real meaning, no man can be justified by any truth,
call it simple, complex, or what you will, while he is an unbeliever in Christ.
And to say otherwise, would be boldly to contradict the express declaration of
him, through whom we must be justified, if this is ever our happy case.

SHOULD it be said, faith indeed is necessary; but then, by faith must be
understood "the truth believed". This is the PROTON PSEUDOS, the capital
mistake, our author has unhappily fallen into. It runs through all his letters,
and is mingled more or less with all that he says. It Is, to me, quite strange,
one of his discernment should not at once see, that he imposed on himself, and
his readers, in speaking of "the truth to be believed", and the "belief of this
truth", as one and the same thing. Surely, there is a difference between
"light", and "seeing" light. And the difference is as real, and as obviously to
be perceived, between the "object of faith", and the "mind's persuasion" with
reference to this object. It Is readily acknowledged, when a man gives credit to
the gospel-report, he becomes "possessed of the truth"; yea, I will add, the
truth he possesses, if he unerringly believes, will lie in his mind just as it
stands in the divine record. But, is the truth's lying in his mind by faith,
and its lying in the divine rec^rd only, the same thing? There is an essential
difference here; insomuch, that contradictory propositions, and the most
interesting ones too, may justly be affirmed of the same truth, in these
different views of it. Damnation, aggavated damnation, may so^ow upon the
"salutary truth", simply or merely as such; that is, abstracted from the
persuasion of a man's mind, that it is the truth; whereas, whosoever believes the
truth, or becomes possessed of it by faith, shall assuredly obtain "the
justification of life". What now should be the reason of this difference? The
true and only reason is, because the truth, as to its MODE OF EXISTENCE, if I
may so speak, is essentially different from what it was. Before the sinner's
belief of it, it was "merely the proposed object of faith"; but it is now "this
object admited into his mind". And in this view only of the truth, is it
connected, in the bible, with any saving benefit. It Is not the truth, in itself
simply considered, but AS BELIEVED, received into the mind by faith, that will
avail to acceptance with God. Faith therefore, or THE TRUTH ACTUALLY BELIEVED,
is as real a requisite in order to life, as the TRUTH ITSELF. They both bear
their part, and unitedly concur, in the affair of the sinner's justification.
This way of speaking, perfectly falls in with the whole tenor of the
new-testament-writings, upon this head. What they say of faith, and its
connection with life, thus considered, is intelligible in itself, and easy to
be understood by any vulgar capacity: Whereas, "if we would enter into the
spirit of our author's writings, upon this head, or read them with any
satisfaction, we must have a new dictionary for some of the most notable words
of the new testament"; as he expresses himself upon another occasion, page 377.
And, even then, we should be at a loss to make out a consistency in what he
says. Sometimes it is the truth, the simple truth, the salutary truth, the saving
truth, that justifies; at other times it is faith, belief, the belief of the
truth, the knowledge of the truth, the knowledge of a righteousness finished in
the days of Tiberius: By all which phrases, if he would not be at odds with
himself, he must mean one and the same thing. And yet, it is impossible,
according to any known rules of language, that the simple truth, the saving
truth, without any adjunct, should be understood in the same sense precisely,
with the same words joined with belief or knowledge. If these additional words
signify nothing, why are they used? If they signify any thing, why used as
though they meant nothing? The truth is, it was necessary our author should,
every now and then, bring in the words faith, belief of the truth, knowing the
truth, and the like; because, otherwise, he would too visibly have thrown
contempt on the sacred books, in which the use of them is both common, and
infinitely interesting. But do they use them, in the sense he understands them?
No: But as pointing out, and directly aiming to point out, a REAL AND ESSENTIAL
DIFFERENCE between the truth considered "as the object of faith", and this
object AS BELIEVED, actually admited into the mind. Nor is the new testament
doctrine, concerning faith, intelligible, upon any other plan of
interpretation. It certainly is not upon our author's. I shall briefly
illustrate this, by one or two instances. -- The apostle Peter professes, in
the name of the other apostles, as well as his own, John 6.69. "we believe, and
are sure, that thou art Christ, the son of the living God". The scripture
simply affirms, "that Jesus is the Christ, the son of the living God". I would
now ask, is there no difference between this profession, and affirmation? It Is
obvious, at the first glance, that the "affirmation" contains the truth "merely
as such", and nothing else. And it is as plain, that the "profession", besides
this, takes in another idea quite distinct, and different; and that is, the
"existence of this truth in the minds of the apostles". And I would add here,
"the persuasion of their minds", with reference to this truth, was as truly
necessary, though not in the same view, to denominate their profession acceptable
in God's sight, as "the truth itself" that was the object of this persuasion.
They both concured in the matter; nor, without this concurence, would their
profession have been of any significancy to any spiritual purpose. -- The
scripture declares, "that Christ is the only begotten son of God, whom he sent
into the world that sinners might live, and not die". It declares likewise,
"that WHOSOEVER BELIEVES in God's only begotten son, shall not die, but live".
Upon comparing these declarations, will any one deliberately say, that the
"latter" means no more than the "former"? That they both convey, and were
intended to convey, the same ideas? If an infinitely interesting difference
cannot be discovered between them, it must be owing to the want of sight, and
not because it is not as clearly and distinctly expressed, as words can do it.
Upon our author's scheme, no one can give a meaning to any of those texts,
which connect salvation with faith. He is himself quite unequal to the
difficult task. He is accordingly led, whether sensible of it, or not, to
confute himself, even while illustrating his grand point, namely, that it is by
"the simple truth", the truth that is "the object of faith", and by nothing in
connection with it, that the sinner is justified. Says he, page 11. what Christ
has done, is that which pleases God; what he has done, is that which quiets
the guilty conscience, so soon as HE KNOWS IT: So that whenever he hears of it,
he has no occasion for any other question but this, is it true? IF HE FINDS IT
TRUE, he is happy; if not, be can reap no comfort by it. It Is at once obvious,
that he here makes a DIFFERENCE between "what Christ has done that is pleasing
to God", and a man's KNOWING or BELIEVING this; between "the truth itself", and
HIS FINDING IT TO BE TRUE* That is, in plain words, he would give us to
understand, though it is true, that "what Christ has done, is pleasing to God";
yet, if a man does not KNOW this to be true, if it is not A TRUTH TO HIM, as
well as a truth in itself, he can reap no comfort by it. And what is this, in
reality of sense, but to say, just as others do, that what Christ did, however
pleasing to God, will be of no saving advantage to any man, unless he has
faith, that is, is persuaded in his mind, that this which is spoken of, as
truth, in the divine secord* really is so. There are many other passages, in
which our author makes as great a DIFFERENCE between the truth "merely in
itself", and "as possessed by faith", as others do; and this too, while he is
proving there is no difference at all. In short, none have more grossly "put the
change upon themselves, by shifting words and names, than he has done in this
matter", if I may return him his own compliment.
It Is nor our belief, but "what we believe", that justifies. The answer is easy.
Neither the truth, nor our belief of it, do justify apart from each other: Or,
to speak in more explicit words, the sinner is put into a justified state,
neither by his faith, separate from the obedience and blood of Christ; nor by
the blood and obedience of Christ, separate from his faith. They both of them
have their part, and use, in this buisiness; nor can it be accomplished without
their joint concurence; Though the use of the former is dependant on the latter,
subservient to it, and valuable only by derivation from it.

'T WOULD be to no purpose to plead here, "as Christ and his apostles speak of
faith and the truth indifferently, to be justified by faith, is to be justified
by the truth, It Is readily granted, that faith is sometimes used in scripture to
mean the object of faith, in which sense "faith", and "the truth", signify the
same thing. But whenever it is thus used, it is in a figurative and less proper
sense. Should we interpret says, or belief, as always signifying the object of
faith, or, what our author calls "the simple truth", we should, at once, strip
a great number of texts of all meaning. I shall briefly mention one or two by
way of specimen. When our Savior preached, saying, "believe the gospel"; if, by
believing is understood the object of faith, that is, "the gospel", what
imaginable sense can be put upon his words? I freely acknowledge my own
incapacity to give them any: Whereas, if we explain them as a call to his
hearers to assent to "the gospel" which he preached, to admit it into their
minds as the truth of God, there is, at once, an easy and important meaning
given to them. In like manner, when the apostles preached, as they were
commissioned to do, "he that believes shall be saved, but he that believes
not shall be damned"; we shall meet with the same difficulty, in affixing any
sense to what they said. If belief stands here to signify precisely the same
thing with "the simple truth", the object of faith, no man alive can paraphrase
the words so as to make them speak sense. If it be said, the phrases, "he that
believes", and "he that believes not", are to be interpreted, as pointing out
those, who admit the object of faith, "the simple truth", into their minds, and
those who do not; this, it is owned, gives a sense, and an highly important
one, to them; and it is the very sense that is intended to be conveyed by them:
But it is not possible, this sense, or indeed any other, should be put upon them,
if belief means exactly the same thing with "the truth simply in itself". I
shall subjoin here, notwithstanding what has been said above, perhaps, in most
of the places, if not in all, where we are said to be "justified by faith", and
not by "the works of the law", we are to understand by "faith", the "gospel",
in opposition to "law". So, when we are sometimes said to be "justified by
faith", where "law" is not particularly mentioned, the meaning may be the same,
namely, that we are "justified" upon the foot of "gospel", upon the "scheme of
mercy revealed by Jesus Christ". But then it ought carefully to be minded, we
cannot, in consistency with many express texts of scripture, be "justified upon
the gospel-plan", but by "believing" in the strict proper sense of the word,
that is, by admiting this plan into our minds as the truth of God. It Is as sure
a truth of "the faith of Jesus Christ", meaning hereby his gospel, that we
shall be "damned if we don't believe", as it is that "he died for our offenses,
and rose again for our justification". The "truth as it is in Jesus" must be
admited into our minds, and exist a reality there, or we shall receive no
advantage either from his death, or resurrection.
that is, to be justified by faith is to be justified by Christ's blood which
is the truth": It would signify nothing, I say, to argue thus, for though faith
and the truth are sometimes promiscuously used, it is in the figurative sense,
and not strictly and properly. The assent of a man's mind to revealed truth, is
a quite different thing from the truth itself, that is the object of his
assent. It becomes indeed a truth to him by this assent; but still, the truth
itself, and that persuasion of mind, in consequence of which it exists in him,
in this point of view, are distinct things. That Christ "died for sin, the just
for the unjust", is a truth plainly testified to in the scripture, and will be
a truth, whether it be admited into my mind as such, or not; but it must be
thus admited, it must stand true in my mind, or I can have no saving benefit
from it. That we are "justified by Christ's blood", is one of the most
important revealed truths; but I must believe it, it must be a truth in my
mind, before I can be justified by it. To be "justified by faith", and to be
"justified by Christ's blood", cannot therefore mean precisely the same thing:
Nor ought they ever to be so explained; but as jointly concuring with each
other. On the one hand, to be "justified by Christ's blood", if interpreted in
consistency with other sacred texts, will mean the same thing with being
"justified by faith in his blood", including both the truth, and our faith in
it; for they are both necessary. Both the blood of Christ, and its being true
in the sinner's mind that he has shed his blood, must concur in order to his
being justified. On the other hand, "to be justified by faith", if explained in
a just consistency with other inspired texts, will mean, not only that the
truth believed, Christ's blood, is necessary to justification, so necessary
that it is not obtainable without it; but that the persuasion of mind with
reference to this truth, signified by faith, has its use also; insomuch, that
where this is wanting, even the blood of Christ will not avail to save the
sinner from going to hell. Says the apostle Paul, speaking of himself, and
other believers, "knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law,
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Christ, that we
might be justified by the faith of Christ". Surely, his meaning, in these
words, is not, that the object of faith only is necessary in order to
justification. If faith, understanding by it, the mind's persuasion with
reference to Jesus Christ, and his finished work, was of no use, of no service,
in the buisiness of the sinner's justification, why does he say with so much
particularity, "we have believed that we might be justified"? Their believing
in Christ was a needless thing, to be sure it was so respecting their
justification, if they might have been justified without this belief.

THE question is short, but the true answer to it will, as I imagine, be
decisive in this matter. It is necessary, in over to the sinner's being
justified, that gospel truth should exist in his mind as the truth of God? If
it is not, us a vain amusement to talk, or write, about knowing the truth,
believing the truth. If it is necessary, if the truth, the simple truth, must
be admited into his mind, received by faith, then he cannot be justified by the
truth simply in itself. There must be the concurence of faith; that is to say,
it must be by this truth, not as lying in the sacred books, but as admited into
the heart. And if the truth justifies in this sense, it must be by some divine
appointment, consti^ting a connection between the truth in this view of it, and
the sinner's being justified. He can be justified in no other way. Joy may
naturally spring up in his heart, upon his believing the gospel-report of a
method in which "God may be just, and yet justify the ungodly"; as "the great
guns of a neighboring castle may give pleasure, by intimating some public
occasion of joy" But the truth of the gospel, however strongly believed, cannot,
in a way of mere natural operation, or indeed by any supernatural assistance,
put the sinner into a justified state. It may, under the influence of the
divine spirit, operate to change his heart, to change the objects of his
passions and affections, and to renew his whole inner and outer-man: But it can
do nothing toward his justification. For the change which justification makes
in the sinner is relative, not real. It changes him from an object of wrath to
an object of God's favor. It puts him into a state wherein he has a right to
life, instead of being obnoxious to death. And there is no way in which this
can be done but by a divine constitution. And if, according to this
constitution, a belief of the truth is necessary, then the truth separate, or
apart, from this belief, cannot do it; but they do it in concurence with each
other. So God has made the connection between believed truth, and a justified
state. And to talk of being justified by the truth, in any other view of it but
this, which God has appointed and revealed, is really delusive, to say nothing
worse.

IT may be further objected, if by faith, in the buisiness of justification,
any thing is meant besides the obedience and blood of Christ, the truth
believed, then, in order to our being justified, we must be possessed of some
qualification or requisite, distinguishing us from other sinners; to suppose
which would be dishonorary to the "work of Christ finished on the cross", as
though it was not of itself sufficient, but needed something in us to make it so.

I ANSWER; it is impossible, in the nature of the thing, we should be believers,
and not be possessed of a qualification or character, distinguishing us from
unbelievers. Faith in the only begotten son of God stamps a character, and the
greatest and most interesting one too, upon the subjects of it. They are now
quite different men from what they were. They have upon them that mark of God,
which discriminates them from all other sinners in the world. Nor can they be
justified, unless they have this discriminating mark, or character. Our author
will, doubtless, esteem it highly heretical in any to say, that a real
difference in men's character must take place before they can be justified; and
that they are justified in this point of view, that is, as being possessed of a
character which makes an essential difference between them, and sinners in
common: But this is undoubtedly the truth; nor otherwise could they be
justified upon the gospel-plan. If the express words of revelation are worth
minding, it is beyond all dispute evident, that no man can be in a state of
acceptance with God, till he is a BELIEVER. And it is as evident, if words are
any thing more than unmeaning words, that a man's being a believer
DISTINGUISHES him from all that are not, and fixes an ESSENTIAL DIFFERENCE
between his character, and their's. Men's being believers, or unbelievers, is
indeed the GRAND DISTINCTION, the scripture makes between them; and it is so
interesting, that salvation or damnation depend upon it. Our author is pleased
to say page 287. "that the gospel considers all whom it relieves as guilty and
unworthy, destitute of righteousness and every qualification and
recommendation, perfectly on a level with all their fellow creatures, and
seeing no difference betwixt themselves and those that eternally perish -- When
it first speaks peace to them, it intimates no difference betwixt them and
others". If he had been speaking here of sinners, as they were viewed by God,
when he purposed, contrived and revealed the gospel-method of life, it is readily
owned they were all destitute of every qualification, and without distinction
the children of wrath. It was "while they were sinners", and as such deserving
death, that "God commended his love toward them", in opening the gospel-scheme
of hope. But to say, that there is no difference between the character of
"those that eternally perish", and those that are "relieved by the gospel", at
the same time when "it speaks peace to them", and that it "intimates no
difference betwixt them", is grossly and boldly to contradict the sacred writers
of the new testament. Can a man, upon the foot of the gospel-revelation, be
relieved and comforted, while an unbeliever in Jesus Christ? If he can, he may
have relief, and enjoy comfort, at the very time he is actually in a state of
damnation; for the scripture directly affirms, John 3.36. "he that believes
not the son, -- the wrath of God abides on him". But if it is necessary he
should believe, before he can be relieved and comforted* he must then be a
different man from what he was, and so different as to differ from all
unbelievers in the world. God views him in this light, when he speaks peace to
him; and he must view himself as God does, or he can find no relief upon the
foundation of Christ and the apostles. It Is true, a man, when he becomes a
believer, will see his own unworthiness and sinfulness, in a far stronger light
than he did before; insomuch that he will be filled with admiration at the
infinitely rich grace of God in contriving and revealing a way, wherein such a
guilty undeserving creature should be admited to mercy: and he will also see,
in the like strong point of light, that it is not in the virtue of his being a
believer, that he may comfort himself in hope: He will look beyond every thing
in himself, to "the work of Christ", as the true reason, the sole meritorious
ground, upon which he is accepted of God. But still, he must view himself, not
simply as a sinner, but a believing sinner, and in this respect different from
sinners in common, or he can find no relief from the gospel of Christ. It may
argue our author's being grossly inconsistent with himself to say, that he no
more than those he treats with contempt, will allow any man to be relieved by
the gospel, till there is a wide difference between him and other sinners; and
yet, this is the real truth. He says, page 286. "the scripture will keep us in
countenance, if we should affirm, that no man before he believes can have any
ground of hope, but what is fictitious and vain". And, in the next page, "there
can be no true piety nor good hope, but what follows upon faith". Faith then,
our author being judge, is previous to, and must necessarily go before, piety
and hope, or they will both be false and vain. And a man's relief from the
gospel will be like his piety and hope, a vain imagination, unless it is
preceded by faith. And, as our author makes hope, comfort, and indeed every
thing, in real christianity, to follow upon faith; so does he make the man that
has faith, a quite different man from what he was, and from all unbelievers
whatever. According to his mode of speaking, no man can be a believer, so as to
be savingly relieved, to whom "the work of Christ" is not "the truth"; who
don't "find it to be the truth"; who don't "possess, know and understand it":
Nor can a man either possess, know, or understand it, if it don't inspire him
"with love to it", a love that will show its reality in all instances of
"self-deny'd obedience": Yea, no man can know the truth in whom it is not "a
principle of life", analagous to that which denominated Lazarus one alive from
the dead. If this is a just account of one that is a believer, must he not be a
quite different man from what he was? Can it, with the least shadow of truth,
be said, that there is no distinction between his character, and their's who
will finally perish? Is there no difference between the man, "into whose mind
God has shined with the light of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ", and
those blinded sinners, who still "sit in darkness, and the region of the shadow
of death"? Is there no difference between the man, who has had planted in his
heart, by the power of the holy Ghost, "a principle of life", and those,
concerning whom the scripture says, "they are dead while they live"? One must
put out his eyes not to see an essential difference between believers and
others, as to their real character. Our author sometimes plainly saw, and as
plainly described, this difference; though, at other times, he keeps it out of
sight, and speaks as though there was no difference at all.
This we have seen to be as evident a truth as any in the sacred books of
scripture. And if God has revealed this as a gospel truth, for any to say, that
dishonor is hereby reflected on the obedience and blood of Christ, is, in
reality of construction, to reproach God. And it would indeed be a reproach to
Christ also, to introduce his blood as operating to the sinner's justification,
in a way that God has not appointed. "The foolishness of God is wiser than
men"; and "the wisdom of this world" is always found, in the end, to be
foolishness with God". If God has made it necessary, that the sinner should be
a believer, that is, a different man from what he was, and from what all other
men are, before he shall be justified, or, what means the same thing, before he
shall reap saving benefit by the obedience and blood of Christ, we shall give
all due honor to this "finished work" of his, while we consider it as available
to the justification of the believing sinner only. We now give it its proper
use, and should disgrace, rather than honor it, should we extend its use, and
attribute a sufficiency to it to a purpose God never designed it for.

THE plain truth is, God's making faith, in us, previously necessary to our
receiving saving benefit by Christ's obedience and blood, is the contrivance of
infinite wisdom; and, far from eclipsing the glory due to Christ, it is the
best conceivable method, by which he might have the whole glory ascribed to him
that is his due, in the great affair of the sinner's justification. For let it
be considered, it is by faith that the sinner beholds himself, in the strongest
point of light, as an undone wretch, unworthy of the divine notice, and a fit
object of wrath. It is by faith, that the only way is opened to his view,
wherein God may show mercy to him, and at the same time discover himself to be
glorious, both in his holiness and justice. It is by faith, he is kept from
ascribing his deliverance from wrath and hell to his own deserts, and is
disposed and influenced to carry his tho'ts up to the riches of divine grace,
as the true source of this blessing, and the perfect character of Jesus Christ,
completed by his death, as the true reason of its bestowment. Though he is in a
justified state, his faith teaches him, with adoring humility and thankfulness,
to acknowledge that he was bro't into it "freely of God's grace, through the
redemption there is in Christ". His faith will not suffer him to look upon faith
in any view, but that of a divinely appointed medium of putting him into the
enjoyment of a blessing, which was wholly owing to the grace of God, and the
redeemer's worthiness. His faith instructs and enables him to argue, I am,
being a believer, an object of the divine favor; but I became so, not in the
virtue of this character, not for the sake of it, but because the good God was
pleased of his mere grace to connect this character with the benefit of his
son's blood. His faith directs him, notwithstanding his being a believer, to
esteem himself, comparing himself with law and justice, as a sinner in common
with the rest of mankind, and worthy of nothing but the divine wrath; and to
attribute it to mere mercy, that his faith, by the gospel-constitution,
interests him in the everlasting advantages that result from the obedience of
Christ to the death of the cross. This is the influence of faith. And wherein
could God have contrived a more effectual method to secure to himself, the
honor of his own grace; and to his son Jesus Christ the honor of his work as
redeemer, than by making it necessary, that the sinner should be a believer,
previous to his obtaining the justification of life? The utmost care is taken
by this method to "hide pride from man", by filling him with the deepest sense
of his own unworthiness, and the most exalted apprehensions of God's grace, and
the Savior's righteousness.

SERMON VII. Human Endeavors, in the Use of Means, the Way in which Faith is
obtained.
GALATIANS II. 16. "Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ" --.


THE last time I spoke from these words, I opened to you the gospel-connection
between the sinner's believing, and his being justified. And it appeared, that
they were inseparably conjoined. There cannot be the one without the other. So
sure as a man becomes a believer, so sure is he put into a state of safety,
respecting the eternal world; and so sure as he remains destitute of faith, so
sure is he liable to the curse of the law, and the wrath of God.

THIS being the truth, a most interesting question naturally arises from it, in
regard of those, who, through the want of faith, are in a state of exposedness to
the "second death". It is this.

HOW shall we obtain faith? Are we to do any thing, or use any means, in order
to the obtainment of it?

THE answer some would give is, that faith comes not by any human endeavors,
or the use of any means, even under the greatest advantages men enjoy; but God
bestows it without any exertments of our's, all which are useless, and serve
rather to prevent, than promote, the obtainment of it.

BUT, surely, this is an answer that has no solid foundation in the word of
God. When Simon, the sorcerer, made it evident to the apostle Peter, that he
was not a subject of the faith that is saving, did he thereupon advise him to
the use of no endeavors, no means, in order to his getting into a better
state? Far from this, his direction is, Acts 8.22.
"repent, and pray God, if perhaps the though it of thine heart may be forgiven
thee". Would he have thus directed one, that was not possessed of the "saving
truth", if he had nothing to do, in order to his becoming possessed of it? He
must have though it it proper, that sinners, who, at present, are destitute of
saving faith", should yet exert themselves, in the use of means, in order to
obtain it; or he would not have exhorted this sinner to the use of "prayer",
and endeavors "to repent". If he could have done nothing toward a compliance
with this direction, or if what he could have done would have been of no use,
to no purpose, as to any spiritual advantage, why was it given to him? It must
needs appear, in this view, little better than an officious impertinent
application to him. And when the jailor fell down, in a trembling condition,
before Paul and Silas, and inquired, "sirs, what must I do to be saved"? Did
they tell him his concern was needless? His question impertinent? He had
nothing to do? No; but they answer in those words, "believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved". Acts 16.31.
Without all doubt, they imagined he both could, and ought to, do something,
relative to this bu^siness of faith: Otherwise, the direction they gave them
can have no intelligible meaning.

NOR did our Savior ever teach men, that they could do nothing toward
obtaining that faith which is unto life. He says indeed, "no man can come to me
except the father, which has sent me, draw him". Joh. 6.44.
And the apostle Paul speaks of faith as "the gift of God". Ephesians. 2.8.
But neither Christ, nor Paul, nor any of the Apostles, lead us to think, that
faith is the bestowment of God, so as to prevent all endeavors of our's; much
less so as to set them aside as totally useless and vain. The commands in the
new testament to believe in Christ; the promises encouraging men to do so, and
the threatenings denouncing damnation, aggravated damnation, against those that
will not be persuaded to believe the truth, but go on to practice
unrighteousness, are so many evident proofs, that they are considered as
agents, and accountable ones too, in the buisiness of faith; which they could
not be, if their own activity was wholly excluded, and God only, in opposition
to them, and all exertments of their's, was the giver of faith.

WHEN our Savior took occasion, from that exhortation, he had given his hearers
"work (so it is in the original) for the meat that endures to everlasting
life," John 6.27.
and from the question they thereupon asked him, "what shall we do that we may
work the works of God"? Ver. 28.
I say, when he took occasion from hence to tell them? Ver. 29.
"This is the work of God (the work God expects and requires you should work,)
that ye believe on him whom he has sent"; one would readily be inclined to
suppose, that they had something to do with reference to faith. It would be
unnatural, to an high degree, to say, the purport of his direction to them was
this, do nothing, sit still, and wait, till it shall please God to work the
work of faith in you. He must do all in this matter, no exertments of yours
are necessary; they are rather useless and unprofitable. And yet, this must be
our Savior's meaning, in real implication, if there is no concurence of man in
the bestowment of faith. See what is further said upon this text, under a note
some pages forward.


WHEN he preached, saying, "repent ye, and believe the gospel", Mark. 1.15.
had he it in view to inform his hearers, that he neither required, or
expected, they should do any other than fold their hands together, and quietly
wait, till God, without any concern or care of their's, had wro't faith in
their hearts? And yet, this must be the true import of what he preached, if it
be a doctrine of his, that God, in the bestowment of faith, prevents all
endeavors of our's.

WHEN he commissioned his apostles to "go into all the world, and preach, he
that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned", ^
was it his intention, that they should declare to mankind in his name, that
if, while they carelessly sat still, doing nothing, God should bestow upon them
the gift of faith, they should be saved; otherwise they should be damned? Would
such a construction do honor to the commission, with which he charged his
apostles? And yet, if all human endeavors to obtain faith are totally
insignificant, and God gives it without them, or rather to the casting contempt
on them, this is, in reality of sense, the true meaning of the gospel, he
employed his apostles to preach to the world.

WHEN, in answer to John's question, "art thou he that should come"? Matthew.
11.3.
he said to the two disciples that bro't it, Ver. 4, 5.
"go and show John those things which ye do see and hear; the blind receive
their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the
dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them": When, I
say, he sent this answer, did he mean to insinuate, that neither John, nor his
disciples, had any buisiness to consider this evidence of his being the
Messiah, or to use any care or labor to get satisfied, by means of it, that he
was the Christ? And yet, this, however impertinent it makes the answer, must be
its true implication; if, in order to their believing that he was this person,
their attending to, and impartially weighing, this evidence in proof of it, was
to no purpose; as any other endeavors of their's would have been also, since
they could not become the subjects of this faith, unless God, in prevention of
all though it and care of their's, should bestow it upon them.

WHEN he said, Mat. 11.21.
to the people of Chorazin and Bethsaida, "if the mighty works, which have been
done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago
in sackcloth and ashes"; did he intend this as nothing more than a declaration,
that God would have given repentance, the fruit of faith, to Tire and Sidon,
without any care or labor of their's, while he saw fit to withold this gift
from Chorazin and Bethsaida? And yet, this must be the sense, if, in
consequence of these mighty works, nothing could be done, or was requisite to
be done, toward this repentance, by either of these people; and God was to do
all without them And when he goes on to say, Ver. 21, 22.
"woe unto you Chorazin, woe unto you Bethsaida, it shall be more tolerable for
Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you"; does he mean, that they
deserved for their infidelity, and would, on account of it, have inflicted on
them, a heavier punishment than those sinners, God though it fit to destroy by fire
from heaven for their heinous crimes, when it was absolutely out of their
power, by any endeavors, in the use of any means, to do any thing toward the
obtainment of faith; and there was no way in which they could become the
subjects of it, but by the gift of God, without any care or concern of their's?
It is a most dishonorable reflection on the Savior of men to suppose, that he
should teach such doctrine; and yet, it is the very doctrine pleaded for, put
into plain english.

WHEN he complains of sinners, and blames them for not believing on him, as in
those words, "ye will not come to me that ye might have life"; John 5.40.
and again, "how often would I have gathered thy children together as an hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not"; Matt. 23.37.
can it be imagined, that he esteemed it a truth of his gospel, that they could
do no more toward coming to him, or believing in him, than toward bringing
the truth down from heaven that is the object of faith. Our author says, page
390. that faith comes not by any human endeavors, or the use of any means,
even under the greatest advantages that men can enjoy, but of that same
sovereign good pleasure which provided the grand thing believed. He expresses
himself yet more freely and fully, page 332. in these words; the conveyance of
the salutary truth to them for their relief, as much prevents every motion of
their will, as did the sending of the Savior into the world to die for men;
yea, as did the gracious purpose before the world was. He is surely mistaken in
what he has here said^ Otherwise, that would not be false, when affirmed of the
"object of faith", which is true, when affirmed with reference to men's
admiting this object into their minds". It would be palpably false to say, that
"sending the Savior into the world" might be the matter of a divine command, in
any sense obligatory upon men; it would be equally false to affirm, that it
would be sin in them, not to "provide the grand thing to be believed"; and it
would, if possible, be more grossly false still to insinuate, as though they would
be worthy of damnation, and an aggravated one, if they did not bring down from
heaven the "gracious purpose" that lay "hid in God" before the world was: And
yet, these are unqestionable truths, when affirmed of men in regard of "faith",
or their "believing the truth". It Is the command of God, obligatory upon all men
every where, to whom the evidences of the christian revelation are made known,
that they believe in the Savior he has sent into the world; they will be
chargeable with sin, if they don't believe in him, according to God's
requirement; and they will be justly liable to damnation, yea, a greater
damnation than other men, if they continue in unbelief, in opposition to the
evidence that has been laid before their view. No one can be in doubt about
these things, who has ever read, and understood, the sacred scriptures. But how
can it possibly be true, that it is men's duty to believe; that they will sin
if they don't believe; and so sin as to deserve a double damnation, if they
have no more to do in order to the obtainment of faith, than in "providing the
grand thing to be believed"? If there is no more of man, no more of his concern
and care, by any endeavors, in the use of any ^ns, in the acquirement of
faith, than in "sending the Savior" that is the object of this faith? The
"mission of a Savior", and the "providing the truth to be believed", are every
where represented, in the sacred books, as the SOLE work of God, his work
ABSOLUTELY, in opposition to all skill, will, and endeavors of men, in any
view whatever. But it is quite otherwise in regard of believing. This is
considered, in the inspired writings, as a matter in which men are ACCOUNTABLE
AGENTS; and may, as such, incur the charge of guilt, and become exposed to the
"damnation of hell", in the most heightened sense. But, with what propriety
could men be considered as AGENTS in the affair of faith? Or with what face of
justice, or equity, could they be liable to the heaviest damnation for the want
of it, if their being endowed with it was the work of God, so as to set aside
all though it or care of their's, and all endeavors they could employ, in the use
of any means, in order to the obtainment of it? It Is incredible, that men should
undergo the forest punishment for their unbelief, if faith is of God as much
without all human concurence, as his gracious purpose from eternity to provide
a Savior to die for them. If this is true, they might as equitably and justly
be damned for not "providing a Savior" for themselves, as for not believing in
him now he is provided, and revealed as an object to be believed on. The plain
truth is, so much of man must be allowed in the acquirement of faith, as to
give a real, as well as equitable and righteous, meaning to those numerous
sayings, not only of the apostles, but of Jesus Christ, which cast the blame
upon men themselves, if they remain in unbelief, and doom them to the hotest
place in hell for their wilful obstinacy hereby discovered. But this, most
certainly, is impossible to be done, if all human though it, care, and exertments
in every view, are as much excluded from the acquirement of faith, and with as
much truth, as from "providing and sending Christ", through whom alone we can be
saved from perishing, and have everlasting life. It would be shockingly absurd
to say, that men might be chargeable with sin for not "provi^ng the grand thing
to be believed"; or that they might be justly damned for not doing it. And why?
Because this is the SOLE work of God, his work absolutely without man, in any
sense whatever. And what should be the reason, that it is not equally absurd to
say, that men may be chargeable with sin, and so as to deserve the heaviest
damnation, for not "believing the record God has given of his son"? No
conceivable reason can be assigned for this difference, but that they have
"something to do" with reference to faith; whereas they had "nothing to do" as
to providing the object to be believed. A pious zeal to exalt the grace of God,
by sinking man into nothing, may be the pretense for making faith the work of
God, to the exclusion of "all human endeavors, or the use of any means, even
under the greatest advantages men can enjoy"; but it ought seriously to be
considered, whether if we reduce men to absolute nothings in the affair of
faith, that is, if we represent it to be God's work, so as utterly to set aside
all though it, or care, or endeavors of their's, of any sort, or in any view
whatever, we shall not, in true consequence, nullify all the
scripture-commands that require them to believe; rendering their unbelief an
innocent thing, for which they ought not to be punished, nor indeed can be,
unless that is done which is unfit and unrighteous. Can it be supposed, that
men should be called upon by God to do that which is "his work", and in such a
sense as that all doing of their's, with reference to it, in any shape, would
be impertinent? Can it be supposed, that they should be punishable for not
doing that which is God's work, to the entire exclusion of every thing in them,
relative to it, not excepting "the remotest wish of their heart"? All I contend
for is, that there may be so much of man, in the buisiness of faith, as to make
sense of the scripture, when it speaks of UNBELIEF as a sin that shall be more
intolerably punished, than the abominable uncleaness of Sodom; and to justify
the righteousness of God herein.
Is it credible, that they should be blameworthy for not doing that which is
God's work, and in prevention too of all attempts of their own, in the use of
any means whatever?

WHEN he, at one time and another, bespake his auditors in that most
compassionate language, "he that has ears to hear, let him hear"; can it be
supposed, that they could make no use of the powers they were endowed with,
about the things he preached to them? Or that their use of them was quite
needless, as God, without the concurence of human endeavors, is the giver of
faith to all who are ever the subjects of it? Surely, when he upbraids, and
fastens guilt upon those, as he sometimes does, Matthew. 13.13, 14. Joh. 12.37,
-- 40.
who, when they had "ears to hear, and eyes to see" other things, would neither
"see nor hear" the things he preached to them, though of infinitely greater
concern; he very evidently takes it for granted, that it was both the
expectation, and requirement of God, that they should have made use of their
faculties, with reference to these important matters of salvation; and that
they were highly criminal, as they neglected to do so. But why are they blamed
for this neglect, if they had nothing to do, till God had given them faith, in
the bestowment of which, all doings of their's are totally excluded? Can any
man, thinking honorably of Christ, suppose, that he would have upbraided these
persons for not doing that, which was God's work, not theirs?

IN fine, when he went into his own country, and preached in a synagogue there,
but met with no success, his hearers, though many, "being offended at him", why
is it remarked thereupon, in those observable words, "he marvelled because of
their unbelief"? Mark 6.6.
What occasion was there for wonder, that they did not believe in him, if they
could do nothing toward faith? Surely, the reason of his marvelling was not,
that God did not see fit to give them faith! And yet, this would be the only
true reason for wonderment in the case, if it is a truth, that faith is the
gift of God in a sense that prevents, yea, absolutely excludes, all previous
endeavors of men, in any shape whatever.

I AM free to own, notwithstanding all that has been said, that God is
sometimes "found of those who sought him not". I here use these words in the
sense, in which our author would interpret them; though, perhaps, it differs from
that which is expressive of the true meaning of the prophet Isaiah, (chap.
65.1.) from whom they are taken. Says the great Mr. How, in his "blessedness of
the righteous", page 282. The prophet is, in this text, foretelling the calling
of the Gentiles; who, while they remained such, did not, it is true, enquire
after God: But then, he expressly first tells us, personating God, I am sought
of them that asked not for me, that is, after the gospel came among them: And
then it is added, I am found ( upon this seeking plainly) of them that sought me
not, that is, of those who once, in their former darkness, before I revealed
myself in the gospel dispensation to them, "sought me not". As if he had said,
I am now sought of a people that lately sought me not, nor asked of me; and I
am found of them. But what is this to thy case, whom God has been, in the
gospel, earnestly inviting to seek after him, and thou, all this while,
refusest to comply with the invitation?
So he is in the "kingdom of nature", and in the "kingdom of grace" also. There
is, in this respect, an analogy in the divine conduct, in both these kingdoms.
That providential government, which concerns itself particularly for man,
sometimes prevents all human skill and industry in those discoveries, which
serve for the accommodation of life. The polar direction of the magnet obtruded
itself upon the first discoverer, when he was in quest of no such thing, being
occupied in some very different inquiry. And it is sometimes seen, that
favorable turns in providence, unforeseen, untho't of, by the persons benefited
by them, constitute the great difference there is between them, and others, as
to their after-situation and circumstances in the world. And thus it is
sometimes in that spiritual government, which God exercises over men. It was
previous to any endeavors of Saul, afterward Paul, and indeed preventive of
any wish in his heart, that he was suddenly and surprisingly changed, from a
persecutor of Christ, into a believer in him. And there may have been instances
of profligate and debauched sinners, who have as suddenly (if not in the like
surprising manner) been changed into good men, through faith in him whom God has
sent to be the Savior of a perishing world. But will any pretend, it is a
needless useless thing for men to employ their tho'ts, or time, or hands, about
temporal affairs, because it sometimes pleases God, without their skill,
industry, or will, to do that which greatly tends to their accommodation and
benefit in life? Would a man be deemed to be in the regular exercise of his
intellectual powers, should he deliberately sit still, and wait for some
extraordinary discovery from God, to supply the place of that use of his own
faculties, bodily and mental, in the use of which only he has reason to expect,
according to the established course of providence, that God will furnish him
with the good things his convenience or necessity call for? It would be like
folly, only heightened in degree, for persons, in the great ^ffairs of
salvation and another world, to lay aside all though it, care and pains of their
own, waiting for God to prevent, supersede, and cast contempt upon all human
endeavors, by immediately discovering the truth to them, so as that they shall
believe it to the saving of their souls. If God has sometimes, in this way,
made such discoveries to sinners, he has herein acted beside his ordinary
method in the kingdom of grace, as really as when, in the kingdom of
providence, he has prevented men's industry, by interposing his own wisdom,
without it, in bestowing signal favors upon them. The gospel-revelation every
where proceeds upon this supposition. It speaks of God, it is true, while acting
in the kingdom of grace, as the "giver of faith"; and it speaks of him also,
while ruling in the kingdom of providence, as the "giver of outward good
things". And why may not faith be his gift, as well as temporal prosperity, in
concurence with human endeavors, in the use of properly adapted means? Why may
he not, by the intervention of men's faculties, suitably employed, be the
bestower of spiritual, as well as temporal gifts? His agency in spiritual
matters, though different from what it is in temporal ones, and exerted to a
quite different purpose, may yet be adapted to the make and constitution of
men, and operate in concurence with their powers and endeavors. And this is
the way in which God ordinarily bestows spiritual good things, and faith in
particular.

NOT but that he has done a great deal, in order to the bestowment of faith,
without the concurence of men, without the interv^ion of human faculties, or
endeavors, in any view whatever. But still, he no more ordinarily BEGINS, than
carries on, the work of faith, as it respects it is existence and operation in
the hearts of sinners, without the concuring use of their powers and
endeavors. A particular illustration of this matter may be of use. It is
certainly of great importance to sinners to know, whether they have any thing
to do toward the obtainment of faith; and wherein their care and labor may be
of service, if they are at all needful.

IT shall be my buisiness to set this whole affair in a clear and full point of
light. In order whereto, I shall be distinct in showing, what it is God does,
relative to faith, preventive of all human endeavors; what it is men may and
ought to do themselves, in dependence on God; and, finally, that it is
ordinarily in concurence with these endeavors of their's, that God BEGINS, as
well as carries on, the work of faith in them.

AS to the first; -- it is readily and thankfully acknowledged, that God, in
the riches of his grace, has done some things in order to faith previous to,
and preventive of, all human though it, or labor in any kind.

THE truth to be believed, or, what means the same thing, the object of faith,
is wholly of God. This can, in no sense, be said to be owing to, or dependent
on, either the will of man, or any thing he was ever able to do. It Is the sole
work of God. Of his mere mercy he contrived, and then revealed the truth to be
believed. This he did, in a summary comprehensive way, to Adam; to Abraham; to
the jewish nation by Moses, though not plainly, but under various types and
figures; afterward, to this same people by a succession of prophets, through a
long series of time, but still in a manner that left them much in the dark:
And, last of all, by his son Jesus Christ, and his apostles, who opened his
everlasting counsels with reference to our apostate world, and the wonderful
method his infinite wisdom, moved by his boundless love and compassion, was
pleased to contrive and execute for the redemption of sinners. This, in
general, is the truth to be believed; and it is the gift of God, his free gift,
preventive of all human though it.

AND as the truth to be believed, so the evidence in proof of its being the
truth, is wholly of God. It must be so wherein the truth carries with it the
signatures of God, and is evidential of its own divinity; because it came
solely from him, previous to any skill, or will of man. And it is so also in
regard of its external evidence. It was God that inspired holy men, in old
time, to foretell the coming of Christ to be the Savior, and to publish those
prophetic marks by which he might be distinguished from all pretenders, when he
should come. It was God, dwelling in his son, while he appeared in our flesh,
that did those miracles, wonders and signs, which gave credit to his character
as an approved messenger from heaven. And it was God that wro't those numerous
and diversified wonderful works, (in the doing whereof the apostles were only
instruments) which are the public, standing and authentic proof of the divinity
of the gospel-doctrine. These are the testimonies of God; and, by these, he has
witnessed from heaven, that he sent Christ, and his apostles; and that the word
they preached was the truth. And in thus bearing witness to the truth, God is
every thing, and man nothing. God only is the author of this ground or reason
for faith, preventive of all human skill, contrivance, or though it.

THE special part assigned to the holy Ghost, in carrying the redemption by
Christ into effect, is wholly of God likewise. This divine agent does nothing,
in this great affair, but in consequence of a constitution, which took rise
from God, without any thing of man. If he disposes and enables the sinner to
believe the truth as it is in Jesus, he does it (whatever is the manner of his
operation, which is not the thing we are now considering) as having been
appointed and authorized hereto. And whatever he does in the kingdom of God,
and Christ, whether in beginning, carrying on, or completing, the work of
faith, or any other good work, he does it as the constituted dispenser of
divine grace. And this merciful establishment of God, providing for the
sinner's being endowed with faith, and every other spiritual quality, is
entirely of himself, and was made previous to all skill, will, or even the
remotest though it of man. How far the divine Spirit may make use of human
faculties and endeavors, in the execution of his office, will be considered
afterward; but his being vested with his office, and deputed the grand agent
in producing faith, and other graces, in the hearts of the sinful sons of Adam,
was previous to all human doing, or thinking, with reference hereto. It was the
sole contrivance, and constitution of God. There is nothing of man in it, in
any view whatever.

THERE are yet other ways, in which God prevents men's endeavors, and
sometimes even their tho'ts, in order to their obtainment of faith. He has done
this by sending "the word of truth", unsought, unlooked for, by them. An
observable instance, in this kind, we have in the 16th chap. of the Acts, by
consulting which you will find, that as Paul, with two of his fellow laborers
in the Lord, had it in their hearts to preach the gospel to several places,
they imagined they should go through in their travels, they were "forbidden by
the holy Ghost", as the words are, in the 6th ver. "The Spirit suffered them
not", as it is otherwise expressed, ver. 7. And while they were at Troas, Paul,
in "a vision of the night," sees a man, having the garb and speech of a
Macedonian, coming to, and addressing, him in that affecting language, ver. 9.
"come over into Macedonia, and help us": Upon which it follows, ver. 10. "and
after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavored to go into Macedonia;
assuredly gathering, that the Lord had called us to preach the gospel to them".
It was not therefore owing to any endeavors of the people of Macedonia, that
the gospel was bro't to them, but to the divine Spirit, directing these
ministers of Christ to carry it to them. And in this same way was the truth
made known, in the first days of the gospel, to the gentile nations. And this
is the meaning, at least in part, of those words of Isaiah, which the apostle
Paul applies to these nations, "I was found of them that sought me not, I was
made manifest to them that asked not after me". Romans 10.20.
And in those places, where the gospel has for many years been preached, and
where there are great numbers of believers in Christ, as the Jews are in Moses,
and the Turks in Mahomet, that is, by education and custom, and in this sense
only, the first thing giving rise to the obtainment of "like previous faith"
with the primitive christians, as to one and another of them, has sometimes
been preventive of all endeavors of their's. Some awakening providence has
roused their attention; or, without any foresight of their own, they have been
in the way of some word of truth, so adapted to their case, and so observably
pointing out their character, and danger, that it has, under the divine
influence, impressed their hearts, and given such a turn to their tho'ts and
pursuits, as has ended in the salvation of their souls. And there are few,
perhaps, in christian countries, especially among those who have for any time,
after their arrival at maturity of years, "walked in the way of their heart, and
in the sight of their eyes", but must ascribe their obtainment of faith, if
they really possess it, to something or other in the providence, or word, of
God, that first awakened their consideration, and this without any previous
foretho't, or endeavors of their own.

IN these and such like senses, God is beforehand with sinners. The truth to be
believed is certainly provided by him, without all care or though it of their's;
and so is the seal he has set to it as his truth; and the agency likewise of
the divine Spirit to give it an enlivened and efficacious virtue: Nor will it
be denied, that he sends the gospel, where it is not, commonly unsought for; or
that he often prevents the sinners who already enjoy it, by some providential
stroke, or word of truth, by which they are set a thinking in good earnest. But
still, the endeavors of sinners, in subordination to the agency of the divine
Spirit, are far from being superseded. Notwithstanding all that God does
without them, they will be altogether inexcusable, if they sit idle as though
they had nothing to do themselves, and all doings of their's would be useless
and vain. Which brings me,

SERMON VIII.
IN the next place, to point out to you what men may do, and ought to do, in
order to their becoming the subjects of that faith which is justifying. Only
let the two or three following things be previously observed, and considered.

THE first is; when I say, the sinner may do some things toward the obtainment
of faith, I don't mean, that the things which he may do are acts or instances
of the faith he is seeking, not being as yet possessed of it. This would be to
speak absurdly. There must be the principle of faith, before there can be the
exercise of it in any degree whatever. If therefore the sinner can do any thing
in order to faith, what he does must be considered as proceeding, not from the
faith he is endeavoring to obtain, but from some other principle of action.
While men are destitute of faith, it is a contradiction to say, that they can
either think, speak, or do any thing, as taking rise from this spring of
operation. To direct them therefore to such exercises, whether internal or
external, as must proceed from faith, in order to their obtaining faith, is, in
reality of construction, to direct them to nothing. Such a direction is in
itself a nullity; as truly so as it would be to direct a blind man, or a deaf
man, to perform some action that supposed the faculties of seeing, or hearing,
in order to their being endowed with them. The direction, in both these cases,
would be equally destructive of itself. It could mean nothing, unless to insult
those to whom it was given.

I AM therefore free to own, that the endeavors of sinners, in order to saving
faith, are not to be looked upon as acts of that faith they are at present
destitute of; nay, I am ready to allow, that none of their tho'ts, no motions
of their hearts, no workings of their affections, no exertments of themselves
in wishes, or desires, ought to be considered as exercises of this faith; but
so far as they may have experience of them, they are the effects of some other
principles they are endowed with. If any popular preachers, or others of more
solid judgment, have expressed themselves so as to lead one to think, it was
their design to put men upon endeavors that suppose faith, in order to their
being endowed with it, they are, without all doubt, chargeable with great
inconsistency: Though I would not charge them with the perception of it; much
less would I take occasion, from their being unwarily inconsistent with
themselves, to speak of them as deceivers that are going themselves, and
leading others, to the place of endless destruction.

ANOTHER thing I desire may be previously taken notice of is, that sinners,
though destitute of the faith that is justifying, have yet other principles in
their nature, that are capable of giving rise to a great variety of actions,
both inward and outward; and this, as it respects religion, and the salvation
of their souls. As intelligent moral beings, they are endowed not only with
perceptive powers, rendering them capable of admiting ideas into their minds,
the original materials (...) all knowledge; they are endowed not only with the
faculty of retaining these ideas there, (...) tending to them, of comparing
them one with another, of judging of their agreement or disagreement, and, in
these ways, of discovering a great variety of interesting truths: I say, not
only are they endowed with these capacities, but with liberty of choice, and a
power, in consequence hereof, of acting this way or that, without hindrance or
restraint. Besides all which, a variety of different passions and affections
are planted in their nature, rendering them capable of various and different
emotions, both agreeable and disagreable, and of being roused, in consequence of
them, to determinations and pursuits, as various and different, as the feelings
in their minds that are the occasion of them. Nor has sin destroyed any of
these powers of human nature; though it has greatly disturbed the regularity of
their operations. Sinners, notwithstanding all their depravity and guilt, are
still capable of thinking, reasoning, considering, reflecting; they are still
capable of choosing some things in preference to others, and of ordering their
conduct conformably to such choice; they are still susceptible of all the
emotions that are signified by love or hatred, joy or grief, hope or fear, or
any other passion or affection; and of being variously excited to action, by
means of them. A large fund, you see, is here opened for human endeavors, from
other principles besides that of faith which is justifying; and consequently
that sinners, who have not this faith, and can do nothing, not so much as exert
one wish, or though it, from this principle, may yet do a great deal from other
principles planted in their nature. And these are the doings that are meant by
those that are precedaneous to justifying faith, and spoken of as performed in
order to the obtainment of it.

THERE is yet another thing, I would desire might be previously remembered, and
this is, that, when I speak of what sinners may do, in order to the obtainment
of the faith that justifies, I would not be understood to mean, much less to
suggest, as though they could do any thing, relative to this affair, without God.
For as they derived all their powers of operation from him, so are they
absolutely dependant on him, not only for the continuance, but exercise, of
them. "In him they live and move", as it was from him that they received their
beings. It Is by his influence, sustaining their powers, and concuring with them,
that they are enabled both to think, will, speak, and do: Nor without this
influence could they exert any power, either of their souls, or bodies. But
besides this general influence of the first cause on all the doings of men,
there is another sort of influence of a superior kind, a spiritual one, that is
afforded even to sinners, while in an unjustified state, in relation to the
affairs of religion and salvation. It will not, I suppose, be denied by any,
who profess a regard to the sacred writings, that those who will finally perish
may yet be favored with the common illuminations, and ordinary assistances, of
the spirit of grace. God strove more than a hundred years by his Spirit with
the old world; though he afterward destroyed them for corrupting themselves, in
opposition to the strivings of his Spirit with them. And there are thousands in
the christian world, who will be "hurt of the second death", notwithstanding
the strivings of God's Spirit with them, in consequence of which they may have
been under convictions, awakenings, enlightnings, and perhaps imagined joys of
the holy Ghost. There is certainly a common influence of the Spirit of God,
which sinners may be the subjects of, while destitute of the faith that is
saving. Whenever therefore I speak of what sinners may do in order to this
faith, I would be understood to mean, not what they may do, in their own
strength, under the general concurence of God with their natural powers; but
what they may do with the concuring influence of the Spirit of grace, which may
be, and actually is, afforded to them. These are the doings I intend.
Accordingly, way being made herefor, I go on to declare what these doings are:
Nor shall I think it impertinent, if I am a little particular in pointing them
out. Let it then be said,

THEY may, by exerting their powers of reason and understanding, under the
advantages they are favored with, be so far persuaded of the existence and
perfections of God, as to be left inexcuseable if they don't do honor to him.
Thus much we are taught by an inspired apostle, who says, "that the invisible
things of God, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead: So
that they (the heathen nations) are without excuse, because, when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God". Romans 1.21, 22.


THEY may likewise so employ their natural faculties as to discern a difference
between moral good and evil; or, what means the same thing, between virtue and
vice, between what is commanded and what is forbidden by the natural law of
God. This, the same divine writer very evidently intimates, when he speaks of
the Gentiles, "who have not the revealed law of God", as "doing by nature the
things contained in this law", and as being "a law to themselves", though they
"have not this written law". Romans 2.14.


AND as they may, by the exercise of their intellectual powers, perceive a real
difference in the nature of actions as virtuous or vicious, so may they, in
like manner, become convinced in their consciences of the obligations they are
under to choose and pursue the former, rather than the latter; and be bro't to
view themselves as liable to the righteous resentments of God, wherein they
fail of doing so. To this purpose are those words, in the epistle to the
Romans, in which the apostle Paul, speaking of the Gentiles, and their gross
immoralities, in violation of the law of nature, says, "they do them"
themselves, and take pleasure in them that do them", while, at the same time,
"they know the judgment of God, and that they that commit such things are
worthy of death". Romans 1.32.


THEY may also, by using their implanted powers, be led into a persuasion of
the immortality of their souls, a future state of retribution, and their
obnoxiousness to punishment in that state, having been sinners against the "law
of their minds", which is the law of God; yea, in consequence of this
persuasion, they may, being moved with fear, earnestly inquire, what they shall
do to escape this wrath of God, they are sensible they are exposed to? This is
evident from the fore-bodings of vengeance in the consciences of many among the
heathen, and the various methods they have taken to appease their gods, and
avoid their angry resentments.

AND as they may, by care, in the exercise of their reason, under the common
blessing of God, be persuaded of the truth of natural religion, so may they, by
like care, in the use of the same faculty, under the ordinary influence of
heaven, become believers in revelation; what I here mean is, such believers as
multitudes were, in the days of Moses and the prophets, of Jesus Christ and his
apostles; who, though they were really believers, and did a great deal from the
faith they were possessed of, were yet destitute of that faith which is unto
life. The evidences in proof of revelation lie open to inquiry by all, who are
favored with the knowledge of them. And sinners, who are thus favored, may, if
they please, attend to them, and examine them with a becoming care and
diligence. And they will be under great advantage thus to do, if they have had
excited in them a sense of guilt and danger, by the truths of natural religion.
Their minds will now be prepared to take these proofs into their serious
consideration, and to deliberate upon them as matters in which they are nearly
and awfully concerned. And if they thus attend to, and examine them, they may,
under the illuminating influences of the Spirit that are common, become possessed
of a real faith in revelation, if it should not be the faith that is saving;
and it may discover its real being in them, by the influence it has upon them.
It may put them upon doing many things, they would not otherwise have though it of
doing; yea, it may strongly operate on their passions and affections, and in
this way excite them to great zeal, diligence and activity in their endeavors
to be saved.

They may, in consequence of their faith in revelation, though a faith short of
that which is justifying, be led, under the common guidance of the Spirit, to
see the sinfulness of sin, and the amazing danger it exposes the sinner to, in
a much stronger light than by their faith in natural religion; and this may
give a more through alarm to their consciences, awakening their fears, and
putting them upon inquiring, with more anxious solicitude, "what shall we do
to be saved."?

They may, in consequence of this faith, especially in this awakened state of
mind, heartily grieve for their past commissions of sin, and carefully
endeavor to be no more chargeable with such commissions for the future. They
may avoid the places and company that were heretofore the occasion of their
being "drawn aside and enticed". They may watch against temptation, and keep
upon their guard so as to "escape the pollutions of the world", and to a degree
that shall engage the attention of those acquainted with them.

THEY may also, in consequence of this faith, take up the practice of formerly
neglected duties, and may practice them, not only with external decorum, but
with a serious solemn frame of mind; as being inwardly and greatly concerned
about the affairs of religion and another world.

THEY may (to come to instances here) engage in the duty of reading God's word;
and they may perform it daily, and with such care, diligence and attention, as
to become possessed of a clear doctrinal knowledge of its truths; yea, they may
attain to such a knowledge of these truths, as to have excited in them an
earnest solicitude to be formed by them, under the enlightening influences of
the good Spirit, to a meetness for the inheritance of the sanctified by faith
in Jesus Christ.

THEY may employ their minds in religious meditation, taking off their tho'ts
from the world, the vanities, the gaities, the amusements, the pleasures, the
riches and honors of it; and fixing them on those invisible objects that are
adapted to soften their hearts, rouse their consciences, warm their affections,
enliven their passions, animate their resolutions, and preserve in them that
tenderness of spirit, with reference to the things of God and salvation,
without which they will soon become tho'tless and secure, the most dangerous
state they can be in.

THEY may attend the institutions of christianity, and may do it, not merely
because it is the fashion to do so, and it might be disreputable practically to
despise them by an habitual neglect of them, but with a real view to be
profited by them in the religious sense; at the same time, hoping and wishing
to meet with that which may, by the blessing of God, prove beneficial to their
souls.

THEY may, in special, be much in prayer to the God and father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the father of mercies, and God of all grace; and they may pray to
him, really believing that he may, through Christ, show favor to such sinners as
they are, however unworthy of his notice, however deserving of his righteous
displeasure. And they may continue in prayer; praying with great fervency,
importunity and perseverance, as those that are in real good earnest. And, as
the divine Spirit is the great agent in preparing sinners for the redemption by
Jesus Christ, they may be humbly urgent in their application to the throne of
mercy for the holy Ghost, to give them that view of the truth in its divinity
and glory, without which they will never be the subjects of the faith which is
"unto life". And they may pray for this enlightening influence of the Spirit,
as being deeply sensible of the need they stand in of it, and that without it
they shall not see the truth so as to believe it to salvation.

THUS sinners, though destitute, as yet, of saving faith, may do a great many
things in religion, from other, and lower principles. And, I may add, their
doings of this sort may be so like the doings that proceed from the faith, by
which "the just do live", that there may be no visible difference between them;
yea, the various affections of their souls, their love, their joy, their grief,
their hatred, their shame, their hope, their fear, may be set into motion, and
the appearance of it may so nearly resemble the working of the same affections
in those, who are the disciples of Christ in deed and in truth, that it may not
be easy, if possible, for bystanders to distinguish between them.

AND need I now say, that sinners ought to do these things? Their obligation is
inseperably connected with their capacity, and all along keeps pace with it. If
they are capable of doing, they are bound to do, and in every instance to which
their capacity extends. And herein indeed will lie their guilt, and the
aggravation of it, if they continue in unbelief; not that they did not, by
their own power, work faith in themselves; but that they did not do what they
might have done, were endowed with a capacity, and placed under advantages, to
do. And in this view of their case, they will be left without all excuse. They
must stand speechless before the throne of judgment; and when sentence of
condemnation is pronounced against them, it must be acknowleged to be just by
all angels and men.

IT IS true, they can neither abstain from sin, nor practice duty, from a
principle of saving faith, not being endowed with it; but, as they can do both,
from other principles, though of an inferior kind, shall they not do what they
can do? Are they not obliged to this? Is it not the reasonable expectation of
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ? It Is certainly fit they should avoid all acts of
(...) within their power, though the motives prompting them hereto should not be
those "spiritual" ones, that influence those that are "in Christ Jesus". Should
they cease from doing evil through fear of that "indigation and wrath, which God
has revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men",
they would, without all controversy, act a more rational part, than if they
went on sinning, without restraint from these "terrors of the Lord". Nay, may I
not say, that they would act from a "good principle", though not the best and
highest, should they, being "moved with fear", make it their earnest endeavor
to abstain from even "the appearance of evil"? The apostle Paul though it this a
"good principle", though not the best; otherwise, he would not have "persuaded
men by the terrors of the Lord". If it was reasonable in him to "persuade them
by these terrors", it must be equally reasonable in them to be persuaded by
them. And wherein sinners are wro't upon, by any considerations proper to work
upon reasonable creatures, to forsake their evil ways, the principles they are
influenced by are "good in themselves", tho they should fall short of those
that are peculiar to justified believers. To be sure, it is infinitely better,
they should avoid sin from these principles, than that they should go on in the
practice of it; better in itself, better for them, better for the world: And it
would be more for the honor of God, and the interest of religion.

AND it is, in like manner, reasonable and fit, that men should be earnest and
diligent in their endeavors to do their duty, from the best principles they
are endowed with, though they should come short of those "spiritual" ones that
are the noblest. They may be excited to these endeavors, from the same motives
that excite them to avoid sin; some of which are "good in themselves", though not
of the highest kind. And will they not be altogether inexcusable, if they
don't, from these principles, endeavor to do their duty? Is it not far more
reasonable, they should do the best they can, from these principles, than that
they should live in the total neglect of their duty. Some it may be, will say,
they had better live in the omission of duty; they had better not pray, or
meditate, or read, or hear God's holy word, or attend on any of the
institutions of the christian religion, unless they can perform these duties in
that "spiritual manner", and in the exercise of these "superior principles",
which are peculiar to the subjects of "like precious faith" with those, who are
"in Christ Jesus". The answer is, what is this, in true purport, but to say,
that it is better for men, who are "reasonable" creatures, not to act
"rationally", unless they can, at the same time, act "spiritually", as true
christians, believers unto life? What is it, in reality of construction, but to
say, that it is best, most fit and right, not to obey the "dictates of reason",
not to hearken to the "voice of conscience", which is the voice of God, unless
it be done upon the highest and noblest, that is, truly christian principles?
What is it, in just consequence, but to say, that the total neglect of what
ought to be done is preferable to the doing of it, unless it be done in a truly
gracious manner? And what will follow upon this principle? It will unavoidably
follow herefrom, that rebellion against the authority of God, disobedience to,
and contempt of, his commands, are rather to be chosen than the highest regard
we can pay to them "merely as reasonable" creatures. It will likewise follow
herefrom, that idleness, doing nothing, would be better, in the religious
sense, than industry and diligence, in the common buisiness of life, where,
through want of a principle of "saving faith", we could exercise this diligence,
not "spiritually", but in a "rational" way only. But whoever made it an
objection against plowing, or merchandising, or following any of the
occupations of life, that he could not herein act from a principle of true
faith in Christ", though he might upon the highest motives that were "merely
rational". One would scarce think a man serious, should he plead thus. And yet,
the absurdity is equally glaring in matters pertaining to religion and another
world. It Is really a gross imposition men put upon themselves, when they say, or
think, they had better sit still, and do nothing, than engage in the
performance of the duties of piety, unless they are previously the subjects of
the "faith by which the just do live". They are "reasonable creatures", if they
an't "true believers". And ought they not to act up to their character as such,
by acting conformably to such "rational principles" as they are endowed with?
Can any thing be more unaccountably absurd, and strange, than that reasonable
creatures should object against doing their duty as well as they can, because
they cannot do it in the best manner? Especially, since if they don't do it,
they must live in neglect of God, and open contempt of his laws and government,
and hereby run the hazard of exposing themselves to the highest degrees of his
displeasure. The truth is, "rational" principles are good ones, though not those
"spiritual" ones that are the best. And it is better, upon all accounts, more for
our own good, and God's honor, that we should engage in duty, and perform it,
from these principles, in the best manner we can, than that we should live in
the perpetual neglect of it, for want of that "gospel-principle", which is more
noble and spiritual, true faith in Jesus Christ.
It Is certainly better to express a regard to the duty they owe both to God and
man, though they should do it from no higher a principle than the "fear of hell",
than that they should carelessly and habitually neglect it in disregard of this
awful place of punishment.

BUT what makes these endeavors of sinners most of all reasonable, and fit, is
the consideration, that they may, of the mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, turn
out, in the end, to their spiritual and everlasting advantage. And this leads
me to say, --

SERMON IX.
IN the last place, that it is "ordinarily" in concurence with "these endeavors"
of sinners, that God bestows his Spirit to "begin", as well as carry on, the
work of faith in their hearts. He does not exert his influence to this saving
purpose, so as to supersede, or set aside, all previous preparation, in the use
of means and endeavors. If he has done thus in here and there a single
instance, such rare cases ought not to be made the standard of his conduct in
this matter. It Is not the way in which he "ordinarily" proceeds.

AND for the proof of this, I may appeal to the experience of those, who have
"obtained like precious faith" with the primitive disciples of Christ, and are
clearly satisfied of it by its having formed them into new men, and disposed
and enabled them to all christian labors of love, and works of piety and
righteousness.

SOME of you, it may be, were going on in a course of sin, tho'tless of God,
and unconcerned about the great affairs of religion and another world, when, by
some awakening providence, or seasonable word of truth, you were roused to
serious self-reflection. But, after this, and before you had reason to account
yourselves believers unto life, were you not sorely pressed in your minds, from
a sense of sin and guilt? Were you not herefrom constrained to come to a stop
in this or the other vicious course? Were you not excited to take up the
practice of this and that neglected duty? Could you be easy without searching
the scriptures, in which you might find the words of eternal life? Could you
let slip favorable opportunities for prayer to the God, who sees in secret?
Could you avoid being present at those places, where you might be instructed in
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and of Christ? -- And are you not
able to say, at such or such a time, while consulting the sacred books of
revelation, or pouring out your souls in fervent prayer to the God of all
grace, or employing your minds in meditation on the invisible objects of the
eternal world, or giving your earnest attention to some suitable truths bro't
to you in the dispensation of the word, you had such a view of God, of Christ,
of yourselves; you had such a sight of the divinity, the glory and importance
of revealed truths, as leads you to think the work of faith was then wro't in
you with power? Especially, as, from this time, you have been enabled to walk,
in some good measure, "worthy of the Lord Jesus unto all pleasing", and of the
God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has thus called you into his
kingdom.

IT may be, as to others of you, the same work has been wro't in you, though not
in the same perceptible way. You have been concerned about your souls, and
their eternal well-being; you have seen yourselves to be sinners, and, as such,
liable to divine wrath; you have seen that there is no help for you, but by
grace through Christ; you have sought the favor of God, through him who has been
the "propitiation for sin", and have often done it, and with fervency and
importunity; you have waited upon God in the use of all appointed means, and
have waited upon him seriously and earnestly; wishing and hoping for a
blessing: And you are at length able to say, one and another of you, "whereas I
was once blind, I now see". The truths of revelation have appeared to me in
such a light, have so moved my heart, have so influenced my conscience, have so
bowed my will, have so turned the current of my affections, and have become
such a spring of action in me, in conformity to the revealed rule of duty, that
I cannot but hope I am possessed of that faith in Jesus Christ, which will
finally issue in "salvation with eternal glory".

I DOUBT not, I have here described "the way", in which some of you that hear
me, and many others, have, under the agency of the divine Spirit, been bro't
into the life of God, and a state of acceptance with him through Jesus the
Savior. And it is the "common way" in which the work of God is begun in those,
who effectually believe; unless we should except some, who might have been
savingly taught of God so early in life, that they know not how they became the
subjects of "unfeigned faith"; though they are well assured it really "dwells in
them".

AND the scripture accords with experience in pointing this out, as the
"ordinary way" of the Spirit, in making men partakers of the grace of God in
truth.

THE Elias, whose coming was (...) ^cede the coming of the Messiah, is spoken
of by the prophet Malachi, in those words, "behold, I will send my messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before me". Mal. 3.1.
John Baptist was "this Elias which was to come". Matthew. 11.14.
And our Savior, speaking of him, calls him "a prophet, and more than a
prophet"; adding this as the reason of so honorable a testimony concerning him,
"for this is he of whom it is written, behold, I send my messenger before my
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee". Matthew. 11.9, 10.
The language here used evidently alludes to Harbingers, and such other
Messengers, as were employed, upon the journeyings of princes, to take care to
level the ways, and remove all obstructions that might incommode their passing
along, or render it less convenient. In analogy herewith, John's buisiness, as
the Messiah's harbinger, was, not only to give notice of his approaching
advent, but to prepare the way for it by removing obstacles, and begeting in
sinners a disposition suited to the design of it, and that might tend to put
them in a readiness to hearken to his doctrine. And this he did, at least in
part, by rousing them to a sense of danger, that, being "moved with fear", they
might endeavor to avoid it. That was the spirit of his preaching, at least to
some of his hearers, "who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring
forth fruits meet for repentance. -- The ax is laid to the root of the trees;
therefore every tree, which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he
that comes after me is mightier than I, -- whose fan is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner; but he
will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire". Matthew. 3.7, -- 12.
But, if all previous preparation was useless, why was John sent to make it? If
it were to no purpose, that sinners should feel their exposedness to wrath, or
endeavor to escape it, why was he so earnest in addressing to their fears, and
warning them to flee from it? If it were as likely they should obtain faith in
Christ, without perceiving the misery of their present condition, as by being
in an awakened state of mind, discovering to them their absolute need of a
Savior, why all this expense of labor to excite in their minds a sense of sin
and guilt? It must surely be of some service, in order to faith in Christ, to
have produced in us such a perception of our perishing circumstances, as may
dispose us to look out for help: Otherwise, it will be difficult to point out
the special pertinency of John's office, as God's messenger, "to prepare the
way" for a reception of Christ as the Savior of sinners.

AND our Savior himself both began, and carried on, his public ministry, by
using "means" to prepare his hearers for, and persuade them to, a cordial
reception of "the truth". It Is accordingly observable, he did not think it
enough "barely to preach the gospel", but called upon men to "believe it"; at
the same time, exhibiting to their view "such evidence" of the divinity of his
mission, and the truth of what he taught, as was naturally and powerfully
adapted to awaken their attention, and dispose and engage them to give credit
to the messages he delivered to them. No one can reasonably doubt of this, who
has ever been at the pains to read the writings of the Evangelists. We are
there told of the numerous miracles, which our Lord wro't upon the sick, the
lame, the dumb, the blind, the deaf, the possessed of the devil, yea, upon the
dead in raising them to life; and that he performed these miraculous works,
that men might believe in him as the Messiah, the promised Savior. But what
occasion was there for these exertments of almighty power, if no means were to
be used with men in order to faith? Or if their attending to them was neither
their duty, nor "the way", in which they might expect to be wro't upon to
believe? Our Savior certainly had it in view, by "the miracles, wonders and
signs, which he did in the midst of the Jews, to approve himself a man of God
among them". And, if he did these works of wonder to give credit to his
character as one sent of God, it would be highly reproachful to him, either not
to look upon them as a well-fited means to answer this end, or not to esteem it
the duty of those, who were favored with them, to pay a due regard to them;
endeavoring, in "this way", to become convinced of the truth of his
pretensions and doctrine. Had our Lord "barely declared the truth, leaving it
wholly with God to make converts", it might have been though it, that men had
nothing to do but wait for the exertment of his power to work faith in them.
But his conduct was quite the reverse of this. Besides "declaring the truth",
he offered such evidence to convince his hearers, that it was the truth, as
left them not only inexcusable, but exposed to a heavier damnation than other
men, if they would not attend to it, that they might be convinced by it. So he
told the people of Capernaum, who continued in unbelief, notwithstanding "the
mighty works he had done among them" Says he, to them, "it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for you". Matthew.
11.24.
With what pertinency, I may rather say, with what justice, could our Lord thus
address to these people, if, after he had done so many wondrous works among
them, to engage their attention, and persuade them to believe in him, it was
not their duty to exert either their wills, understandings, or any power either
of their souls or bodies, in order to faith? If it lay wholly with God, without
these means, or any other, or any endeavors of their's, to bestow it on them?
Was it true, that their using care and diligence in seriously and thoroughly
examining into the force of these proofs of our Lord's character, with earnest
prayer to the God of all grace that they might be led into a right judgment
upon them, was not "the way" to obtain faith, any more than if they sat still
and did nothing, why are they blamed for their unbelief? What should make it a
damning sin in them? These are difficult questions, and, as I imagine,
impossible to be answered upon the impleaded supposition. The plain truth is,
to say, that human endeavors, in the use of means, is not "the way", under the
Spirit's influence, in order to faith, is virtually, and in reality of sense,
to say, that our Savior needlessly used means with men that they might become
believers; that they will not be blameworthy, should they stupidly neglect to
give these means a serious consideration; and that they deserve no punishment,
much less an aggravated one, for any folly, or sin, they are hereby chargeable
with. I see not, but these consequences are strictly just; and that even the
Scribes and Pharisees of old must stand justified in all their perverse
stubbornness, in opposition to Christ and his gospel, if the "only way" to
faith is to wait, without any endeavors, in the use of any means, till we are
made the subjects of it. The whole ministry of our Savior certainly proceeded
upon the contrary supposition, that means are to be used with men in order to
faith, that men must themselves give "due attention" to these means, and that
this is "the ordinary way", and the only one, in which they may reasonably hope
to become believers in christianity, to the saving of their souls.

AND the apostles contented themselves, no more than their master and Lord,
with laying before men the simple truth of the gospel", as "the only way" to
faith. Besides "preaching the truth", they endeavored to do that also which
might have a natural aptitude, a rational tendency, under the divine blessing,
to beget faith in their hearers. When the apostle Paul went into a synagogue at
Thessalonica to preach to the Jews, he not only declared Acts 17.3.
"that Jesus was the Christ", that he "had suffered", and "rose again from the
dead"; but "reasoned with them out of the scriptures" upon these heads:
"Opening", as well as "alleging, that Jesus was the Christ, and that he must
needs have suffered, and rose again from the dead". Ve^. ^.
And this was "his manner", the method he usually took. And surely, he hereby
meant to use a proper and well suited means to convince their understandings,
and persuade them to believe the truth. But if it did not lie with them to
attend to his reasoning, and consider his arguments; or, if their doing this,
in the best manner they could, had no tendency toward their becoming believers
in Christ, he most certainly took a great deal of pains for nothing. This
conduct of this apostle very evidently shows, that reasoning with unbelievers
is not only a proper, but the true "scripture-way", in order to their having
faith. And if so, that consideration, attention, and a readiness to receive
conviction upon good evidence, are suitable and fit, and indeed "the way" in
which the divine blessing may be expected: Otherwise, 'twill be hard to account
for this behavior of the apostle Paul.

And Philip, upon his being driven away from Jerusalem, by reason of the
persecution that had been raised against the church there, not only "preached
Christ" to the city of Samaria; Acts 8.5.
but "cast out unclean spirits out of many that were possessed with them, and
healed many that had been taken with palsies, and were lame". Ver. 7.
And it is observed, by the sacred historian, "that the people, with one accord,
gave heed to those things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles
which he did". Ver. 6.
If these miracles had no rational tendency, no moral aptitude, to awaken the
consideration of these Samaritans, and dispose them, with greater readiness, to
hearken to what he said to them, why did he work them? And why is their
attention attributed, under God, to their "seeing and hearing them"? He
certainly did more than "declare the simple truth". And what he did was
evidently designed, by God, to prepare their minds for the reception of the
truth; which was altogether needless, if no previous preparation was in the
least useful, and it might as well have been expected, God should have given
them faith without, as with it.

IN agreement with this conduct of Philip, it is observable, after the apostles
had been commissioned to "go into all the world, and preach the gospel", that
is, declare the simple saving truth, they received express orders from Christ
himself "to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high",
Luk 24.49.
that is, with power from heaven to work miracles. They accordingly tarried in
the city of Jerusalem; and, "on the day of Pentecost", they were endued with
this power: For they were "filled with the holy Ghost", and, in consequence
hereof, "began to speak with other tongues", so as that "devout men out of
every nation under heaven heard them speak every man in his own language". Acts
2.4, 5,6.
And what was the effect? The minds of many were awakened to attention, and in
"this way" prepared to hearken to what they had to say. Upon which, the apostle
Peter preached a long sermon to them, wherein he not only declared, that "that
same Jesus whom they had crucified, was the Christ"; but endeavored, by clear
and strong reasoning, both from "prophecy" and "miricles", to make it beyond
dispute evident, that he really was so; as may be seen at large in the second
chapter of the Acts. More was here done than laying before the hearers "the
saving truth". Proper care was taken, and suitable means used, both to rouse
their attention, and set the evidence of our Lord's character in a clear and
convincing point of light. The apostles had it in their view to make believers
of these Jews. And "the way" they took, in order to it, was not merely to tell
them, that "Jesus was the Messiah"; but to exhibit also such evidence in proof
of it, as was wisely and powerfully adapted to produce in their minds a
conviction of this truth. And it appears, from what follows, that they took the
right method. For, upon their giving such undeniable proof, "that Jesus was
both Christ and Lord", great numbers were so "pricked in their hearts", as to
be put upon inquiring, with sober seriousness, "what shall we do"?

IT may be worth remarking here, though the distressed state of mind these
hearers of Peter were now in, signified by their being "pricked in their
hearts", was owing to the credit they gave to the "truth," as preached by this
apostle, and confirmed with irrefragable evidence; yet no one knows, or is
capable of knowing, that their faith now was of the justifying kind. It Is true,
"three thousand" of these heare^s, upon being "added to the church, continued
steadfastly in the apostle's doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in prayers". Acts 2.41, 42.
But this they might do, collectively considered; while yet, speaking of each
one individually, they might not. Or, should it be supposed, that every
individual, constituting this collective body, "continued steadfast", it is far
from being certain, or indeed so much as probable, that their faith, when first
b^o't under distress, was of the saving kind. It might, under the influence of
the Spirit, if not different from their's who perish, be productive of this
conviction; they might also, in virtue of it, be "added to the church", and
"have fellowship with the apostles in breaking of bread, and in prayers"; and
further still, this faith of their's, though short, at present, of that which is
saving, might afterward, under the special illuminations of the Spirit, in
their use of the institutions of christianity, become that "faith by which the
just do live", and are "continued steadfast". And this, perhaps, was no uncommon
case in those primitive times; nor has it been in other ages since. Upon which,
it is natural to observe the propriety of their joining in an attendance on the
institutions of the christian religion, who have so much faith in its divine
origin, as to be herefrom pierced in their minds from a sense of sin and guilt,
and put upon inquiring, "what shall we do"? They should, in conformity to the
pattern here set us by the apostle, be directed to be "baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ", if they have not been baptized already; and also to join in
fellowship with christians "in breaking of bread, and in prayers", and in an
attendance on all the duties of piety. If their faith is not as yet saving,
this is a proper means in order to its becoming so, and, as I imagine, the best
they can be advised to.

I SHALL not think it a needless going out of my way, to take some notice here,
before I proceed, of the compassion of Jesus Christ toward those, who had so
much faith in natural, or revealed religion, or both, as to be in distress of
soul from a sense of sin and guilt. Do we ever find him telling this kind of
persons, their anxiety was needless? There was no need of any such solicitude
-- It answered no purpose -- They might as well be without it -- There was no
difference between them, and the most careless and secure sinners on this side
hell, as to the likelihood of their finding the saving truth. Far from giving
any such insinuations, he always treated them with singular tenderness;
directing them, in the most endearing manner, to the only way in which they
could find relief.

IT IS accordingly observable, those who "labor, and are heavy-laden", are
particularly told, by the merciful Jesus, where to go that they may "find
rest". Matthew. 11.28.
It would give but a poor jejune sense to his words, should we explain them
merely, or only, of a "rest" by the gospel from those ceremonious rites, which
were "a yoke" that neither the then Jews, nor their fathers, "were able to
bear". It Is more honorable to our Savior to suppose, he is here principally
speaking of those, who labored under a sense of guilt, such a sense of it as
filled their minds with fears that were grievously burdensome. Sinners
therefore, that have "only so much faith" as to be awakened to see, and feel,
the greatness of their guilt and danger, are here called upon, as it were by
name, to repair to Christ, in whom they may find ease, by being freed from
their guilt, and put into a state of safety respecting another world. And it is
surely an advantage to be in this state of mind, rather than in a stupid and
insensible one, if those, who have been bro't into it, are particularly taken
notice of by the Savior of men, and invited to "go to him" that they may find
rest unto their souls".

THIS same kind of sinners, pointed out by another metaphor, are, in like
manner, mercifully directed, by Christ himself, to go to him for the supply of
their spiritual wants. "In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink". Joh.
7.37.
"If any man thirst". The persons here described are those, who are in pain and
distress, through anxious tho'ts and cares about their condition in the future
world. The description is certainly applicable to such. Where there is the want
of justifying faith, there may be a "thirst", and a very severe one too; that
is, an uneasy distressed state of mind, resembling that of the body when a man
craves drink, and is greatly pained for want of it. And this kind of thirst is
more proper to sinners who are not believers to salvation, than to those that
are. Hence that remark of our Savior, "he that believes on me shall never
thirst". Joh. 6.35.
And again, "whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him, shall
never thirst" Chap. 4.14.
This spiritual water, when spiritually drank off, quenches the flame which
before occasioned the thrist Our Lord therefore proposes to those "who thirst,
to come to him, and drink", as that which would quench their thirst, that is,
remove their uneasiness by removing the cause of it.

THE same kind of sinners still are chiefly meant by the "brokenhearted and
bruised", for whos^ relief our Savior seems particularly concerned. We are
told, that he read, in the synagouge at Nazareth, those words of the prophet
Isaiah, Chap. 61.1
"the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord". Luke
4.18, 19.
Upon which, having closed the book, he said, "this day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears" Ver. 21.
He was the person pointed out in this prophecy; and it was fulfilled in his
coming upon this merciful design, among others, "to heal the brokenhearted",
and "to set at liberty them that are bruised? The heart may, with all
propriety, be said to be "broken", and "bruised", when in a state of anxious
fear and distressing concern, from a sense of sin and wrath. And this
scripture, which was fulfilled by the ministry of our Savior principally
respects sinners, whose hearts are, as it were, broken and bruised with painful
sensations from their exposedness to the curse of the law, and the wrath of
God. For they eminently are the persons, who want to be "healed of their broken
hearts", and to be "set at liberty from their spiritual bruises". This has been
already done for justified believers. -- But to leave this digression, if it
should be so called, and to go on,

NOT only were "means" used by our Savior, and his apostles, with sinners as
"the way" in order to faith, which, in the nature of the thing, supposes it to
be their duty to pay a due regard to them, as they would hope to be the
subjects of this faith; but they are represented, in the sacred books, as being
"more or less prepared", in a "better or worse state of mind", for the
reception of the truth, upon the use of means with them.

REMARKABLE to this purpose are those words of our Savior to the scribe, who
"answered discreetly" to what he had been saying, "thou art not far from the
kingdom of God". Mark 12.34.
If he was no nearer than he would have been, had he answered foolishly as one
that was under the entire influence of false notions of God, and his
commandments, what intelligible meaning can be pu upon these words? They very
obviously import our Lord's approbation of what he said concerning the divine
being, and the divine law; that he esteemed him less prejudiced, more knowing,
and better prepared to hearken to the doctrine of the Gospel, than many of his
profession, or than he himself might have been heretofore; and that he was, in
this view of his character, not at so great a distance from the kingdom of God
as he might have been, and as many others actually were. Our author has said,
in order to ward off the force of this text, Jesus often put the question, in
such a manner, to his adversaries, as to extort discreet answers from them. A
man may be very near the kingdom of God in point of argument, who is very far
from it in every other respect. Page 341. This, as I judge, is the least
plausibly said of any thing in his letters. Could he have given our Lord's
words a better turn, in favor of his cause, I doubt not he would have done it.
I have no other return to make, as I think what he has offered deserves no
other, than that of his, upon another occasion, "let it avail with whom it may
avail".
Not to be far from a thing means, if it means any thing at all, not to be at
the greatest distance from it, to be nearer to it than it is supposeable one
might be, or than others are. But if this scribe, notwithstanding his "discreet
answer", and the unprejudiced teachable disposition thereby discovered, was at
the SAME DISTANCE from the kingdom of God, he would have been, had he
discovered gross ignorance, prejudice and perverseness, with what propriety
could our Savior declare concerning him, that he "was not far from the kingdom
of God". Surely, he does not mean by this saying, that he was at as great a
distance as any of the scribes and pharisees, in that day! If he meant thus, he
has certainly expressed himself in a manner not at all adapted to convey his
sense. His intention, so far as we may judge of it from the most obvious and
natural import of his words, must have been to represent this scribe, in
consequence of the disposition he discovered, as really "nearer the kingdom of
God" than others, who were of a worse disposition; or than himself would have
been, had their disposition been his. And it is from hence evident, beyond all
reasonable dispute, that it is not a matter of indifferency, in order to the
obtainment of faith, what state of mind sinners are in, when the truths of the
gospel are presented to their view. They may be in such an one as will argue
the utmost distance from the kingdom of God; or they may be so disposed and
prepared as to be at a less distance; yea, "not far from it", as was the case
of this scribe.

THERE is another saying of our Savior, of the like import with this we have
been upon, and that may reflect still more light upon it. It Is his declaration
to a number of the jewish priests and elders in these words, "verily, I say
unto you, that the publicans, and the harlots, go into the kingdom of God
before you". Matthew. 21.31.
If, in order to that faith which admits into God's kingdom, the minds of
sinners need no previous preparation, but this faith may be, and always is,
bestowed so as to supersede any thing of this kind, these jewish priests might
as readily have gone into the kingdom of God, as the publicans and harlots: Nor
would there have been any just reason to suggest, much less to say with such
positive asseveration, that the latter would go into it before the former. One
would naturally suppose, from this saying of our Lord, that these priests and
elders were in a more blind, hardened and perverse state of mind, than the
publicans and harlots; and less fited, on this account, for a reception of the
gospel, in the "ordinary way" in which God enables persons to receive it. And
from what follows, it very evidently appears, that this was the real truth of
the case. Our Lord goes on, "for John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and harlots believed
him: And ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward that ye might believe
him". Ver. 32, 33
This same though it is expressed more strongly by the evangelist Luke. Luke 7.29,
30.
"And the publicans justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John; but
the pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being
not baptized of him". The plain truth is, John, the messenger of God to prepare
the way for the Messiah, had endeavored to awaken the fears of these jewish
rulers, and excite in them a disposition that would render the coming of Christ
acceptable to them; but he could make no impression on them, though what he said
wro't powerfully upon the publicans and harlots. They were therefore more
obstinate and perverse, and for that reason less likely, in the "usual way" of
God's dealing with sinners, to become the subjects of the Messiah's kingdom.
And this our Lord very emphatically represents in Luke 7, from the 31st to the
35th ver. where he seems to be at a loss to describe their obstinacy, and
scarcely to know by what comparison to point out their perverseness, in not
being wro'^ upon by one way of teaching or another. As children in a froward
peevish humor, when playing together, do every thing contrary to what their
companions desire and expect: So they interpreted crosly every thing that was
said or done, either by John the forerunner of Christ, or by Christ himself. No
arguments could persuade them, no manner of behavior remove their unjust
prejudices. It Is quite evident, from what our Lord has thus said of the
obstinacy, insensibility and perverse spirit of these jewish teachers, that
they were, upon this account, less fited and prepared to be wro't upon to come
into his kingdom, than the publicans and harlots, who, being not so hardened,
were more easily susceptible of good impressions, and therefore more likely,
according to the "common way" of God's dealing with sinners, to go into his
kingdom before them.

AND the scripture proceeds upon this same though it, whenever it speaks, as it
often does, of a greater difficulty in the way of the conversion and salvation
of some sinners than of others. There are many texts to this purpose. The
recovery of one "accustomed to do evil" is compared to the "ethiopian's
changing his skin, and the leopard his spots"; denoting the extreme difficulty
of the thing; Jer. ^3.23.
a "rich man's entering into the kingdom of God" is said to be harder, than for
a "camel to go through the eye of a needle". Matthew. 19.2^.
It Is affirmed of the man, "into whom the unclean ^it entered, after he had been
cast out", (...) "the last state of that man is worse than the first"; Matt.
12.43, 44, 45.
that (...) would be more har^ned in sin, and, for that reason, in greater
hazard of perishing in infidelity. It Is, in like manner, declared of those, who,
having "escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, are again entangled therein and overcome", that "the
latter end with them is worse than the beginning", that is, they are in a worse
state, a more difficult and dangerous one, respecting their souls and
salvation. 2 Pet. 2. 20.
And it is also remarked of those, who were "once enlightened, and had tasted of
the good word of God", that if they should "fall It may be worthy of notice
here, the scribes and pharisees are told by our Savior, upon occasion of their
imputing a miraculous work he had wro't, to his confederacy with Beelzebub, that
"this blasphemy against him", however sinful, "might be forgiven"; but if they
should thus blasphemously speak against the holy Ghost", by maliciously
attributing the miracles, which would soon be wro't by power communicated from
him, to the influence of the devil, they should never be forgiven", Matthew. 12.
31, 32. And why? Surely, not for want of power, or mercy in God; power to
subdue their obstinacy, or mercy to triumph over their unworthiness; nor yet,
for want of merit in the atoning blood of Jesus Christ: But because they would,
in this case, withstand the highest evidence, the wisdom of God saw fit to lay
before them for their conviction; which evidence was "the way", and the "only
one", by which, as a means, he would work the work of faith in them. So that
men, by the increase of their obstinacy in sin, may increase the
"improbability" of their being savingly wro't upon; yea, they may become so
hardened and perverse, as to be beyond the possibility of obtaining this mercy.
It were to be wished, sinners were more seriously tho'tful of the danger of
hardening themselves in iniquity.
away", it would be "impossible to renew them again to repentance"; importing
the vast difficulty of the thing. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
The pertinency of these and such like texts very evidently turns upon this
though it, that it is easier, not in regard of the power of almighty God, considered
simply in itself; but in regard of his "usual method" of exerting it, in the
buisiness of salvation, to effect the conversion of some sinners, than of
others; and that the same sinners may, at different times, be at a nearer, or
greater, distance from the kingdom of God, and more or less likely to enter
into it, as they are more or less stupid and hardened, more or less fited and
prepared for divine teachings and impressions. If one state of mind is no more
adapted to a reception of the gospel than another; if the stupidly secure and
hardened in impenitency are in a disposition as well fited for the bestowment
of faith, as the awakened and deeply concerned about their sins; and are as
near to it, and may as probably obtain it, there would be no reasonable room to
say, that the conversion of one sinner was at all more difficult than the
conversion of another, or that the same sinner was in a worse state now than at
any time heretofore; the reverse of all which is most apparently the purport of
the above texts: Nor can they be understood, in any intelligible sense, unless
we construe them so as to take this into their meaning. If the affirmations, in
the above quoted texts, may be received as faithful sayings, what must we think
of our author's, so frequently repeated in his letters, in which he ridicules
those who speak of some sinners, as under a greater probability of obtaining
mercy than others? In which he declares he "can see no difference between
careless and convicted sinners", suggesting, that it would be "like an
impertinent sarcasm" to tell the latter, they were in "a more hopeful way"? In
which he puts the most hardened rebels, the vilest prostitutes, the most
notorious criminals, upon "a level with sinners who have been awakened to a
serious sense of religion, and an earnest care of seeking God as to "the
likelihood of their finding the saving truth? Which, as he says, needs no
preparative", but "comes to men always unsent for; not meeting them inquiring
after it, but overtaking them when runni^g away", page 84 293. His zeal to
serve some design or other has certainly carried him far beyond the truth; not
suffering him to exhibit it, in the plain simple manner, in which it lies open
to view in the sacred books. It is acknowledged, to the glory of the riches or
God's grace, that "the justification of life", in the gospel proclamation, is
"equally free" to sinners, be their character what it will; be they "virtuous
ladies, or the vilest prostitutes; the most revered judges, or the most odious
criminals, receiving the just sentence of death from their mouths; the most
servent devotees, or the greatest ring^ ^rs in profaneness and excess"; insomuch
that nothing is wanting, in regard of any of them, but "faith in Jesus Christ",
in order to their being actually interested in this inestimable mercy. Upon
their "believing in him whom God has sent", they shall, be they who they will,
or their former obstinacy in sin what it will, be instantly accepted of God,
and with an equal welcome. There is no reasonable room for dispute as to this,
it is so evidently the truth of revelation. But where is it said, in the inspired
books, or so much as insinuated, that there is no difference between one sinner
and another, as to "the probability" of their thus becoming believers? Where
are we told, that sinners are "as much in the way to faith", while running from
God as fast as they can, as when they are endeavoring, in the use of means, to
come to him? Where is it declared to be "as likely" they should meet with "the
gift of grace", while going on securely in a course of the grossestimpiety,
unrighteousness and intemperance, as if, being roused to a sense of sin and
danger, they should be earnestly engaged in "inquiring after God that they
might find him"? This is the doctrine of our author. But while he is so
strenuous in teaching, that there is no difference between sinners, as to "the
likelihood" of their becoming believers; but that the vilest and most abandoned
wretches are in "as fair a way", as any sinners whatever, to meet with the
saving truth, he ought to know, that he herein opposes, not the popular
preachers only, but Jesus Christ and his inspired apostles. For this is
certainly the truth, unless a man's being "not far from the kingdom of God"
means the same thing with his being "at the greatest distance from it"; unless
"his going into this kingdom before others" signifies, that those others are
"not at all behind him" as to this gospel privilege; unless his being "in a
worse state", respecting his obtainment of saving mercy, "than he once was"
imports, that he is in "as good a one as he ever was"; unless its "being
difficult", next to "impossible", that he should be "renewed to repentance", if
he relapses after he has been illuminated and tasted of the good word, conveys
this idea, that it is "as easy and as likely he should be now bro't to
repentance as it was at first". What sad work shall we make of the sacred
books, if we force them to speak at this rate? And yet, thus our author must
make them speak, or there will be a palpable contradiction between what he
says, and what they say. He may possibly imagine he is doing honor to God, by
exalting the riches and freedom of his grace; but neither the one, nor the
other, can be truly exalted, by telling men who are hardening themselves in
wickedness as much as they can, that they are "as much in the way" of the
saving truth, and "as likely" to find it, as the most serious, concerned and
inquisitive seekers after it. If this is not that encouraging men "to continue
in sin that grace may abound", which the apostle Paul repels with "a God
forbid" it is not easy to say what is.


UNDER this head, those texts also may properly be bro't to view which teach
us, that sinners by going on in their iniquities, in opposition to the checks
of conscience, and the warnings of God in his word, may be totally left of him,
and given up to the influence of their lusts, so as that their continuance in
life shall issue, not in the obtainment of faith, but their "treasuring up to
themselves wrath, against the day of wrath". To this purpose are the words of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 81.11, 12.
"my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would have none of me: So
I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts; and they walked in their own
counsels". In agreement herewith, the apostle Paul, speaking of those, who had
"changed the glory of God into an image, made like to corruptable man", says,
Romans 1.23, 24.
"wherefore, God also gave them up to uncleaness, through the lusts of their
heart". And again, Ver. 26.
for this cause, God gave them up to vile affections". And this same apostle,
prophesying of those, who, in aftertimes, "would not receive the love of the
truth, that they might be saved", says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
"for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness". Surely, these texts import the awfully sad
condition of the sinners, pointed out in them, beyond that of others. But what
sinners are they? Will it be said they are those, whose consciences are quick
and tender? Whose concern about eternal life is pungent and pressing? Who
earnestly seek God, if perhaps they may find him, and are importunate in their
applications to him, night and day, to take pity on them? Can it be supposed,
that such sinners as these are judicially given up of God to "hardness of
heart", and "blindness of mind"? That he has "cast them away from his presence,
and taken his holy spirit from them"? May it not rather be said, that the good
Spirit is actually striving with them? And that the state of mind they are in
is the effect of his influence upon them? Certainly, these are not the sinners
that are given up of God, so as that the "saving truth" shall not be
communicated to them. They are those, on the contrary, who are securely impious
and profane, openly vile and wicked, or secretly so under the cloak of
religion; they are those, who, not having the fear of God before their eyes, go
on in a course of mocking heaven by their religious hypocrisy, or of trampling
on the divine authority, by giving a loose to their lusts, commiting all manner
of iniquity with greediness Hence the many passages, in the sacred books, which
caution sinners "not to grieve the Spirit"; not "to resist the holy Ghost"; not
"to harden their hearts"; not to "depart from God", but to "take heed lest they
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin". It is too evident, from such texts
as these, to admit of a denial, that there is a "difference" between sinners,
as to the "probability" of their finding mercy; and that some are in a "more
hopeful way" in order to it, than others. And it is, in consequence of the real
and just import of the sacred texts that have been mentioned, that sinners may,
with all propriety, be called upon, and exhorted, and in a pressing manner too,
instantly to come to a stop, and not proceed a step further in their evil ways,
lest there should be "less likelihood" afterward, than there is at present, of
their finding "the salutary truth".

BESIDES what has been already said, I may properly remind you of those
numerous passages, in the inspired books, which expressly direct sinners to the
diligent use of endeavors as "the way" to God's saving mercy in Jesus Christ.

IN general, they are called upon to "consider their ways"; Hag. 1.5, 7.
to "remember, bring to mind, and show themselves men". Isa. 44.8.
They are called upon "to receive the instructions of wisdom, and not silver;
and knowledge rather than choice gold"; Prove. 8.10
to "cry after knowledge, and lift up their voice for understanding; to seek
her as silver, and search for her as for hid treasures". Prove. 2.3, 4.
They are called upon to be "ashamed and confounded for their evil ways"; Ezekiel.
36.32.
to "know, and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that they have
forsaken the Lord"; Jer. 2.19.
to acknowledge their iniquity in transgressing against him", Jer. 3.13.
and to "amend their ways and their doings, ceasing from doing evil" Isai.
1.16. Jer. 7.3.
They are called upon to "seek the Lord, and his strength"; Psalm. 105.4.
to "seek the Lord while he may be found"; Isai. 55.6.
and to "draw nigh to God", for that "he will draw nigh to them". Jam. 4.8.
In a word, they are called upon to "do with their might whatsoever their hands
find to do", as there is "no work, nor device in the grave, whither they are
going"; Eccls. 9.10.
to "labor, not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life"; Joh. 6.27.
to "enter in at the strait gate"; Matt. 7.13.
yea, to "strive", exert themselves with the utmost strength and vigor, to
"enter in at this strait gate", as "many will seek to enter in, and will not be
able". Luke 13.24
Can it be imagined, after such calls and exhortations, so frequently repeated,
and pressingly urged, upon sinners, that they have nothing to do, till they are
made the subjects of "saving faith"? They very solemnly command their
endeavors, in the use of means; and not only so, but most evidently point them
out as "the way" in which the work of God is ordinarily "begun", as well as
carried on, in them: Nor can it be reasonably though it, that the inspired writers,
in all parts of the bible, in the new as well as old testament, would have thus
commanded and urged men to exert themselves, if all exertments of their's would
be totally useless to any saving good; as not falling in with "the way of God"
in communicating the gift of faith It would be a dishonorable reflection on
them to suppose, they should be chargeable with so gross an inconsistency.

IT IS true, sinners cannot, in their own strength, do any thing to purpose in
the buisiness of religion; but, through Christ's "strengthening them, they can do
all things". And if the use of their endeavors is "the way", in which God is
pleased to communicate the aids of his Spirit, these endeavors, however weak,
insufficient and contemptible in themselves, become, in this view of them,
greatly serviceable; yea, they are of such necessary importance, that sinners
may perish without them: And should they perish, they must justify God, and
blame themselves: Whereas, if God bestows "saving faith" without human
endeavors, and so as to render them vain and useless, it will be hard to point
out the reasonableness, or fitness, of the above numerous
scripture-exhortations and commands; and still harder to reconcile them with
the justice of God, much more his goodness and mercy, in the aggravated
damnation of impenitents under the gospel.

I MAY go on, and say still more particularly, that sinners are directed, in
the sacred books, to the duty of "prayer"; and this, as "the way" to obtain
saving mercy. Simon Magus was, without all doubt, a sinner, and a very great
one too. For the apostle Peter said to him, "I perceive thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity". Acts 8.23.
And yet, he exhorts him to "pray God if perhaps the though it of his heart might
be forgiven him". Ver. 22.
And shall we say, an apostle of Christ would have put him upon doing that,
which was perfectly useless, in regard of the main thing he had in view in
giving him this direction? Surely, he would not have advised him to "pray", if
prayer had not been, in his apprehension, "the way" in which God was wont to
bestow his mercy in Christ. The people of Israel were in the like sinful state,
when God was pleased to declare that to be his purpose concerning them, "a new
heart will I give unto you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh". Ezekiel. 36.26.
But what follows? "Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the house of Israel to do it for them". Ver 37.
It was in "the way" of prayer for a new heart, and a new spirit, that God
would bestow these blessings, and in no other. And prayer is a duty our Savior
has directed to, as "the way" in which the divine Spirit is given to beget, as
well as increase grace. In what other sense shall we explain those words of
his? "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened to you". Matt. 7.7.
Were they addressed to those only, who were the subjects of the "faith by
which the just do live"? Far from this; they were delivered, together with the
whole sermon of which they are a part, to "great multitudes" ((...)) that
followed our Lord "from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond
Jordan". So we are authorized to say from the 28th ver. of the 7th chap. of
Matthew; where it is expressly declared, that "when Jesus had ended these
sayings "the people ((...), the multitudes) were astonished at his doctrine",
that is, the multitudes beforementioned. It follows, in the next verse, "and
he taught THEM", that is, by necessary grammatical construction, these
"multitudes", who had flocked after him. from all parts of the country. It was
therefore in the hearing of a mixed and great number of persons, from all parts,
among whom, perhaps, there were few, who had obtained the justification of life
through faith, that our Lord said, "ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you". And would he have thus
preached to such an audience, if it had not been his intention to put those,
who had not saving faith, as well as those who had, upon applying to God by
prayer for the influences of his Spirit? The former to begin the work of faith
in them; the latter, to maintain, and increase it in their hearts. It cannot
reasonably be supposed. His directing them to prayer is, indeed, in itself
simply considered, a good reason why prayer should be looked upon as "the way"
of God in bestowing his Spirit to the purposes of saving good. He would not
otherwise have given this direction. It supposes the gospel-plan of mercy, and
that God may, in consistency with the honor of his justice, holiness and
wisdom, bestow that grace upon sinners they are directed to seek to him for,
notwithstanding their sinfulness and unworthiness, however hainously
aggravated; yea, it supposes God's readiness, in "this way", to communicate his
Spirit to all the valuable ends to which he is needed. It will be observed, by
those who are in any measure critical, that I have all along spoken of the use
of prayer and other means, as "the way" in which God is pleased "ordinarily" to
communicate the grace that is saving; purposely avoiding to affirm, that he
has, by "direct promise", constituted such a connection between the "use of
these means", and the "bestowment of saving grace", as that the latter shall
certainly take place upon the former. Perhaps, this is a real truth, and as
plainly revealed, in the bible, as that God, by his "promise", has given
believers unto life reason to hope, that they shall be still "stronger in the
grace which is in Christ Jesus", upon their use of the means he has appointed
to this end. But without insisting upon this, (which I have accordingly waved,
as it is a matter in dispute among the best and greatest of men) all reasonable
pretense for want of encouragement to human endeavors is superseded, if the
use of these is "the way" in which God "ordinarily" bestows his saving mercy in
Jesus Christ.

The sinner, it may be, will plead, if God has not "oblig"d himself to succeed
men's endeavors; if he has no where "promised" that, if they exert themselves,
as they may, in the use of means, he will certainly reward their well-meant
efforts with the communications of his grace; to what purpose should I attempt
to do any thing in the affairs of religion? What encouragement have I to do so?
When I have done all I can, God may withold his graec; and then, I am but
where I was, and may, notwithstanding all my endeavors, suffer the pains of
Hell.

Should this be supposed, would your punishment, in the place of "weeping and
gnashing of teeth", be equally dreadful, whether you did your best in the use
of means, or went on in your sins, throwing contempt on the authority and
government of God? There is no room for dispute as to this. You would certainly
be more miserable beyond the grave, in proportion to your neglects of God, and
the acts of your rebellion against him.

But (to express myself in the words of the celebrated Mr. How.) "Why should
thou imagine so sad an issue, as that, after thine utmost endeavors, grace
should be withheld, and leave thee to perish, because God has not bound
himself by promise to thee? What promise have the ravens to be heard, when they
cry? But thou art a sinner. True. -- Yet experience tells the world, God's
"unpromised" mercies freely flow every where. "The whole earth is full of his
goodness". Yea; "but his special grace is conveyed by promise only, and that
only through Christ; and how can it be communicated, through him, to any but those
that are in him"? What then: Is "the first in-being in Christ no special
grace"? Or is there any "being in him" before the "first", that should be the
ground of that gracious communication? Things are plain enough, if we make them
not intricate, or entangle ourselves by foolish subtilties. --

Poor soul, thou need not stay to puzzle thyself about this matter. "God
binds himself to do what he promises"; but has he any where "bound himself, to
do no more"? Did he promise thee thy being, or that thou should live to this
day? Did he promise thee the bread that sustains thee, the daily comforts of
thy life? Yea, what is nearer the present purpose, did he promise thee a
station under the Gospel? Or that thou should ever hear the name of Christ?
If ever his spirit has, in any degree, moved upon thy heart, inclined thee at
all seriously to consider thy eternal concernments, did he beforehand make
thee any promise of that?

My friend, consider a little, it is HOPE that is the great engine that moves the
world, that keeps all sorts of men in action. Does the husbandman "foreknow",
when he plows and sows, that the crop will answer his cost and pains? Does the
merchant "foreknow", when he imbarques his goods, he shall have a safe and
gainful return? Do thou "foreknow", when thou eatest, it shall refresh thee?
When thou take physic, that it shall recover thy health, and save thy life?
Yea further, can the covetous man pretend a "promise", that his unjust
practices shall enrich him? The ambitious, that he shall be great and
honorable? The voluptuous, that his pleasure shall be always unmixt with gall
and wormwood? Can any say, they ever had a "promise" to ascertain them, that
profaneness and sensuality would bring them to Heaven? That an ungodly and
dissolute life would end in blessedness? Here the Lord knows, men can be
confident and active enough, without a "promise, and against many an express
threatening. Will thou not, upon the HOPE thou have before thee, do as much for
thy soul, for eternal blessedness, as men do for uncertain riches, short
pleasures, an airy soon-blasted name? Yea, as much as men desperably do to damn
themselves, and purchase their own swift destruction.

Or can thou pretend, though thou have no pre-assuring promise, thou have no
HOPE? Is it nothing to have heard so much of God's gracious nature? Is it
suitable to the reports, and discoveries he has made of himself, to let a poor
wretch perish at his feet, that lies prostrate there, expecting his mercy?
Did thou ever hear, he was so little a lover of souls? Do his giving of his
son, his earnest unwearied strivings with sinners, his long patience, the clear
beams of gospel light, the amiable appearances of his grace, give ground for no
better, no kinder tho'ts of him? Yea, has he not expressly styled himself, "the
God hearing prayer", taken a name on purpose to encourage "all flesh to come.
to him"? Will thou dare then to adopt those profane words, "what profit is
there to pray to him"? and say, it is better sit still, resolving to perish, than
address to him, or seek his favor, because he has not "by promise", assured
thee of the issue, and that, if he suspends his grace, all thou do will be in
vain?

How would thou judge of the like resolution? If the husbandman should say,
when I have spent my pains and cost in breaking up and preparing the earth, and
casting in my seed; if the sun shine not, and the rain fall not in season, if
the influence of heaven be suspended, if he withold his blessing, or if an
invading enemy anticipate my harvest, all I do and expend is to no purpose; and
God has not ascertained me of the contrary, by 'express promise; it is as good
therefore sit still. Censure, and answer, him and thyself both together"
"Blessedness of the righteous. page 276, 277, 178.




I MAY not impertinently add here, that our Savior, besides directing sinners
to the duty of prayer as "the way" to obtain saving mercy, has given them all
desirable encouragement to hope for success in "this way". Says he, "ask, and
it shall be given you". Surely, he intended this declaration, as a reasonable
ground for hope, in the use of prayer. And as though he had not, in these words,
said eno' to encourage their hope, he goes on, by a striking comparison, to
reason the case with them; and he does it in the most convincing, as well as
affecting manner. His words are these. Ver. 9, 10, 11, 12.
"What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a
stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your father
which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him"? Who, after this
reasoning of the Savior of men, can suspect the willingness of God, upon their
seeking to him for his Spirit, to bestow him upon them? If any can harbor in
their breasts jealousies of this kind, they must either want the bowels of a
father, or be grossly mistaken in their notions of him, who is our father in
heaven. Are we, who are parents, ready to pity our poor sinful children, when
they cry to us in distress? Do our hearts move toward them? Are we disposed
freely to give them the good thing they need, and apply to us for, wherein we
are able? And shall the parent of the universe, the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the father of mercies, the God who so loved sinners, while they were
sinners, enemies, and ungodly, as to part with his own Son, out of his bosom,
to shed his precious blood as a propitiation for their sins; I say, shall this
most merciful God and father be wanting in his readiness to pity his poor
sinful children, when sensible of their folly in departing from him, they
ardently look to him for help in making their return to him by repentance and
faith? The though it is highly dishonorary to him, whose style is that "the hearer
of prayer", and "the God of all grace". And it likewise directly opposes the
whole thread of our Savior's arguing, in this passage, which is evidently
designed to give us the most exalted apprehensions of the mercy of our heavenly
father; such as might tend to free our minds of all suspicion and jealousy,
and encourage our application to him in full hope of his willingness and
readiness to afford us all the spiritual help we need, in order to our
salvation.

ENO', I trust, has now been said to show, not only what sinners may and ought
to do, toward obtaining the faith that is saving; but that their thus doing is
the "ordinary way" in which God communicates his Spirit to effect this work of
grace in them.

SERMON X.
SEVERAL objections, and of some weight, may be made against what has been
offered, in the preceding discourses. My intention is, to propose these
objections distinctly, and to give the proper answers to them: And, with the
doing of this I shall conclude this subject I have been so long upon.

OBJ. I. THE first objection is, faith is wro't by an immediate act of God's
power, in which men are only the subjects of what he works in them. There is no
more of man in the bestowment of faith, than there was in bringing Christ from
heaven to be "a propitiation for the sins of the world".

I ANSWER. Should this be the truth; should it be supposed, that faith is a
"gift of God", in which men are nothing more than the "passive recipients" of
what he bestows, it will not from hence follow, that human endeavors, in the
sense we have explained them, are needless, as being of no use, or service. For
God may, if he pleases, as well make awakened seeking sinners, the subjects of
this gift, as the stupidly tho'tless and secure; he may as well display his
almighty power, in giving men to believe, while exerting their powers as
reasonable creatures, about their duty, as when they make no use of them, but
are shamefully careless and indolent. It lies with him to choose his own way to
bestow the gift of faith; and, if he chooses to bestow it, rather upon
inquiring, seeking sinners, than others; upon men, while acting like reasonable
creatures, rather than while they are senselesly siting still, and doing
nothing, "who shall say unto him, what do thou"? Most certainly God is
master of his own gifts, and may bestow them in what way he pleases. And for
any to dispute this is, in reality of construction, to say, that God has no
right to "do what he will with his own"; it is to oppose that "sovereignty",
which, at other times, is strenuously pleaded for, as one of the distinguishing
glories of the supreme being.

BUT should it turn out a truth, that, in the bestowment of faith, men are more
than the passive subjects" of a gift; that God accomplishes this part of his
good pleasure in them, by the use of means, and the concurring operation of the
intellectual faculties with which he has endowed them, what has been discoursed
about human endeavors, instead of carrying with it the face of absurdity, will
at once appear most highly congruous. There is evidently, in this view of the
matter, a natural aptitude in the prescribed means, and men's use of them, in
order to the obtainment of faith. It Is in reason fit, they should exert
themselves in earnest endeavors, if it is, by cooperating with those
endeavors, that God communicates the light and help, whereby faith is wro't in
them. The work is now accomplished in a way accommodated to the human make. Men
are dealt with as intelligent and moral agents. For though it is God principally
that does the work; yet, in the doing of it, he considers the constitution of
men, and operates by the intervention of their faculties, and in a way adapted
to their proper nature.

AND this way of communicating the gift of faith appears, to me, to be most
reasonable in itself, and most consonant to the scripture-account of the matter.

IF we consult our own reason, it perfectly falls in with all we are able to
collect from it, to suppose, that God, in "drawing sinners to Christ", should
do it "with the cords of a man, and the bands of love", that is, by
cooperating with human faculties, in the use of proper means. It Is true, had
men's faculties been destroyed by the original lapse, or any thing consequent
thereupon, these faculties must be restored, if at all restored, by an
exertment of almighty power, without their doing any thing, in any kind
whatever: But, as they still exist men, endowed with intellectual and moral
powers, and capable of using them, it should seem reasonable to think, that
God, when he works faith in them, should do it in a way adjusted to their
character; that is, by the intervention of their faculties, in the use of
suitably adapted means.

AND this is evidently the way, the scripture has pointed out. Why else has it
made faith in Jesus Christ a commanded duty? Why has it urged this duty, by
declaring, that if we "believe we shall be saved", but if we "believe not we
shall be damned"? This does not look, as though faith was a work of God, so as
that men were only the "passive recipients" of it, as a gift from him. They are
certainly considered as agents, and accountable ones too, in the buisiness of
faith. But where would be the propriety, or indeed consistency, of their being
viewed in this light, if faith was the work of God, so as to supersede the
intervening operation of their faculties, in the use of means, and endeavors?
Was this the way, in which faith was wro't, they might as well be commanded,
upon pain of damnation, aggravated damnation, to bring that truth down from
heaven, which is the object of faith, as to believe this truth now it is already
bro't down, and revealed in the sacred scriptures. Besides, if faith was the
work of God, so as that men are nothing more than the "passive subjects" of
what he does, and all means and human endeavors, in the use of them are set
aside, as having no concurring influence, why were so many miracles wro't by
Christ and his apostles, in confirmation of the truths they published to the
world, as sent from God? Why are men complained of, charged with guilt, and
declared worthy of an aggravated punishment for not being wro't upon to
believe, in consequence of these attestations from heaven, in proof of the
gospel-revelation? Why are they applied to in all the ways that are rationally
suited to work upon moral and intelligent agents? It would be grossly absurd
thus to adress to them, if the "salutary truth" was conveyed into them, without
the concurrence of their faculties, in the use of means.

IT IS observable, though God is spoken of, in the scripture, as "the author of
faith"; yet that is the inquiry of inspiration, Romans 10.14, 15.
"How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a preacher"? And that is the apostolic conclusion deduced herefrom,
Ver. 17.
"So then, faith coming by hearing, and hearing by the word of God". You see,
in order to believing, there must be preaching, and this by persons duly
authorized and sent to preach; and the word preached must be heard, that is,
heedfully, diligently, seriously attended to. Here then there is both room and
opportunity for the exercise of human faculties; and it is by the exercise of
them, that God, by his Spirit, concurs to the production of faith. Men are
"workers together with God" in this christian attainment; insomuch, that if
they neglect to exert their own powers, in the use of the means and advantages
they are favored with, they can reflect the blame no where, but on themselves,
if they are never made the subjects of that faith, by which "the just do live".
This will be the true reason of their condemnation; and it will eternally
justify God in it, before all angels and men.

IT IS a plain case, the scripture every where considers sinners, as beings that
are endowed with intellectual and moral powers, and accordingly represents God
as FIRST BEGINNING, and then CARRYING ON, the work of faith, in a way analagous
to their proper character as such, by making use of "means", and by requiring
"their attention" to them, and the "exertment" of all their powers, in
subordination to him, and the concurring influences of his Spirit. He don't
introduce faith into them, as into beings that are not agents; neither does he
make them believers, by giving them new faculties, or by destroying, or
effecting any physical change in, their old; but accomplishes his pleasure in
them, by accommodating his agency to their proper make and constitution. The
bible always considers the matter in this light. And it would, in truth, be
quite unintelligible upon a contrary scheme of though it. See what is more largely
said, upon human endeavors in the latter part of the 12th Sermon.


OBJ. II. ANOTHER objection is, to urge men, before they have faith, that is,
saving faith, to religious doing, is to invert the scripture-order. It Is to make
that precede, which should follow after. It Is to put the effect before the
cause. What more absurd, than to call upon men to work in order to faith, when
they can really do no work at all, till they are the subjects of faith? The
apostles did not proceed after this unnatural manner. They first laid before
men the simple truth of the gospel. Some believed. -- And, upon this, they put
them upon endeavors to "walk in newness of life".

HOW far any may have put men upon acting from faith before they had it, and in
order to their having it, I will not, at present, take upon me to say; Though if
they have really done thus, they are doubtless chargeable with great absurdity.
For no man can do an action from a principle he is not endowed with, and to put
him upon it is to put him upon doing that which is NATURALLY IMPOSSIBLE. But
this is not the case, as we have stated it. We call no man to endeavors, that
will argue his being a subject of saving faith, in order to his becoming so. We
put him upon no exertments, but from principles he is possessed of. And
endeavors, from such principles, in order to his obtaining still higher and
more noble ones, are what he is capable of; yea, God requires them, and they
are "the way" (as we have seen) in which he "ordinarily" bestows his Spirit to
the purposes of saving and everlasting good.

IT IS true, upon men's obtaining faith, they become capable of acting from this
principle; and there are many apostolic exhortations, persuasions, and
directions, given to them as believers. And it is through faith, under the
influence of God's mighty power, that the spiritual life is nourished in them,
to their growing in grace, and a greater meetness for that life that is eternal
in heaven. But it is, at the same time, far from being true, that there are no
commands and exhortations given in scripture to persons, while destitute of
justifying faith. When our Savior preached, saying, "repent ye, and believe the
gospel", Mark 1.15.
his hearers, for the generality, were of this sort. When he said, John 6.29.
"this is the work of God", the work God requires of you, "that ye believe in
him whom he has sent", he spoke, to those, who followed him "for the loaves",
and not "the miracles" which he had wro't. And when the apostle Paul published
it as the will of God, now the gospel dispensation had taken place, "that all
men every where should repent", Acts 17.30.
he principally had in view the sinners we are speaking of. And sinners, while
viewed as destitute of saving faith, are, in innumerable places, in the sacred
books, the immediate subjects of the divine exhortations and commands; See the
texts particularly mentioned, page 242.
yea, and these are urged with every argument, that is suited to work upon
reasonable creatures. Every power of the human mind is applied to, and every
motive used, that can be fetched, either from earth heaven, or hell.

NOR is it true, that the apostles took no other care of those, who were
believers, than to lay before them the simple saving truth of the gospel. They
not only did this, but endeavored to do that also, which might have a natural
aptitude, a rational tendency, under the divine blessing, to beget faith in
them. See what is said upon this head, in page 224, 225, 226.


IT may with propriety be added here, In the first days of the gospel (as has
been the case ever since) there were two sorts of believers; such as were
possessed of faith, which, though real, was short of that which is justifying;
and such as were endowed with the faith that is unto life. This is represented
by our Savior under a variety of similitudes: by the ten virgins, five whereof
were wise, and five foolish; and by the parables of the talents, of the pounds,
of the wheat and tares, and of the sower that sowed seed in four several sorts
of ground. And all the churches gathered by the apostles consisted of these two
sorts of believers. Some had faith in the saving sense, others had only such a
faith as might be the effect of the common illuminations and assistances of the
Spirit. This now being a known truth, many of the commands, exhortations,
persuasions and encouragements, which were directed, by our Savior, to b^ievers
in general; and, by the apostles, to the churches as collective bodies, may
reasonably be looked upon as designed for the use and benefit of those, who had
not saving faith, as well as those who had it. When they are exhorted and
persuaded, not "to draw back"; to "hold fast the profession of their faith", to
"labor that they may enter into rest"; to be "circumspect, watch and pray"; not
to "harden their hearts"; not to "depart from the living God"; not to "grieve
the holy Spirit"; not to "neglect the assembling themselves together"; to "draw
nigh to God"; to examine themselves, and to eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup", and the like: These exhortations are equally proper to both these
sorts of believers; and they might both of them, from the faith they were
respectively the subjects of, exert themselves in expressing a regard to them.
And, in truth, no good reason can be given, why the means of grace, the
advantages of the visible kingdom of God, should not be intended for the
spiritual advantage of believers in common; that is, of believers who are not
as yet in a state of justification, as well as those who are. It Is certainly
fact, that all who made a profession of faith, in the days of the apostles,
whether their faith was of the "common", or "special" kind, were admitted to a
participation in all visible gospel privileges; and these priveleges are, in
their nature, happily calculated to promote the spiritual good of all that have
faith, whether of the "common", or "saving" sort. It Is possible in the moral,
though not in the natural world, that "tares", by proper means and due culture,
may, under the divine influence, be converted into good "wheat". And this was,
doubtless, the case oftentimes in the days of the apostles; as it may have been
in all ages since. Nor unless we suppose, that gospel-means may be used by
believers, who have not as yet attained to the faith that justifies, shall we
find it an easy matter to account for the conduct of the apostles, in
"immediately" admiting persons to "baptism", and "fellowship in breaking of
bread", upon their profession of faith in Christ: It Is indubitably true, that
the first preachers of the religion of Jesus readily admitted all, who
professed faith in him, to an attendance on gospel-institutions, upon their
bare profession, without waiting for proof that their faith was that by which
"the just do live". This appears from the case of the Ethiopian eunuch, whose
conviction that Jesus was the Christ, confession of him as such, and baptism in
his name, were all completed within the space of a few hours only, Acts 8.
from the 27th ver. The same thing is equally evident from what is said of the
Jailor, and those that were in his house. The apostles, Paul and Silas, had
scarce done "speaking the word of the Lord" to them, before they "baptized"
them all. They did it "straitway, the same hour of the night", Acts 16.33. In
like manner, the "three thousand", spoken of in the 2d chap, of this same book,
were, within the space of a single day, convinced that "Jesus who had been
crucified was Lord and Christ, baptized, added to the church", and admited to
"fellowship with the apostles in breaking of bread, and in prayers". Nor do we
read of any, who confessed Christ, whose baptism, or reception into christian
communion, were delayed by the apostles; but their manner was "immediately" to
admit them as disciples barely upon this profession. Surely, they would not
have been thus hasty in admiting persons to a participation in
gospel ordinances, had they imagined, that christian professors might not "draw
near to God", till the truth had been SAVINGLY received into their hearts. Had
they though it, with our author, that "all the exhortations, commands, and
institutions of the gospel, were directed to consciences endued with this new
instinct", it cannot be supposed, without reflecting dishonor on their
character, that they would at once, without the least delay, have admited all
kinds of persons to fellowship with them in the kingdom of Christ. It might
rather have been expected, that they would have taken time to instruct, advise
and guard their hearers; and have waited for credible evidence, in the judgment
of charity, that they were believers in the SAVING sense, before they put them
upon attending on the institutions of christianity. Had they esteemed it a
truth, that these institutions were appointed for the observance of none but
those, who were in a "justified state by faith", it is incredible they should
have been active in encouraging such numbers to observe them, upon a verbal
profession only, before there had been opportunity for the trial of their
faith, or the exhibition of proper proof that it was of the SAVING sort. And
what makes this the more incredible is, that they had been sufficiently taught
by our Savior, before he left the world, that merely a profession of faith was
no good proof, in the case of any, that they were SAVINGLY the subjects of it.
Multitudes, in his day, so believed on him, as, in transport of joy, to profess
themselves his disciples; and yet, after a while, they "went back", and so
totally as to "walk no more with him", Joh. 6.66. Great numbers flocked to the
baptism of John; but it became matter of observation, yea, and of offense to
the pharisees, that "Jesus made more disciples" than his forerunner, permiting
them also to be "baptized", Joh. 4.1. And yet, the writer of the book of the
Acts, speaking of our Lord's disciples, just after his resurrection, says, "the
number of names together was about an hundred and twenty", Acts 1.15. What an
amazing falling away of Christ's disciples must there have been, by this
account! The apostles could not but know it. They knew also, that our Lord had
said to those, who had professed faith in him, Joh. 8.31. "if ye continue in my
word, then are ye my disciples indeed": And in words still more explicit,
Matthew. 7.21. "not every one that faith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of my father which is in
heaven". It ought not therefore to be supposed, when the apostles so suddenly
admited persons to baptism, and communion in gospel ordinances, upon a mere
verbal profession of faith, that they imagined this profession gave credible
proof that they were believers in the SAVING sense, or that they looked upon
them as such. It Is far more reasonable to think, that they understood, by the
faith men professed, no more than such a conviction that "Jesus was the
Christ", as to be therefrom disposed and influenced to a readiness to own him
as their Savior and master; to put themselves, as disciples, under his care,
guidance and tuition; and to be found in the use of his appointments, as the
best method they could take to be further enlightened, instructed, improved,
and "trained up in the way they should go", in order to their finding eternal
life. If gospel-institutions are considered as a means wisely fited to
cultivate and make the best of such a faith as this, and as designed by God to
be used, by those who have it, to this end; the conduct of the apostles will
need nothing to be said in its vindication. It was just such as it was fit and
reasonable it should be. It Is beyond doubt with me, that this was their
sentiment concerning these institutions; and that this also was their view in
admiting these professors to an attendance on them. Surely, they did not take
them into their christian fellowship, upon the presumption that they were the
subjects of a faith that was SAVING; for they had no credible evidence to
ground such a presumption on, in the judgment of the largest charity. They had
reason rather for fear, least the faith of, by far the greater part of them was
no other, than that common one, which might consist with their perishing beyond
the grave. But still, if gospel-institutions were a suitably adapted means to
BEGET, as well as increase, SAVING says, they acted a wise and faithful part
in "immediately" admiting these professors to the use of them; as hereby they
put them into the "most likely way" of becoming christians formed to a
"meetness for the inheritance of the sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ".
Unless the apostles acted upon this supposition, I confess my own inability to
justify the wisdom of their conduct, or indeed its faithfulness either to God,
or men. Nor can I justify their's, upon any other supposition, who encourage
persons in the use of gospel-institutions, till they are clearly satisfied,
upon proper trial of their faith by its fruits, that it is of the SAVING kind:
Nay, I see not, if the means, privileges, and advantages of the visible kingdom
of Christ, were intended for the use of those only, who are the subjects of
SAVING faith, that any other persons, be they who they will, or their common
seize as high as you will, have any buisiness to meddle with them. Upon
which, it will perhaps follow, in a course of just reasoning, that none have
any thing to do with the appointments of the christian religion, that is, they
have nothing at all to do, till the truth is "savingly" admited into their
hearts. Our author, to do him justice, is herein consistent with himself. I
wish I could say the same of all he has to do with.
Whereas, the difficulty, upon this head, will be at once removed, if it is a
truth, as I imagine it is, that the institutions of the christian religion were
appointed for the use and benefit of all that have faith, whether of the
"common", or "special" kind; that it is accordingly the duty of all such to
wait upon God, in the diligent use of these means; and that, by thus using
them, they are in "the way" of a blessing.

OBJ. III. SOME, it may be, will again object and say, the best doings of the
most refined sinner, while destitute of that faith, without which there cannot
be spiritual life, are of no value, of not the least consideration. They may
rather be esteemed splendida peccata, The best doings of those, who are
destitute of the faith that is saving, are called shining sins, not merely on
account of their being defective as to the "manner" of their performance, or
the "end" proposed thereby; but as being sinful in their "whole form", as
having "no good" in them, nothing but what is offensive to God, and displeasing
in his sight. I don't remember, that our author has particularly made this
representation of them. But others, and of considerable reputation in the
learned world, have expressly considered them in this point of view; but without
sufficient warrant, as I imagine, either from reason, or scripture. The late
reverend Mr. Experience Mayhew, who was exceeded by few, if any, among us, in
the strength of his reasoning powers, and might truly be called a great Divine,
notwithstanding his disadvantageous circumstances for learned improvements;
having spent a long life in ministerial services, upon an unreasonably scanty
maintenance, to the Indian-natives, in several of their obscure villages: This
gentleman, though a known, professed Calvinist, even upon the supralapsarian
scheme, in his book entitled, "Grace defended", has so clearly and judiciously
handled this point, as to leave no reasonable room for further dispute about
it. See from page 148 to 153. I shall only select a few of his thot's, in the
following words. Many of the materially good actions, which unregenerate
persons perform, are the effects of the grace of God in and upon them; and
therefore not sins. I cannot think, that actions which men perform by the help,
and influence, of the word, and Spirit of God, are well called sins. God may be
truly said to be the author of such actions. It is he, of his grace, who stirs
up, and excites, poor sinful creatures to perform the actions I speak of. He
enables them to hear, read, meditate, and pray; and he is the author of such
faith as they have, who believe only for a while, as in Luke 8.13. Or may it
not be granted, that such faith, repentance, etc. as the best, of which
unregenerate persons are sometimes the subjects, are effects of the grace of
God, wro't by God's word and Spirit in their souls, and frequently called
common grace? And are they, this notwithstanding, all sin, abomination in God's
sight; and, as some say, contrary to saving grace? I constantly maintain, that
there is a specifical difference between common grace, and that which is
special; but I see no reason to oppose them one to the other, as contraries are
opposed. Whether, by common grace, we understand those gracious influences of
God's Spirit, with which the unregenerate are sometimes times favored, or the
good effects produced in them by these gracious operations, I am not, for my
part, willing to allow them to be sin. Page 151. He says, in the next page, If
the best actions of the unregenerate be truly and properly sins, I see no
reason, for the present, but that it were better they were let alone than done.
If it be said, though the doing of them be sin, yet it is a greater greater sin
to omit them; I answer, that if they are properly sins, I know not of any rule
men have, of two sins to choose the least. I believe that neither the one, nor
the other, ought to be chosen; but that both ought to be abhorred. Indeed, of
two things where one is less good than the other, if both cannot be done, the
best ought to be made choice of; but where both the things in question are
properly sins, this is not the case. He adds, I believe, that if the best
actions (if I may may so speak) of the unregenerate were really sins, all the
regenerate would be obliged to repent of all they did before their
regeneration, and in order to it; as their reading, hearing, meditating,
praying for converting grace, giving alms, etc.. I confess, they ought to
repent that they performed these things in no better a manner than they did;
but not that they did them at all: Though they did them not in such a manner as
the regenerate only can perform actions in respect of the matter, or general
nature of them.
shining sins, than performances that have any good in them. And will God pay
any regard to such worthless services? Will he take occasion from them to make
sinners the partakers of the grace that is in Jesus Christ?

I ANSWER. The question is not, of what real value are these doings of sinners?
For it is not in the virtue of what they are, in themselves simply considered,
that they are ever followed with the bestowment of spiritual favor. And the
same may be said, with equal truth, of the doings even of the most sanctified
believers. In their own value, they are insignificant to the purposes of
salvation. The worthiness of that glorious person, who "once offered up himself
a sacrifice to God for sin", is the alone foundation of all spiritual
bestowments, whether to saints, or sinners. And if, upon this foundation, God
has directed to human endeavors as "the way" in which he chooses to bestow his
saving mercy, who shall dispute his pleasure? The only proper question
therefore here is, has God pointed out these endeavors as "the way" in which
he "ordinarily" dispenses his grace? If this is the truth, and appears to be so
from the sacred scriptures, as well as experience, it is to no purpose to dispute
about their true moral intrinsic worth. For whether they are of great, or
little, or no value at all, in themselves simply considered; yet, if God
requires them, and, in the use of them, effects the work of grace in the hearts
of sinners, they become valuable in this relative view, yea, to an high degree
important and necessary.

IT IS true, when the performances of sinners in religion are nothing more than
form and ceremony; when their main view in what they do, is to be "seen of men,
and to have glory from them"; when they "make long prayers" for a disguise "to
devour widow's houses, and appear to be righteous that they may, with greater
advantage, carry on some wicked design: What they thus do, however specious it
may seem to men, is abomination to the Lord: Nor can such doings be well spoken
of with too great severity. But the same ought not to be said of the religious
endeavors of awakened sinners, who tremble for fear of God, and the wrath to
come; who are earnest in their enquiries what they shall do to be saved, and do
with their might whatever they apprehend to be their duty, and this with
seriousness, solemnity and concern of soul; yea, with views and aims that are
"good", as being "directed to by God himself", though they are not the highest
and noblest. Is ther^ (...) difference between this kind of sinners, as to the
state of their mind, and their manner of doing duty, and those who are in no
trouble about their sins, or the consequences of them, and never engage in
religious services unless for fashion's sake, or to serve their own worldly
ends? The difference between them is great and striking. And that God, whose
eyes run too and fro through the whole earth, sees the difference, and will
accordingly make a different estimate of them. He will not indeed esteem these
awakened persons to be gracious ones, as this may not be the truth of their
character; but he may take occasion from the state of mind they are in, and the
consequent operation of it (in the production of which his own Spirit has had a
great influence) to display his mercy in Jesus Christ toward them. And this,
in fact, is "the way" (as we have seen) in which he "ordinarily" does it. And
for any, therefore, to speak of the endeavors of these awakened sinners,
exerted in the manner we have described, so as to lead people into an
imagination, as though they were useless; nay hurtful, rather than tending to any
salutary purpose, is a barefaced affront to the wisdom of God, in the "method
he usually takes", conformably to his own appointment, in dispensing the
influences of his grace; and it may, besides, eventually prove to many, by
leading them into a contemptuous though it of these endeavors, and a consequent
neglect of them, the occasion of the damnation of their souls Our author, in
order to counter-act "the large work that is cut out", by the popular
preachers", for the pride of the devotees in this doctrine about convictions of
guilt", introduces the following illustration, page 290. If two men are led to
execution for the same crime, the one overwhelmed in sorrow, and the other
elevated to noisie mirth by strong drink, we justly reckon the condition of the
latter to be fully as miserable as the former; and if mercy respects mere
misery, wretchedness, and unworthiness, it will certainly as readily regard the
miserable person, as him who has the quickest feeling of what is before him:
Otherwise it behoved to regard the one, as more worthy than his fellow; which
would be inconsistent with the nature of mercy, at least that of divine mercy;
for wherever the least degree of worth appears, there the province of mercy
ceases, and that of justice and equity takes place. The case, as here put, is
far from being placed in a fair or just point of light. Who ever said, or
though it, that a sinner, by being bro't under "a work of conviction", became a
"worthy" object of the divine notice? Or that he now had that about him which
made it a matter of "justice", or "equity", in God to show regard to him?
Sinners in common, whether sensible or insensible, were viewed by God, when he
laid the plan of redeeming grace, in all their unworthiness; and
notwithstanding their unworthiness, whether more or less, he was pleased, in
his super-abounding grace, equally to comprehend them all in the
gospel-proclamation of mercy. But then, which should be heedfully minded, not
any of them shall obtain this mercy, till they are wro't upon to become
believers in Jesus Christ. A "conviction of guilt" is therefore urged, not as
though it would make sinners the "worthy" objects of the divine favor; but as it
prepares their minds for that faith, without which they cannot be admitted to
mercy. It Is office wholly relates to the introduction on of faith, and must
therefore be determined to be useful, or useless, as it either has, or has not,
a tendency toward the obtainment of it. And is an awakened sensibility of mind
of no use, of not the least service, in order to faith? Is the stupidly
tho'tless and secure sinner under as great advantage to become a believer to
life, as he that pressingly feels his need of relief, and is therefrom excited
to an earnest care in inquiring, where, and how, he may find it? Is the
hardened profligate, who scoffs at God, and every thing serious and sacred, in
as fair a way to come to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, as he that so
sees and feels his need of this knowledge as to "cry after it", and "seek for
it as for hid treasure, watching daily at wisdom's gates, and waiting at the
posts of her door"? One would think, there could be no room for debate in so
plain a point as this. The scripture certainly speaks of sinners, as being in a
"better", or "worse" state of mind for the reception of faith; yea, it very
evidently insinuates, that they may so harden themselves in perverse obstinacy,
as to be beyond any probable prospect of becoming the subjects of it. See page
235, to 242. I shall illustrate what has been above offered, in the following
manner. A malefactor that goes to the gallows deeply sensible of his folly, and
awakened therefrom to humble ardent supplications for mercy, may not, upon this
account, "deserve" a pardon, or demand it as his right in point of "justice" or
"equity", any more than his companion that goes with him to the same
punishment, for the same crime, in an unconcerned, light and merry frame of
mind. But, had the earthly sovereign, in whose power it was to grant a pardon,
contrived and published a method, through the mediation of his own son,
conformably to which he might, with honor and justice to his government, show
mercy to any criminal, in this state of condemnation; and certainly would to
all, who so believed in his mercy as, in the exercise of true penitence, to
apply to him for it? -- In this case, the deeply concerned, and ardently
supplicating malefactor would act a wise and proper part; while the tho'tless,
vain and jovial one would deserve, could it be done, to be executed a second
time for the baseness of his ingratitude, in reflecting such contempt upon that
mercy of his sovereign, which would have saved him, had it not been for his own
stupid folly. It Is observable, the story of the two malefactors, who were
crucified with our Savior, exhibits a case not unlike this I have put. It very
strikingly points out the difference our Lord made between "a careless and
convicted sinner". Were both these criminals in the like hardened and
insensible state of mind? It Is as certain they were not, as words can make it.
Of one of them it is said, that he "rebuked the other" for his profane mockery
of our Lord; that he expressed a becoming sense of the heinous crime for which
he was now suffering; and that he acknowledged the justice of his condemnation,
professing that he therein received no more than "the due reward of his deeds":
Besides all which, he was so tho'tful of futurity, so deeply concerned about
what might follow upon the death of his body, and had so much faith in Christ,
as an almighty Savior, from what he had heard of him, as importunately to pray
to him in those moving words, "Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom". Upon which, "Jesus said to him, verily I say unto thee, to day shall
thou be with me in paradise", Luke 23. from the 39th to 44th ver. Had this
malefactor, while hanging on the cross, been equally stupid with his companion
as to any sense of sin, or danger after death; and had he equally signified it
by his speech or behavior, reviling our Lord, instead of making application to
him for spiritual and eternal mercy, will any one say, he would have showed it
to him? It Is evident, from the whole run of the story, that he was in a serious,
distressed, awakened state of mind. In "this frame of mind" he applied for
mercy, and in "this way" he obtained it; while his unconcerned, insensible and
unseeking companion was left to perish in his sins. And this, I believe, is
commonly the case. Insensible, secure sinners seldom receive the "saving
truth", till they are previously awakened to such a sense of their need of it,
as importunately to seek to God for it.
A serious though it this, and well worthy of our serious consideration.

OBJ. IV. SOME, perhaps, will go on, and say still further, to put sinners upon
exerting themselves, in the use of means, to obtain the faith that is unto
life, is, in reality of construction, to put them upon working out a
righteousness of their own, which is not only dishonorary to Christ, but one of
the most destructive mistakes they can be led into.

THE reply is obvious; If any should be so unadvised, as to put sinners upon
exerting themselves, in any way whatever, in order to atone for their guilt, or
do that which was effected 1700 years ago, by the work of Christ finished on
the cross, they would, without all doubt, put them upon "establishing a
righteousness of their own", in opposition to "the righteousness of God by
faith". But this can, with no face of truth, or justice, be charged upon those
endeavors, we have been recommending. Far from placing them in the room of
Christ, we ground all the hope of sinners upon the perfection of his obedience,
completed by his humiliation to death. We freely allow, that their best doings
are of no value, "as a righteousness" that will supply the place of grace and
Christ. They suppose an atonement already made without them; and that, in
consequence of it, God may show mercy to sinners, notwithstanding the greatest
unworthiness. And they are put upon religious endeavors, not because they are
adapted, in their own virtue, to procure for them the divine favor; but because
it is in concurrence with such endeavors, that God "ordinarily" operates to
form that character, without which none can, in consistency with the gospel,
receive saving advantage from the obedience and blood of Christ.

MEN may, it is true, through ignorance and pride, expect that from their own
endeavors, which they ought to expect, and can reasonably expect, only from
the doings and sufferings of Christ. And this may be a fault too common, in a
less or greater degree, among saints as well as sinners, that is, those who
have saving faith, as well as those who have it not. All indeed are chargeable
with it, who expect acceptance with God, in the virtue of any righteousness of
their's, instead of the perfect work of Jesus Christ. Such righteousness may
properly be called "their own", as it is of "their own devising", and not of
God's appointing; and it will reflect dishonor on Christ, as constructively
rendering his death a vain thing. But shall men set still, and do nothing,
because they may ignorantly, or proudly, expect too much from what they do?
They ought rather to be put upon their guard, and taught, how they may exert
themselves, and, at the same time, give due honor to Christ, by placing a just
dependence on what he has done. The short of the matter is, if God has required
the endeavors of sinners, and "ordinarily" bestows his grace in the use of
them, we may be sure they may be so used, as not to be inconsistent with the
doings of Christ. And to say, that they cannot, is, in reality of construction,
to make ourselves wiser than God; for he would never have required these
endeavors, nor would he have blessed them with the concurring influences of
his Spirit, if they had thrown contempt on Christ, and were incapable of being
used, but to the subversion of his work finished on the cross.

WHAT remains then, as the conclusion of all, but that those, who are destitute
of the faith that is justifying, exert themselves in the use of all proper
means, that they may become the subjects of this grace. If you will not ask God to
give it you; if you will not seek for it as for hid treasure; if you will not labor
and strive to obtain it; -- but choose rather carelessly to set down, and do
nothing, what may you expect but that God, in righteous judgment, should take
from you his holy Spirit, and suffer you to live and die in a state of
unbelief? And should this be the case, who could you blame but yourselves? Your
mouths would be stopped; you would not be able to say a word, unless to justify
God, and condemn yourselves.

YOU will certainly be chargeable with folly, the madness of folly, if you are
thot'less and unconcerned, in this affair of infinite and everlasting
importance. It challenges your first care, your highest solicitude, the most
vigorous exertment of all your powers. And you have this to encourage your
endeavors, that it is in "this way ordinarily" that God makes sinners the
subjects of his saving mercy in Jesus Christ. Take all due care to put and keep
yourselves in this way of God. And you may humbly hope to reap the advantage of
so doing, by his sending his Spirit to work that work of faith in you, which
will interest you in the redeemer's obedience and blood, and, in consequence of
this, the everlasting salvation of your souls. God grant it may be the portion
of us all, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

SERMON XI. The Method of the Spirit, in the Work of Illumination.
EPHESIANS I. 18. "The Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened" --


I HAVE chosen this text, to take occasion from it, to discourse to you upon
that "illumination of the Spirit", without which we cannot be the subjects of
the "faith by which the just do live".

AND it may, perhaps, be of service, in order to our conceiving justly of its
nature, to attend a while to the manner in which the apostle Paul expresses
himself, with reference to it, in the text; "the eyes of your understanding
being enlightened". The like figurative mode of speech is frequently used
elsewhere in scripture. Says the inspired David, Psalm. 19.8.
"the commandment of the Lord is pure, -- enlightening the eyes". Says the
evangelical prophet, describing the office of Christ, Isa. 42.6, 7.
"He is given a light to the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes". By "the blind
eyes", he means precisely the same thing with what is called, in the
new testament, "the blind mind"; and the persons he would point out are those,
whose character is that, Ephesians. 4.19.
"alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their hearts". The apostle Paul, in like language, speaks
of himself as "sent to the Gentiles, to open their eyes" the eyes of their
understanding, "and to turn them from darkness to light". Acts 26.18.


IT IS observable, in all these passages, that "faculty of the soul", by which we
discern truth, is likened to the "bodily eye", by the help of which we discern
the objects of sight. And there is, in some striking respects, an analogy
between the bodily, and mental, faculty of seeing. And it is in virtue of this
analogy, that seeing is so commonly applied to the mind; and that we so
frequently read, and hear, of "the eyes of the understanding", as well as of
the body.

I SHALL endeavor, not only to point out to you this analogy, but so to do it
as, at the same time, to illustrate the doctrine of "divine illumination"; the
thing I principally have in view.

1. IN the first place, In order to men's being capable of seeing, they must be
endowed with those bodily organs, which are naturally fited to the purpose. If
they are destitute of these; were born without them, or have since been
deprived of them, it is impossible they should see. Their condition is such,
that none of the objects of sight can be perceived by them. Darkness and light
are to them the same thing: They have no faculty by which they can discern the
difference between them. And if they were always without this faculty, they
have no idea at all of light, or colors: Nor can it be communicated to them,
conformably to the established order of nature. They are incapable of such
communication, unless by a miraculous exertment of the power of the God of
nature.

AND thus it is with respect to "mental sight". The understanding is the same
thing in relation to truth, that the bodily eye is with regard to the objects
of sight. If therefore men are not endowed with an intellectual faculty, they
can have no perception of truth of any sort or kind. Their minds will be in as
total darkness, as their bodies are when they have no eyes. No^ can the idea of
truth, while they are destitute of the understanding-faculty, be conveyed to
them, any more than the idea of light to those that never had the organs of
sight.

IN consequence of this analogy between bodily and mental sight, it may
naturally be enquired, whether, in the work of "illumination", God creates the
faculty by which men are made to see, or effects a moral change only in the
intellectual faculty they are already possessed of?

I SHOULD not have though it, that there was any room for such an inquiry, had it
not been for what some have said, it may be unwarily upon this subject. It
should seem past all reasonable dispute, that, in enlightening men's minds, God
considers them, and deals with them, as intelligent beings. It Is the truth of
fact, that they are so. They come into existence endowed with an
understanding-faculty. Some indeed are born idiots, as there are others that
are born blind. But for the generality, they are naturally endowed with an
intellectual capacity. It Is true, the entrance of sin into the world has greatly
hurt this power of the mind; insomuch that, if left to ourselves, and our own
guidance, we shall "darken our hearts" through prejudice and lust. But
notwithstanding the original lapse, and all that has been consequent upon it,
the intellectual faculty itself remains in us. We still exist intelligent
creatures. There is therefore, in the "work of illumination", no infusion of
any new faculty by the creating power of God. "The almighty inspired us with
understanding", the natural capacity for it, when he gave us a being in the
world. Whatever therefore is done, in the affair of illumination, is done upon
a faculty we are previously the subjects of: Nor is there any change effected,
when sinners are enlightened by the Spirit of God, but what is of the moral
kind Their understandings may be assisted, strengthened, enlarged, refined, and
greatly altered for the better; but no new faculty is introduced into their
nature. The scripture no where suggests such a thing; but always supposes, on
the contrary, that men have understandings to enlighten; otherwise they could
not be enlightened. There would be no foundation, in their make, for this work
to be built upon.

IT will, perhaps, be said, those that are enlightened "discern spiritually"
the things of the Spirit, which the "natural man" is not capable of doing: Nor
can it be done, by any, without the introduction of some new faculty. If by a
new faculty is meant, a faculty so changed from what it was, that it may
properly be called new in the moral sense, it is readily allowed. But this is a
quite different thing from the formation of a capacity, power, or faculty, in
the soul, that is physically new. Their is no need of any new faculty, in this
sense The natural one, made morally new, will answer the end as well. Nothing
more indeed is necessary, in order to a "spiritual discerning of the things of
the spirit", than an ability to see them in a light that is new, and different
from that in which they are seen by the understanding, considered in its mere
"natural" state. And what is there in this, but the mind may be capable of,
when it comes to be enlightened by the Spirit of God? It Is easily supposeable,
that he may so help men's understandings, as that they shall be able to see the
things of God in their true point of light, and so as they never did, or could
see them before.

2. We cannot see, in the literal sense without light. This is the medium by
which visible objects are made perceptible. Was the visive faculty ever so
sound and perfect, it would be entirely useless if there was no light. It is by
the intervention of the rays of the sun, or some other luminous body, that
impressions are made on the organs of sight, and those sensations caused, which
none are the capable subjects of, but those who have eyes to see.

AND something analagous to this is true, in regard of the
understanding-faculty. Ideas are the same thing to the intellectual eye, that
the rays of light are to the bodily eye. Were we void of ideas, we should be
in total, mental darkness, and incapable of seeing with the eye of the
understanding, though it were ever so bright and clear. There might, in this
case, be the faculty of intellectual sight, but we should not be able to use
it. It would be of no manner of service: We might as well be without it.

THE "God of nature" has therefore, not only implanted in us an intellectual
faculty, but taken care to provide for the introduction of ideas into our
minds, that it might be useful to us. Impressions from the material world, by
the intervention of a variety of bodily organs, suitably adapted to the
purpose, affect the soul, and, in time, conformably to a settled course of
nature, store it with ideas; which ideas, together with the perceptions we have
of the operations of our mental powers, serve as a light to our
understanding-faculty: And it is by this light, that we become capable of
seeing with it, that is, of perceiving those innumerable "natural truths" that
are the objects of this faculty.

BUT, besides this natural light, to come nearer to our point, the God of
grace, that men's minds might be suitably enlightened, has superadded the light
of revelation; which light he intended, should be of like use to the eyes of
their understandings, with respect to the great things pertaining to salvation,
that the natural light is to the bodily eye, in regard of the common affairs of
life. We are frequently led, by the sacred writers, to conceive thus of the
matter. Says, the man after God's own heart, Psalm. 19.8.
"the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes". And again Psalm.
119.105.
"thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my path". To the like purpose
are those words of Solomon, Prove. 6.23.
"the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light". And Christ, Whose character
is that, "the sun of righteousness", is represented to be of the same use to
the intellectual sight of men, that the sun in the heavens is to the bodily
sight. Hence he is said to have "come a light into the world". John 8.12.
Hence he is called "a light to lighten the Gentiles" Luke 2.32.
And hence the design of his coming is spoken of in such language that, "to
give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death". Luke 1.79.
And the light he has given the world, in the revelations of scripture, is that
alone, by which we are let into the knowledge of the gospel method of
"redemption through Jesus Christ". It lay "hid in God", till he was pleased
"supernaturally" to open the everlasting designs of his grace to a perishing
world. This he did to Adam, and Abraham, in a general summary way; and to the
jewish nation, under the cover of types, figures and prophetic representations;
but never in a distinct and explicit manner, till the times of Christ, who came
from the father, knew his mind, respecting the great affair of man's salvation,
and plainly declared it to the world.

IT IS observable, the natural light, without which a being on the earth would be
scarce desirable, is the sole contrivance, and effect, of the infinite wisdom,
power and goodness of God. He CREATED it. And he is, in like manner, the
CREATOR of that light, which shows men the way of salvation through a redeemer.
It came down super-naturally from above: Nor could we have had any idea of the
truths it discovers, had they not, in this way, been revealed to us. This
revealed light is therefore the same thing, in the "new creation", that the
natural light is in the "old". And we are absolutely beholden to God for it.
There is nothing of man in it, no will of his, not so much as a wish, or though it
of his heart. It Is entirely the gift of heaven. And it is in this sense, with
great propriety, that God is said to "enlighten our understandings"; for they
have no light, nor was it possible they should have any, with reference to the
gospel-plan of salvation, but what God has been pleased freely to give them;
and this, in a way preventive of any endeavors of their's to procure this gift.

I SHALL not think it a digression to subjoin here, the bodily eye, and visible
objects, are so fited to each other, by the wisdom and goodness of God, as that
pleasure is connected with the application of the latter to the former. Not but
that the impressions made on the organs of sight, by external objects, are
sometimes the occasion of uneasiness. It was designed they should be so. And
many wise and valuable ends are answered hereby. But still, pleasure is
ordinarily conjoined with seeing, according to that observation of the wise
man, Eccles. ^^.7.
"the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eye to behold the
sun". And this is as true of the eye of the understanding, as of the body. The
perception of truth is accompanied with pleasure, unless in those instances
wherein it is intended to excite aversion, and give anxiety. There is such a
proportion, congruity, agreement, or whatever else any may please to call it,
between the intellectual faculty, and the objects that are fited to give it
delight, that this, by an established uniform course of nature, is the result of
their meeting together. It not only perceives these objects, but perceives
also, at the same time, a sweetness, beauty and excellency in them, greater or
less, according to the nature of the object perceived, and the degree in which
it is perceived. There are no intellectual objects, in themselves beautiful and
excellent, but the understanding is formed with a capacity, originally greater
in some, and less in others, to perceive the beauty and excellency there is in
them, as truly as to perceive the objects themselves: Nor has this capacity
been destroyed by sin, any more than the intellectual faculty itself. And it
is, perhaps, impossible it should be destroyed, but by the destruction of the
faculty by which we perceive at all. It Is accordingly the truth of fact, that
men, who, by their personal folly, have awfully corrupted their understandings,
and moral taste too, are yet capable of seeing, and feeling, a beauty and glory
in characters that are the reverse of their own. When placed before their view,
in a strong point of light, they command their approbation; they cannot but own
their perception of an amiable glory in them; -- though, at the same time, they
are ashamed, they are not themselves the subjects of this glory.

WHAT I aim at, in this additional though it, is to show, that, in the work of
illumination, there is no "physically new sense" implanted in the sinner, any
more than a physically new intellectual-faculty. If he had no intellectual
capacity, it would be, not "morally" only, but "naturally", impossible he
should understand; and it would be equally, and in the same sense, impossible
he should perceive a beauty and excellency in any object of the mind, if he had
no capacity in his nature for this perception. The idea of this beauty could
not, in this case, be communicated to him. A physically new capacity must be
put into him, in order to it; that is to say, he must be made a physically
different being from what he was, and from what others of his species are. But
the bible no where gives us reason to expect the implantation of any such new
capacity: Nor indeed is there any need of it. The moral change that is made in
the understanding, by the illuminations of the Spirit of God, will, at the same
time, introduce a proportionable taste, relish, or favor of divine and
spiritual objects. This taste may be, and actually is, wanting in vitiated and
corrupted minds; and so is the just perception of revealed truth also: And they
bear an exact proportion to each other. But if the understanding is enlightened
in the things of the Spirit, a taste for them will be a natural concomitant.
When the mind is illuminated, so as to perceive revealed objects in their true
point of light, it will perceive also a beauty and glory in them. These
perceptions are, as I imagine, inseparable from each other. The constitution of
man is such, that he cannot see the truth as it is Jesus, and not perceive, at
the same time, the excelling glory and importance of it. And if it is the case of
any, that they have no taste for spiritual and divine things, perceive no
favor in them, it may with certainty be concluded, they have never been
enlightened by the Spirit of God, so as to see them in their just and proper
light.

3. THE bodily eye, where there is a sufficiency and clearness of external
light, may yet be disabled from seeing, at least in a distinct and clear
manner, by reason of natural or contracted weakness or disorder. This is no
uncommon case; though an unhappy one: Nor can it be remedied, but by a removal of
the cause of it. Till this is done, the eye will not see clearly, though the
rays of the sun should be reflected from external objects with ever so bright
a luster.

AND the same is true, with ^espect to the eye of the mind. Such is its weak
and disordered state, since the introduction of sin into the world, that its
sight is obscured, in a less or greater degree, in regard of all mankind. There
is no man but has upon his mind some wrong biass or other, which is a like
impediment to the eye of the understanding, that a film is to the eye of the
body. We may be not sufficiently aware of it, but it is a real truth, that
prejudice, partiality, passion, pride, sensual and other lusts, are, as it
were* the cataracts of the mind; and, in proportion to their growth, will cloud
its sight; yea, they may prevail to such a degree of strength as, in a great
measure, to put out the eyes of the understanding. And this indeed has, in all
ages, been the real truth of fact.

THE heathen world have ever so poorly understood, even, what they might have
known of God, that they have all along lived in ignorance of him; nay, what is
much worse, they have so corrupted their understanding, that, in^ead of being
their guide, it has proved their seducer; and in so gross sense, that there are
no absurdities in speculation, nor abominations in practice, but they have been
led into them. As the apostle speaks, Romans 1.25.
"professing themselves wise, they became fools; changing the truth of God into
a lie, and serving the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed forever."
Hence those numerous passages of scripture, in which they are represent^ ^s
having "darkened their hearts", and "blinded their minds"; yea, and as having
done this to so great a degree, as that they "could not see", though they had
intellectual eyes for this purpose.

NOR is this blindness peculiar to the heathen world. It Is common to all the
sons of Adam, in a less or greater degree. Even the christian world, who are
favored with the light of the glorious Gospel, have so blinded their minds as
to grope in the dark, as it were, at noon day; admiting, for truths of God, the
grossest absurdities. For such are some of the doctrines taught, and received,
in the church of Rome; as the worship of God by images; the use of living and
dead saints as mediators with heaven, particularly the Virgin Mary, who has far
more respect paid her than even Christ himself; the conversion of the bread and
wine, in the sacrament, into the real body and blood of Christ, and the like:
Than which, more palpable absurdities were never introduced into any pagan
religion. They are indeed as shocking as were ever received for truths, unless
we should except those doctrines of this same church, which teach, that she is
infallibly right in establishing these monstrous errors; and that she takes a
rational and christian method to gain the assent of men's minds to them, by
inflicting on them the severest bodily tortures. These, it must be owned, are
such an affront to the human understanding, and such a defiance of common
sense, as can scarce be matched with a parallel, in any part of the heathen
world, however invelop't with darkness.

NOR can it be said, even of Protestants, that they have not betrayed a strange
blindness of mind, in the gross mistakes which they have embraced for sacred
truths. It is indeed acknowledged, the light of the reformation opened to their
view the enormous folly of some of the popish tenets; which they have
accordingly rejected: But they still, many of them at least, receive
absurdities of another kind, and very great ones too. There are numbers, even
in the protestant world, who have so strangely lost sight, both of human
reason, and divine revelation, as that they are ready to place the substance of
christianity in any thing, rather than in what it ought to be placed. Nay, to
such a degree have some been blinded, either by the god of this world, or their
own vain imaginations, and foolish prejudices, as that they have encouraged
themselves in a wicked life, even from the very overtures of that institution,
which was purposely set on foot to destroy men's lusts and vices; pretending,
that, by their "continuing in sin", they should give occasion for the "greater
illustration of the mercy of God" in their forgiveness. Amazing infatuation!
Their "foolish hearts" must be extremely "darkened", or it is not possible, they
should have been led away by so senseless a delusion.

THE eyes of men's understanding being thus disordered, the illuminating work
of God's Spirit is designed for their help. And more a great deal is included
in it, than merely his giving them the external light of revelation. This
light, it is true, is necessary. We can, in no other way, have an idea of God as
"reconcilable to the world", and as "reconciling the world to himself by Jesus
Christ". But it is, at the same time, true likewise, that we may enjoy this
light, and not perceive the truths it would make manifest, so perceive them as
to be savingly wro't upon by them. Some secret powerful influence of the divine
Spirit must go along with it to effect this. Our "eyes must be opened", or we
shall no^ "behold wondrous things out of God's law". It Is observable, many
truths were "wrote in the law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms
concerning Christ"; but even his disciples entertained wrong conceptions of
them, till he "opened their understandings to understand the scriptures". Luke
24.44, 45.
In like manner, "the hope of the christian's calling, and the riches of the
glory of the inheritance of the saints", are externally revealed in the gospel;
but the apostle Paul knew, notwithstanding this, that the Ephesian believers
needed to have "the eyes of their understanding enlightened", in order to their
taking in a more clear and just idea of these things. Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
And if those, who were believers already, needed further enlightening by the
Spirit, in order to a more full prospect of the "glory of the hope that was set
before them", much more are his illuminating influences necessary for others.
The truth is, "the vail that is on the hearts of sinners must be taken away",
or they will never "behold with open face the glory of the Lord", so as to be
"changed by it into the same image from glory to glory"; that is to say, the
impediments to their intellectual sight, occasioned by the mists of sin and
lust, must, in a good measure, be removed away, or they will be unable to see
revealed truths so as to be morally transformed by them. This calls for help,
from the Spirit of God, beyond that which is afforded by the light of
revelation, in itself simply considered. And it is principally by means of this
further help, that that effect is wro't in sinners, which is expressed in the
sacred writings by their "understandings being opened", by their being "called
out of darkness", by their being "turned from darkness to light", and the like.

THE Spirit of God, as I imagine, ordinarily begins this part of his
illuminating work, by rousing the consciences of sinners, and exciting in them
an earnest solicitude to become acquainted with the things that are connected
with their everlasting wellbeing. They were walking, it may be, "in the way of
their own heart, and in the sight of their their eyes", tho'tless of God, and
unconcerned about their souls, and the important affairs of salvation. But, by
some a^arming providence, or seasonable word of truth, suitably impressed on
their minds by the influence of the Spirit, they are so changed from what they
were, as to become seriously tho'tful; and their tho'ts, instead of running
upon the vanities and gaites of the world, or the gratifications of time and
sense, are turned toward the infinitely greater concerns of eternal life. This
is the natural effect of an awakened state of mind; and it strongly tends to
check the power of sin, and weaken the force of those wrong biasses that darken
the sight of the mind. It is certainly a well adapted mean to this purpose; as
truly so as external applications are to the bodily eye, to take off a film
that hinde^ it from seeing. A sense of sin and guilt is ever accompanied, more
or less, with distressing anxiety. This naturally puts the sinner upon looking
out for help; and upon doing it, in a sober, serious and earnest manner.
Persons under awakenings by the Spirit of God, especially if they are strong,
and of any long continuance, are always tho'tful, and religiously so: And they
are, for this reason, from the very make of the human soul, in a better
disposition, in a fiter temper, to be guided by the Spirit into the knowledge
of the truth, as it is in Jesus, than when they were going on in their sins,
unconcerned about the affairs of religion and another world. Their minds are
now, in a measure, prepared for those higher illuminations of the Spirit, which
we shall have occasion to speak of under the next head of analogy, to which I
proceed.

4. THE bodily eye is not able fully to take in, what visible objects are fited
to communicate, by a sudden transient glance only. It must be fixed on them,
and view them with care and attention; or many things, both useful and
important, will escape their notice, which yet they might have perceived, upon
a more exact and close examination of them.

AND the same is equally true, if not much more so, in respect of the eye of
the mind. It cannot perceive truth, unless in a few self-evident instances, and
not even in these at first, by a single cast of its discerning power. It must
view it with care, deliberation and attention; otherwise it will not see it: To
be sure, not so as to be in any considerable measure, impressed and influenced
by it. And to the want of this care and attention it is very much owing, that
so many truths are either wholly undiscerned by multitudes, or discerned only
in an imperfect, partial and confused manner. Especially is this the case, in
regard of religious truths; those, I mean, which are not perceivable, but by
the light of revelation. This light does not transmit, to those who are favored
with it, a conception of the truths, it would declare, either as to their
evidence, meaning, usefulness, or importance, whether they attend to them, or
not. It Is indeed fited to convey into the mind this perception; and so as to
renew and transform it: But it does this in the use of consideration and
attention. It Is accordingly observeable, "the word" as "able to save the soul",
is spoken of as "an ingrafted word". How does the cyon turn the sap of a stock
into its own nature, and cause it to bring forth good fruit, but by being
fastened upon it, and let into it? "The word" turns the temper of the mind into
its own nature, the same way, in the moral sense, that is, by serious
consideration; which does, as it were, fasten the word to the mind, let the one
into the other, and unite them together. In like manner, it was by this same
consideration and attention that the "hearers of the word", resembled, in the
parable, by "seed sowed in good ground, that bro't forth good fruit, and in
plenty", are distinguished from the other hearers, resembled by "seed that was
sowed, and came to nothing": It Is said of them, "having heard the word, they
kept it", that is, they retained it in their hearts by serious contemplation,
by frequently employing their tho'ts on it; wherein they differed from the
other hearers, who, for want of this consideration, suffered the word to be
"snatched away from them", or to "wither", having nothing to give it "root"; or
to be choked with the cares of the present life. And the "doer of the word",
who shall be "blessed in his deed", is distinguished from the "hearer of it
only", by his "looking into the law of liberty; and continuing therein", that
is, continuing to look therein. In other words, expressive of the thing meant,
he is one that does not, in a heedless, cursory way only, cast his eye upon the
sacred books of revelation, but looks into them with care and attention; and he
continues in the use of this care, "daily searching the scriptures", if he may
find in them "the words of eternal life". Hence the advice, "take heed how you
hear". Luke 8.18.
And again, "give the more earnest heed to the things which you have heard,
least at any time you should let them slip". Heb. 2.1.
Hence David "though it on his ways", as a proper means "to turn his feet into the
path of God's testimonies". Psalm. 119.59.
And hence also that solemn prayer of his, 1 Cron. 29.18.
"O Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for
ever in the imagination of the tho'ts of the heart of this people, and prepare
their heart unto thee".

NOW the Spirit of God, in managing the work of illumination, fixes the tho'ts
of sinners upon revealed objects, and so governs their exercise, as that divine
truths are savingly opened to their view. I observed, under the former head,
that he ordinarily begins this work by awakening, in the minds of sinners, such
a concern about their future everlasting well-being, as turns their tho'ts from
the things of this world, to the things of God and their soul's salvation. I
would now say, having thus excited in them a disposition to sober, religious
consideration, he proceeds in the work, by calling their attention to divine
and spiritual objects, and holding their tho^ts to them, by frequent and close
contemplation. So it was that he made David spiritually wiser than his enemies.
He did this, by keeping divine truths, and his mind together. That is, the
account of the matter, "thou, through thy commandments, have made wiser than mine
enemies; for they are ever with me". Psalm. 119.98.
So he "opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to the things which were
spoken of Paul". Acts. 16.14.
She "held her mind to them", kept it staid upon them by close consideration.
And this she did, as influenced hereto by the Spirit of God. He "opened her
heart", so as that she "thus attended". And, in like manner, he opens the
hearts of others, by his secret and powerful influences, to think of the great
concerns of their souls and eternity, and to think of them with an attention so
earnest and engaged, as that other tho'ts are excluded, at least the force of
them restrained within proper bounds and limits. They might before this have
though it of the great truths of religion and salvation, but their tho'ts of this
kind were sudden in their rise, and short in their continuance. They were soon
"choked with the cares, or riches, or pleasures of this life". But they have
now a settled abode in them. They "meditate on them both in the day, and in the
night". They are the principal objects that employ their serious consideration.
And it is ordinarily in concurrence with this awakened, and engaged attention,
that the divine Spirit "shines into their hearts", so as to "give them the
light of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ". Having excited in them
a serious, considerate disposition, he turns their tho'ts to the great
doctrines of salvation, assists, superintends and conducts the exercise of
them, and in this way opens their understandings so as to discover to them the
truths of revelation in their divinity, reality, excellency, usefulness and
necessity. And now it is, that they see divine objects in a different light
from what they did before. They have now such a sight of God, as that they love
him with their whole souls, and are disposed to make him the supreme object of
their hope, trust and confidence. They have now such a sight of Christ, as one
"able to save even to the uttermost, all that come to God by him", that they
can readily venture their eternal concerns in his hands. They have now such a
sight of sin, in its odious nature, as well as ruinous tendency, as that they
find within themselves a heart to hate it, and to abhor themselves for ever
having had any love to it. They have now such a sight of holiness, in the
excellency of its nature, as well as the usefulness of its tendency, that they
more heartily desire nothing, than that they may "be holy even as God is holy".
In a word, they have now such a sight of the wisdom, the holiness, the
righteousness and mercy of the gospel scheme of "redemption, through the blood of
Christ", that they can entirely acquiesce in it; neither expecting, nor
desiring to be saved in any other way. They "count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge" they now have "of Christ Jesus their Lord".

5. I HAVE yet to say, in the fifth and last place, the bodily eye may be so
circumstanced, as to be incapable of seeing distinctly and clearly, but by the
intervention of foreign help. A common case this. There are multitudes,
especially among those in years, whose eyes are in such a state, as that the
objects of sight appear as through a mist; and they see them in an indistinct,
and confused manner only: But, by the help of proper glasses, the rays of
light are so collected, and thrown upon the eye, as that this obscurity is
taken away, and they are enabled to see with clearness and precision.

AND thus it is, in a great measure, with the eye of the mind. It may not be
able to discern truth, in a thousand instances, with clearness and certainty,
till, by foreign aid, it is placed before their view in a special point of
light. They can now readily perceive it to be truth, and so perceive it too, as
to feel the beauty and excellency of it; and the light may break in upon them
with so bright a luster, as to occasion even their wonder, that they could not
discern it before.

AND, perhaps, this is eminently one of the ways, in which the Spirit of God
opens the eyes of men's understandings to see the truths of revelation, in
their certainty, sweetness and infinite importance. He may so superintend and
govern the exercise of their tho'ts with reference to them; their ideas, under
his guidance, may be set in such order, and placed in such an easy relation to
each other, as that the mind shall see things in a point of light it never did
before, and never would, or could, have done, had it not been for this
intervening help. By giving their tho'ts this special direction, and
connection, they may have the most lively sight of that, they could not discern
before, or saw only, as it were, in the dark, in a partial, indistinct and
confused manner. And let it not ^em strange to any, that the Spirit of God
should, in this way, shine into men's hearts, "calling them out of darkness
into mavelous light". He has inspired some, even among the sons of men, with
such dexterity and skill, that, by putting together, and placing in a proper
point of light, the ideas that constitute these and those natural truths, they
can easily convey a perception of them to others, and in cases too, in which,
perhaps, they would never have had this perception, had they been left to
themselves, and been the sole guides of their own tho'ts. And shall not the
Spirit himself have an ability so to place revealed objects before the view of
men, as that they shall be able to see them so as they never did, or could,
before? He most certainly has this ability. And though he may, in the work of
illumination, so mix the exertments of it, with the actings of men's own
faculties, as that they cannot easily, if at all, distinguish the one from the
other; yet, it is doubtless principally owing to this intervening influence of
his, that they are enabled to see "spiritually" the things, he has "externally"
revealed in the sacred books of scripture.

THE influences of the Spirit, in helping men to this new and spiritual sight
of the things pertaining to salvation, are sometimes dispensed in such a
measure, as that light breaks in upon their minds suddenly and perceptibly;
insomuch that they are able to say, at such a time, "the eyes of my
understanding were opened", I had then such a sight of God, of Christ, of my
self, and of the gospel-way of salvation, as gives me reason assuredly to
think, the life of grace was now effectually begun in me. But commonly the work
of illumination is carried on, in a more gradual and less perceptible way. The
subjects of it can only say in general, "whereas I was once blind, I now see".
Their light, like the "morning dawn", gradually and indiscernably "shines more
and more" till it increases "to perfect day".

SOME, perhaps, may be disposed to think, if not to speak, contemptuously of
this influence of the Spirit, by which men's understandings are opened to see
divine truths in a new and different light, because it is, to them, inconceivable
how he should operate on them, so as to give them this perception. But the
inconceivableness of the thing is no just objection against the truth of it. Do
those who move this difficulty know, how the objects of bodily sight affect the
soul, by introducing into it those sensations we have certain experience of?
Can they describe the modus of their operation, pointing out the way in which
impressions on the visive organs convey perceptions into the mind? Till they
find themselves able to do this, they cannot, with any face of modesty or
reason, object against the influence of God's Spirit upon the understandings of
men, because the manner of it may be secreted from us. It Is indeed an objection
of no more weight against the Spirit's acting upon the minds of men, that we
know not how he does it, than it is against the actings of external objects upon
them by the intervention of the senses, that we are ignorant how this is done.
The one is as easy to conceive of as the other; or rather, they are both
equally beyond human comprehension. Nor is it at all incredible, that the God
that made our souls, and is therefore intimately, and perfectly acquainted with
them, and all the avenues into them, should be able to influence them in ways
we are not formed with capacities to investigate. It would be highly
unreasonable, I might say, grossly absurd, to suppose, he had not this ability:
Though, he ought always to be considered as exerting it, not only in consistency
with the nature of men's faculties, but in concurrence with them, and so as to
preserve and promote, not supersede, the proper use and employment of them. And
in this way it is, as we have seen, that he both begins, and carries on, the
work of illumination. He awakens men's consideration; he fixes it on the great
things pertaining to salvation, keeping these and their minds continually
together; he directs and assists the exercise of their tho'ts on them; and, in
a word, so conducts and governs this whole affair, as that the result is, their
seeing revealed truths so as to be no longer in the dark, but to become "the
children of the day", and "to walk in light": All which is both easily
intelligible, and highly reasonable; though the modus of the Spirit's influence
herein should be unknown, and not to be described.

A VARIETY of remarks might now easily and naturally be deduced, from the
preceding discourse, which would further tend ^o illustrate the doctrine of
the "Spirit's illuminating work", as well as to correct some mistaken notions
about it; but I must confine myself to two only, ^east I should put your
patience to too long a trial.

THE first is, that the divine Spirit, in enlightening men's minds, lets them
into the knowledge of no truths, but those that are contained in the sacred
books of scripture. These were "wrote by holy men", as "moved and inspired by
the holy Ghost"; and they exhibit the whole mind of God, so far as he though it it
needful, or proper, to make a revelation of it. The design therefore of the
Spirit, in his ^minating-work, is not to enlarge the object of faith, by
revealing any new truths; but to set those that are already revealed in such a
point of light before the minds of men, as that they shall have a just, strong
and lively perception of them, in their divinity, as well as excellency and
importance. That light, which, under the influence of God's Spirit, gives life
and vigor to the "new creation", is "the light of the glory of God", as it is
manifested in the scripture. No other light is necessary; no other is ever made
use of by the holy Ghost, in "enlightening the eyes of men's understanding". He
conveys into their minds no light, no knowledge, no ideas whatever, but as
derived from that old, public, standing revelation of God, THE HOLY BIBLE. To
suppose otherwise would be, in true consequence, to reflect dishonor on this
sacred book, as though it did not exhibit the mind of God in all things
necessary, in order to man's salvation. For if, in the work of illumination,
new truths were discovered, truths the scripture had not before revealed, it
would be an incomplete, insufficient revelation; as needing to be supplied by
new inspiration from the holy Ghost. It could not therefore be justly said of
it, that it is "profitable", so as that "the man of God might be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works"; that it is "able to make men wise
unto salvation"; able to "save their souls"; and to "build them up, and give
them an inheritance among all them that are sanctified"; all which is expressly
affirmed of it, as let into men's minds, and actuated when there, by the
influence of the Spirit of grace.

IT obviously, and necessarily, follows from this remark, that those are grossly
deluded, not divinely illuminated, who imagine, that the "teachings of the
Spirit", under the gospel, are ever afforded to men, either "without" the
revealed written word, or in "opposition" to it. Would to God it were a
falsehood to affirm it of any, that they were thus deluded! But it has been, and
now is, too common a case in the christian world; especially among those, who,
under the influence of an overheated imagination, have been able to see
visions; or to hear voices, audibly speaking, or softly whispering in their
ears; or to feel themselves strongly impressed with this or that notion, or as
strongly impelled to this or that action. Under such warmth of imagination,
there is scarce any thing too absurd for men's faith, or practice. Their
supposed immediate, extraordinary communications of light and knowledge from the
Spirit of God, they substitute in the room of scripture; making these, not
that, the rule by which they walk. If they pay any regard to the sacred books
of inspiration, it is only as they may be interpreted to fall in with that
superior teaching, they vainly conceit they are under. In their own
apprehensions, they are above instruction from the oracles of God; as having a
more safe and sure guide, even the Spirit of truth, who is their immediate
director. It Is strange, any should so grossly deceive themselves. For nothing is
ever suggested to, or impressed on, the minds of men, by the divine Spirit, but
in perfect harmony with the revealed truths of scripture: He makes no
discoveries of any kind, but from this sacred book. His work lies in setting
gospel truth in such a convincing, commanding, striking light, before the eye
of the understanding, as that it may answer the great and good purposes for
which it was revealed. The "inward" teaching of the Spirit ought therefore, in
no case, upon no occasion, to be "opposed" to what is "outwardly" taught in the
revelations of scripture. It Is impossible, as "the scripture was given by
inspiration of God", that there should be any disagreement between what he
"inwardly" teaches, and what he has caused to be "externally" wrote. "What
says the scripture"? ought therefore to be the grand question in all supposed
illuminations, manifestations, suggestions, and discoveries from the Spirit. If
they agree not with this infallible rule, they are not from him; and we may be
as sure of it, as that he is the revealer of the truths contained in the bible.
There is indeed no delusion more dangerous than this, of depending upon the
teaching, and guidance, of the Spirit, "without" the word, or in "opposition"
to it. Men have now a rule, that supersedes the bible, even the immediate
dictates of the Spirit of God; and so are prepared for whatever delusions a
heated imagination, or subtle devil, may suggest to them, under the disguise of
divine communications; and this, in opposition to the clearest reason, as well
as most express revelation. How many enthusiasts, vainly conceiting they were
extraordinarily illuminated by the Spirit, have proceeded from one absurdity to
another, till they have run quite wild! There is scarce any thing so
extravagant, but they have been the patrons of it, and under the pretense too
of being immediately instructed by God to be so. We cannot be too careful in
guarding against any supposed influences, dictates, or manifestations from the
Spirit, to the neglect of the scripture, much more in contradiction to it. This
has never yet failed of betraying men into folly; and the same effect may
always be looked for from the same cause. To wait for the Spirit, and to depend
on him, for teaching and guidance "without the word", or in "opposition to it",
is an endless path of error. As one expresses it, John Stillingfleet, "his
divine presence in the places of religious worship", page 222, 223.
"If there be any delusions in the world, we must own this as the BELZEEBUB
among them. What rule have I to try the Spirit by, but the word revealed, and
written, in the scriptures? As St. John says, "try the Spirits, whether they
are of God or not". But how shall I know, whether I am taught of the Spirit, or
not, unless the word directs me? -- The pretense of the Spirit, in its dictates
of truth, "besides and above the word", will fetch arguments from the same
Spirit to maintain them, though the grossest delusions; and so the word, and all
ordinary means of reducing such to their right wits, become wholly useless and
impossible. We have had too many years experience of the dismal sad effects of
this grand principle of enthusiasm. -- Admit once of new-lights and visions of
the Spirit, and you cannot keep out damnable errors from following after".

THE other remark, deducible from the preceding discourse, is, that God, in the
work of illumination, considers men as endowed with intellectual and moral
powers, and conducts toward them as such, by influencing the exercise of these
powers so as, in "this way", to effect the good pleasure of his grace in them.
It Is true, the light of truth held forth in the sacred books of scripture, that
light by which sinners are "turned from darkness", and enabled to "behold the
glory of the Lord", so as to be "changed into the same image from glory to
glory", is absolutely the gift of God. He first provided it, and then
supernaturally sent it down from above. It Is no more owing to men, than the
understanding faculty itself, they are the subjects of. Both the faculty, and
the object, are wholly and equally of God; the latter, as really as the former,
and as exclusively of all human skill, will, or exertments of any kind
whatever. The work of illumination therefore supposes, both a "faculty" already
planted in men's nature, rendering them capable of being enlightened; and the
existence of "light", whereby it is made possible this should be done: And it
accordingly lies, not in the physical infusion of any power or capacity, they
were not before possessed of; nor yet in the communication of any other light
than that, which is already provided and revealed in the scripture: I say, it
consists in neither of these things, but in such influences of the Spirit, as
are wisely and powerfully suited, so to bring together the
"understanding-faculty" in men, and "gospel truth", its proper object, as that
the latter shall be perceived, believed and understood, to the purposes of
saving and everlasting good. This is all that is wanted; this is all that the
Spirit does in the affair of illumination; and this he effects -- how? Not by
conveying into men's minds the "salutary truth", either in regard of its
evidence, or just import, in the way he provided it, that is, without the
intervening use of their faculties; but in concurrence herewith, and as
influencing and conducting their exercise, so as that the work shall be
accomplished. How should reasonable creatures be bro't to perceive, and
understand, the sacred truths of revelation, as to their evidence, o^ meaning,
but by the use of their intellectual powers? Why were these truths committed to
writing, under the guidance of the holy Ghost? Why solemnly attested to from
heaven, and transmited to after-ages, but that men might read, study, believe
and understand them? But how should they do this, unless by the exercise of
their minds in thinking, considering, and reasoning? It Is readily acknowledged,
sin has "darkened men's hearts", and "blinded their eyes", the eyes of their
understanding; insomuch that they will never see "the truth as it is in Jesus",
so as to perceive its divinity and beauty, and feel its transforming power,
unless by the influence of the illuminating Spirit. But what kind of influence
is this? Not of a kind, we may be assured, that supersedes the use, or sets
aside the exercise, of men's intellectual powers. It is rather adapted, in its
nature and tendency, to excite, assist, superintend, conduct and govern the
exercise of these powers, so as that, in "this way", the light of truth shall
be let into their minds, and exist and operate there as a new and powerful
spring of action. It is a kind of influence that is perfectly suited to the
constitution of men, as reasonable creatures; rendering their endeavors, in
the use of means, highly fit; yea, necessary: Nor otherwise would it be easy,
if possible, to justify the wisdom, or propriety, of a "written revelation",
attested to by God, and intended for universal and perpetual use. If the divine
Spirit, in the "conveyance of the saving truth", does every thing without man,
to the setting aside of all motion, action, or exercise of the human soul with
reference to it, he might directly reveal this truth from heaven to all, God
ever intended should be the happy subjects of it, to the exclusion of the
"written word", as well as the use of men's faculties: Nor can any good reason
be given, why he don't thus reveal the truth to every man, but that the work of
illumination is carried on by the intervening use of means, and the concurring
exercise of human faculties. And it is upon this supposition only, that those, to
whom the gospel has been sent, are capable of being blamed or punished, for not
admiting into their minds the truths it reveals. How otherwise could they, in
reason, be accounted faulty? If men have nothing to do in any kind, with
respect to the admitance of the saving truth into their minds, but the Spirit
of God does all, so as entirely to exclude all exertments of their's, in the
use of any means, with what equity could they be blamed or punished, should it
never be admited there? Will the righteous judge of all the earth account men
sinners, and worthy of condemnation, for not being possessed of that, in order
to the possession of which they have nothing to do themselves, and all doings
of their's would be useless and impertinent? This would be, in reality of
construction, to call them sinners, and to condemn them, for not taking God's
work out of his hands, and doing that themselves which it lay with him to do,
absolutely without them. The scripture no where places this matter in a light
thus injurious to the name, and dishonorary to the perfections and government
of God. On the contrary, if men admit not the light of gospel truth into their
minds, it is attributed to themselves, the fault is charged upon them, and they
are esteemed worthy, on this account, of a heavier condemnation than other men.
Says our Savior himself, Joh. 3.19.
"this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil". "If ye believe not
that I am he, ye shall die in your sins". Joh. 8.24.
"If I had not come, and spoken to them, they had not had sin; but now they
have no cloak for their sins". Joh, 15.22.
"Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life". Joh. 5.40.
"O that thou had known in this thy day the things of thy peace"! -- "How
often would I have gathered you as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings! but ye would not". Matthew. 23.37. Luke 13.34.
Surely, these texts are incapable of any real meaning, if, in the work of
illumination, the Spirit of God makes no use of man, of any of his faculties,
or exertments, but conveys the saving truth absolutely without him, and so as
to set aside all means, and all endeavors that are human. How is it possible,
in this case, that it should be the fault of men, if they are not the subjects
of this truth? It cannot be supposed, that they should be though it worthy, either
of blame, or of punishment.

THE plain truth is, men are not only endowed with intellectual and moral
powers, but charged by their maker with the care, use and exercise of them. And
it is upon this foundation only, that they become capable, in the nature of the
thing, of moral government, and of being counted proper subjects, either of
blame or punishment. And this is as true in regard of matters of pure
reve^ation, as of mere reason. Wherein men can use the faculties they are
endowed with, and are called of God to use them, but neglect to do so; or, what
is worse misuse them to purposes for which they were not betrusted with them,
they are justly charg^able with guilt, and as justly ^iab^e to punishment: But
to speak of them, as either blameable, or punishable, wherein they have nothing
to do, wherein no exercise of any faculty they a^e possessed of is required, or
expected, is, in reality of sense, to say, that they may be blamed, or punished
for nothing; which is, in itself, a downright moral contradiction.

THE result from all which is, that the Spirit of God, in the work of
illumination, so manages his influences, as that men, notwithstanding what he
does, have so much to do themselves that it will be properly their fault, and
justly chargeable upon them as such, if they remain destitute of the saving
truth. It would therefore be a vain thing in any to excuse their ignorance, or
unbelief, of revealed truths, under the pretense, that the divine Spirit has
not been pleased, as yet, savingly to enlighten their minds. I see not, I own,
but this would be a good excuse, and such an one as could never be reasonably
set aside, if the work of illumination was accomplished without any exercise,
motion, or activity, of the human mind; if the Spirit of God was agent in this
matter, so as utterly to exclude all exertments of men in any shape or form.
But if the influences of the Spirit, in the performance of this work, are
accommodated to the make of men; excite, assist, superintend and guide the
exertments of their faculties; and cooperate with these exertments, there is
no difficulty in the case. All due honor is given to the divine Spirit, and men
are agents, notwithstanding his influence; and may justly fall under blame, and
become liable to punishment. This is certainly the light in which the scripture
always places this matter, and the light in which we must view it, if we would
entertain right conceptions of it.

LET us then, as the conclusion of all, consider the intellectual faculties, it
has pleased God to implant in our natures, as betrustments committed to us for
improvement. And let us make the best use of them we can; especially, in order
to our believing and knowing those sacred truths of scripture, which are
connected with our eternal well-being in the future world. Let us daily look
into this book of God, and use the utmost care, caution, deliberation,
diligence and attention, that we may be, not only convinced by the evidence he
has given, that it came from him, but let into the just import of the great
things contained in it. For, it was purposely wrote by inspiration of God, to
furnish our minds with the knowledge, both of the evidence, and meaning, of
those truths which may be "savingly" profitable to us. Yet, let us not depend
upon the exercise of our own powers, as though we needed no help, and could of
ourselves, without assistance from above, attain to such a faith in, and
understanding of, revealed truths, as would avail to our inheriting eternal
life. This would be to deceive ourselves into ruin. For it ought to be
seriously remembered, our thinking and reasoning faculty is greatly weakened
and disordered by means of sin. We have "darkened our hearts"; and are indeed
so under the government of prejudice, passion, and diverse lusts, both of the
flesh, and of the mind, that we stand in absolute need of the influence and
guidance of the Spirit of truth, that our understandings may be enlightened in
the knowledge of those things that pertain to the kingdom of God, and of Jesus
Christ. Let it affect us to think, that God should so pity us, in that state of
ignorance and blindness we had bro't ourselves into by sin, as to make
provision for our being enlightened in all spiritual knowledge and
understanding. Let us be thankful to him for the light of revelation, and for
the holy Spirit to give us to see this light, and so to see it as to be changed
by it into the divine likeness, from glory to glory. These are favors
unspeakably great, and call for our humble and thankful adorations before the
God of all grace. And let us express our gratitude to him, not only by the
words of our mouths, but by a suitable care to comport with the designs of his
mercy, in thus contriving and opening a way for our knowing "the truth as it is
in Jesus", so knowing it as to be eternally saved by it. Let us endeavor to
get our hearts impressed with a deep sense of the need we stand in of the
illuminating influences of the good Spirit. Let us importunably seek to God for
them. Let us do nothing to "grieve the Spirit of God", and provoke him to
depart away from us. Let us cherish his motions, and put ourselves under his
guidance and direction: So may we hope that he will, by helping, and
superintending the exercise of our faculties, "show us God's ways, teach us his
paths", and give us such a view of the great truths of revelation, as that we
shall believe them, and so feel the force of them, as to be formed by them to a
meetness for heavenly glory.

AND if we have any of us been so enlightened by the Spirit, as that we are the
subjects of that faith in Christ, and knowledge in spiritual and divine things,
which are connected with the "justification of life", let us bow the knee in
grateful acknowledgements of the rich grace of God, that has been manifested
toward us. And let it be our daily care to grow in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and to get filled with all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Our own
endeavors, in the use of proper means, are necessary in order hereunto. We
have no reason to expect the assistances of the divine Spirit in any other way.
It Is accordingly seen in experience, that "grace", no more than nature, if
neglected, and not wisely improved, will attain to any considerable degree of
perfection. All our powers, at first, are feeble and lanquid; and it is in a
gradual way, under the divine blessing, that they acquire strength, and rise to
any considerable height in glory. Though, upon our coming into the world, we are
endowed with all the powers which are proper to the human kind; yet, they are
nothing more, in their original implantation, than mere simple capacities; and
it is by time and exercise, that they gradually dilate, expand, and grow to the
maturity, they are fited to attain to. And this is very much the case, with
respect to our moral and spiritual powers. They are small, and weak, in their
beginning; but capable of growth, and naturally tend to it; and will, under the
influence of heaven, continually increase in strength, and go on toward
perfection, if they are duly exercised. I say, if they are duly exercised;
because they depend, in a great measure, upon our use of them in order to their
growth and increase. And it is indeed impossible, consistently with the
established order of God's communicating his grace, that christians should make
any great seize in it, while they are slothful and indolent, and will not
exert themselves with vigor, under the advantages they are favored with. Hence
they are called upon in scripture, not only to depend upon the influence of the
Spirit of truth, but to exert themselves, under it, in all suitable ways. Hence
their "growing in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ", is the matter of a
command, what they are exhorted to as their incumbent duty. 2. Pet. 3.8.
And hence also it is enjoined on them, to "give all diligence to add to their
faith, -- knowledge, and other christian graces". 2 Pet. 1.5.
In like manner, they are applied to, being "newborn babes", to "desire", in
order to use, "the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby"; 1
Pet. 2.2.
yea, they are "besought by the Lord Jesus, that, as they have received how
they ought to walk, so they would abound more and more". 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
If therefore those, who are possessed of the truth, would be through
proficients in the faith and knowledge of Christ, they must not let their
understandings lie by neglected, but take care to employ them diligently, in an
attendance on all the means of spiritual instruction; at the same time, seeking
to God for, and depending on the help and guidance of his Spirit, that they may
so abound in the knowledge of God's will, as that their hearts may be more and
more established in goodness.

SUCH indeed is the weakness of our minds, and so many the ways, in which,
through prejudice, or some wrong biass or other, our intellectual sight may be
obstructed, that we shall, in a degree, remain in ignorance and darkness,
notwithstanding all that we can do ourselves, or that the Spirit of God will do
for us, by his enlightening influences. We must put off mortality, before we
may expect a perfectly illuminated mind. But though light, without any mixture,
even, of criminal darkness, is not compatible with our present state of frailty
and imperfection; yet we may gradually grow in the faith and knowledge of the
truth, so as that we shall perceive it more clearly and fully, feel more and
more of its beauty and force, and be more and more wro't upon by it to our
being dialy formed to a greater "meetness for the inheritance of the sanctified
by faith in Jesus Christ".

IN order whereto, having committed ourselves to the guidance of him who is
"light", and in "whom there is no darkness", we should heedfully watch over all
the propensities of our nature, lest they should insinuate themselves into our
understandings, and give a wrong turn to our tho'ts; and perpetually be upon
our guard, that neither vanity, nor singularity, nor interest, nor any thing
else, break in upon our integrity, and prevent our making the highest
seize in the knowledge of spiritual and divine truths. And by a constant
heedful use of suitable care, we may hope, under the influences of the good
Spirit, that "the light that is in us will not be darkness", but a "shining
light" that will "shine more and more", with an increasing brightness, till it
lets us into the light of "perfect day". Which God grant may be the portion of
us all, through Jesus Christ! AMEN.

SERMON XII. The Question answered, what shall I do that I may have eternal
Life?
MATTHEW XIX. 16. "And behold, one came and said unto him, good master, what
good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life"?


THE story, of which my text is part, is an observable one, and would, if duly
meditated on, naturally give rise to a variety of notes, "profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness": But
my present design, and the limits of this discourse, forbid my taking any
further notice of it, than may be occasionally proper, in order to illustrate
the words I have selected to engage your attention, at this time.

THEY contain an address to our blessed Lord, (...) way of inquiry, upon no
less an affair than (...) of eternal life. And the following particulars are
observable in it.

THE "person" making this inquiry; the "manner" in which he made it; and
finally, "the enquiry itself".

1. AS to the "person" making this inquiry, he is described, in the text, in a
general way only. "Behold one came and said unto him". But, (...) the 20th
verse, he is pointed out as a person (...) the prime and flower of life. "The
young man says unto him". The evangelist Luke, in his narrative of this story,
speaks of him as a person of figure, one clothed with authority. "A certain
ruler asked him". And all the evangelists, who have related this story, unite
in describing him as wealthy, one that "had great possessions".

THESE are the particulars descriptive of the person, who came to our Savior
with the question in my text. He had probably just come to the age of man, and
to have a large estate at his own disposal. And, being a young man of fortune,
and perhaps of superior accomplishments, he was soon taken notice of, and,
while a youth, made a ruler among the Jews. He could scarce have been placed
under circumstances more likely to make him totally tho'tless of another life.
And yet, in the height of youth, and all the ensnarements accompanying riches
and honor, he extends his view beyond this present world, and inquires what he
should do to obtain an inheritance in the better eternal world?

AN instructive example this! And I may pertinently take occasion from it, to
bespeak our young men of rank and fortune; putting them upon their guard, lest
they should live unmindful of their souls, and the state that is beyond the
grave. Your danger, in this respect, is awfully great. You are now in that
period of (...), which is attended with peculiar temptation^, as well as
advantages; and the temptations, in regard of you, are much greater, and more
numerous, than in regard of ordinary young people. O how common is it for young
persons, in your circumstances, to abandon themselves to levity and vanity;
"walking in the way of their own hearts, and in the sight of their own eyes,
not knowing", not considering, "that God will bring them into judgment for
these things"! How common to pervert the design of God's bestowments on them,
by taking occasion from them to gratify their lusts, whether of the flesh, or
mind! How common to give themselves up to the enjoyments of time and sense;
living in the world, as though they had no faith in God, no faith in revelation,
no sense of religion, no concern about their existence beyond the grave! O take
heed, that you also be not drawn aside, and enticed, by the amusements and
pleasures of this vain and evil world! And while so many of your age, and
circumstances in life, are practically saying to their souls, "take your ease,
eat, drink, and be merry"; let it be your inquiry, "what shall we do to inherit
eternal life"? And be wanting in no labors, nor in the use of any proper means,
that you may finally, of the mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, come to the
enjoyment of it Remember, if you don't get into such a state in this world, as
that, when you leave it, you may enter upon the happy life, that is the great
promise of the gospel, you must suffer the "second death": Nor will the
distinction, in outward and civil respects, it has pleased God to make between
you and others, serve in the least to secure you herefrom; it will rather be a
means to render the pains of this death the more dreadful and intolerable.

BUT it should be the care, not only of young persons of figure and fortune,
but of every condition, to inquire "what they shall do to inherit eternal
life"? And to pursue this enquiry to effect. This is the "one thing needful".
Nothing can be proposed to you of more serious weight, and awful importance.
Your everlasting well-being is connected herewith. And what more proper season
for the buisiness of religion, and the concerns of the soul and salvation, than
the age of youth? Now is eminently "the accepted time, and the day of
salvation". Now you are under the greatest advantages to secure the favor of
God, and an interest in the only constituted redeemer of sinners. Now, if you
seek to God for his mercy, you will have the most probable prospect of finding
it: But if you lose this opportunity, you will never have a better, and you
know not that you shall have any other. O be persuaded to be seriously tho'tful
about your souls, and their happy existence in another world! Beg of God to
impress your minds with a just sense of the importance of spiritual and eternal
concerns. And if such a sense has been excited in any of you, don't suffer it
to wear off; but let it quicken and invigorate your endeavors, in the use of
all appointed means, that you may be formed to a meetness for that life in
heaven, which shall never have an end.

THERE is yet another thing, in the character of this young man, worthy of
notice; and that is, his regular life. He was no fornicator, nor adulterer, nor
liar, nor profane swearer; but seems rather to have been a youth of a sober,
blameless conversation. He therefore replied, when our Savior bid him "keep the
commandments", as in the 20th ver. "master, all these have I observed from my
youth". And he probably spoke the truth, according to the sense, in which he
had been instructed, by the jewish teachers, to understand the law. There is no
reason to think, but he had abstained from those follies, which too commonly
pollute the lives of young people. And besides this, he had, in all likelihood,
been externally devout; a worshipper of the God of his fathers; an observer of
the sabbath, and the various rites of the Mosaic dispensation; a man strictly
chaste and temperate in his life; and, in a word, as "touching the
righteousness that is of the law", externally "blameless". And it was much to
his honor, that he had been so far religious. It Is observeable, it was more
especially upon the account of his blameless sober life, that our Savior "loved
him". So speaks the evangelist Mark, Chap. 10. ver. 21.
"THEN Jesus beholding him, loved him. THEN, that is, "when he had answered,
and said, all these have I observed from my youth".

I MAY properly take occasion from hence, to urge upon our young people a care
to conform their external practice to the divine law. This, it is true, will
not suffice to constitute you good men, in the estimation either of the law, or
gospel. If you go no further, you will still lack that which is absolutely
needful. But for all this, a freedom from the outward acts of sin, is very
commendable: Nor is it (as the times now are) a despicable attainment. Would to
God, it could be said with truth of all our youths, they are not given "to
rioting and wontoness"; they "have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness"; they profane neither the day, nor name of God; but are, to all
appearance, virtuous and sober! It would rejoice the hearts of many sollicitous
parents, and yield a comfortable prospect, with reference to the rising
generation. But alas! there are too many, among our young people, who give a
loose to their sensual inclinations, and are even scandalous in their pursuits
of carnal pleasures. And when such numbers of young persons are so shamefully
attached to the vanities of time and sense, denying themselves scarce any thing
their heart can wish, or their eyes look upon; how happily distinguished would
you be, from the many of your age, should you "flee youthful lusts", and escape
those follies whereby their lives are polluted? Should you be chaste and
modest, sober and temperate; in a^l things conforming your external behavior
to the divine law? It Is true indeed, as I just now observed, freedom from vice,
and a mere external conformity to the law, will not argue that men are possessed of
the "real power of godliness". There must be a "heart purified by faith", as
well as the outward appearance of virtue in the life. But this notwithstanding,
a freedom from sin, especially in instances that are gross and heinous, is
infinitely better than an allowed indulgence to vice and wickedness. And it is a
glory to a young man, or woman, to be unlike to the multitudes of their age,
who are shamefully debauched in their morals. It Is indeed an agreeable sight to
behold one and another, in the bloom of life, avoiding this and the other bad
course, abstaining from this and the other corrupt custom, and maintaining a
care to be honest, sober and chaste; though they should not have attained so high
as to be "transformed in their minds by the renewing of the holy Ghost". Our
Savior loved the young man spoken of in my text, though he had no more religion
than this comes to; and he will love you also with the same kind of love.

2. THE next thing observable in my text, is the "manner" in which this young
man inquired of our Savior, with reference to eternal life. And it is
sufficiently evident, that it was with a becoming decency. He appears to have
been a well-bred youth, one who knew how to behave, and was disposed to behave,
toward those with whom he had occasion to converse, with respectful
agreableness. We are told in the text, that, upon coming to our Lord for
instruction in the affairs of another life, he saluted him in that style, "good
master"! He calls him "master"; owning his authority as a teacher, putting
himself in the place of a learner, and tacitly suggesting his readiness to
receive instruction. He gives him the title of "good"; signifying the honorable
opinion he had of him, as well as hope of being kindly answered, as concerning
the serious and important question he had proposed to him.

NOR was his language only respectful, but he treated our Savior with becoming
decency in his behavior; for, as the evangelist Mark observes, Chap. 10. ver.
17.
"he kneeled to him", no doubt in veneration of him as an extraordinary
teacher, one far superior to the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat in Moses's seat
Of all the persons, who addressed to our Lord for religious instruction, we
read of none, who carried it toward him with greater external decorum. And it
is the more observable in this young man, because he was both rich and
honorable. And riches and honor united in the same person, especially when
young, before he is arrived to maturity in judgment, and to have had experience
of the world, is apt to elate his mind, puffing him up with a vain conceit of
himself, and rendering him unfit to receive instruction, or to treat those with
a becoming reverence, who are able to give it him. But it was not thus with
this young man. Notwithstanding the elevation of his circumstances in life, he
appears to have been a modest youth of a sweet, agreeable, endearing deportment.
To be sure, his behavior toward Christ was decent and respectful.

YOUNG people should learn from, this example, a becoming, winning, respectful
carriage, especially toward their superiors. This will beautify your
character, and render you amiable in the eyes of all, who have opportunity to
behold the decency of your deportment: Whereas, if you are rude in your speech
and behavior, you will appear with an ill grace, and make but a disagreable
figure.

I SHALL not think it a needless digression here to recommand this respectful
carriage, in young persons toward their superiors, in a few special instances.
As thus,

CHILDREN should behave with all dutiful reverence toward their parents Their
speech should be grave, mannerly, engaging; and their carriage such as may be
expressive of suitable esteem and honor. This is particularly required in the
5th commandment, which is, "thou shall honor thy father, and thy mother" And
what more agreeable, than to behold an habitual veneration in children toward
t^eir parents, discovered upon all proper occasions both in their speech and
behavior? There is scarce a more pleasant sight. It recommends such children
to the approbation of all, who have any notion, either of civil or religious
decency, and propriety: Whereas on the contrary, what more grating than to hear
children bespeaking their parents in terms of disrespect? Or to see them
behaving toward them, in a rude and unseemly manner?

IN like manner, those young persons, who, by the authority of their parents,
or guardians, and by their own consent, are fixed, in order to their future
advantage, in the relation of servants to others, should behave toward them
with all decent respect both in word and deed. They should not bespeak their
masters, as though they were their equals; much less should their carriage
toward them be expressive of the want of due honor, and reverence. The apostle
exhorts, 1 Timothy 6.1.
"Let as many servants as are under the yoke, account their own masters worthy
of all honor, that the name of God, and his doctrine, be not blasphemed". It
tends to the reproach of religion, and occasions unworthy reflections on the
name of God, and his doctrine, when servants, instead of expressing a just
esteem and reverence of their masters, carry it indecently toward them,
whether in language, or behavior. The prophet therefore observes, Mal. 1.6.
"A servant honoreth his master". A good servant does so, one who has upon his
mind a just sense of his duty: Nor otherwise will he deserve this character.

MOREOVER, young persons should carry it toward those who are in age, with all
suitable deference. Their age gives them superiority, be their circumstances,
on other accounts, as they will; and makes a respectful deportment toward
them, decent and proper. That therefore was a law in Israel, Levit. 19.32.
"Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man".
And it is peculiarly graceful, when children and young people treat their fathers
in age, in a manner becoming their superiority in years. It discovers a modesty
of temper, an ingenuity of disposition, which are highly recommending: Whereas,
if the "child behaves himself proudly against the ancient"; if he carries it
toward him with neglect, or despises him because he is old, either in language
or behavior, it argues a bad turn of mind, and is offensive in the sight both
of God and man. But especially ought young people to be cautious of every
thing, that does not favor of a just decorum toward those, whose "hoary heads
are a crown of glory to them, being found in the way of righteousness".

In these, and such like instances, should young persons endeavor to render
themselves agreeable. They may, it is true, fall short of the power of religion,
tho they should behave toward their superiors, in this graceful manner we have
described; but it is a desirable conduct notwithstanding. It rendered the young
man in my text lovely in the sight of the blessed Jesus. And it is in itself a
lovely recommending circumstance in the character of a young person of whatever
condition in life. It discovers a becoming sweetness of disposition, an
agreeable modesty and obligingness of temper, which are highly ornamental, and
appear so in the eyes of the whole civili^d, not to say, christian world.

THERE is yet another thing, as to the "manner", in which this young man
inquired about eternal life, well worthy of notice; and that is, the
engagedness of heart with which he did it. It was indeed the serious concern he
had upon his mind about the affairs of another world, that bro't him to our
Savior, and put him upon making the inquiry in my text. Some came to him to ask
him questions, not from any serious sense they had of religion, not with a view
to receive instruction; but that they might ensnare him in his discourse. But
this was not the temper of mind, with which this young man came to our Lord. He
appears, from the general run of the story, to have been a tho'tful serious
young man; and he was probably, at this time, under an awakened concern about
the great affair of eternal life. To be sure, he appears like one, whose heart
was full of the matter. Hence the evangelist Mark observes, Chap. 10. v. 17.
that "he came running" to our Lord. This denotes the engagedness of his heart.
He was earnest and eager to be resolved in the important question he had to
make, relative to eternal life.

AND he has herein set an example, worthy of the imitation of young persons;
yea, of all persons whatsoever. What should engage our concern, if not an
affair that relates to "our everlasting wellbeing, in that world we must go
into, when we shall no longer live in this? O the stupidity of those
multitudes, who are so concerned about the present life, that they have none at
all about the other! One would think it impossible, reasonable creatures should
be guily of such madness of folly! and yet, it is the very folly the generality
of mankind run into. They run into it at their first setting out in the world,
and too commonly continue in it as long as they live; as if their great and
only buisiness was, to pursue the profits, and please themselves with the
amusements and vanities of this evil and transitory world. The good Lord open
our eyes to see our amazing folly, and awaken in us a serious and deep concern
about the affairs of religion and another world! This is the first thing
necessary. Concern about any thing is the spring of all endeavors, with
reference to it. We must therefore be concerned about eternal life. And if this
o^ce comes to be our case, and our concern is deep and through, we shall be
seriously inquisitive, how we may obtain it; and our endeavors, consequent
hereupon, will be such, as that we shall be in "a hopeful way" of being
prepared in this world, for the enjoyment of eternal blessedness in the next.
-- But I must now proceed to the --

3. THIRD thing observable in the text, and this is, "the inquiry itself", the
young man proposes to our Savior; contained in those words, "what good thing
shall I do, that I may have eternal life"?

HE here takes it for granted, that there is another life after the present is
ended, and that it may be an eternally happy one. So that he had faith in this
first, and essential article of all religion. And, probably, the foundation of
it was, not the exercise of his reason upon mere na^ural principles, but upon
the scriptures of the old testament which, being a Jew, he had in his hands,
and looked upon as wrote by holy men inspired by God. And it were to be wished,
that all who are favored with the writings of the new, as well as old
testament, had the like faith. There are Saducees among christians, so called,
as there were among the Jews; that is, men of corrupt minds, who say there is
"neither angel, nor spirit", nor future state of existence, hereby erasing the
foundation of all religion For "he that comes to God, must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him", as the author of
the epistle to the Hebrews expresses it. 11. Chap. 6th ver.


THE young man, in my text, was not in this corrupt way of thinking. For he
supposes it a matter past all dispute, that there was such a thing as eternal
life; and his inquiry accordingly is, not whether there was such a life? But
"what he should do that he might have it"?

AND here it is apprehended by most interpreters, that he discovered his
ignorance of the gospel-method of salvation by grace through Christ. And it is
highly probable, being a Jew, and educated in the principles generally received
in that day, his mind was leavened with the notion of obtaining life upon the
foot of law. He doubtless imagined, when he proposed the question, in my text,
that doing was the ground or reason upon which he might hope for life. Some
good thing he supposed must be done; and he desires to be instructed, what this
good thing was, that he might do it. And here lay his ultimate dependence. It
was his doing this good thing he concluded would, in its own virtue, give him a
right to eternal life: In which he was grossly mistaken, and really "established
his own righteousness", instead of honoring Christ as "the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes".

YOU will then possibly ask, must the concerned sinner sit still, and do
nothing in order to eternal life? Or, if he does any thing, will he be
chargeable with "ignorance of God's righteousness", and "establishing his own"?

I ANSWER, this will by no means follow from what has been said, with reference
to this young querist It Is true indeed, and readily acknowledged to be so, that
nothing ought to be done in the sense, in which he understood doing, in the
question he put to our Savior. For he undoubtedly imagined, that doing was
that, in the sole virtue of which, upon the sole account of which, he might
obtain a right to eternal life: In which view of doing, nothing can be done by
us; nor indeed ought we so much as to attempt the doing of any thing; yea, so
far is doing, or any attempt toward it, in this sense, either necessary, or
fit, that it is, in reality of construction, and by just consequence, a
subversion of grace and faith; for "if righteousness comes by the law, faith is
made void, and Christ is dead in vain"; as the apostle Paul argues, Gal. 2.21.
But still, sinners in concern about eternal life, ought by no means to sit
idle, as though they had nothing to do. For though they can do nothing, nor ought
to do any thing, as the "consideration" upon which they may hope for the
obtainment of life; yet, in subserviency to Christ, and while their dependence
is principally and ultimately on him, and not on the virtue o^ woe thiness of
their own doings, they may do all within the verge of their power. They may
"ask, seek, knock"; they may "watch, pray, labor, strive, wrestle, fight", and,
in a word, "do with their might whatsoever their hands find to do", a^ the
scripture expressions are. And they ought, it is their undoubted duty, thus to
exert themselves to the utmost: Nor will they, by so doing, be justly
chargeable with "frustrating" either "the grace of God", or that "righteousness
of his which is by faith": Nay, it is only in this way of doing, that they may
reasonably hope for the obtainment of that "eternal life, which is the gift of
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord".

BUT as this is a matter of very considerable importance, I shall not think it
either unprofitable, or unseasonable, if I am at some pains to set it in a more
full and distinct light. In order whereto let it be remembered,

THERE are three things, with reference to the great affair of eternal life,
which are worthy of special note; namely, the rise or source of the divine
plan, conformably to which it becomes obtainable; the moral ground or
foundation, upon which it is obtained; and finally, the character of the
persons who shall actually obtain it.

JUST conceptions of these things will, if I mistake not, lead us into just
ideas of our own exertments. We shall herefrom clearly perceive, not only its
being fit and reasonable, that we should be up and doing, but be instructed how
to give what we do, its proper place, and due subordination, in the buisiness
of eternal life.

AS to the first of these things, the source of the plan, conformably to which
eternal life becomes obtainable, -- it is the free favor of God, his undeserved
love and good will. The excitement hereto was not from without, but lay wholly
in his own breast. It proceeded from the essential, everlasting, supremely
perfect benevolence of his nature. No foreseen doings of our's, in any shape
whatever, had the least influence to persuade hereto. "He first loved us". We
were indeed "sinners" in the view of God, when he came into the gospel-scheme
of bestowing life. Adorable grace therefore was that, and that only, which
moved him hereto. It sprang from this source, antecedently to all other
considerations whatever. Even the appointment of Christ, to carry the plan of
life into execution, was posterior to, and consequent upon, this love of God,
and one of the amazingly glorious effects of it. "God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten son, that we might have life through him".

NOW, the consequence naturally and obviously deducible from these premises is,
that eternal life, in regard of its being an obtainable blessing, has no
connection with, or the least dependence on, any thing we can do: Nor is it
either necessary, or fit, that we should do any thing, or attempt to do any
thing, as though we could hereby move the heart of God to a willingness that life
might be obtainable. This would be to substitute works in the room of grace;
taking that glory to ourselves, which is due only to God: Whereas, that
absolutely free favor, and undeserved love of God, to which it is owing that
life is attainable, should be the first and great object of our dependence; and
what we do, should be done in a becoming subserviency hereto Grace, in this
way, will be principally honored, and not our selves. And I may pertinently
add, it is only this way of doing, that is adapted to give ease and quiet to the
sinner's conscience He might well be filled with desponding anxiety and fear,
if his dependence was on his own worthless doings to move the heart of God
toward him; but while he exerts himself, having his chief and ultimate
dependence on that boundless grace of God, which, from everlasting, gave rise
to the plan of redemption, he may reasonably take heart, and be of good
courage. For, "if, while an enemy", the love of God was such, as to purpose and
contrive a way, wherein he might "be reconciled; how much more, being thus far
reconciled", may he hope to obtain life?

THE next thing, in regard of eternal life, worthy of particular remark is, the
moral ground or reason of its bestowment. And this is the meritorious life and
death of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. The inspired writings, especially
those of the new testament, every where lead us to think thus of the matter. I
need not turn you to the texts. You are all, it may reasonably be presumed, too
well acquainted with them to be ignorant, that that glorious person, the only
begotten son of God, while in our world, a partaker of flesh and blood, both
did and suffered every thing that was necessary, in order to a righteousness,
on account of which God might, in consistency with the honor of his
perfections, and the authority of his law and government, make the grant of
eternal life. Accordingly, this meritorious righteousness of Christ is that,
for the sake of which, upon the account of which, this blessing is conferred.
And on whomsoever it is conferred, this is the true ground or reason of its
bestowment.

IT IS easy now to collect from this remark, that no doings of our's are to be
looked upon, as the reason, or consideration, upon which the gift of life is
made. In this sense, all works of righteousness, done by us, are totally
useless* yea, the doing of them would reflect dishonor on Christ, as though his
worthiness was an insufficient ground of dependence for life. The plain truth
is, the perfect righteousness of Christ is the one only meritorious cause of
eternal life. For which reason, we are to do nothing, it is not fit we should
do any thing, we cannot indeed do any thing, in the virtue of which, upon the
account of which, we may hope to obtain life. All doings of our's in this
sense, would be that "establishment of our own righteousness", in opposition to
"the righteousness of God by faith", which is so often cautioned against by the
apostle Paul. They are therefore, in this view of them, with great care, and
particularity excluded, in his epistles, from having any, the least hand in the
affair of salvation: And with the highest reason; for if life could be obtained
in the virtue of any doings of our's, it would "come through the law, and not
through the righteousness of faith"; which would "make faith void", and the life
and death of Christ of none effect".

THE last thing to be taken notice of, with respect to eternal life, is the
persons upon whom it shall actually be bestowed. And these are not sinners in
common. For though eternal life, of the rich superabounding grace of God, is a
blessing obtainable by all without exception; and though the true reason of its
bestowment, the righteousness of Christ, is meritoriously sufficient for all:
Yet, the actual bestowment of it is limited to some only, and these, of a
certain character. Unbelieving impenitent sinners, so living, and so dying,
instead of entering into life, shall suffer the "second death": Nor will the
grace of God, or the righteousness of Christ, be any security to them herefrom.
The persons upon whom God will actually bestow eternal life are those, who so
believe in his son Jesus Christ, as to be possessed of a disposition to true
holiness, that will throw itself out into suitable corresponding acts, as
occasions are offered therefore in the providence of God. This is the "grand
mark", by which they are described in the revelations of scripture. And upon
whomsoever it is found, whether they are Jews, or Gentiles; whether they be
bond, or free; whether they are male or female; they are, in the gospel
estimation, subjectively meet for the bestowment of life; and life shall
actually be bestowed upon them, of the rich grace of God, upon account of the
meritorious righteousness of his son Jesus Christ. And these are the only
persons, upon whom he will bestow it. As for all others, be they who they will,
or their character what it will, their doom will be, to be "cast into outer
darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth".

THIS remark now will clearly and distinctly point out to us the suitableness
of our own exertions, with reference to eternal life; and, at the same time,
ascertain their proper use, and place, in this momentous affair.

WE have seen, that eternal life will be bestowed upon none but persons of
"such a character", that is, upon none but those, who are subjectively meet for
it. What therefore we have to do, lies wholly in endeavors relating to this
character, and this meetness. God, of his free favor, has absolutely made
eternal life an obtainable blessing. Here then we have nothing to do. All
doings of our's would be impertinent. Christ, by his meritorious righteousness,
has furnished a completely perfect reason for the bestowment of it. Here also
it would be highly absurd to suppose, we had any thing to do. This would be to
place our own doings in the room of the perfect righteousness of Christ; which
is, constructively, a subversion of the gospel. All therefore that we have to
do must relate to that character, which the constitution of the gospel makes
necessary in order to the actual possession and enjoyment of that eternal life,
which the free favor of God has made obtainable, and which he may honorably
bestow in consideration of his son's meritorious righteousness.

AND in this view of doing, there is both room for it, and an high degree of
fitness in it, while we properly subordinate what we do to Christ and grace.
For it is to be remembered, though God is the principal agent in the application
of redemption, or, what means the same thing, in forming the character, without
which he will never bestow eternal life; yet, in the doing of this, he
considers us as intelligent and moral agents, as beings endowed with the
several powers of thinking, reasoning, willing, choosing, refusing, desiring,
hoping, loving, fearing, hating, and the like; and accordingly deals with us as
such, by cooperating with these powers, in use of proper means, suitably
adjusted to their nature. He don't make men believers, without the use of their
own faculties; neither does he form them to this character, by giving them new
faculties, or by destroying, or making any physical change, in their old ones;
but accomplishes his pleasure in them, by accommodating his agency to their
proper make and constitution. The bible always represents the matter in this
light. And this method of acting exhibits the true reason of the erection of
God's visible kingdom, under the administration of his son Jesus Christ, with
all its means, privileges, motives and blessings. Of what significancy would it
be to place sinners under the gospel dispensation, if they had nothing to do
but to sit still? In this view of the matter, of what use would the
institutions of religion be to them? Of what service, the instructions, calls,
entreaties, counsels, warnings and encouragements of God's word? To what
purpose would it be to apply to them to enlighten their minds, to influence
their wills, to alarm their consciences, to awaken their passions and
affections? There would be no propriety, I might rather say, there would be a
downright impropriety and absurdity, in this method of dealing with them, if
they had nothing to do but to wait till God, without any exertion of their's,
should make them meet for eternal life.

IT IS he indeed that forms men to this meetness; but he does it mediately, and
in a way suited to their nature as ^sonable and moral beings. It Is therefore
observable, faith, conversion, the new man in Christ, which constitute the
character of those who are "meet for the inheritance of the saints in light",
are not only spoken of, in the inspired writings, as "the work of God", but a
work that he begins, maintains, carries on, and compleats, with the "concurring
agency of men themselves", in the use of various means wisely adapted to the
purpose. Here therefore there is both room, and opportunity for the exertment
of our reasonable powers; and if we neglect to make the proper use of them, we
can reflect the blame no where but on ourselves, if we are never made the
subjects of that faith which is to salvation.

THE plain truth is, God, man, and means, are all concerned in the formation of
that character, without which we cannot inherit eternal life. They ought not
therefore to be set in opposition to each other; but should be considered as
jointly agreeing, and concurring, in this great affair. And the separating
these, or the opposing them to one another, or the setting aside any one of
them in order to exalt the other, is a disservice to religion, and dangerous to
the souls of men. The order of the divine plan, and harmony of its parts, are
hereby broke in upon, and those things disjoined, and viewed as counter-acting
each other, which the wisdom of God has joined together, and duly subordinated
to each other.

IF, on the one hand, it would be extremely unreasonable, and highly derogatory
from the honor of God's grace, because, in many texts of scripture, we are
called upon "to believe, repent, and be converted", to argue from hence, there
is no need of the powerful operations of the divine Spirit to introduce that
moral change which is signified by these expressions: So would it, on the other
hand, be extravagant and absurd, because faith and conversion are ascribed to
the influences of God's grace, to conclude herefrom, that there is no propriety
in the use of means; no need of preaching, or hearing, or praying; no need of
instructions and motives, nor of the exercise of our own powers in attending to
them; nor of any exertments of our's, that this work may be accomplished in us.
It Is true, means, in themselves simply considered, will do nothing to any saving
purpose; but still, God, by the powerful influences of his Spirit, can render
them effectual; and with this dependence only should we use them. It Is true
also, we are, in our present fallen state, poor, weak, corrupt and sinful
creatures; but however weak and corrupt we are, we yet retain the character of
intelligent moral agents; and the grace of God does not supersede our activity,
neither does it destroy our faculties as men, but supposes the exertment of
them; and by their exertment, duly subordinated to the influences of the
divine Spirit, and concurring with them, that work of grace is wro't in us,
whereby we are made meet for eternal life.

THE short of the matter is, the scripture every where considers us as men, as
moral and intelligent agents, and represents God as beginning and carrying on
the work of faith and conversion in a way analagous to our make as such, by
making use of means, and requiring our attention to them, and the exertment of
even all our powers in subordination to him, and the all-powerful influences of
his grace and Spirit. A great part of the bible would be unintelligible upon
any other scheme of though it. If it did not lie with us to make use of our several
faculties, whether intellectual or moral, why has God taken such care, in all
suitable ways, to apply to them to excite their exercise? Why has he offered so
much light to inform our understandings? Why, so many motives to persuade our
wills? Why, so many awakening considerations to alarm our consciences? Why so
many curses and blessings to rouse our fears, and animate our hopes? Surely, it
is reasonable and fit we should exert these powers of our nature, or such
reasons to engage their exertment would never have been presented to us. Shall
God set before our view his law, in all its strictness and terror, on purpose
that it might be a "schoolmaster" to teach us our abounding sinfulness and
guilt, and show us the absolute need we stand in of the Savior he has provided
for us; and we, at the same time, take no care, make use of no endeavors to
learn, from this instructor, the undone state we are in as sinners, that we may
be in a proper disposition to look out for help in the mercy of God through Jesus
Christ? Shall God reveal to us the hope of the gospel, the all sufficiency of
Christ as a redeemer, the fullness of merit and grace there is in him, his
ability and readiness to save even the chief of sinners, and we remain unmoved
under these amazing discoveries of his love and pity, and set down easy
without doing any thing at all that we may partake of the benefits of redeeming
grace? Shall God apply to every faculty he has endowed us with, every principle
of action in our nature; omiting nothing we can mention, nothing we can
conceive of, that is adapted to work upon reasonable creatures, and we continue
notwithstanding indolent and inactive? It Is infinitely absurd to suppose it fit
it should be so. And, in truth, we are so constituted, that it cannot be so; it is
impossible we should sit still, and do nothing, unless we are stupidly
ignorant, or as stupidly insensible.

SOME, I know, under the pretense of being jealous for the honor of Christ and
grace, have represented all exertments of our's as hurtful, rather than useful;
and instead of urging sinners to "strive to enter in at the strait gate",
rather tell them their own endeavors are useless, and it better becomes them
to wait inactive till God shall please powerfully to work the work of faith in
them. But this is to run from one extreme to another, and to guard against one
danger, by geting into another as truly fatal. We cannot be too much concerned,
that Christ and grace may have their due glory in the affair of our salvation;
but under the notion of exalting Christ, and magnifying grace, we must not
reflect dishonor on the wisdom of God, who has so contrived the plan of life,
as to make our exertments necessary, though in the proper place of subordination.
If there is danger, lest, if men are put upon doing, they should trust to their
doings to the dishonor of Christ; is there not danger likewise, if they are
instructed to sit idle and do nothing, lest they should miss of grace, die
without an interest in Christ, and perish in another world? The proper method
here is, not to suppose that men must be inactive, but to show them how their
activity may be so subordinated to the grace of God, and the righteousness of
Christ, as that they may harmonise with each other in the great affair of
eternal life; which is what I have endeavored to do in the preceding discourse.

AND now, as the conclusion of what we have heard, let us endeavor to
entertain in our minds just conceptions of the scheme of God, with reference to
eternal life. Let us adore and magnify that unmerited love, and free favor of
his, which have made it obtainable by the sinful sons of men. Let us admire his
wisdom in contriving so wonderful an expedient, for the bestowment of it in a
way honorary to his perfections and government, as the meritorious
righteousness of his son Jesus Christ. And let our hope for life be primarily
and ultimately grounded on grace and Christ, and not on any doings of our's,
lest we become chargeable with "establishing our own righteousness", and not
submiting to that which God has contrived and appointed: Yet, let us beware of
sitting idle, and doing nothing, as if all doing of our's was needless; for it
has its place; and, in its place, it is highly proper. Neither the grace of
God, nor the merits of Christ, take away the necessity, or the suitableness, of
our own exertions in the business of attaining to life; and it is so far from
honoring the grace of God, or the merits of the redeemer, to suppose such a
thing, that it really casts reproach upon them both. It Is to separate between
those things, which God has joined together. Men may, it is true, place their own
doings in the room of Christ, or divine grace; and so they may, under the
notion of exalting Christ, and magnifying grace, reject all exertions of
their's as useless, and to no purpose: But, in either of these cases, dishonor
is done to the redeemer, and that grace of God which can never be inconsistent
with our own endeavors, duly subordinated. While therefore we give God the
glory of his grace, in making life attainable; and Christ, the glory of his
worthiness, in depending on that for the bestowment of it, let us labor and
strive, that we may be made meet for this great and absolutely necessary
blessing; as firmly believing, we can have no good reason to expect to be made
thus meet for it, if we sit still and do nothing: Whereas, if we exert
ourselves with zeal and vigor, in the use of appointed means, we may encourage
ourselves to hope, that God, for Christ's sake, will begin, maintain, and carry
on that work of grace in our souls, which will finally end in that life of
glory, in the heavenly world, which shall be eternal. GOD grant this may be the
happy portion of us all for his mercy's sake, in Jesus Christ our Lord!

AMEN.
The reader is desired to correct the following Errata, and any other he may
observe that have escaped the Author's notice.

Page 40. title page read answered. p. 41. l. 31. for purity, r. sincerity. p.
77. last l. aft. chief dele, p. 93. l. 24. aft. subjects r. of. p. 99. l. 18.
f. they were, r. it was. p. 107. at bot f. Gen r. Heb. p. 108. at mark r. Heb.
11. p. 118. l. 8. r. remembered. p. 128. l. 9. f. had, r. has. p. 138. l. 1. f.
has, r. have. p. 175. Note l. 9. f. words, r. sounds. p. 176. Note l. 4. dele
same. p. 211. last l. f. his, r. sin. p. 250. l. 18. r. things. p. 259. l. 20.
f. believers, r. unbelievers. p. 267. Note l. 8. dele greater. p. 288. l. 17.
aft. gross, r. a. p. 315. l. 27. r. daily. p. 325. l. 2. r. recommend.


