THE PLAIN DEALER: OR, A few REMARKS upon QUAKER-POLITICKS, And their ATTEMPTS
to Change the GOVERNMENT Of PENNSYLVANIA. WITH Some OBSERVATIONS on the false
and abusive PAPERS which they have lately published.

NUMB. I. TO BE CONTINUED.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, ANNO MDCCLXIV.

The Plain Dealer, etc.
FOR several years I have been a silent spectator of the political conduct of a
particular faction in this province; I have observed how they have ruled in
most public transactions; have handled the public money, and disposed of our
lives and fortunes at pleasure: I have seen this very faction raise the hue and
cry about liberty, while they were stealing the poor remains of liberty from
the miserable inhabitants of the province: And I have now observed, that while
the injured and distressed are crying for redress, they are endeavoring to
plunge us into new schemes, in order to amuse us; though the wound is still
bleeding of which we have complained. In such a situation, silence would no
longer become a friend of liberty and his country. And as our representatives
are gone home to consult with their constituents, what is to be done in this
conjuncture, I think we are now in a particular manner called upon to speak
out, and tell what we take to be the origin of all our troubles, and what is
the best way to cure them. For my part, I am clearly persuaded that Quaker
politics, and a Quaker faction, have involved this province into almost all
the contentions, and all the miseries under which we have so long struggled.

There can never be a greater cause, perhaps no other cause of tumults and
complaints in any government, than the people conceiving that unjust laws are
imposed on them, and that measures are pursued to which they did not consent.
This is the very case with the majority of this province. They are deprived of
their share in legislation; laws are made and imposed on them, and measures are
taken which they do not approve, and yet cannot prevent, because they are not
fairly represented in Assembly. This would be in any view, an intolerable
grievance, as it deprives us of liberty; but that grievance is doubled, when we
consider that it is contrary to an express stipulation in Charter, for which we
left our native country, and came to this. howling wilderness. -- This
grievance is the foundation of all our trouble, and has its origin from
Quakers. You, Gentlemen, soon perceived that the majority of your people were
come over at first, and that all future increase of this province would be of
other denominations. The government was in your hands, and that you might never
loose it, you resolved to deprive all new Counties of their rights as
Englishmen, and their rights by the Proprietor's charter: And you have so
contrived it, that three Quaker counties may give laws to all the province,
although it should contain fifteen counties. If you had not formed new counties,
the people now in those counties must have voted amongst you, and might have
turned you out of power; but now you have made blanks of them for ever; and by
this scheme they must ever wear such a yoke as a Quaker may please to shape for
them. If the province is to be protected, the principal of Non-Resistance takes
place, and we must protect your lives; but if money is to be raised, a very
different principal takes place, and you will take care of our money. In this
blessed situation we have jogged on, and called our selves Freemen. The poor
sun-burned African comes to a more desirable slavery in this province than we;
for his master is at least careful of his life; but ours diligently pursue such
practices as bring us to destruction.

In the beginning of the last French war, you would not grant so much as L.
10,000 for his Majesty's service; you had not started your quarrel with the
Proprietor then, but you plead conscience, and that did as well. On account of
such conduct the English parliament had like to have turned you out of the
Assembly for ever; but your Friends in London interceded, and come over to
persuade you to resign; and resign you did with great reluctance, just so as to
make a sham majority of other denominations in the House: But some of the
gentlemen that you chose would not go heartily into your measures, so you
turned them out, and have put a great majority of Quakers in the Assembly
again. Viz. 22 out of 36.
However though, with much trouble his Majesty obtained supplies; yet, like good
engineers, you found a way to counter-plot him. It may not indeed become us who
are slaves, to say this; but we may tell you, that his Majesty's General, Lord
L -- n.
his Governor, Gr. D -- y.
and his Agent for Indian affairs, Sir William J -- n.
have said that you invaded the King's prerogative royal, and presume to treat
with foreign princes, with whom we are at war; and act as moderators between
the government and an independent people. From this conduct have flowed those
streams of innocent blood with which our frontiers have been drenched for many
years. Soon as war was proclaimed with the Indians, By Gr. M -- s.
you opened a correspondence with them, you created a King among them,
Tedyuscung; the Six Nations said he was no King, till the white people made him
one. See the first treaty at Easton.
and him you supported for several years as your Deputy-Enemy to the
Proprietor, and the poor inhabitants of our frontiers. You taught him to accuse
the Proprietor. Tedyuscung confessed this afterward. --
The Indians also say, and we have much reason to believe it, that you
persuaded them to kill the frontier inhabitants. See Conrad Weiser's diary. --
It is certain, however, that you falsely This appeared upon examining into the
matter. See Sir WM. J -- N's report.
persuaded them that they were cheated; and that was the proper way to make
them kill the people: You attended at public treaties; procured a secretary of
state C -- s T -- n.
for your Indian King, and furnished him with whatever was necessary for his
purposes and yours. When the Governor complained of this treasonable tampering
and treating with Indians, you modestly told him that you would do it whether
he was pleased with it or not; for you did not choose to leave the Governor and
King's agent to manage the business without you. This was done in an address to
the Governor, 1757.
We need not tell what blood this has cost our province: The miserable Dutch
and Irish on the frontiers have felt your scourge, and the groans of many a
thousand widows and fatherless children which daily pierce the heavens, will
tell it, as far as the Quaker-government in Pennsylvania shall be known.

In order yet to prove that you have abused the province, need I mention how
the public money has been squandered away? You raised large sums, but always
granted them too late, as though on purpose that little might be done. Was ever
half a million of money so consumed as it has been in this province? It was not
with our many troops; for a New England colony has raised three times the
number of troops, and yet never spent such sums of money. Does any man ask what
is become of this money? Many a thousand pounds were spent in debating with the
Governor about things that you knew he could not grant; many thousands as
bribes to G -- r D --, to obtain iniquitous laws, and to pervert justice; many
a thousand to support your friends, in order to maintain your faction; many a
thousand to murderers, and his Majesty's enemies; and a great many thousands
where Quakers alone can tell, though it may not suit them to tell: But hardly
ever was a farthing given to support the naked and perishing frontier
inhabitants; to whom the Indians that you fed, had left nothing but the
miserable life. And in this present Indian war, it is notorious, that great
sums of money were spent last summer, while the most effectual endeavors were
used to order matters so as to render no effectual service to the poor and
defenseless inhabitants. It is no wonder, as a Prime Minister lately informed
us, that His Majesty sees through such artifices. See Lord EG -- T's Letter.


In this manner you have tyrannized over the good people on the frontiers of
this province. -- If you might avail your selves of a friendship and trade with
the Indians, no matter what miseries we suffered; if you might help the Indians
to recover their lands from the Proprietor, no matter what became of the people
who lived on those lands: And suffer me to observe, this conduct of yours, and
not the price of lands, was the true cause of thousands leaving this province.
The Scots and Irish were rode by main force; and the unhappy Germans, being
ignorant of our constitution, have been blindly led into your schemes, and
patiently groaned under the burden, while their wives, their children, and all
were perishing by fire and hatchet.

But when you find that the province is to be enslaved no longer; the frontier
counties, almost to a man, insist on having justice done them; the Hibernian
winches beneath his yoke; the German, having lost every thing else, begins to
pray that you would spare his life: -- In short, the voice of misery and
distress is no longer to be stifled, now you propose to lead us another dance.

The Proprietor is no more; by 26 very decent and very modest Resolves of the
House, you conceive him as dead as Harry the Eighth. So the helm must be clapped
hard to lee, and we shall be about in a jerk. Nothing else than a King's
government will now suit the stomach of a Quaker politician: Not that you all
love his Majesty neither, for some of you would not willingly give sixpence to
support his cause; many who now push for a King's government, have never paid a
farthing of a tax for the King's use, but as their goods have been destrain'd.
You would not take up arms for him, when his dominions were at stake; not
because you are mightily averse from shedding blood; for we never saw people
have a better Gou for that business than some of you had, when his Majesty's
subjects were like to come in your way. But whether it proceeds from a love to
his Majesty, from a hatred of the Proprietor, from some hopes of keeping the
people under a Quaker-yoke for ever by this scheme, or from a desire to throw
down the whole fabric together, if you must fall, -- whatever is the motive, --
you are determined on having a King's government.

But as our Assembly adjourned without granting any supplies, in order to
consult their constituents (of whom you are at present no inconsiderable part)
whether we shall petition his Majesty to take this government under his
immediate care, etc. And as we find you are forwarding this petition with great
vigor, we would humbly beg to know whether it might not be consistent with
Quaker politics, to instruct your Representatives to prepare the Supply Bill
first, so that it may pass; and petition afterward, if necessary. If the Bill
be unjust, they may protest against the oppression, and give the Proprietor as
many sur-names as they please; but at the same time raise troops for the
security of the miserable inhabitants; his Majesty will not be the least more
unwilling to take care of us, upon hearing that we have raised money for the
support of his subjects, though we should do it under oppressive circumstances; I
should think that such an action would rather recommend us to his Majesty;
unless perhaps he might think that while we were acting wisely, we had no
occasion for new Governors. For my part, I can see but one objection to passing
the Supply Bill, under those circumstances, and that is, the extraordinary
expense to which it will put the province. -- If the Proprietor's located
uncultivated lands be taxed at only L. 5 per hundred acres, it will reduce his
share of the present supply about L. 110 lower than it should be, according to
the Assembly's plan: That whole sum will fall upon the inhabitants of the
province, which will be almost the third part of a farthing for every
inhabitant, and all we should get in return for this great expense, would be
protecting the lives and fortunes of the frontier inhabitants: For, suppose we
should grant no supplies during the season, we may compute that the Indians
would kill about 900; make slaves of about 1100; and, wound, banish, and reduce
to beggary about 13000: -- So you see all that we get by the extra expense of
L. 110, is the prospect of saving fifteen thousand of his Majesty's subjects
from beggary, captivity and death; which would make each one of them cost us
about seven farthings. But it may be a question with some, whether the life of
a Dutch or Irish man, be worth so much? --

But if you will not urge the Assembly to pass the Supply Bill, I beg that you
would at least send another messenger to the Indians; acquaint them that we
hope by next winter to import a new Governor, and then we shall look them in
the face; but in the mean time, as we are not in tune for making any defense,
it will not be fair to meddle with us; but if they insist on continuing the
murder and ravages which they began a few days ago, tell them that we have
computed their chance, and on the condition that they will not wound, plunder
and banish any more for the season, we shall agree quietly to give up 3000
frontier inhabitants, whom they may kill, and eat if they please; for some of
your writers See the Letter that Chief Justice R -- D signed.
have made it plain, that it is no matter what the Indians do with a man after
they have killed him. -- By this bargain with the Indians, you will save from
banishment, and perhaps dying with hunger, about 13000 innocent people; which,
we apprehend, would be as great a proof of your loyalty, as you have given for
many years. -- The thing is practicable enough; there are Indians in town, whom
you may send on this message; and if the Governor should not approve of it, you
may send without his approbation, as it is said you lately did.

We are all this time taking it for granted, that the Proprietor is to be
kicked off the Stage; but let us now see what has been his fault: He desires
that his located, uncultivated lands, be taxed at five per cent: And is there
not a very express decree to that purpose? It seems unaccountable to me, why
the Proprietor should be blamed for what the King in Council has done; and
still more surprising, that we should abuse him for a thing that we have
already approved by our Agent; if the decree was unjust, should not we have
complained then; have represented the great Difference of the Prices of Land,
and the singular goodness of the Proprietor's Land? It is strange that we
should have to quarrel in this province, at the expense of so much Money, and
danger of so many lives, about a Thing that should have been settled in England
long ago. We conceive that we have spent about ten thousand pounds already,
upon an embassy to London; but if that sum was not enough to get business well
done, let us send again, and spend three times as much: We seem to be preparing
for it; but in the mean Time, don't let us avenge our blunders on the
Proprietor. Suppose that he has done wrong, in selling his Lands too dear, or
in reserving some of the best to himself, how will the Matter be mended by
geting a King's Governor? Shall we then make laws to force the Proprietor to
take up the worst Land? (for he has a right to some) Or shall we force him to
sell his property at whatever price we choose to give? Shall we prevent him
from leting his friends have land? Or, shall we force him to refund the
fourscore thousand pounds which we gave to his Governors? Is he also to refund
the thousands which Governor D -- received as bribes, to injure the Proprietor?
And besides that, is the new Governor, and all the retinue and dependants that
may follow him, to ^ed upon the air? If this be the scheme, pursue it on; but
if these things be impracticable, I cannot see how we shall get our present
condition mended.

I expect to be told, I am not well affected to his Majesty, as you said of
some Presbyterians the other day at the State-House, because they would not
plunge themselves blindly into your measures: I suppose, however, they are very
indifferent about such malicious accusations. In spite of all you can say, his
Majesty will judge of your loyalty, and theirs, according to the substantial
proofs you give of it, in time of danger; and not by your idle gasconade at a
State-house. What under the heavens did your speaker mean, by telling us that
the Proprietor has made us all slaves, and will presently bring our heads to
the block? Can the Proprietor take away our lives, or our liberties? Have we
not got a valuable Charter? Don't we make our own laws, and sit as juries to
determine upon life and property, according to these laws? The danger is from
another quarter; you are the persons that have made us slaves; you have
deprived us of charter-privileges; have made laws for us, and have offered to
deprive us of juries, so that you might have the power to spare our lives, or
take them away, at pleasure. Did the Proprietor ever attempt such a thing? You
ascribe all our contentions and trouble to the Proprietor, with the same
justice that you do our slavery: Your non-resisting principle began our
troubles, and your obstinacy continued them. You refused to grant his Majesty
supplies in Governor THOMAS's time, but the Governor was obliged to take the
men; and through obstinacy you sunk ten or twelve thousand pounds. What share
of blame had the Proprietor in that affair? When you had lost your hold in the
corporation of this city, the Governor would not assist you to be avenged of
your successors; for which you never forgave him. Was the Proprietor to be
blamed for that quarrel? In the beginning of the late French war, you plead
conscience, or unbelief, or something worse, and would grant no supplies. Was
the Proprietor to blame there? -- But the Proprietor urged you then so hard, to
come into some measures of defense, that you never forgave him since. And as
you were afterward obliged to grant supplies, you resolved to manage your
cards so as to give him but little ease.

And we contend, that if our Assembly had, ten years ago, consisted of men
sincerely disposed to serve his Majesty and their country, by defensive
measures, we might have avoided most of all our quarrels with the Governor; and
should at the same time have saved this province one hundred and fifty thousand
pounds, at least, and many thousand lives.

How many thousand pounds did it cost us to get the Indians to charge the
Proprietor with all our trouble? Even to accuse him with the highest fraud, --
of producing false records. But when the matter was inquired into, it was plain
that the accusations were false, and that you had set the Indians on.

Sir W -- M J -- N, in his report of these proceedings, mentions several
Quakers who had corresponded with the Indians, and been guilty of several
seditious and treasonable practices: Yet you are still disposed to fling all
our calamities on the Proprietor. It is notorious that the Proprietor looses
greatly by the depopulation and slavery of the frontier counties; but you are
the persons who gain by it; for the fewer the new counties are, the more likely
the Quakers are to hold their power in this province. Yet we are told By J -- G
-- y, Esquire
that the Proprietor has made slaves of us all, and will presently (make us
lords, and) bring us to the block. A curious politician is this same orator of
yours. -- We are told that the change is easy, from Proprietary-Slavery to
Royal-Liberty. It is a pity the change were not easy, from Quaker-Slavery to
British-Liberty. For my part, I cannot see what you mean, by talking as if we
were not already under his Majesty's government: -- We conceive that we are
under it; and are ready to spend the last drop of blood, rather than submit to
any other Sovereign: That Is more than you can say. -- The Proprietor is our
Governor under the King, and he nominates a Lieutenant Governor for his
Majesty's approbation. Can this circumstance ever be mended? It is impossible
his Majesty should be acquainted with the many thousand officers who are in his
service. Even in a King's government we must expect to have a Governor whom
some body has recommended to his Majesty. My Lord Somebody has a friend, who
has a cousin, who needs a place, or stands in some other body's way: Him he
recommends to the prime minister, etc. and so we may come by a Governor. And
the question now is, Who shall recommend our Governor to his Majesty; shall the
Proprietor? who must naturally be desirous of the growth of this province; or
must some Nobleman or other? who, perhaps, knows and cares little about it.

We have had one trial already of a Governor the Proprietor did not choose to
recommend, i. e. Governor D -- Y. We know he obliged you much: And a few such
Governors would do for us all. -- But the change of a Governor is not the only
thing we are to expect; if we must have a change, we shall have a thorough one.
For if we get a new government, the Parliament must alter our Charter first,
and then we shall have new privileges and new laws. We know what we have, and
we can hardly get better, but we may get worse, when it will be too late to
repent. It is very probable that we shall soon have stamp-offices, customs,
excises and duties enough to pay, we don't want to pay tithes into the bargain.
-- Our present Charter is a very good one, if you would suffer the people to
enjoy it: But you seem resolved to enslave us, either in one government or
another. You privately instructed your Agent in England, to make terms for you.
You were preparing, like the unjust steward, that in case you should be turned
out of power in this government, you might immediately plunge us into a new
government, where you should reign again: And doubtless a Quaker's finger would
then be heavier than his loins have been hitherto. The answer that you got from
England, was that you might be able to get the government changed, The Quakers
still retaining their power. A very comfortable answer! -- But if the people of
this province suffer you thus to lead them blindfold into a new system, they
will very well deserve to be rid. -- You have the power at present of making
any laws for us that you please, and you would retain the same power in the new
government, for your scheme is not to grant the frontier-counties any
Representatives before this change. Thus, bound hand and feet, we are to be
delivered up!

If you are really desirous to do this province a service and make the people
happy, your only way is to grant them their privileges, let them be fairly
represented in Assembly; and then when they are free men, if they desire a
change of government, let them petition; but sooner by no means. -- Suffer me
to say, that when there are petitions before the Assembly from two or three
thousand frontier inhabitants, and more daily coming in, praying for redress of
grievances, that at such a time to push for a new government, instead of
letting the people be redressed; such conduct, I say, and at such a time, will
admit of constructions very dishonorable to your society.

It is cruel to deprive people of their liberties, and when they cry for
justice, immediately to raise a counter-cry, and set the province in a ferment
about another affair, lest the groans of the injured should be heard.
Therefore, instead of listening to new schemes, I am resolved, and hope that
every lover of this province and of liberty, will resolve to listen to no
proposals for a change of government, until justice is done to the injured, the
oppressed and groaning inhabitants of our frontier-counties. --

W. D.
P. S. In the next we purpose to show how little regard the Quakers have paid
to decency or truth; and how they have not once spoke to the true subject of
complaint, in all the pamphlets they have wrote.



[End of the First Number.]

