A SERIOUS ADDRESS, To Such of the Inhabitants of PENNSYLANIA, As have cannived
at, or do approve of, the late Massacre of the Indians at Lancaster; or the
Design of killing those who are now in the Barracks at PHILADELPHIA.

PILADELPHIA: Printed for the AUTHOR, 1764.

My BRETHREN and COUNTRYMEN,
MADNESS in any Society of People is generally a Forerunner of their
Destruction. For, before the Almighty destroys a Nation or People, he permits
them first to be so infatuated as to run into Extravagancies, which by natural
Consequences, bring Destruction upon them. The Massacre of the Indians at
Lancaster, and the too general Approbation it has met with, are Evidences of
very great Madness: And that Calamities, by Occasion thereof, are impending
over us, will appear from the following Considerations, viz.

To put any Man to Death (though in open War) when he may be made a Prisoner, is
contrary to the Laws of Nations.

UNDER the Mosaic Dispensation, we find the Jews, who were under the immediate
Direction of GOD himself, observing and performing their Treaties with great
Punctuality. -- Thus the Gibeonites were spared, because of the Public Faith
of the Isralites plighted to them, though the same was obtained by Fraud and
Falsehood. And we find the good old Patriarch Jacob, by divine Inspiration, on
his Deathbed; bitterly cursing two of his Sons; because of the Murder of
Schechem and his Family, in cool Blood, after Peace had been concluded; though
before he had committed a Crime worthy of Death.

IT is a fundamental Law of all civil Governments, that no Person shall put
another to death by his own Authority, let him have committed what Crime he
may, if he can, with Safety be apprehended, so as to be brought to Trial by the
Laws of the Community.

To make War on one Nation for the Offenses of another Nation; or to slay one
Man for the Crime of another, seems contrary to natural Justice. But to butcher
Infants at the Breast, in capable of distinguishing between Right and Wrong,
for the Crimes of their Parents, or of the Nation to which they belong, or
perhaps only for the Crimes of other Nations of the same Color, is shocking to
every Person who has the common Feelings of Humanity. The Visiting the
Iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children can only be understood of such
Children, who, from the Examples of their Fathers (which is too commonly the
Case) pursue the same vicious Courses. For to understand it otherwise, would be
inconsistent with the moral Government of the Divine Being; who, by the Prophet
has forbid to use this Proverb; "the Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the
Childrens Teeth are set on Edge: Because the Soul that sins, shall die, and
the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father."

To apply these Doctrines to the present Case of the Indians, let us consider;

THAT the Indians consist of different Nations or Tribes independent of one
another, and make War or Peace separately without each others Consent, -- Some
indeed for their mutual Protections have joined in Associations, like those of
the Swiss Cantons, or the united Provinces. The Canostogoe Tribe in the Year
1701. confirmed a Grant of their Land to W. Penn; and, by a solemn Treaty with
this Government, agreed to live together with us as one People. A small Spot of
Land was assigned to them to live upon: And, tho we did not make them Hewers of
Wood and Drawers of Water, they have continued there ever since, in no better
Condition, than that of poor Basket-Makers and Broom-Makers. If some of them
have, now and then, been guilty of Offenses, they were always ready to be
apprehended and brought to Trial: And indeed, from the prevailing odium against
Indians in general, if a Jury could be presumed to be biased, it is most likely
they would be so, in Favor of the Prosecutors.

DURING all the Time of our late Troubles they lived quietly and peaceably
amongst us, and some of them have been employed by the Government.

BUT, notwitstanding all this, an enraged Body of People, irritated by the
Murders of some of their Relatives, by Indians of other Nations, on the
Frontiers, came to the Indian Town and killed and scalped six of them, in cool
Blood. The Residue of the whole Tribe, being fourteen in Number, in Pursuance
of Promises made at solemn Treaties, immediately upon this, put themselves
under the Protection of the Magistrates, and were lodged in the Workhouse;
which is Part of the Public Goal in Lancaster. But this was in vain. For a
Party of fifty Men came to the Goal in broad Daylight; broke it open, and
barbarously murdered those Indians, not sparing a Woman Seventy-seven Years of
Age, nor a Child sucking it is Mother's Breast. Now I appeal to every Man, who
will give himself Leave to consider, if such an Act be not contrary to the Laws
both divine and human, which I mentioned before.

BUT the immediate apparent Consequences of this tumultuous Riot, and
atrocicous Murder, is an additional Proof of the Infatuation of these People
and their Abetors.

IT appears, from the public Papers, that Negotiations for a general Peace
with the Indians were in great Forwardness, which these unlucky Affairs must
greatly retard, if not altogether prevent. For, how can Indians, who have been
at War with us, confide in the Promises of the Government, when they find that
Government unable to protect the friendly Indians, who have always been at
Peace and have claimed it is Protection, from the Outrages of our own bad
People! To extirpate the Indians is impracticable: It has been said (and I
believe with a great deal of Reason) that all the Forces in Europe could not
totally destroy them. The Canaanites will still be in the Land. And while we
continue at Enmity with them, they will be Thorns in our Sides, and Briars in
our Eyes. -- We have a long extended Frontier; to defend, all of which, from
the Attacks and Incursions of Savages, is impossible. -- And these unhappy
People who have committed this Outrage, if they had not been demented, ought,
from their exposed Situation, to have been the most cautious of doing any Act
which might prevent such a Peace. On the contrary their Friendship might be of
very great Benefit to us. -- The Skins and Furrs are great Weights in the
Balance of Trade between Great Britain and us. Exchange is thereby lowered,
and consequently the Prices of Goods which we import.

ANOTHER apparent bad Consequence is, unless the Indians have more Humanity
than some of us, who profess, to have received the Light of the Gospel, and to
be Followers of the Prince of Peace; We cannot expect but that the Prisoners,
of our own Blood, who are now amongst them, will share the same Fate with the
unhappy Wretches in Lancaster Goal.

THIS Province has been a Land of Liberty; and Justice has hitherto been
effectually administered, without Assistance of a Military Force. It has also
been an Asylum for People of tender Consciences, who removed hither for the
Liberty of worshipping the Supreme Being, in the Manner they believed most
agreeable to Him. These inestimable Privileges induced our Ancestors to leave
their Native Land, to encounter the Dangers of the Deep, and settle in this
Howling Wilderness; which is now become a fertile Field, a Land of Plenty. But
alas! is it likely we shall long enjoy these Privileges? Can you imagine that
Great Britain will suffer the Administrations of Justice in so valuable a
Province as Pennsylvania to be interrupted; the Goals broke open; the Civil
Officers insulted; Trade rendered precarious; and every Thing put into
Confusion, by a Mob? No certainly!

INSURRECTIONS which had but small Beginnings have often arose to great
Heights; Because, when once a Mob have broke through the Limits prescribed by
the Laws, it is uncertain, how far they will wander in the Fields of Anarchy and
Confusion; and what Extravagancies they will run into which at first they did
not Design. If these People should take it into their Heads, not to pay Taxes,
or not to pay the Proprietaries for their Lands, or the Merchants for their
Goods; what would be the Consequence? Is it not highly probable, that, to
prevent the like, the English Government will oblige us to maintain a Military
Force to support the Civil Authority; and dragoon us into our Duty, at our own
Expense! The Iron Rod of Military Power must correct those who are deaf to the
Voice of Reason and superior to the Fear of the Laws. -- Great is the Law, it
must, and it will prevail. Whoever thinks himself exempted from the civil
Jurisdiction only gnaws a File, which will break his Teeth. -- Besides, as it is
currently reported, that these Outrages, Tumults and Insurrections have been
excited executed, and abetted, principally and chiefly, if not altogether, by
Persons dissenting from the Church established in England; it is too likely, if
they are repeated and encouraged, that every Person who would bear an Office
must conform to the Rites of that Church, in the same Manner as in England.

FROM all these Hints, which I have thrown together, without Order or Method, I
hope you will be convinced, that it is your Duty to Use your Influence with
these deluded People, to desist from their intended Enterprise; and that you
will endeavor to convince them of their Error in what they have already done.
Why should they be rendered desperate by having a Price set upon their Heads,
like Wolves? Why should they have a Mark set upon them; and wander like
Fugitives and Vagabonds in continual Fear? Or why should we be put to the
Expense of maintaining an Army in Time of Peace, which we might have done
without? Or pay Tithes, etc. to Clergy, whom many of us do not choose to hear
preach? Or why should you deprive yourselves of filling the Posts you are
otherwise qualified for, by vindicating a wrongheaded Mob?

THE lower Sort of People are very imitative of their Superiors. -- They watch
their Motions, Looks and Eyes: -- If therefore the more sensible Part of you
would openly avow your Disapprobation of these Measures, you will find this
Rage and Clamor will soon subside; These People will disperse; they will
crumble like the Dust, and disappear [at least in a hostile Manner] like the
Snow that melted yesterday.

yours etc. A PENSYLVANIAN.


