LETTER FROM A BLACKSMITH.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF, in the following sheets, the reader finds the Blacksmith now and then
introducing scraps of Latin, he will be the less surprised if he reflects that
in Scotland, most of the Mechanics have a smattering of that language, which
is taught, even in the country parish schools. It seems the author thought it
incumbent upon him, when he had to do with the clergy, to muster up all the
little learning he was master of. With what propriety and judgment his
quotations are introduced, is submitted to the reader, by his most obedient
servant,

The PUBLISHER

A LETTER FROM A BLACKSMITH, TO THE MINISTERS AND ELDERS OF THE CHURCH OF
SCOTLAND. In which the Manner of PUBLIC WORSHIP in that CHURCH is considered;
its Inconveniences and Defects pointed out; and Methods for removing them
humbly proposed.

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God; for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth: therefore let thy
words be few. ECCL. V. 2. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the
Understanding also. 1 COR. xiv. 15. THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON Printed: NEW YORK Reprinted, and Sold by JOHN HOLT, at the Exchange,
1764.

A LETTER TO THE MINISTERS AND ELDERS OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
Right Reverend and Right Honorable,
I Have presumed to address you upon a subject which appears to me of the
greatest importance, and worthy of the consideration of the ministers and
elders of the church of Scotland; thank God, I have reason to hope, from your
wisdom, learning, and piety, that I shall be favored with a fair and patient
hearing, though my sphere in life be low, and my sentiments set off with no other
advantages than sincerity and truth, as far as I can distinguish it; for God,
and my own heart, bear witness, that I present this address with no other view
than to promote (as much as I can) the glory of God, the interests of true
religion, and the honor, purity, and peace of the church of Scotland. Could I
have found any better method of communicating my thoughts than by a letter, I
would willingly have chosen it; or had I hoped ever to have seen a more
favorable season than the present I would patiently have waited for it. But
now we are blessed with a learned body of clergy, with a prince well disposed
to promote true piety among his people, and we have the happiness to live in an
age, in which the prejudices of parties are mostly worn off, the rage of
dispute abated, and men disposed to hear truth, and obey reason; such peaceful
happy days are designed by heaven, and ought to be employed by men, to repair
in religion, what has been pulled down by mad passions, in turbulent times; to
restore to its first beauty, whatever has been defaced by party prejudices in
the days of contention, and to recover the purity of our faith, and decency of
our worship, from the rust and low superstition which they have contracted in
the ignorant ages; and tinctures of enthusiasm they imbibed in the shock and
tumult of the reformation. There was no church that met with greater
opposition, or was more violently agitated than ours; and though (thank God) it
stood out the storm, yet it suffered very severely; and when the fury was in
some degree abated; and men had time to look about them, our church appeared
little better than a ruin; her sacred buildings levelled with the ground, or
bare shattered walls, the standing monuments of religious madness; her
treasures robbed by sacrilegious hands; her registers destroyed, or carried
off; her funds applied to profane uses, and her clergy left to starve: would to
God she had suffered only in these less essential things.

But along with these she contracted a singular and whimsical taste, her
principles of faith grew dark and mysterious, and her method of worship
defective and unreasonable: some of these ruins, she never can repair; some of
them indeed time has in a great measure patched up; and some of them remain to
be repaired by the present rulers of our church, or by succeeding generations;
of this kind is our public worship; in which there are several things that
demand your serious attention, and call loudly for the diligence and learning
of the present age. I will presume, with due deference, to point out a few of
them; hoping that my poor endeavors, may at least obtain pardon, out of
respect to the importance of the subject, and the sincerity of my intention;
and that some able head and good heart, will take the hint, and fully point out
the flaws, in our present way of worship, and direct us how to amend them. Some
unprejudiced and happy genius, may perhaps appear, whose persuasive eloquence,
refined expression, and conclusive arguments may command attention, and gain
assent; in spite of the bigotry of the ignorant, the vain ambition of those,
that are fond of popularity, and the whimsical opinions of enthusiasts. Till
such an one shall appear, I hope you will not take it amiss, that I offer my
remarks, especially as I beg leave to assure you, that this my address does not
proceed from a fondness of novelty, much less any intention to disturb the
peace of the church established by law, or indeed from any other or any worse
motive, than that her public service may be such as seems best calculated, for
promoting the interests of religion and virtue; and most suitable for
reasonable creatures to offer, and an infinitely wise God to accept.

First, I submit to your serious consideration, whether a larger portion of the
scriptures should not be read every Lord's day in our public assemblies; the
reading of the scriptures always made a part of the public service in all the
churches of God; the law and the prophets, were solemnly read Acts xv. 28.
in the synagogues every Sabbath day; our Savior countenanced and sanctified
this practice Luke iv. 1^.
with his presence and example; the Apostle Paul peremptorily commands Timothy
to give attendance to reading, as well as to exhortation and doctrine; and the
primitive church religiously observed this command, as Justin Martyr Ap^l.
(...) p. 2^. Tertul. ad Gent, p. 47.
bears witness. "Upon the day that is called Sunday (says he) all that live in
the country, or in the towns, assemble in one place, and the commentaries of
the apostles, and the writings of the prophets are read, till the time allotted
for them be expired." Nay more, our own directory for public worship, (which
perhaps may have more weight with some, than the example of our Savior, the
command of his Apostles, or the practice of the purest antiquity) recommends
498.
that ordinarily one chapter out of each Testament should be read at every
meeting. I am at a loss whether to ascribe the negligence of this essential
part of our service, to the pride of the clergy, or the perverseness of the
people, perhaps it may be in some degree owing to both; the clergy, probably
think that it would not give them a sufficient opportunity to display their own
talents; and the people, that it does not so fully please their ears, always
itching with the desire of something new; to the first I shall only observe,
that though we have, as we always ought to have, a very great respect for the
observations and discourses of our spiritual guides, yet at the same time we
cannot but wish to hear what the Spirit says unto the churches, in his own
words; we have room to wish for this, as we are told by the apostle, that the
scriptures are profitable, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness; and that by them the man of God may be made
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. It is true you indulge us
now and then with ten or a dozen of verses of pure scripture in our public
assemblies, but as we Our directory declares that it is requisite that all the
canonical books be read over in order; but our Parsons proceed in a very
different method.
have no regular plan of reading the scriptures, of consequence we only hear
detached places, chosen at the pleasure of the preacher, and applied to what
purposes he thinks fit; this leaves our understandings too much in the power of
the clergy, and exposes the simple and ignorant (who make the greatest part of
our congregations) to be seduced by the party principles and whimsical opinions
of the preacher. It may at first sight appear, that the whole plan of our
worship, is as happily calculated for making a property of the laity, and
keeping their judgments and consciences in the power of the person, as any part
of the popish system; for the minister needs not read any part of the
scriptures unless he pleases; he may choose what place he thinks proper, may
begin where he inclines, and break off when he has a mind; he may mangle them
in any manner he thinks fit, and make them say whatever he would have them to
say.

But allow me tell you, that as the reading of the scriptures in public
assemblies, is of divine appointment, no power upon earth can dispense with the
obligation; as they contain the articles of our faith, and the rules by which
we are to regulate our lives, nothing can supply and therefore nothing ought to
usurp their place; and as all the reformed churches are agreed, that the
scriptures are plain in things necessary to salvation, we ought to hear them as
they are, without your glosses and comments; nay what can be more effectual for
our salvation, or so proper for instruction, seeing they bear witness for
themselves, that the word of God is sharper than a two-edged sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. iv. 17.
That it converts the soul, and makes the simple wise. Psalm, xix, 7.
Is there any thing that can be substituted in the place of the scriptures,
from which, such great and happy effects may be expected? But if this shameful
negligence be owing to the perverse humor of the people, who perhaps may
think, that the reading of the scriptures is a dry insipid part of the service,
you will not I hope take it ill, if I say, that amusements are more their
errand to church than instruction, and they are more desirous of new words than
sound doctrine, and that in fact their hearts are carnal, and estranged from
the things of the Spirit; for the apostle informs us that the natural man
receives not things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness to him. Pardon me
if I think that your compliance with this humor, is like Aaron's to the folly
of the Israelites; as he ser up a calf made with his own hands, to be the
object of the people's worship, instead of the living God; so you set up your
own compositions, to direct the faith, and regulate the manners of the people,
in the place of the scriptures of truth, dictated by the Holy Spirit. The
service of God in the way of his own appointment ever was, and ever will be
disliked by the bulk of the people; the Jews would willingly have embraced any
religion, but that which was given them from heaven; they would have sacrificed
in any place but in that pointed out by their Maker; and thought no rites
burdensome but those that God was pleased to appoint; but with respect to those,
the prophet upbraids them with saying, as our people say, Behold what a
weariness is it. Malachi i. 13.
It is the business and duty of ministers to check and resist this humor of
the people, and not encourage it by a mean compliance with a vitiated taste,
and a base betraying of the trust reposed in them; but, alas! the taste of the
people in this, coincides with the inclinations of the pastor, and flatters his
pride and vanity too much to be restrained; however, with all humility I
presume to beg, that you would be pleased to consider, how you can answer to
God, to your own consciences, and to us your hearers, for such a dangerous and
wilful neglect.

As to praise, we seem to study to give this part of our worship as much the
air of rusticity, and contempt of God as possible; because we thought that the
engagement of the heart was (as indeed it is) the essence of this part of
worship, we have whimsically thrown out every thing that helped to engage and
elevate the heart; many of the words we use are obsolete and low, the
versification is mean and barbarous, and the music harsh and ill performed;
our harmony otherways not very sweet, is entirely lost, and the sense broke off
at every line; our posture too is the most indecent, negligent, and improper
for singing well, that we could have contrived; it is true, the posture is of
no importance, farther than as it expresses our reverence to the God whom we
worship; yet it is as necessary that it should be decent, as that our words
should be proper, for both are only signs of inward sensations; should we find
a fellow crying very bitterly, and dancing very briskly, these are signs of so
opposite sensations, that we would be apt to imagine he was distracted; and
what shall we conclude, when we hear a congregation addressing God in some
ardent hymn, or earnest petition, and see them sitting upon their breech, or
lolling with the most negligent air and posture upon their seats? the signs
here point to very different sensations! Quintillian seems to think that there
may be a solecism in gesture as well as in the expression; and if such a thing
can be, we seem guilty of a very great one, in using the most indifferent,
negligent posture, when we are employed in the most interesting and serious
affair, I mean offering praise to the living God.

I cannot help thinking, that all the rational people of our communion, must be
shocked with the indecencies, and follies, that attend the administration of
our Lord's supper, known among the the common people by the name of an
occasion. We accuse the Roman church of superstition, and that very justly; but
in this instance she may fairly retort, and tell us, that we blame in others,
what we approve of, or at least allow in ourselves; for if our people did not
imagine that there was some superior virtue, in sermons preached upon these
occasions, some sanctity in the place, or some merit in their attendance, it is
unlikely, that such numbers, who have no intention to communicate, should crowd
from all quarters, leave their parish churches almost empty, and slight as good
sermons, which they might hear, without the fatigue of traveling, or the
inconveniences that attend a crowd. Superstition in all countries has the same
effect, though it may be directed to different objects: in popish countries,
people crowd from place to place, to visit the shrines of the saints, and pray
before the most famous images; in Scotland, they run from kirk to kirk as it
were after the host, and flock to see a sacrament, as those to share in the
procession, and too many of our people (with shame we must confess) make the
same use of our occasions, that the papists do of their pilgrimages and
processions; that is, to indulge themselves in drunkenness, lust, and idleness;
most of the servants when they agree to serve their masters in the western
parts of the kingdom, make a special provision, that they shall have liberty to
go to a certain number of fairs, or to an equal number of sacraments; and as
they consider a sacrament or an occasion (as they call the administration of
the Lord's supper in a neighboring parish) in the same light in which they do
a fair, so they behave at it, much in the same manner. I defy Italy, in spite
of all its superstition, to produce a scene better fitted to raise pity and
regret in a religious, humane, and understanding heart, or to afford an ampler
field for ridicule, to the careless and profane, than what they call a field
preaching upon one of those occasions: at the time of the administration of the
Lord's supper (ye know) that upon the Thursday, Saturday, and Monday, we have
preaching in the fields near the church, which it seems we must not use upon
that occasion; I have often thought that the frequency of the sight makes it
familiar, and consequently less shocking to you, or that being in the inner
circle, you seldom have access to see the indecency and absurdity of the whole
scene, otherways you would not encourage it. Allow me then to describe it, as
it really is: at first you find a great number of men and women lying together
upon the grass; here they are sleeping and snoring, some with their faces
toward heaven, others with their faces turned downwards, or covered with their
bonnets; there you find a knot of young fellows and girls making assignations
to go home together in the evening, or to meet in some alehouse; in another
place you see a pious circle sitting round an ale barrel, many of which stand
ready upon carts, for the refreshment of the saints. The heat of the summer
season, the fatigue of traveling, and the greatness of the crowd, naturally
dispose them to drink; which inclines some of them to sleep, works up the
enthusiasm of others, and contributes not a little to produce those miraculous
conversions that sometimes happen at these occasions; in a word, in this sacred
assembly there is an odd mixture of religion, sleep, drinking, courtship, and a
confusion of sexes, ages, and characters. When you get a little nearer the
speaker, so as to be within the reach of the sound, though not of the sense of
the words, for that can only reach a small circle, even when the preacher is
favored with a calm; and when there happens to be any wind stiring, hardly can
one sentence be heard distinctly at any considerable distance; in this second
circle you will find some weeping, and others laughing, some pressing to get
nearer the tent or tub in which the parson is sweating, bawling, jumping, and
beating the desk; others fainting with the stifling heat, or wrestling to
extricate themselves from the crowd; one seems very devout and serious, and the
next moment is scolding and cursing his neighbor, for squeezing or treading on
him; in an instant after, all his countenance is composed to the religious
gloom, and he is groaning, sighing, and weeping for his sins; in a word, there
is such an absurd mixture of the serious and comic, that were we convened for
any other purpose, than that of worshipping the God and Governor of nature, the
scene would exceed all power of face.

But when one considers, what solemn awe should accompany the pronunciation of
his name, and what decent gravity attend his worship, and sees such an unhappy
contrast, if his heart be not entirely unacquainted with the feelings of
humanity, the sigh will force its way, and the pitying tear start into his eye;
especially if he knows, that many of the clergy encourage this absurdity; that
this is the time, when they vie with one another for popularity, and try who
can convene the greatest mob; that some of the elders are so fond of these
religious farces, that they have threatened to abandon their churches, if the
absurd practice of preaching without doors should be discontinued; and that
even those of the clergy, who have sense to perceive its inconveniences, and
ingenuity to own that it is wrong, yet want courage to oppose the popular
frenzy, and resolution to reform what in their own hearts they cannot but
condemn. Whether we consider this practice in a moral, political, or religious
light, we shall find it attended with very bad consequences; how much must it
encourage drunkenness, when such crowds are convened from all quarters? what
must the consequence be, when a whose country side is thrown loose, and young
fellows and girls are going home together by night, in the gayest season of the
year; when every thing naturally inspires warm desires, and silence, secrecy,
and darkness encourage them? When I was a young fellow at my apprenticeship, I
was a great frequenter of these occasions, and know them so well, that whatever
others may think, I would not choose a wife that had often frequented them, nor
trust a daughter too much, among those rambling saints; old maids may perhaps
be be allowed to revenge themselves of the world, by growing religious at the
easy rate of running from sacrament to sacrament; and they who are in pain to
be provided with husbands, may possibly find their account in frequenting those
sacred assemblies; but I would advise others to go but seldom, and never to a
greater distance than that they can return before sunset; lest by frequenting
them too much, they contract an idle disposition of mind, and by staying too
late, they get into a bad habit of body. Nor are the consequences of this
practice, considered in a politcial light, more favorable than in a moral; our
church disclaims all holy days, and I should offend at once against truth and
the rules of our church, if I said that we observed any such; but I presume
that the number of our idle days will fall very little short of the number in
the popish calendar, and all the difference is, that their holy days are fixed,
and, our idle days moveable; theirs are dedicated to some saint, and ours are
devoted to some occasion; theirs foster superstition and idleness, and so do
ours; theirs are signalized now and then by miraculous cures, by which the
patient's health is seldom bettered; and ours by miraculous conversions See two
volumes published at Glasgow, by Mr. Gillies.
, by which the converts morals are rarely mended; and to do the papists
justice, they deal more fairly in their miracles than we, for a man can see if
a crooked limb be made straight, because it is the object of the senses, but a
miracle wrought instantaneously in the mind, must be taken upon the word of the
patient or the parson; but the truth is, their holy days, and our idle days,
whatever miracles they may produce, do hurt to true religion: the people lose
many laboring days by them, and the country is deprived of the fruit of their
industry. I have seen above three thousand people at one of these occasions;
but supposing that one with another there are only fifteen hundred, and that
each of them, one with another might earn six pence a day, every sacrament, by
its three idle days, will cost the country much about 112 l. 10 s. sterling,
not including the days that they who live at a great distance must lose in
coming and going, not the losses the farmer must sustain, when occasions happen
in the hay, harvest, or seed times; the man of business, when they chance to
fall upon market days; or the tradesman, when any particular piece of work is
in hand that requires dispatch: now supposing the sacrament should be
administered only twice a year, in all our churches, which, if it be not, it
ought to be, these occasions, as they are managed at present, will cost
Scotland at least 235,000 l. sterling, an immense sum for sermons! the greatest
part of which might be saved, much disorder and irregularity prevented, would
the assembly be graciously pleased to appoint some particular Sundays in the
four seasons This was the method for several years about the time of the
reformation.
, for the administration of this sacrament, over all the kingdom. We were too
fond of novelties, and perhaps too proud of our own judgments, when we altered
established practices founded on reason, and approved, by long experience; and
we could hardly have pitched upon a more unnatural method than the present,
consider it in what light you will; for if the design of this sacrament, next
to setting forth the death of our Lord, be to remain as a piedge of love and
charity among christians, it does not with us seem at all to answer the design;
as our congregations, like discontented children, take a private hour as it
were, and eat their bread by themselves in a corner; whereas all the rest of
the christian world, do, christian like, communicate together three times in
the year; and as they show forth the same meritorious death, they show it forth
at the same season, and, like brethren, sit down at once to the same love feast.

But, besides this, the great noise that we make about these occasions, leads
our people to lay too great a stress upon them, and to imagine that there is
something meritorious, nay that the life of religion lies in hearing a great
number of sacramental sermons; they serve nearly the same ends in our church,
that confession, and absolution, do among the papists; our people put on a very
demure look some days before the sacrament; the gloom gradually gathers upon
their faces as it approaches; and they look like criminals going to execution
when the day is come; just so may it be seen in the popish countries, in the
seasons set apart for confession and penance; but in both countries the
professed repentance proves only a flash of devotion, and as if matters were
made up with the Deity, and all former accounts cleared, the papist soon put
off his penitential countenance, and the presbyterian lays by his sacramental
face, and they and we in a little time are the same men that we were before.

And as these occasions make our people lay too great a stress upon the outward
means, while they neglect the great end of all religion, I mean, to better the
heart, and reform the conduct; so they raise contention, heart-burnings, envy,
and factions among our clergy, while they contend for popularity, vie with one
another who shall convene the greatest crowd, and work up the mob to the
highest pitch of enthusiasm; and they offen succeed so well, that they bring
the weak and ignorant, to the very brink of downright madness. I have seen
scenes of this nature, that had much more of the fury of the bacchanalia, than
the calm, serious, sincere devotion of a Christian sacrament. It is here that
the ministers display that false eloquence which catches the crowd, and
consists in a strong voice, a melancholy tone, and thundering out at random
damnation, death, and hell, fire, and flames, devils, darkness and gnashing of
teeth; any one who has good lungs, and can borrow the beggar's cant, and the
merry andrew's action, may become very popular, and make a great figure at an
occasion; for the contention there is not, who shall reason most justly,
deliver most gracefully, or direct their discourse in the best manner for
bettering the heart, and reforming the manners of the audience; but who shall
appear most frantic, cry loudest, speak with the deepest, strangest and most
hollow tone; and be most wrapped up in mystery, and scholastic terms. I have
known these qualifications make nonsense triumph over sense, ignorance be
preferred to learning; and incoherent, unintelligible, nay contradictory
rhapsodies, be received with admiration by the gazing crowd; white plain,
learned, and pious sermons, delivered with a becoming modesty and gravity, have
been preached almost to the empty pews. Quintillian, assigning the reasons why
the ignorant orators were heard with more applause by the mob, than the
ingenious and learned, paints so justly the methods by which our ministers
contend for popularity at the occasions, that the passage is worth
transcribing, Clamant ubique, et omnia levata (ut ipsi dicunt) manu emugiunt,
multo discursu, anhelitu, jactatione, gesta, motuque capitis furentes -- mire
ad pullatum circulum facit -- cum ille ^ruditus modestus et esse, et videri
malit -- at illi hanc vim appellant, que est potius violentia Quintil. Inst.
lib. ii. cap. 12. They always cry loud, and deliver all their discourse in a
sort of ecstasy, with a hollow bellowing tone, a frantic action, deep sighs,
furious gestures, violent tossing of their arms, and mad-like motions of their
heads -- it is wonderful what effect these things have upon the surrounding mob;
a man of learning suits his pronunciation and action to his subject, chooses to
be modest, and to appear so; they call this delivering their discourse with
force, though it be rather with fury.
The art of managing mankind (says Mr. Addison, speaking of quacks in physic)
is only to make them stare a little, to keep up their astonishment, and to let
nothing be familiar to them; this art is perfectly well understood by our
parsons, for at these occasions, they try who shall make the people stare most;
and sometimes they make them stare so long, and so eagerly, that the poor
people turn almost stark staring mad: we are damned an hundred times over in
one day; and damned too, without any sort of discretion; for most of our
ministers that I have had occasion to hear, seem to have embraced, and do
certainly propagate Hoadly's notions of the sacrament of the supper; and yet
they go on damning us still, when their master says, and they sometimes say,
that the communion is little more than a mere ceremony. Poor laymen I own
ought not to presume to dictate to the parson, what notions he is to embrace,
and teach; but I humbly hope that we have a right to expect that the parson be
consistent with himself, so far at least as not to damn us, where at other
times he teaches us that there is no danger.

But as it is not likely that these opportunities of speaking great and
swelling words 2 Peter ii. 8.
will be given up, while men are so presumptuous and self-willed; I submit to
your consideration, whether it would not be proper to pitch upon the place
designed for the scene of the field preaching, at least upon the communion
Sunday, at a considerable distance from the church: this would draw off the
mob, the contrast between the solemn action within doors and the comical scene
without, would be less striking; the communicants would breathe a freer air,
they would be less distracted in their devotions, have easier access to come up
to the table, or to return to their seats, and the whole might be transacted
with less bustle and confusion, and with more decency and order. As it is
managed at present, it is liker any thing than the administration of the supper
of our Lord; not a man amongst us would be content with a common meal served up
in such confusion; I am sure that it is impossible for me, and I believe it is
very difficult for any one, to carry up with him that sedateness of soul, and
calmness of thought, that I presume to think are necessary, when he approaches
the table of the Lord. How should he? when he is forced to wrestle through a
crowd, to push and be pushed, stunned with a general hubbub, the seats
rattling, the galleries sounding, the people singing, the communicants justling
one another in the crowded passages, some falling, others fainting, and in all
corners of the church, hurry, confusion, and noise. I never see our tables In
the kirks in Scotland they have long Tables, at which they sit and communicate;
they will hold about an hundred or more, and when these remove, to make room
for others, there is the utmost confusion, as the kirk is crowded with
spectators, and one part is struggling to get from the table, and the other
wrestling to get to it.
filled up, but it gives me an idea of the distraction at Babel, when the
confusion of languages began to be felt. I submit it, whether the apostle's
censure of the Corinthian church be not pertinent here, This is not to eat the
Lord's supper 2 Corinthians. ii. 20.
.

Perhaps the communicants should be left a little more to their own
meditations, at least for my own part I could wish, that while the elements are
handing about, there were observed (if it be possible) a solemn and universal
silence, that we might have time for our private devotions, and an opportunity
to ask a blessing of God upon his word and ordinances; especially as it is
either forbidden, or become unfashionable with us, to do so when we take our
seats, or finish the service. These things I have mentioned, and I submit my
thoughts to the wisdom and candor of the rulers of our church. There still
remains a very solemn and interesting part of our worship, I mean that of
public prayer, upon which I beg leave with all submision to make some few
remarks, earnestly entreating that they may be considered with calmness and
impartiality by your reverences, and the other members of our church; and that
though my sentiments should not please, yet in charity you will believe that I
wish well to the protestant cause, the interest of religion, and the purity and
peace of the church of Scotland. These, I presume to think, would be greatly
promoted, by the composition and establishment of some devout liturgy, or form
of prayer, for public worship. Have patience, and hear me out! I was once as
much prejudiced against a proposal of this nature, as you can be at present,
and if you will consider the inconveniences that attend our present way of
worship as calmly as I think I have done, you may perhaps see the necessiy and
advantages of a form of prayer as clearly as I do.

I beseech you then to reflect, that our present extemporary way of worship is
contrary to the practice and opinion of all mankind, in all ages, and of all
religions, until it was introduced amidst the ferment and confusion of the
fifteenth century; for before that time, whatever was the object of men's
worship, whatever the matter of their prayers, or however widely they differed
in the articles of their creed, yet they agreed as unanimously in the use of
forms of prayer for their public worship, as they did in the belief of a God,
Greeks and Romans, the Magi and the Mahometans, Jews and Christians, have all
agreed in this practice. I have often heard our Mass John, honest man, urge the
universal consent and opinion of mankind, against the atheists, as a proof of
the existence of a Deity; if this argument be conclusive, when applied to the
first and greatest article of religion, I mean the existence of God, sure it
will be so too, with respect to the best and fittest way of worshipping him. But
what is still more, God himself prescribed this way of worship to the Jews, as
in the cases of murder, when the person who committed it was unknown; of
suspicion of adultery; and when the first fruits were presented; his Son our
Savior honored this way of worship with his presence (for the worship of the
synagogues was by a form of Prayer;) he sanctified it by his practice, for in
his agony in the garden, he rose up, awakened, and rebuked the disciples,
returned to the same place, repeated the same form of words three times over;
and, before he expired upon the cross, he offered up his devotions, in the
words of the twenty-second Psalm; he authorized it by his command; for our
directory for prayer, informs us that our Lord's prayer is not only a pattern
for prayer, but is itself a most comprehesive prayer; so that if the command of
God himself, the example, practice, and command of his Son, be sufficient to
point out, in what way he would be worshipped, a form of prayer is pointed out
for that purpose; whereas it cannot be proved that ever God commanded
extemporary public prayer; that ever his Son attended worship performed in
that way; that ever he practiced it, or ever commanded it; nay I am not certain
that there is one example of extemporary public prayer in all the Bible; at
least, I am sure, there is not an instance that will correspond with our
situation, or authorize us in the use of it, when so many and so great
inconveniences do attend it.

We complain, and very justly too, that the popish clergy are too assuming, and
claim a superiority over the laity, inconsistent with the natural rights of
mankind, and the relation of brethren formed by the covenant of grace. Pardon
me, gentlemen, if I say that you claim a very extraordinary superiority over
the laity, in the case before us; every one of you claims an exclusive
privilege of manufacturing our public prayers, and assumes a right of making
us say to the Deity, whatever he thinks fit. In the most momentous affair in
which we can be concerned upon earth, we must depend entirely upon the
discretion, honesty, and ability of every private parson, and take the words
and matter of our addresses to our God and maker, such as he is pleased to
give, without ever seeing, examining, or judging for ourselves. This is really
treating us as if we were children or fools; we allow that you have a right to
offer our prayers; and as it is not fit that we should all speak, the minister
may be called the mouth of the congregation; but the mouth of the congregation
should speak the mind of the congregation. In our congregations, the mouth runs
before the mind, and speaks without giving us any opportunity of thinking what
we ought to speak, and often says things that we should certainly reject, and
sometimes offers petitions that we should absolutely abhor, had we time calmly
to examine them: our mouth leads us into the gross blunder of presenting our
addresses to the Deity first, and next judging whether they be proper addresses
after they are offered, when we cannot mend what is wrong, or alter what is
improper; we absurdly begin where we should end; for, in the natural order of
things, the congregation should first be satisfied that the prayers are proper
to be offered, and then the minister should offer them in their name; just as a
prudent man will think before he speaks; but in our admirable plan of worship
the congregation speaks by its mouth, before it has considered what it is to
say; that is, the parson offers up the petition, and the people may judge of
its propriety after it is offered, if they please.

The absurdity here is so glaring, that it is astonishing that it escapes the
observation of the laity; and it would not escape them in any other instance.
Should the ablest member of the house of commons, propose to offer an address
to his majesty, in the name of the house, without communicating it to the
members, the impropriety would be immediately perceived. When the estates, or
counties, design to address their sovereign, offer your service, and tell them,
"Pray gentlemen, give yourselves no trouble about the matter, we and our
brethren will each of us address the king in our own way; trust the whole
affair to us, every individual of the cloth is more than sufficient for the
undertaking; it is your business to approve of whatever we are pleased to say
for you; or at least, you may consider how you like the address, after it has
been offered." Take this advice, and try if the laity will be as complisant
with respect to the honor of their prince, and the concerns of their bodies,
as they are with respect to the honor of their God, and the interests of their
souls: yet one would be tempted to think (if the common consent of this nation
were not against the opinion) that the laity are as much interested in an
address to the Deity, as in one to the king; and that they would be at least as
loath to trust the first, as the last, to the discretion ability, or honesty of
every man who chanced to put on a black coat, or wear a starched band. But the
grossest absurdity will be swallowed down when it is in fashion, and I think
there can hardly be a grosser one, than that a gentleman should mount the
pulpit, of whose principles or discretion we have no knowledge at all, and that
this man should have a right to dictate the prayers of the whole congregation.
If we will believe the author of the characteristics Ecclesiastical
Characteristics, published at Glasgow, 1756.
, who seems to speak from experience, there are among you many whose principles
are very dangerous, and very inconsistent with the religion of Jesus; yet these
men not only lead, but even compose the devotions of the people, and make us
poor laymen address our Maker upon any principles that they please.

I have come from my house a found orthodox Christian, and have hardly taken my
seat in the church, when I have found myself praying, or at least one was
praying in my name, as a rank Socinian. I have been made an Arian, as to my
prayers, very often; and in short, there has hardly any whimsical opinion been
broached among the clergy for these forty years, that I have not sometime or
other found mixed with my public prayers, though, for my part, I am a plain old
fashioned man, and content myself with the apostles creed. Sometimes, indeed,
for my heart I could not have told upon what particular principles my prayers
were offered, they were so excellently well contrived, and so free from all
narrow notions that they would have served a Jewish synagogue, a Mohammedan
mosque, or a congregation of Persian magi, as well, or better than a Christian
assembly. If the minister that officiates be a sceptick; I am made to pray like
a sceptick; if an enthusiast, he addresses God in my name, according to his own
enthusiastical notions; when he chances to be a factious firebrand, or a keen
party man, though I be a very peaceable tradesman, my prayers breathe faction, my
devotions in public are flaming with party heat, and tinctured with the fury
of his faction. It is well known, that when any disputes happen, and
differences arise among the clergy in their synods or assemblies, both sides
appeal to heaven in their public prayers, and force the laity to appeal with
them (we are not supposed to have any right to judge for ourselves in these
cases;) and what is even worse, by an unlucky change of ministers, or by
stepping into another church, I have often been made to appeal to heaven as an
advocate for both sides of the question, and pray for and against each of the
parties in one day: for though our churches have the appearance of the same
worship, yet in fact their worship is as different as the tempers, principles,
and parties of the parsons who manufacture it; and this leads the laity into
the dangerous blunder of offering contradictory petitions, and praying at
different times, upon principles as opposite to one another, as light is to
darkness. It is an unsual thing amongst us to pray for and against
presentations in one week; I have thanked God for his decrees of election and
reprobation in the forenoon, and in the afternoon offered my humble thanks that
all men have equal access to salvation, by faith and virtue. In a word, there
is no party, nor different principle among our clergy, with respect to which I
have not been made to play fast and loose with the Deity, to ask what I did not
want, and to pray against what I most earnestly wished for. This we call
worshipping God! but did we deal so with our fellow men, they would call it
mockery, and take it as a gross affront: I cannot help thinking, gentlemen,
that this will appear, even to yourselves, hard treatment of the laity, and
that you will acknowledge, that their judgment ought not to be so entirely made
a property of, as to oblige them to have their public worship offered upon
what principles the parson pleases to espouse; or upon opposite principles, as
the minister, for the time, is of this, or the other, party. One of your cloth
complains, that we betray a Mr. Fordyce's Edification by public Institutions.
visible impatience till prayer be over; is it any wonder if we do? for, as it
is managed at present, prayer is to us a very dangerous part of worship; for as
that judicious gentleman observes, A great deal more, a vast deal more, depends
upon our performance of this duty with judgment and propriety, than most people
seem to be aware of. They who are aware of this, cannot help being impatient
and uneasy, when a duty of such vast importance is trusted to every individual
of the clergy; and they who seldom think of its nature or importance, will
always esteem it a dry and lifeless part of our service.

I am apt to think, that it is sometimes happy for our laity that they only
hear prayer as they do sermons, and cannot, I believe, as it is at present
performed, or at least, I am sure do not, join in it, for though it be criminal
not to worship God in public, yet it seems to be as great, if not a greater
crime, to offer an irrational worship, to insult him with contradictory
petitions, with ministers of opposite parties, and to have our devotions
tinctured with the spirit of faction, the wild dreams of enthusiasts, the
dangerous notions of scepticks, and the absurd follies of men whose heads are
filled with vapors and whims. Though these should sometimes be mixed with your
discourses, the hardship and danger would not be half so great. If they did not
instruct, they might amuse; and we needed not embrace your notions, unless we
pleased; our own reason might resist, or some approved printed sermons might
expel the poison. But when they are wrought into our public prayers, there
remains no remedy; we must take these as you are pleased to give them, or go
away without public worship.

The popish clergy indeed put a great hardship upon the laity, by offering
their prayers in an unknown tongue; but though the hardship be great, it admits
of some remedies; they may have their prayers translated into their respective
languages; they may have them explained by those that understand the language;
and constant use of the same forms, may in time enable them to annex proper
ideas to the words: but the hardship put upon us admits of no remedy; we must
offer what prayers every clergyman pleases; we must understand them the best
way we can; we must pick up the words as we can catch them, according to the
strength of your voices, the distinctness of your pronunciation, and the
largeness of the church; the fall of a bible, the opening of a seat, or a cough
in any corner of the church, will lose us half a sentence; and yet, if we would
pray with the understanding, we must collect the several parts of the sentence,
supply the words that are lost, compare it with what went before, examine,
approve, and offer it; and this must be all done in a breath. I question
whether the parson could perform this task himself; and I am convinced that it
is impossible for the slow and ignorant part of the audience; especially as
some of you speak so fast, that we cannot keep pace with you barely in hearing
what you say; others deliver so slowly, that our memories cannot serve us to
collect the several parts of the sentence; some are so fond of new and learned
words, that one half of the congregation cannot know their meaning; and many of
you have such a perplexed, intricate way of expressing yourselves, that we find
it impossible to discover the import of your petitions; and perhaps would find
this a difficult task, though we had an opportunity to consider them at leisure
in our closets.

So that putting all these difficulties together, I imagine that it will appear
that the laity of the kirk of Scotland lie under greater hardships, with
respect to public worship, than the laity of any church upon earth; and this
hardship is made still more galling to those who have sense enough to feel it,
by the pompous harangues that we are frequently entertained with, upon the
privileges that we possess above other Christians, the religious liberty we
enjoy, and the singular purity of our worship. Sure, gentlemen, you must mean
your selves, when you ascribe these great blessings to our church, o^ you
insult us in the most cruel manner; if you mean that you enjoy great
privileges, and a most extensive liberty, it is very true* for you ray what you
please, you sing what you please, you teach what you please, and your whole
public worship is so much of your own manufacturing, that there can hardly be
found room for a verse or two of scripture, and these you choose as you please;
in a word, every parish minister is a little pope, subject to none but a
general council, and, like the great pope, not subject to that, but when he
pleases: for it seems to be a point as much disputed in the presbyterian
church, whether a minister is obliged to submit to the sentence of a general
assembly, as it is in the popish, whether his holiness ought to yield obedience
to a general council. So that it must be acknowledged, that you enjoy very
great privileges, and a most extensive liberty. But pray what privileges do we
enjoy, when one man's judgment prescribes to a whole parish? when we must pray
for or against whatever party the parson pleases? offer our devotions according
to the religious or political principles that the minister for the time,
chooses to embrace? shift sides as your humors change, and address our God, as
Arians, Socinians, or Scepticks, as the gentleman in the pulpit is inclined? --
Sure, if our civil liberty were not something more substantial, we should be
the greatest slaves in Europe! -- Again, what purity can there possibly be in
our worship, when the passions, prejudices, and whimsical opinions of every
minister may, and do mix with it? I have always been at a loss to determine
whether your confidence in entertaining us with such harangues, and your power
of face in keeping your countenances, and stifling the laugh, or our stupidity
in not perceiving the gross affront, and patience in not resenting it, were
most to be admired. I cannot imagine that you are so weak as to think, with the
bulk of our people, that our worship must of consequence be pure, if it be
different from the practice of the church of Rome; and that we can only err
upon the side of superstition. If this be your opinion, it resembles the
conduct of some Germans, of whom I have read, who, for fear of the Roman army,
ran into a river and were drowned. Just so the greatest part of our people (for
I believe better things of you) conclude that our worship must be pure, if we
do not worship images, pray to saints, or adore the virgin Mary, though it be
mixed with the whimsical notions, enthusiastic opinions, and silly nostrums of
every quack doctor in divinity. It would be happy if you would content
yourselves, with insulting the people only, with such harangues; but you often
make them insult their God, or at least, you do it in their names, by thanking
him for establishing a pure worship, which he did not establish; a worship
which cannot possibly be pure; and which even in your own opinion is not pure;
for if the moderate party consists of such ministers as the author of the
Characteristics Ecclesiastical Characteristics, published at Glasgow 1756.
(who is said to be one of your order) has represented them to the world, God
have mercy upon the souls committed to their care! and may the Almighty pity
and relieve the congregations whose devotions they compose, dictate, and offer.
Yet in all probability if the moderate men were to write characteristics, they
would give us (...) forbidding a picture of the party that our author is
pleased to call orthodox. What then must become of us poor laymen, whose souls
are bandied about between the factions, and our prayers offered sometimes upon
the principles of the one, and sometimes upon the principles of the one, and
sometimes upon the principles of the other? Would it not be happy for us, that
we had some pious, primitive form of prayer, that would secure the purity and
reasonableness of our prayers, let the ministers private opinions be what they
would? As things are at present, it is impossible that our service can either
be reasonable, perfect, or pure; unless we can suppose, that our church has a
privilege, which no other church upon earth ever had or ever claimed; I mean,
that no weak or whimsical minister, no factious firebrand, no sceptick or
enthusiast, can mount our pulpits; or that after men of these characters get
into them, they will pray better than they are able, upon principles that they
do not believe, or with a calmness which they do not possess. Now supposing,
that there are only an This is not an unreasonable calculation in these latter
ages, considering, that there was one of twelve who proved a traitor, even when
our Lord was visibly present with his church.
hundred of our ministers of some or other of the above characters, and that
one with another each of them has 500 souls under his charge, there will be
50,000 persons in Scotland, who never worship God in public in the way of his
own appointment, and whose public worship must be dangerous to themselves, and
unacceptable to the Deity. Where must the blood of these poor people fall, but
upon the rulers of our church? who', though they have found by fatal experience,
that all the subscriptions in the world will not hinder men of pernicious
principles from creeping into the church, yet will not take the only effectual
method to prevent them from doing mischief there.

But besides the injustice of assuming to yourselves a right to dictate to us
what prayers you please; besides the absurdity of making us offer contradictory
petitions, and leaving our public worship exposed to the whims and follies of
the sceptick and enthusiast, there are many other inconveniences that attend
our present method. First, it is a question whether the laity can join at all
in our public prayers; for we must either suppose that they go along with the
minister, offering every word as he utters it, or wait until he has finished
the sentence, and then examine it, and give their assent. If the first be their
method, it is evident that they place an absurd and dangerous confidence in the
honesty and ability of the parson, and embrace in their prayers all the
whimsical notions and pernicious principles that he may chance to mix with
them: and further, that many of them, will, like parrots, talk what they do not
understand, since many words will occur, whose meaning and importance they are
not able all at once to conceive. At least I find it so with myself. Perhaps
our people may be inspired with more than ordinary penetration in the time of
prayer; but, at other times, I find it difficult enough to make many of them
comprehend an ordinary message, delivered in the plainest words that I can
possibly find; and after repeating it over and over again, have the
mortification to find, that they misunderstand me, though the whole passage does
not exceed two sentences. That these men should understand all the expressions
in an extempore prayer, and with their understandings and judgments keep pace
with the minister for half an hour, or twenty minutes, to me appears
impossible, and, I believe, will appear even to you very miraculous. But
suppose that our people wait till the minister has finished the sentence, and
then compare the several parts, examine the whole, and give their assent, God
knows how unfit many of them are for this task; but let them be ever so fit, if
a word be lost, if one occurs whose meaning they do not understand, or if the
arrangement of the words be perplexed it is evident that they cannot give a
rational assent: and if they take time to examine what may be suspicious, to
supply what is lost, or to unravel what is perplexed, let them be as quick as
they will, the subsequent sentence will be lost. I do not indeed suppose that
the bulk of our congregations ever dreamt of these difficulties, because they
give themselves no trouble about understanding, examining, or assenting; but
content themselves with being humble hearers, and perhaps in all their lives
never once gave a sincere and rational amen to public prayers; though hearing
another pray, and joining in prayer, be very different things.

Another inconvenience that attends our way of worship is, that young
gentlemen, just come from the university, full fraught with philosophy, and
fond of showing their learning, very injudiciously vent their notions in our
public prayers. A young spruce gentleman the other Sunday converted us in an
instant, from plain country people, into profound philosophers, and these too
of the dogmatical kind; for we told God Almighty many things concerning his own
works, which the learned gentleman, it seems, thought he did not know before,
many things that we neither understood nor believed; we traveled so high, that
our heads began to turn, and after all lost our gentleman, for fifteen minutes,
amongst other things that he called vortices, and began indeed to suspect that
he was swallowed up by them, or had gone where Milton tells us all vain and
empty things go, -- Up whirled aloft,
Fly over the backside of the world far off.
Into a limbo large and broad, since called
The paradise of Fools. Milt, Parad. Lost, book iii. 495.

Whether he visited that place or not, we cannot tell, but we found him at last
upon earth, chasing a mole. Had he been pleased to tell us these things,
stripped of their philosphic garb, in a sermon, some of them might have been
entertaining, some of them useful, and most of them tolerable; but to make us
inform the Deity of things that we neither knew nor believed, and as it were
instruct our maker in the nature, beauty, and order of his own works, (I humbly
think) was imprudent and presumptuous. However, he made a shift, by new-coined
words, and terms of art, to be far above the reach of our understandings; and
to pray with him, we must have read Euclid, studied Newton's works more than
our bibles, and brought half a dozen of dictionaries to church with us, to help
us to the meaning of his words. The gentleman however obtained his end, the
people stared, and, when they came out, concluded that he was admirably
learned, and that none was so fit to be their minister. Upon this whim, they
vigorously opposed the settlement of a pious and prudent gentleman, presented
to the charge by the patron, and are most piously supported in their wise
opposition by a set of the clergy, I suppose for conscience' sake. But I beg
pardon, digression is a fault. My business is only with our public worship;
and I flatter myself that you will own, that upon that Sunday it was but poorly
performed: yet such farces as these we are often forced to bear with; and
instead of the humble expressions of penitents, the concise petitions of poor
mortals, and the grateful thanksgivings of rational creatures, to their
merciful God, our prayers frequently consist of the foolish ostentation of
learning, and the harsh jargon of hard words.

Neither does our worship suffer more by the ostentatious folly and pedantick
humor of our young Dominies, than by the natural and necessary decays of the
invention, memory, and judgment of our aged ministers; for as the clergy are
foolish enough to vie in the expenses of dress, table and equipage, with the
landed gentlemen, most of them are unable, and all of them are unwilling to
call an assistant, as long as they are able to creep up to a pulpit, and
prattle out something like a prayer; so that you will frequently find a man
inventing and dictating the devotions of a congregation, who is superannuated
to all the other affairs of life. This man it seems has a right to make us
address our maker, in what manner and with what words he thinks proper; though
in common conversation, we cannot help perceiving that his memory has lost its
strength, and that his understanding is decayed, and all the powers of his mind
are sadly declined. It would perhaps be cruel to give instances of the
blunders, blasphemy, and nonsense that have been mixed with our prayers by this
misfortune, though many instances might be produced; but it is (I humbly think)
more cruel and highly unreasonable, to put the aged ministers under the
necessity of exposing their weakness, and dishonouring the service of their
Maker; and the laity under the hardship, either of offering nonsense, or
blasphemy, instead of pious, ardent, and expressive prayers, or of reducing
their minister to want and beggary in his old age, by forcing him to call an
assistant, whether he can maintain him or not; especially, as all danger might
be prevented, and all deficiencies supplied, by composing and establishing a
pious form of prayer; for he might read a prayer very devoutly, and distinctly,
when he cannot invent readily, or dictate an extemporary prayer to the
congregation with propriety and judgment; or if he chanced to blunder, or
pronounce indistinctly, having the form before us, we could easily supply the
defects; we could much better put up with trifling in his sermons, and
patiently hear him prattle about his subject and about it, because we could
supply our loss, in some measure, by reading some of the best sermons
ourselves, or to our families; but public prayer is a matter of that
importance, that there is no possibility of supplying it by our own industry,
no rectifying mistakes after the prayer is offered, and no possibility of
preventing very gross and dangerous blunders, while we perform this part of our
worship after the present method: for though our aged ministers should retain
all the powers of their minds to the last, which is not the case with one in a
hundred; though they should be able to invent extemporary petitions, with
propriety; yet as the organs of the body decay, it is impossible that they can
express them with that strength of voice, and distinctness of pronounciation,
which are necessary to us, before we can give a rational assent, if we can at
all give a rational assent to prayers that we have never examined; no, nor yet
the minister himself. The weak voice, the trembling body, the want of teeth,
and other infirmities incident to old age, do often render the pronunciation so
indistinct, that in our present way of worship one half of the congregation is
at as great a loss, as if the gentleman prayed in an unknown tongue; or at most
they can only pick up a word here and there, without any connection. Let us
suppose, that among more than a thousand ministers there are only 80, whose
understandings, or bodily organs, are thus decayed, and that one with another,
each of them has 500 souls under his charge; it would be a misfortune to those
who are under the care of the first, if they did join in the public worship as
it is performed amongst them; and they who are under the care of the last,
cannot possibly do it; so that there must be in Scotland at least 40,000
persons, who are debarred from the most essential part of public worship, by
the old age of our ministers, joined with the absurdity of our present plan; to
which if we add the 50,000 I mentioned before, there will be ninety thousand
persons in this nation who cannot worship God at all in public, or worship him
in a way unworthy of him, and dangerous to themselves, whose blood must be
crying to heaven against the rulers of our church. For whether the above
calculations be allowed to be just or not, there must certainly be a very
considerable number of our brethren in this distressed situation; unless we
suppose, contrary to known matter of fact, that the ministers of our church are
not subject to the same infirmities of body and mind that other men are
subjected to; and that they are secured by some sacred infallibility, from
embracing enthusiastical or skeptical opinions.

But further, our worship, as it is performed at present, is not only corrupted
by the contrary petitions of contending parties; not only tinctured with the
heats and animosities that arise in synods and assemblies; not only mixed with
the whimsical opinions, and pernicious principles of libertines and
enthusiasts, that climb up into our pulpits; not only rendered obscure and
contemptible by the pedantry and affected learning of the younger, and the
weaknesses of mind and body of our older ministers; but frequently interlaid
with ill-timed compliments to the great, or the minister's favorites, and the
grossest abuses of those who have the misfortune to be out of favor. I could
produce numerous instances of both, and, were it not an invidious task, point
out the persons, places, and times. Upon the marriage of a certain noble peer
in this nation, the parson carried his compliments so far in the public
prayers, that he exceeded all the bounds of decency, and made his female
hearers blush; and I would blush to repeat to the rulers of our church, in a
letter, the expressions that he made use of to the God of heaven and earth, in
the face of a congregation; so extravagant and ill-chosen were his words, that
the lady was forced to direct the clergyman, and entreat him to forbear his
rude petitions. A minister, even in one of our royal burghs, observing a young
gentleman, son to one of the magistrates, in church, after a journey to London,
made all the congregation thank God, that he had brought back their friends
from foreign lands. Most men, I presume, will remember how grossly the royal
commander of his majesty's forces, during the last war, was abused, by having
his praises wrought into our public prayers, by rough and unskilful hands;
some allowances, I own, are to be made for the clergy in this instance; the
augmentation scheme was then in agitation, and the weaker part of them
foolishly thought, that this would pave the way for it.

On the other hand, he must be a great stranger in our congregations, or very
heedless when he comes there, who has not observed that sometimes a well meant
zeal, and sometimes too warm an attachment to party opinions, with respect to
religious subjects, and private resentments too, have taught ministers of keen
passions, to use several expressions, not only inconsistent with the charity of
Christians, but even with the humanity of men; Vex them in thy wrath, and plead
with them in thy displeasure, through all eternity, was the unchristian petion
of Mr. -- with a respect to papists; Pour down the vials of thy wrath upon
them, and burn their flesh with fire, was Mr. C -- 's ungenerous wish. Nothing
but heat of zeal, and hurry of passion, could have dictated these petitions;
and I am far from thinking, that many of our ministers suffer themselves to be
driven to so great lengths* But all of them are subject to passions, and what
is left to the discretion of the minister, is left also to the indiscretion and
passions of the man; and we frequently find the two last, where the first was
designed to take place. Many instances could be given of the ill-timed flattery
of friends, and unchristian expressions, with respect to enemies, that have
been vented in our public prayers; but I am tender of the reputation of the
clergy, and do not choose to expose their errors, farther than is absolutely
necessary to show the danger and absurdity of our present way of worship; and
to pursuade them to recover and secure its purity and decency; and therefore, I
humbly entreat you to consider, whether the ill-timed, ill-chosen compliments
of sycophants upon the one hand, and the unchristian expressions of keen
zealots upon the other, do not render our public worship contemptible and
dangerous; and whether there be any thing so likely to prevent them from
indulging their humors, to the dishonor of God, and disgrace of religion, as
some well-chosen, pious, public form of prayer.

After flattery we may mention politics, in which our ministers will be
dabbing, in spite of grace, nature, and common sense, as another very fruitful
source of blunders in our worship; few of them have genius, fewer still have
sufficient intelligence, and all of them are at too great a distance from the
seat of government, to comprehend the secret intrigues of courts, or to
perceive, in spite of the varnish by which they are disguised, the real views
of parties; yet all of them will be meddling, and in every dispute our prayers
must take a side, and the poor laymen must address their maker, sometimes upon
the faith of a foolish rumor, and often upon the credit of common news. To say
nothing of the times, very wittily but very truly described by Butler in his
Hudibras, When gospel trumpeter, surrounded
With long-ear'd rout, to battle sounded,
And pulpit, drum ecclesiastic,
Was beat by fist instead of a stick.
Not (I say) to mention these days, whose history will be an eternal disgrace
to our religion, and would furnish as many instances of nonsense and blasphemy
vented in our public prayers, as would be sufficient to fill up a large
volume; even in latter days, politics have introduced very gross absurdities
into our public service. I am not yet an old man, and I remember to have been
made to pray, that God would pull down the bloody house of Austria: during the
last war, I earnestly begged that he would build it up; now I begin to give
broad hints that I would have it pulled down again; and am expecting every
Sunday, to be made to desire it, in a formal manner. The interests and leagues
of the states of Europe shift so frequently, that we are often flung out in our
prayers, and pray for our enemies as if they were our friends, and against our
friends, as if they were our enemies. Would our ministers be contented to make
us pray in general for our friends, and against the devices of our enemies, we
should never be wrong: but they choose to mention whom they mean, lest
omniscient wisdom should mistake, or at least that their people may know that
they are great polititions, and very zealous for the public good. Many a time
have I thanked God for giving us glorious victories, when we have been
shamefully beat; for inspiring courage into our troops, when they have run
away; for success granted to our arms in battles that were never fought; and
for deliverances from plots that were never formed. Our public worship, in the
present way, has always been and will always be tinctured with the spirit of
party, and made the property of faction in church and state. When the famous
Cambuslang conversion was going on (I shall never forget it) one Sunday morning
I was made to thank God for the manifestation of his power in that conversion,
and entreat him to continue the great work he had begun; in the afternoon, by
an unlucky change of ministers, I was made to pray that God would put a stop to
the delusions of the devil, by which the ignorant and simple were deceived, and
give us grace to resist that spirit of enthusiasm, that had gone out into our
land: thus, what I ascribed to God in the morning, I ascribed to the devil in
the afternoon; and what I had requested God to promote, I requested him too to
give me grace to resist. I prayed long and earnestly with Walpole's enemies,
before their intrigues and my prayers could pull him down; and when he fell, I
was made to thank God for the great deliverance; though it was soon discovered,
that it was nothing more than a struggle for power between parties, and a
matter of no moment to me or my country, which of the parties was in or out:
however, all ranks contributed something to raise the clamor; the mob made
bonfires, the magistrates rung the bells, the ministers gave their prayers, and
the mountain brought forth a mouse.

Nay, I have known the private piques and little quarrels between the parson
and his neighbors, introduced into the public worship, and made a part of our
prayers; even when the parson was the first aggressor, he had the assurance to
complain to God (as he called it) and what was still more unreasonable, made
his parishioners complain with him, or at least, he complained in their names,
though most of them were very sensible, that he himself had done the injustice;
how his complaints were received in heaven, I cannot tell, but I know that they
had their effects upon earth, for his antagonist, unable to bear the staring of
the congregation every Lord's Day, was forced to sit down under the injustice.
It is hard to determine in this respect, whether you have the meanest opinion
of your God or your hearers; for it seems you think that both are obliged to
shift sides as you are pleased to direct them, and, right or wrong, be still of
the party which the parson for the time thinks fit to embrace. That you should
treat the laity with so great contempt in this case, is not so surprising, as
you may be convinced from long experience, that they will swallow down the
grossest absurdities in their public prayers, and trust the propriety of their
worship upon Sunday, to the discretion and ability of a man, whose folly and
weakness perhaps they laugh at all the week. But I own it is amazing that you
can use such freedom with the Deity, to desire him to do and undo as the fancy
strikes you, or your designs chance to alter.

Our prayers are, for the most part, too historical, and seem rather designed
to instruct the congregation, than to confess their sins, express their wants,
or offer their grateful thanksgivings. I do not at all suppose that you are
ignorant, as our people seem to be, of the difference between preaching and
praying, or that you are not sensible that a very good sermon will make but a
very bad prayer; but I cannot help thinking, that you comply too far with the
popular taste in this respect, and strive to please, by giving our public
prayers as much the air and manner of a sermon as possible; or knowing that
many of your people judge of the propriety and excellency of a prayer, by its
length, to come up to the common standard, you are forced to fill up a gap with
what materials come first to hand; and this I am more apt to believe to be the
case, because we sometimes find half a dozen of sentences from scripture,
poured into our prayers all at once, without the least connection among
themselves, or the least relation to what went before, or follows after; and
frequently too, without the least affinity to any of the parts of prayer. What
Mr. Fordyce means, by that certain Edification, etc. page 15.
happy irregularity in our public prayer, which he is pleased to recommend, I
profess I know not; but I know very well, that there is a certain unhappy
irregularity in most of ours, that renders them very improper for public
worship. The several parts of prayer are most absurdly confounded, though they
require very different dispositions of heart; confession is jumbled with
thanksgiving; petition is mixed with narration; and sometimes we have all the
parts of prayer in one single sentence. By these means the mind is held in
suspense, and cannot settle to that humility, conviction, and sorrow, that
ought to attend confession; nor is it raised to that warm gratitude, and ardent
love, that ought to enliven our thanksgivings; neither is it filled with that
sense of dependence, nor formed to that serious earnestness and lively faith,
with which our petitions ought to be sent forth.

Instead of these, amused with the novelty of expression, and distracted with
the quick and irregular successions of the several parts of prayer, it
fluctuates between these sensations, and feels not much of any of them. When
all the powers of the soul should be employed in their proper places, and
making their greatest efforts to offer a spiritual worship to the Father of
spirits, our curiosity is only awake, and we are listening to a prayer no
other-ways than we do a sermon. I would beg leave further to observe, that our
extemporary worship in the church, produces very bad effects, with respect to
our worship in our families; for as praying to God extempore is the prevailing
fashion, and as our people are taught to despise worship offered by a form, so
those of them who want memory, learning, and invention, to express themselves
extempore with propriety, and have modesty to be ashamed of indecent
expressions, and reflection to think of the danger of unreasonable and
unchristian petitions, never pray with their families at all. On the other
hand, when ignorance and self-sufficiency meet in the master of a family, their
worship of consequence is a miserable mixture of nonsense, error, and
blasphemy. The most ignorant are always the most presuming, and the less sense
that a man has of the nature and importance of prayer, the more readily will he
venture upon extemporary worship. In fact it is true, that many of our people,
who can hardly repeat their creed, and know very little more of their religion,
than a few hard words that they have gleaned out of our catechisms, imitate our
parsons in praying extempore; and approach their maker with as great
familiarity, as they would do their neighbor, and with much less respect and
reverence than they dare treat their lord. Good God! what pitiful scenes have
I seen of this kind! what rude and shocking expressions, what blasphemous
petitions have I heard! how often have I trembled, when the ignorant and proud
enthusiast kneeled down with his family to his extemporary worship! how often
have I shuddered at the whimsical notions that he wrought into our prayers, the
insolent and unchristian expressions which he used, and the nonsense that he
offered in our name. How often has my heart bled in secret for the sad
situation of many miserable families, who, by our unhappy attachment to
extemporary prayer, either want family worship altogether, or offer their
worship in such a manner, as dishonours God, disgraces religion, and is very
dangerous to themselves! but I would very far exceed the bounds of a letter,
and I am afraid, weary out your patience, if I should endeavor to lay before
you all the inconveniences that attend our present way of worship; and I
flatter myself, if you will add to these already taken notice of, the blunders
of ignorance, the flights of vanity, the needless silly repetitions, the
unguarded expressions, and the childish thoughts that are mixed with our
prayers (and must be mixed with them, unless you can suppose that all our
ministers are men of the greatest abilities, elocution, and prudence) you will
see, that our present way of worship, is defective, unreasonable, and
dangerous; and that the hardships that the laity labor under, and the danger
to which they are exposed, can only be removed by some devout and approved form
of prayer.

To support the present absurd practice, to make the laity fit quietly down
with the injustice done them, and to blind their eyes, that they may not
perceive the disadvantages that they labor under, and the danger to which they
are exposed, it has been said that a form of prayer will limit the inspiration
of the Spirit; that it deadens the devotion of the people; that all the wants
of a Christian congregation cannot be expressed by a form: and some have been
so foolish as to say, that it is unlawful to worship by a form of prayer. Will
you pardon my presumption, and hear me with patience, if I humbly offer my
thoughts upon these heads; I hope you will. As to the first, I might boldly
appeal to your own consciences, and ask you, in the name of God, Do you believe
that you are inspired? Have you indeed so mean an opinion of the understanding
and judgment of the laity, as to imagine that any of them, who think at all,
can ever be brought to believe, that the prayers we commonly hear are dictated
by the Holy Ghost? Or have you so little regard to the honor of God, and the
interests of religion, as to ascribe your extemporary effusions to the Holy
Spirit? No, I am persuaded, that none but the rankest enthusiasts will ever
urge this argument against a form of prayer; and I will beg leave to ask such,
are the words or the matter of your prayers, or both, inspired? That the words
are not inspired, is evident from the difficulty that you frequently have to
find proper words; from the improper, and sometimes indecent expressions, that
fall from you; from the ill-timed pauses that you are forced to make, and the
most useful supplement of coughing, groaning, and spitting, that must come in
to your assistance. But supposing that you were indeed inspired with words, it
would be of small importance to yourselves or to us, unless the matter of your
prayers be inspired too: and if the matter of them be inspired, your prayers
are of equal authority with the scriptures themselves, and should be entered
into the canon. I know not how to excuse the negligence of the people of this
nation, in suffering so much sound doctrine to be lost; it might have cleared
up some difficult passages in scripture, and decided several important
disputes. I know not what to say for this piece of negligence, unless our
people think that all things necessary for Christians to know, to believe, and
to practice, are revealed in the holy scriptures; and that they may be taught
by them what to ask in prayer, and how to regulate their lives; and if this be
true, your inspiration is a very great gift bestowed for very poor purposes,
only to save you the pains of searching the scriptures, and the trouble of
composing a form of prayer by the instructions and examples contained in them.
The heathen poets themselves had a greater reverence for the Deity than this,
for it was a maxim among them Nec deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Inciderit -- Hor. Art. Poet. Never let a god be introduced, unless there
happens to be some difficulty worthy of such an agent.

I submit, whether you do not transgress against this rule, by introducing the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, if the scriptures be sufficient to direct us
what to ask in prayer; and if they be not sufficient for this, the revelation
of the will of God, for our salvation, is defective in a very important point;
and neither the prophets, nor the apostles, no nor our Savior himself, though
he enterprized it, have taught us how to pray. But supposing that it were
necessary, that the words, and matter of our prayers should be inspired by the
Holy Ghost; why might not a number of pious and learned divines, met together
with such an interesting and great design, as that of composing a form of
prayer for a whole church, have as much reason to expect, and be as likely to
receive the assistance of the Holy Spirit, as a private clergyman inventing the
transient prayer of a particular congregation? But this supposed inspiration in
our extemporary way, will involve us in very great, nay insuperable
difficulties; for we shall be as much puzzled where to find our miraculous
inspiration, as the papists are where to find their wonderful infallibility.
For if we suppose that this inspiration is confined to any one of the several
sects that use extemporary prayer, we prescribe to the Holy Spirit, and limit
him with a witness, and shall be sadly perplexed to determine to which
particular party this wonderful privilege is given. If we suppose that this
privilege is common to the ministers of all the sects, then we must conclude,
that the Holy Ghost inspires opposite petitions to men of opposite principles,
and directs one sect to pray against another: for instance, if he inspires the
burghers Burgher and antiburgher are the names of two parties among the Scotch
seceders, taken from the cause of their quarrel, an oath imposed in some of the
royal butroughs in Scotland, upon those they admit into the corporation.
to pray against the principles of their seceding brethren the antiburghers,
and to cut them off from their communion by excommunication; we cannot suppose
that he inspires the antiburghers to return the compliment: and if he inspires
the ministers of these sects to pray against the principles of the church
established by law, he does not direct the ministers of the established church,
in their public prayers, to call the secession a dangerous schism* that the
ministers of the several sects do pray for the success of their several
parties, and that God would hinder the spreading of the principles of the other
sects, is evident to all the world. Now, unless we would be guilty of the
boldest blasphemy, and say, that the Holy Ghost chimes in with the principles
of the parson, whatever they be (as the people are forced to do) we must
conclude, that this inspiration is not granted but to one of the sects; and I
shall only request each of them to use a form of prayer, until they shall be
able to prove that this gift of inspiration belongs to them. -- And that the
established church, with which I have to do, may be more willing to hear and
grant my request, I will produce some strong presumptions that it does not
belong to them: indeed the instances that I have given above, are more than
sufficient for this purpose; but I shall further add, first, that if the
confession of faith be true, none of our ministers are inspired in their
prayers; for there all mankind are divided into two classes, the elect and the
reprobates; yet it is evident, beyond all possibility of dispute, that the
elect pray as if it were possible that they may be damned; and the reprobates,
as if it were possible that they may be saved; and yet it is impossible that
the Holy Spirit inspires either of them with these prayers, unless we be so
impious as to imagine, that he directs them to pray upon false principles, and
inspires them to pray for or against what he knows can never happen; and though
some of you urge this argument of inspiration against your adversaries, yet our
church has in fact very fairly disclaimed it, by publishing and authorizing a
directory for public prayer; unless we would suppose them so presumptuous as
to direct the Holy Spirit how to pray. In truth, our presbyterian inspiration,
is as mysterious and as useless a gift, as the popish infallibility. The popish
church has an infallibility lodged somewhere, but she knows not where to find
it in time of need; we presbyterians, have an inspiration among us, but we know
not to which of all the sects it belongs. The infallible church is filled with
disputes, which her infallibility cannot determine; and the inspired church has
nonsense, contradiction, and whimsical opinions, vented in her public prayers,
which her inspiration does not prevent; the infallible church, has the most
unreasonable and absurd creed of any church upon earth; and the inspired church
has, and will have (while she adheres to her present plan) a very defective,
unreasonable, and dangerous kind of public worship: so fully, and justly, does
the providence of heaven confute the vain pretensions of presumptuous men.

But it may be said, and it has been said, that this gift of inspiration is not
universal to all our ministers, nor uniform and constant to any of them; but
granted now and then by fits and starts, something (I suppose) like the
quakers' spirit. I cannot help thinking, if this be the case, that the quakers
proceed more judiciously than we; they patiently wait in silence till they
feel, or imagine they feel the influences of the Spirit; but if he does not
come, we venture to do without him: they humbly submit to his will, to inspire
whom he pleases; but we confine him to the minister: they stop short when his
influence ceases; but we run our glasses, let his influences cease when they
will. I would therefore humbly propose, either that, like quakers, we should
wait the Spirit, and permit any one of the congregation, who chanced to be
inspired, to dictate our devotions; or that a form of prayer be composed and
authorized, only to be used when the minister feels no inspiration. Let him
have full liberty to depart from the form, when he feels upon his mind the
miraculous influences of the Holy Spirit, suggesting the matter of his prayers.
By this method we shall gain two very considerable advantages; first, we shall
always worship, either by inspiration, or by an approved form, and be certain
(unless the parson deceives us) that the ignorance, affectation, ill-timed
zeal, pride, or passions of the man himself, cannot tincture our public
worship, or mix themselves with our prayers. And next, we shall discover when
our parsons are inspired; for, as things are managed at present, this miracle
is as much lost in our presbyterian church, as the famous miracle of
transubstantiation is among the papists. In both churches there is a wonderful
manifestation of almighty power, yet no one is able to perceive it in either.
The papists are convinced that bread and wine are converted into flesh and
blood, though to all the senses, they remain bread and wine still; we
presbyterians are persuaded that our ministers are sometimes inspired, though
we cannot tell when the inspiration begins or ends; and though our ministers in
this case, lie under the same misfortune that Hudibras did, When with greatest
art he spoke,
You Would think, he talked like other folk:
so it unluckily fares with them, when they pray most by inspiration, they only
pray like other people; and all my attention and skill has never been able to
discover the inspiration in one single instance. But by the method that I am
proposing, we shall discover, that the inspiration immediately begins, when the
minister departs from the established form; and perhaps we may make another
discovery; I mean, that the rage of party, the spirit of pride and enthusiasm,
as frequently inspire our ministers, as the spirit of peace and love. In a
word, let those ministers who have pride enough to believe, and presumption to
affirm, that they are inspired, and can find people so ignorant and credulous
as to believe them, or so tame and indifferent as to trust their devotions to
an imaginary inspiration: let these, I say, use the present method, but have
pity upon us, who see the difficulty, disadvantages, and great danger of our
present way of worship.

As we cannot find in scripture any promise of such a gift, as we are convinced
that there can be no need of it (unless we suppose, that the Holy Ghost has not
fully revealed the will of God for our salvation) as we are absolutely certain
that you are not all inspired, and have no reason to believe that any one of
you is so; we presume most humbly and most earnestly to request, that some
pious form of prayer may be composed and authorized. The only inspiration that
is promised in scripture, that is necessary, or that can be useful, is that the
Holy Spirit will inspire the hearts of the faithful with affections proper for
this important duty; such as shame and sorrow in confession, an humble
Christian hope of obtaining what we ask in our petitions, gratitude and love in
our thanksgiving, and such other affections as are suitable to the several
parts of prayer; and no man, I believe, will say that the Holy Spirit cannot,
or prove that he will not, inspire our hearts with these affections, as easily
and as readily when we pray by a form, as when we pray without one. And as far
as prayer may be considered as one of the means of inspiring these affections,
a form seems better calculated to answer that purpose, in public assemblies,
than extemporary effusions: for in the extempore way, the hearer, (if he has
any sense of the nature and importance of prayer) must begin the duty with a
trembling heart, and go through it with a continual diffidence, as he trusts it
entirely to the discretion of another man; sometimes to a man whom he never saw
before, and always to a man who has not so much as calmly considered it
himself. He must often suspend his assent, when he is not satisfied of the
propriety of the expression; he must lose the sense, where the sentence is
intricate; and through the whole, be in perplexity, suspicion, fear, and real
danger. Whereas when prayers are offered by a form, no word needs escape him,
he understands every word, he perceives the connection of every sentence; and
let the minister's judgment be ever so weak, his learning ever so little, his
manner of expressing himself perplexed, his principles pernicious, his passions
ever so keen, and his party prejudices ever so violent, yet in spite of all
these he offers a reasonable service, and breaths forth the warm feelings of
his soul, in decent, devout, heart-affecting, and heart-approved prayers. This
observation may in a great measure obviate the second objection; I mean, that a
form of prayer does not so much enliven the devotion of the people; but I beg
leave further to observe, that they who are used to worship in this extemporary
way, cannot be competent judges in this case; because they have not fairly made
the experiment, but reason only from speculation. When they drop into a place
where forms are used, they come in with strong prejudices, they are entire
strangers to the form, and are perplexed in all the parts of it. -- It happens
with them in this case, as it does with men in every other thing, what they
have not been accustomed to, appears strange, what they are unacquainted with,
seems perplexed, and what they do not know reasons for, is apt to appear
unreasonable. It may be too, that the ignorant miss the unnatural cant, the
frantic gestures, and fearful distortions of the face, that, in their opinion,
are essential parts of prayer. But let a man of sense and candor, make himself
master of a form, and try the experiment for a year or two, by attending
carefully to prayers offered in that way; and then, and not till then, will he
be able to determine whether the form, or the extemporary method, has the
noblest effect to enliven his devotions. At least it is certain, that many who
have tried both, give their opinion in favor of a form; and that they who use
a form of prayer, constantly affirm, that they feel it ten times more
enlivening, and better calculated to inspire our devout affections, than
extemporary effusions. And there must be something in it, because the
professors of all religions under the sun, have chosen this method; the
Christian church universally used it till the fifteenth century, and indeed may
be said to do so at present, for we make such a small part of the catholic
church, that our practice hardly deserves to be considered as an exception.

I shall not dwell long upon the speculative arguments that are offered by
either side, because ingenious men will always find something plausible to say
in defense of a practice that answers their purposes. They who use forms, say
that their minds are free from all distraction and fear, and have nothing else
to do, but attend to the object of their prayers, and maintain upon their minds
a constant and lively sense of the importance of the business in which they are
engaged, free from the care of examining every sentence before they offer it as
their petition; secure that no indecent or unchristian expression can mix with
their devotions, being already satisfied of the propriety of the whole form.
They say that the mind of man is not able to attend to many things at once, and
that in our way of worship, if the people offer a reasonable service, they must
examine every sentence, hear every word, and understand every word they hear;
and they must remember what went before, if they would conceive the connection;
that they must unravel what is expressed in a perplexed manner, if they would
pray with judgment; and in fine, that they must give their amen to their
prayers, with a more superficial examination of them, and a much less perfect
knowledge of their contents, than they would venture to set their subscription
to, in an address to their superiors, upon earth.

We answer, that the novelty and variety of the expression, in our extemporary
method, help to fix the mind and keep up the attention. They ask us, upon what
is the mind fixed, upon the object and matter of our prayers, or upon the
novelty and variety of expression? If we say upon the object and matter of our
prayers, they will tell us, that there are in these, neither novelty nor
variety to assist us; because our prayers are always addressed to that Being,
who is the same today, yesterday, and for ever; and the matter of our prayers
in public must always be nearly the same: but if our minds be fixed upon the
variety of the expression, or novelty of the phrase, they say (and I fear they
speak truth) that this is not prayer, but mere amusement; such as the mind
receives from music, a song, or an entertaining piece of history; that it
might perhaps prepare the mind for prayer, but is not prayer any more than a
sermon is prayer.

It is evident that many of our ministers are sensible, that their people
attend only to the outward circumstances of their prayers, and that the way to
be popular, is to tickle their ears with strange sounds, or please their eyes
with antic gestures; else why do many of them affect such an unmanly whining
cant? Why use such dismal heavy tones, and draw out their words to such an
immoderate length? Or why do they affect such distortions in their faces? All
the world will acknowledge, that these are neither necessary nor useful parts
of prayer, unless to please the silly vulgar, who regard little more than the
sound and circumstances of our prayers.

But whatever weight may be in the speculative arguments upon either side,
experience and matter of fact are fairly against us; for they who say that
forms of prayer enliven devotion, seem, by a certain decency observable amongst
them in time of service, to confirm what they say; while the visible
inattention and indifference of our congregations, flatly contradict our
arguments, and prove to the very senses, that our extemporary prayers do not
enliven our devotions. In assemblies where forms are used, there is at least
the appearance of devotion, and an air of seriousness. None of them are seen
sleeping in time of service, few of them gazing about them, not one of them
ever presumes (unless in a case of absolute necessity) to remove till the whole
service be ended; and they frequently meet in public for the business of
prayer, which Edification by public institutions.
Mr. Fordyce justly complains we never do, and seems to think, that it would be
very difficult to persuade our people to it. Thus the practice of those who use
forms of prayer, proves to me more effectually than all the speculative
arguments that can be offered, that they have an higher opinion of the great
duty of public prayer, feel a greater pleasure from it, or are some way or
other more affected by it, than our people are. Whereas in our assemblies there
is not so much as the air of devotion, not even the outward appearance of
seriousness and attention; many are sleeping, more gazing about them, and all
of them Edification by public Institutions.
betray a visible impatience till prayer is over, that they may be entertained
with something more to their liking. When sermon is over do we not see them
remove in crowds, though one half of our service, and that the most solemn
half, still remains? Perhaps it may be thought, that this is not a fair account
of the matter, and that I misrepresent things. Will you believe your own
brethren? they shall vouch what I have said: let us first hear Mr. Bennet's
report of the devotion of our brethren in England Sermon upon joining in
public prayers, p. 112.
"That careless air (says he) which sits upon the face of a congregation, when
engaged in prayer, shows how little they know of the matter, and how few
seriously join in public and solemn prayer; some gaze about them, others fall
asleep -- others fix their eye, it may be on the minister, and are affected
with what he says; but then they only hear him pray, and are moved with the
prayer, just as they hear sermons, and are moved thereby (a most lively picture
of our public worship!) -- I must profess to you, should the enemies of our
way of worship be present to observe us, there is nothing I should be so much
ashamed of, as our exceeding careless, irreverent, indevout manner of joining
in public prayer." So far Mr. Bennet bears witness to the want of devotion in
congregations in England, where extemporary prayers are used. Let us now see if
this way of worship, has any better success or happier effects amongst us here
in Scotland. Alas it is every where the same unnatural, unreasonable, lifeless
thing. Let Mr. Fordyce speak for the Scotch congregations: "I doubt not my
brethren (speaking to the clergy) but you have frequently observed when the
minister of God has been addressing him in the name, and as the mouth of the
people, the greatest part of them seem to be doing any thing, rather than
joining in the solemn service; in reality there is no exercise of a spiritual
nature which the generality seem to regard so little, or to attend so
listlessly; seem did I say, the expression is much too feeble; their
insensibility, their irreverence in this respect are, from the whole of their
deportment, most shamefully distinguishable and flagrant." Edification by
public Institutions.
If this be true, as indeed it is the very truth, I may be allowed to add, that
it is most shamefully impudent in us to allege that forms of prayer deaden the
devotion of the people, and that our extemporary method enlivens it. The little
respect, nay visible contempt, that our people show of public prayers, prove
more clearly than all speculative arguments that can be offered, that our
present way of worship is very ill calculated for enlivening the devotion of
the people: I have proved by two unexceptionable witnesses, and had it been
consistent with the brevity I proposed, could have produced many more, to
prove, that our devotion is not only dead, but wants even all appearance of
life. In truth it needs no proof, for every Sunday will show that we want
attention, and reverence, to this most important duty; and every impartial
heart will tell its owner (if he understands the nature of prayer) that it is
very difficult to join in our public worship as it is at present performed;
that it is impossible to do it rationally; that it cannot be attempted without
great danger; and that in fact he does it very seldom, and even then in a very
faint and lifeless manner.

Allow me next to consider the third objection offered against forms of prayer.
I mean that the wants of a congregation cannot be so fully expressed in that
way, as by the extemporary method. This objection supposes, that a number of
the most learned and pious men of the age (for such I imagine would be
employed) deliberately composing a form of prayer, calmly recollecting the
matter of it, frequently reviewing the whole, furnished with all the ancient
and modern liturgies, directed by all that has been written on the subject, and
assisted by every one that wishes well to religion and virtue, are more likely
to omit some necessary petition, than a single person, perhaps of very
indifferent talents, and a very moderate education, trusting entirely to an
extemporary invention, and to his own memory. The man who can suppose this,
hardly deserves to be reasoned with; for it is evident, that, in the first
case, our prayers will be brought as near perfection as possible; and that in
the second, many things must be omitted, many injudiciously expressed, many
needlessly repeated, and the whole tinctured with weakness, passions, and party
principles of the speaker, and that his best performances will be as much
inferior to a general form of prayer, as he himself is in discretion, learning,
and judgment, to the greatest men that have wrote upon the subject, and to a
number of men of the best hearts, and calmest, ablest heads, convened to
compose the form. The wants, and consequently the matter of the petitions of a
Christian congregation, must in the main be always the same; they will at all
times have sins to confess, still have need to ask pardon, and implore the
divine grace to direct their thoughts, words, and actions; it will ever be
their duty, to pray for all ranks of men, etc. If any general calamity should
happen, such as war, famine, pestilence, proper forms may be provided; in
private cases, perhaps it might be more for the honor of our religion, and
decency of our worship, that we did not descend to particular circumstances, so
much as we do. It is needless to describe the disease to an omniscient God;
most cases of this nature, might be comprehended under the general names of
sickness and distress; but if it be thought proper to deal with God Almighty as
we do with an ordinary doctor, and to lay the case before him at full length,
methods may be found to indulge the humor of the clergy, in this respect,
without leaving our whole worship to their discretion, and putting all our
public petitions in their power.

Should the spiritual condition of a congregation be altered (if it possibly
can alter so much, that the established form could not comprehend the case,
which, in my humble opinion, cannot happen, if the form be well composed) let
the bresbytery, synod, or commission of the assembly be applied to, and the
case being calmly considered, its nature and tendency deliberately examined,
and its truth and certainty ascertained; let a form of prayer be composed
suitable to the case: but this is too delicate, too dangerous, and difficult an
affair, to be trusted to the discretion or capacity of any one clergyman; for
weakness, or villainy, in this respect, has more than once dishonored our
public prayers, with the grossest enthusiasm, perverted them to serve very bad
purposes, and exposed the most solemn part of our service, as well as religion
itself, to the ridicule of infidels.

In a word, the ordinary wants of a Christian congregation may, nay must be
more fully expressed by a form of prayer, than by extempore effusions; and
extraordinary cases, after they are discovered and examined, may easily be
provided for, and it is not only possible, but very easy, to provide for all
cases that ought to be particularly mentioned in our public prayers, in the
first composition of them. But to prevent all wrangling upon this subject, and
(if possible) to content the most self-sufficient clergyman, let there be a
proper place in this proposed form of prayer, where the minister may have
liberty to pray for all extraordinary cases, in what words he thinks proper. It
is better, that a small part of our worship be exposed to the discretion,
ignorance, and passions of the parson, than that the whole should be liable, as
it is at present, to be made the property of faction, to be tinctured with the
prejudices and whimsical opinions of every private minister, and offered upon
the pernicious principles of the deist, or the extravagant notions of the
enthusiast.

I shall not dwell long upon the last objection, I mean that forms of prayer
are unlawful, because I believe it never will be offered by men of sense and
learning; and it is losing time and pains to reason with such as are destitute
of both. I shall only beg leave to observe, that they who say that forms of
prayer are unlawful, in fact say, that God Almighty commanded, that our Savior
attended, used, and taught his disciples an unlawful way of worship; for that
he did so I have proved already, and our own directory for public worship
acknowledges, that "Our Lord's prayer is not only a pattern for prayer; but is
itself a most comprehensive prayer." Here I cannot help observing with regret,
that where ever our directory directs well, there our clergy have despised our
directory; for instance, it recommends that the Lord's prayer be used in our
public worship; that ordinarily a chapter out of each Testament be read at
every meeting: the first is neglected by most, and the last by all of them. It
directs that our worship begin with prayer, but now it begins with praise; that
the minister before worship shall solemnly exhort the people to the worshipping
of the great name of God; but at present we rush into a very solemn part of
worship, without a word of previous exhortation, and I fear, very often,
without a serious thought. It is easy to find out the reason why the Lord's
prayer, and the reading of the scriptures have been jostled out of our service;
they have been forced out to make room for Mass John's more masterly
performances; but why the other alterations have been made, the clergy, who
direct all things, can only tell. To them I leave it, and resume my subject. If
forms are unlawful, we are unlawfully baptized, for that is done by a form; and
all the extemporary prayers which we use upon that occasion are not essential
to the sacrament, and are additions of men. We administer the Lord's supper in
an unlawful manner, for we do it by a form, I mean the words of the first
institution: we are dismissed every Lord's day with an unlawful blessing; for
one of the solemn forms with which the apostles conclude their epistles, is
always used upon that occasion: so that nothing can be more inconsistent with
ingenuity and common sense, than for us to cry out against forms, when the most
solemn and important parts of our religion and worship are performed in that
way, and when we neither baptize, nor communicate, nor bless our congregations
in a lawful way, unless forms be lawful; nor do these things in the best
manner, unless doing them by a form be the best.

But further, if forms of prayer be not acceptable to God, and an useful way of
worship for ourselves, we grossly offend every time that we meet in church: for
it is impossible to sing eighteen to twenty lines of a psalm, but we offer some
important petition by a form; and some psalms might be pointed out that are
almost continued prayers; so that unless we will affirm, that our prayers are
acceptable to God, and useful to ourselves when they are sung, but otherwise
when they are said by a form, we must allow, that we are inconsistent with our
ourselves when we cry out against forms; that our ministers impose upon us,
when they spirit us up against that way of worship, that they may have the
better opportunity to gratify their own vanity, to manufacture our prayer after
their own manner, and to mix them up with their own private opinions.

If extemporary worship be preferable, what good reason can be given why the
ministers do not sing psalms extempore in our names as well as offer
extemporary prayers; for we are as much concerned to join in the last as in the
first; a blunder in the one is as dangerous as in the other, and we could as
well go along with him in our hearts, when he sung an extemporary psalm, as we
can do when he says an extemporary prayer. This inconsistency in our worship
has not entirely escaped the observation of our brethren, for many of them have
warmly insisted upon it, that the Spirit of God is restrained by using the
psalms of David H^ylin's history of the Presbyterians.
, and therefore proposed that we should sing as well as pray extempore: and
upon the supposition, that public worship in the extemporary way is most
rational, they were certainly right; for no good reasons can be given for
praising God by forms, that will not be equally good for praying to him in the
same way; and no objection can be offered against the last, that will not be as
strong against the first; for instance, if we say that praying to God by forms
deadens the devotion of the people, so will praising him by forms too. If forms
of prayer restrain the influences of the Holy Spirit, so must forms of praise.
If forms of prayer cannot express all the wants of a Christian congregation,
neither will forms of praise comprehend all the causes for which a Christian
congregation may have reason to praise God; especially, as the forms we use
were composed several thousand years ago, and calculated chiefly for the Jewish
religion and worship. If forms of prayer be unlawful in themselves, so must our
forms of praise, because, as I observed before, they are often real prayers.

Supposing that extemporary worship was more acceptable to God, and useful to
ourselves, no man in a congregation can reap the benefit of it but the parson.
Our laity are most grossly mistaken, if they imagine that they pray extempore
by our present method; for if they pray in the words of the minister (and in
his words they must pray if they join at all in public worship) they are as
much confined to a form as any other people. For example, if the minister says,
most gracious God forgive us our sins, preserve us from danger, and provide for
our necessities; if the people repeat these words, either in their minds, or
with their mouths, or both, it is evident that they pray as much by form, as if
the prayer had been composed a thousand year ago; in fact it is impossible for
a congregation to join in worship other ways than by a form; and all the
difference is, that we worship by a form with which we are entirely
unacquainted; a form that we have never seen nor examined before; a form that
is trusted to the discretion and ability of the parson for the time, and which
the minister himself has never once read over, nor examined, even in the
slightest manner. It is hard to determine whether his presumption in putting a
form of prayer into our mouths, that he has never examined, or our complaisance
in using a form that neither we nor our minister have ever once read over, is
most unaccountable. But that either he or we should imagine, that to worship
God in this manner is most rational for us, or most acceptable to him, is such
an instance of the strength of prejudice, and the effects of education, as no
man could have thought possible, had it not been proved by experience. For in
fact, it is to imagine that our worship is the more rational, the more we are
strangers to the words and matter of our prayers, and the less access we have
had to satisfy ourselves of the propriety of our petitions, and the more
confidence we repose in another man.

That our worship will be the more acceptable to the Deity, the less care and
pains are taken about the words or matter of it by the parson, or the people,
and that our prayers will be so much the sooner heard, the less chance they
have to be expressed in proper words, or to consist of pious and reasonable
petitions. We may sometimes have a better, or worse form, according to the
judgment and capacity of the minister, but we must always have a very defective
one, and our very best form must be as far inferior to a national well-composed
liturgy, as the learning, judgment, and memory of one man, is to the abilities
and calm reflection of a number of the most learned and judicious men of the
age. I must confess that I have often beheld with indignation the parson
pulling out his papers for the sermon, when he trusted the prayer to his
invention and memory; not that I have any prejudice against reading of sermons,
or am not convinced that it is the best method, unless the minister be a man of
extraordinary parts, of extensive learning, and blessed with a very good
memory; but that I look upon it as an affront offered to God and the
congregation, and very absurd in this instance, as it shows that the minister
is less concerned about the propriety and decency of his address to his God,
than to his people; and that he is more afraid of a blunder in his sermon, than
in his worship; or at least, that he thinks, either that a mistake in the last
is of less consequence than in the first, or that it is an easier matter to
pray than to preach well. I own that he has reason to believe that any thing
like a prayer will pass with the bulk of the people, because in truth they do
not regard it much; but this should never induce him to show that he is as
careless about the matter and words of their prayers as they are themselves,
and that he takes more care and pains to please them by his sermons, than to
offer their prayers in a concise and proper manner.

I have often heard the members of our church, when the difficulties and
dangers of our present way of worship have been fairly laid before them,
satisfy themselves by saying, that most of our ministers had a form of prayer
which they used, and with which, by length of time, their people became very
well acquainted. I believe it may be true, that most of them naturally fall
into a form; but if we will believe themselves (and they certainly know best)
it is rather by chance than by design, and of consequence more by good luck,
than good management, or much care, if the form they fall into be a good one.
However, it is here granted, that the worshipping God by a form, is not only
lawful and reasonable, but also necessary; and, if this be the case, why should
not our worship be rendered uniform by an established general form of prayer?
Why should it not be brought as near perfection as possible, by the judgment,
piety, and learning of our ablest ministers, and other members of our church,
conferring together upon the subject? why should not this form of prayer be
communicated to the laity, that we may examine and approve of it? is the
parson's form such a secret that we may not see and examine it for ourselves?
is it any advantage to our worship that he may alter* curtail, or enlarge it,
as his passions or prejudices chance to direct, and warp into his form any
whimsical opinion, that he chances to embrace? we must, notwithstanding of his
form, go to the church with a trembling heart, as we know not but some minister
may officiate whose form of prayer we never have heard, our own minister may
have changed his, or some unlucky and indecent petition may be thrown in, as he
has it in his power to do as he pleases.

At the same time it is true, that our ministers, who carefully compose and
constantly use a form of prayer, do as much as they can, in their present
circumstances, to render our worship pure and rational, and to assist the
devotions of their people; and therefore deserve their esteem and thanks; but
yet it is evident, that these private forms have no great chance of being so
full and perfect, and that they have but few of the advantages of a general
established form of prayer, and many of the disadvantages of the extemporary
method.

It has been often urged in defense of extempore public prayers, that the
apostles used that way of worship. If they did so, they did more than their
master either taught them, or gave them an example of, as far as we can judge.
But supposing that it were proved (which it has not yet been, and I doubt never
will be) that the apostles used extemporary public prayer, I am afraid we
shall not be able to infer from thence, that our ministers should pray
extempore, or that the people should trust every one of them with the
composition and direction of their public worship; unless it could be also
proved, that every one of them is directed by immediate inspiration. I have
often blushed for our ministers, when I have heard them urge this argument, as
it is so weak and inconclusive in itself, and betrays so much presumption and
self-sufficiency in them; for in fact it is putting our present ministers upon
a level with the apostles. Some days ago I was passing by Bedlam, and observed
one of its wretched inhabitants wrestling with a great iron gate; I asked him
what he was about; he told me, with an air of importance, that his name was
Sampson, and that he meant to carry up that gate to the top of an opposite
hill, as his namesake did the gates of Gaza. I did not stay to convince him
that Sampson was endued with miraculous strength, but I could not help thinking
that there was a great resemblance in his way of reasoning, or rather running
mad, to the argument in hand; for the apostles were endued with miraculous
gifts, as much superior to the abilities of our present ministers, as Sampson's
strength was to that of the poor Bedlamite: they lived in an age in which
miraculous gifts, by the goodness of God were common in the church; but in our
time there is nothing miraculous, unless it be the self-sufficiency and
presumption of the clergy, in taking upon them to offer an extemporary address
to their maker; and each of them claiming a right to make a whole parish pray
as he pleases; and the absurd confidence reposed in them by the laity; and the
tame submission by which they suffer every man that chances to fill their
pulpits, to manufacture and mix up their prayers as he chooses. These, indeed,
are miraculous things, such as no age no country, no religion, ever produced
examples of; and it is still more surprising that the clergy themselves (as I
have proved before) see, and publish to the world, that the people do not join
in public worship; and the most learned and sensible part of the laity feel
and acknowledge that it is very difficult and dangerous for them to join in it,
as it is performed at present; and yet that none of our clergy have compassion
and humility to propose, nor any of the laity resolution to demand a change,
but that all of them sit down with an absurd and dangerous way of worship,
introduced partly by necessity, and partly by enthusiasm, in the distracted
days of our reformation; disapproved of by our ablest reformers from the
beginning, as witness John Knox, who composed and used a form of prayer; and
only approved of and supported by the silly ignorant vulgar, who have so little
knowledge, either of the nature, or importance of prayer, that they would not
give themselves the trouble to go to church, unless it were to hear a sermon;
and by the turbulent and self-sufficient part of the clergy, who find that it
gives them a fair opportunity to sow discord, propagate faction, and prostitute
our worship to their foolish fondness for popularity. That the mob, who place
great merit in hearing many sermons, and think preaching the most important
part of public worship, should be fond of our present method, is no wonder at
all, for our extemporary effusions are rather sermons than prayers. It is
natural too for the ambitious, enthusiastical, and libertine part of our clergy
to be warmly attached to our present way of worship; it most effectually
answers their several purposes; it affords the ambitious a large field for
displaying their popular talents, and an excellent opportunity to preach
themselves; it gives enthusiasts and libertines fair scope to vent their
whimsical and pernicious principles: indeed nothing can be better calculated
for propagating sedition, heresy, enthusiasm, and party principles, than our
present way of worship, since every minister, has the composition of most of
it, and the choice and management of the whole; so that it is no wonder if men
of these characters be fond of it, nay, it would be very surprising if they
could be persuaded to give up our present method.

But it is not easy to conceive why the learned, orthodox, and pious part of
our clergy, who have no other views but the good of souls, and the glory of
God, have not endeavored to remedy these ills, by composing and authorizing
such a form of prayer, as might enable every congregation in the kingdom to
offer their prayers upon truly Christian principles: or how it comes to pass
that the sensible and pious part of our laity (though they can hardly miss to
see, that it is inconsistent with religion, and common sense, to trust the most
solemn part of our worship to the discretion, honesty, and ability, often of
strangers whom they have never seen before, and always of individuals, of whose
weakness and folly they have many instances) choose to run such a terrible risk.

I have contributed my poor mite to deliver the laity from the hardships and
danger to which they are exposed by our present way of worship; and, as (I
think) I have made it obvious, that the present method is attended with great
inconveniences and imminent danger to us poor laymen: I may likewise hope
that the rulers of our church will lay our case to heart, and take such methods
as may enable us to offer a rational service to the great source of reason, and
to lift up holy hands without perplexity, fear, or danger. While our case
continues as it is, our churches may indeed be crowded by those who have not
sense to see their danger, nor attention to perceive upon how many opposite
principles they are made to pray; persons who have never perhaps in all their
lives reflected upon the nature and importance of prayer, and come to church
partly because it is the custom, or at most to hear a sermon; but they who
consider the nature and importance of public worship will hardly choose, in a
thing of so great consequence, to be blindfolded and led by the parson.

With all humility and due deference I submit the whole to your consideration,
more extensive learning, and better judgment, and to the candid reflection of
all pious Christians, and am with the greatest respect,

Reverend Fathers, Your most obedient And most humble servant, A. T. Blacksmith.
Invetary, May 8th, 1758.

