THE MAIN POINT; OR, SAVING FAITH DISTINGUISHED FROM COUNTERFEITS: AS DELIVERED
PUBLICLY IN SEVERAL DISCOURSES -- ANNO M.DCC.LXII.

BY TIMOTHY ALLEN, A. M. AND V. D. M.

PROVIDENCE: N. E. PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM GODDARD, AT THE POST OFFICE.
M.DCC.LXV.

The MAIN POINT, etc.
JAMES ii. 20. FAITH WITHOUT WORKS IS DEAD.


PERFECT obedience to the most holy law, is the fixed medium of acceptance with
its author. And the impossibility of such obedience, in those who are any way
chargeable with sin, made the necessity of CHRIST'S appearance in human nature,
for the purposes of such obedience, as well as sacrifice; that GOD might be
just, and yet the justifier of them who believe in JESUS. But as man was
originally formed for such obedience in himself, his pride still stimulates him
that way; and though, in respect of his original abilities, he is become like
the beasts that perish, he still trusts in himself that he is righteous. This
was the spirit of those to whom St. Paul says, "by the deeds of the law, there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight." And again, "a man is not justified
by the works of the law* but by the faith of JESUS CHRIST." On which he soon
succeeded to convince the Galatian churches, and in their turn the Roman too.
But this method of acceptance with GOD not being natural, they made no long
stand in the simplicity of its profession; so that when St. James came to
prosecute the same design, he found the word among them was, "Do ye believe? --
Do ye own the faith of CHRIST?" And whosoever made an affirmative answer, was a
good christian, without regard to the distinguishing qualities of his faith, or
its influence on heart or life. So they were generally believers, and as
generally careless, ungodly livers. To them, in this light, St. James cries
out, "Can faith save you? -- Faith without works is dead." -- "This is not the
sort of faith which Paul taught, but another, a counterfeit, a dead sort." So
that these two apostles speak of different things, and not contradictorily of
the same thing. St. Paul speaks of true faith, St. James of a counterfeit and
most dangerous sort of faith to be depended on. The former denies works to be
the ground of a sinner's justification in the sight of GOD. The latter requires
them as the saint's vindication of his profession in the sight of men. One
says, the sinner's works cannot save him; the other says, the saint's works must
prove him to be what he pretends. St. James found the christians of his time
made high pretensions to faith, and actually had a great deal of what they
called by that name; yet, says he to them, ye may know it is a counterfeit sort
by your unevangelical tempers and lives; whereas if your faith was right, its
fruits would justify it; such a sight of divine righteousness and grace would
be imported in it, as could not fail to show your own vileness, and so take
away the occasion of pride, and make you deeply humble. It would also give such
sight of the purity of the divine nature and law, as would transform your
spirits into the likeness of GOD, and make you holy, like his most holy law;
whereas the faith you have, leaves you earthly, carnal, vain. The effect which
a man's faith has upon his temper and life, proves what sort it is. Ye see,
therefore, says he, "how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
only." That is, not by being able to say that he believes, for that is not the
evidence of true faith, nor will justify any one's pretensions to it; the
devils can with great truth say they believe. When there is nothing but belief,
in a man's religion, no divine truth, or genuine virtue of its spirit; and so
no transforming effect, no holy fruits, it is thereby determined to be delusive.
If faith be without works it is dead. All this is as true now, as it was in St.
James's time. That faith which of its own nature makes a humble, self-loathing,
self-denying, and of course a grace-exalting bent of mind, and so a life
evidently bearing the heavenly impress, is as surely saving, as the word of GOD
is true; and the want of these in any one's belief, as evidently proves the
contrary. This, methinks, might give surprise to many, and make them each begin
to say, the LORD have mercy upon me! What shall I do? I see I have faith
plenty, I believe all things, in general, which the bible teaches; but alas! I
don't find it affects my heart or life much. I am proud, vain, worldly,
passionate, negligent of duties, yet believe all the time; I fear my faith is
dead, and that I am deceived in my religion to this very day. My life certainly
stares against me; I don't find my faith is humble and sanctifying. I can have
it as well in a careless way, as any; and don't this look like dead faith
indeed? I don't find peace toward GOD; something within tells me I am not
right; am I not yet in the gall of bitterness, and under the bonds of iniquity,
without GOD, without CHRIST, and without hope in the world! And so have been
every moment of my past life in immediate danger of eternal burnings, having
never had one thing about me, with which GOD is pleased; always deceiving
myself with this notional faith.

BUT perhaps all this is only surprise, and you are not yet convinced that your
faith is false, and so damning instead of saving. Perhaps you don't see that
your belief is essentially defective; but rather that it might do, if you had
more of it, or if you had lived more agreeably. Perhaps you don't see, that, as
readily as you have entertained the faith you have, you are thoroughly averse
to that which is divine; and that true faith never begins with any thing less
than omnipotence; and that GOD never bestows it, but on such as have wholly
lost sight of all ability and goodness in themselves. On this supposition, how
great the dangerous and growing distance between your soul and saving faith to
this day? And what reason have those who can pray to cry out and say, O thou
GOD of the spirits of all flesh! who see and judge the secrets of all
hearts; who know, perfectly know, the inward state of every soul here,
and what sort of faith we are risking our eternity upon; be pleased, for the
sake of that perfect atonement, to shine in these dark souls this day, to give
them the light of the knowledge of the glory of GOD, as it appears to faith, in
the face of JESUS CHRIST. And suffer no proud, self-righteous delusion to
prevent genuine conviction and light, by the plain account of true and false
faith which may now be exhibited. And as every heart is naturally bent against
it, with all its might, 'till conquered by mere power of truth, so let thy
power now be glorious in its going forth from conquering to conquer, 'till
every heart of thy chosen shall bow to this only faith of the great Redeemer,
Amen. Let us now attend to the following distinctions between true and false
faith, viz.

I. True faith commences at the very time when the sinner first finds all his
soul needs, in the bible's account of JESUS CHRIST, neither sooner nor later;
but a dead faith never commences at that time.

II. True faith always affects the mind in a manner answerable to the nature of
its objects; a dead faith never.

III. True faith produces just such effects, as the scriptures ascribe to true
faith; but a dead faith produces none of them. It has no sort of divine
influence at all.

I. TRUE faith then begins when CHRIST with his own truth, and glorious
sufficiency is first made known to the sinner. By which it will appear that
dead faith has no such commencement. Here,

1. WE shall show that there is an absolute and universal necessity for CHRIST
to be specially made known to a person in order to his salvation. And then,

2. THAT this must be by faith, or in believing the gospel, and that there is
no other way for a sinner to be saved.

3. SHALL give some account of the manner in which such faith is wrought. --
Which will show the nature and work of faith in the sinner's justification, and
that it is peculiar to divine faith.

1. THERE is an absolute necessity of a revelation of CHRIST to the sinner for
his salvation. Now if we are not well assured of this necessity, the doctrine
of faith, as the alone mean of justification, will be to us as the doctrine of
the cross was of old, to some a stumbling block, to others foolish. Not being
convinced of our moral ruin is the grand reason why the doctrine of faith as
taught in the scriptures, is so little regarded; they who are whole need not
the physician. Let us take then a hint or two of evidence, that this ruin is
ours.

(1.) IF death reigned from Adam to Moses, that is, for two thousand five
hundred years, over such as never committed one actual transgression; then
human nature must be in a fallen guilty state; but death did so reign. -- Romans
v. 14. Now death is the greatest punishment that ever was inflicted; such
punishment those subjects deserved, if GOD is righteous in all his executions;
but as they had committed no actual transgression, how could they deserve it,
unless by an universally corrupted and ruined nature! And yet that same
punishment has passed upon all men, because all men, in that same sense, have
sinned. There is therefore no way or name under heaven, given among men, by
which they may be saved, but that of JESUS of Nazareth, Acts. iv. 10, 12. Nor
any salvation by him, but through faith, Ephesians. ii. 8. It Is no evasion of this
argument to say it was only bodily death that so reigned as the apostle says;
because death of the body is great punishment, and so the argument is the same,
viz. it is inconsistent with the nature of GOD and his government to punish
those who are not guilty.

(2.) If we have all a natural freedom to sin, but no such natural freedom to
be holy and heavenly; then our natures are sinful and not holy. This is evident
to common sense. But nothing that works abomination or makes a lie, can, as
such, enter heaven, nor can we be renewed from such state, but through faith.
-- Therefore, he that believes, shall be saved, and he who believes not shall
be damned, Mark xvi. 16.

(3.) IF one died for all, then were all dead, 2 Cor. v. 14. Now though the all
for whom CHRIST died, is to be understood in the most restrained sense, for the
elect only; it will doubtless be allowed that they are not naturally in a worse
state than the non-elect; but then the consequence is, all are as surely dead
in sin by nature, as that CHRIST died for any. -- Only therefore in him who
raises the dead is there any possible hope of salvation.

2. THE only way to be saved by him, is through faith. Faith is believing GOD.
Hence Abraham's faith is thus described, ( Romans iv. 3) -- it is a believing the
record which GOD has given of his son, -- 1 John v. 10, 11. True faith is such
a belief as makes its objects, present and certain realities in the mind; just
as it is in believing a common fact, -- Heb. xi. 1. Of consequence, a believer
is one who is affected with divine things, just as if they were present
realities, even as a common fact affects us as a common truth, when we believe
it; and by this he stands distinguished from all subjects of counterfeit faith
in the world, 1 John iii. 10. Now we must be saved through such faith only, or
by our own goodness altogether, or partly by both. But,

1. Not by our own goodness altogether; for if we were without sin at all, and
our obedience was quite perfect, we could merit nothing, it is all already due;
what can we then do, now that we are altogether sinful? Nay, our utmost cannot
begin to answer the native demands of the most holy law, because they are all
perfect, and we are so in nothing. And if we cannot begin, what can we do?
Beside, no person in the world is naturally willing to be holy, "the carnal
mind is enmity against GOD, not subject to his law, nor indeed can be;" ( Romans
viii. 7) -- and if not willing, if emnity in the abstract, what can we do?
Truly nothing at all. -- Therefore, cursed is the man that trusts in man,
himself, or any other, 2. We cannot be saved partly by both; first, because we
have no such goodness, as has been shown; and also because no part of the glory
of his grace, will CHRIST divide to another; ( Isa. xlii. 7, 8) -- therefore,
-- 3. We are shut up to faith, to mere believing in the sense above described,
for justification and acceptance with GOD. But now the question is, have we got
this only saving precious faith? He who has, is now in a state of acceptance
with GOD, and shall be found in CHRIST without spot and blameless. -- But he
who has not this only saving faith, is yet in his sins; all his life's
transgressions are now lying against him in the book of GOD. What a dreadful
catalogue fills out the long pages of that most voluminous record! Such as dare
to trifle with cleansing blood, and free mercy, 'till righteousness terminates
divine patience, will there find a long detail of crimes beyond their
expectation! Sins of childhood, youth and riper years; of heart and lip and
life; secret iniquities, which they thought no eye beheld; those which have
galled their conscience, and they well remember; also thousands which
(surprised to see) they thought long since forgot; millions more, which they
hoped would be excused. -- Nay, whole sheets are filled with their religious
duties; not because they did them, but because profanely or proudly done. And
the blackest charge of all is, ye would not come to me, that ye might have
life. There is trusting to false hopes, self-righteousness and duties;
crucifying CHRIST, despising the blood of the covenant; sabbaths and sermons
trifled away; means and mercies always abused. Providence, word and spirit all
profaned; sun and moon, house and friends, bed and board, life and health all
abused to diverse lusts and pleasures. And when they see hell subjoined to every
page, and burning flames to every line, and no redeemer there, what will they
do? The word of GOD condemns them; the perfect knowledge of the judge condemns
them; and conscience from within, echoes truth to every charge. These are the
three books by which the world is judged, and which for that purpose John saw
opened in the judgment. And when sinners, long called to faith by a kind
redeemer, come to see these three records of divine authority, opened before
them, they will turn their own accusers, and each amazed, begin to say, Oh
stupid wretch that I was! Oh hardened rebel to this dreadful GOD! How long he
called me, but I still refused! He warned, he waited, but I would not hear.
Long time his bowels yearned, for he saw my state, he saw my danger, and this
final day a coming. Indeed he told me all about it, but I chose my own
delusions, was pleased with sin, and would not forsake it. I know he offered
pardon if I would believe; he bid me trust his mercy, and I should be saved.
But here, this heart held fast its idols, and would not let them go; yet hoped
for heaven, dreaming of faith, of duties, and of sins forgiven. And now my time
is gone, the door is shut, and he whose mercies I have abused, is now my judge,
my dreadful avenger; no hope remains, there is no escape; his eye sees through
me, and his guards are round me! The thunder rises! Torment increases! My soul
is sinking in the gulf of vengeance forever and ever! There are they who
despised the gospel, and despised the savior; were bid believe his truth, and
trust his grace, but never did; were often warned of certain ruin in every
other way, but still would give ear to lying vanities; they must lie in chains,
must burn in hell forever and ever. More ages than this world has stood, will not
bring relief. Their old heart remains, they have the same lusts and passions,
the same taste and aversions, which always governed them; yea, they are
incensed and increased, old restraints are taken off, and restless fury burns
within; felt disappointment, and black despair inflames and rages all their
powers; and these by distortion always growing, must from nature and justice
make that hell eternal.

NOTHING less than all this, is the certain consequence of delusion in point of
faith: -- For GOD will bring every thing into judgment; and "he that believes
not shall be damned." This should excite the grand inquiry, -- how shall I
become acquainted with true faith? Or, how shall we know whether our faith is
living or dead faith? Which brings me to,

3. THE third thing proposed, viz. To give some account of a saving change as
wrought in the sinner's heart; which will show that it is peculiar to divine
faith. Here we should speak, -- 1. Of the sinner's being brought down from his
towering hopes of acceptance with GOD, by his own righteousness, to see himself
as he is, in order that mere mercy might have all the honor of his salvation.
We have already shown that all are naturally dead in sin; in which state, they
are either so stupid as not to apprehend danger, or so far blinded with their
notions of goodness in themselves, as to hope for deliverance thereby. -- They
are either hardened to ease in Zion, or are rich and increased in goods, and so
have need of nothing; though in fact they are wretched and miserable, and poor,
and blind and naked; not a moment's peace of conscience; always under wrath. --
Know nothing of the comforts of the Holy Ghost, or of communion with GOD, nor
taste any sweets in holy religion. -- Their hearts are pleased with sin, but
cordially delight in nothing that is divine. -- And though they are always
unhappy, their hearts being like the troubled sea, never at rest, knowing
nothing of the nature of peace; yet they have a strange sort of easiness, and
frost-bitten pleasure. -- They make themselves secure, by a guard against
thoughts of GOD, religion, and death; they make themselves hope things will end
well, by false notions of GOD, and of their own goodness. In such like manner
men lead their lives, not one person exempt, of any sort, 'till, it may be, GOD
is pleased to alarm one, and that none of the best; for publicans and harlots
shall go into the kingdom of heaven before those who think well of themselves.
The means of this alarm are the words of GOD, with their inseparable attendants
the Holy Ghost. The occasion may be taken from death, sickness, word read or
preached, signal providence, or dictate of conscience; but the power of GOD is
not restrained to all these, he may seize a person in the midst of his career,
as Saul going prosperously to Damascus. Often the effect of this alarm, is only
reformation of known sins, or setting up the practice of some known duty. And
this naturally becomes a new ground of pride and self-righteousness; for the
sinner knowing no better ground of trust, always puts importance upon what he
thinks good in himself; here therefore many, doubtless very many, sit down, and
here they die. But the scriptures, which are our grand rule in these matters,
assures us, not only that GOD can, but that he often does, with little or no
distinction of time, give the sinner his killing wound, and his healing grace;
for it is all the same with him, to say, "I kill, and I make alive," or to do
the work. This was illustrated in the forementioned case of Saul; the woman of
Samaria; the thief on the cross, and others; and was represented in the
resurrection of Lazarus, and other like instances. But a state of sin, guilt,
death and wrath, must be seen and felt, for the whole need not a physician; and
CHRIST came only to save such as are lost, and to none can he be precious but
those who feel that character. This was the case of the convinced jailor, and
the thousands at Peter's sermon, Acts ii. 37. -- Some are by light of truth
compelled to come forth sooner, others later. -- Some go along kicking against
the pricks, resisting light and conviction. It Is a metaphor taken from a dull
ox, who will rather kick against the pointed goad, than yield to work, and
quicken his pace; though by trying to repel the goad, he only hurts himself the
more. Convictions make no alteration in the sinners moral state, no more than a
person's continuing to feel pain in the rising of a distemper, cures it. They
are the sinner's sight of himself, and when he is brought to see himself
completely fit for immediate damnation, free grace will be glorious, if he is
delivered; for the excellency of the power will be manifest to be of GOD. And
'till this is the case, be it sooner or later, delivering grace will not
appear. But when the sinner is brought to see himself lost, two things
remarkably take place. viz.

1. His old excuses, in which he used to persuade himself there was some
reason, now appear to be willing, discontented evasions of known truth and
duty, and so greatly enhance his guilt. These fig leaves, not only will not
cover him, but he sees himself, by so much the more exposed to wrath for them;
they are now numbered among his great iniquities, and serve eminently to
condemn him, as evidence in fact of the pride and enmity of his whole heart
against the truth.

2. His duties and good qualifications, as a reason of hope, totally disappear.
Before his convictions, yea always 'till now, he thought there were some good
things about him, which kept his self-righteous spirit alive, and which showed
itself. 1. By an habitual conceit that GOD intended to be merciful to him. 2.
By a turn of mind against those who did not think well of his moral state; and
consequently by a disposition to caress those who flattered his hopes. 3. By
his habit of thinking there were some worse in the sight of GOD than himself.
4. By his inward disaffection to discourses or books which strenuously excluded
all works in justification; and his real pleasure when some consideration for
them was asserted. 5. By his thinking it hard that such as he should be doomed
to eternal hell. -- But now he views himself as a sinner, a hearty helpless
sinner, his conscience and the law testify of a righteous judge, but he sees no
beauty in him that he should be desired; for in this, those views of GOD which
legal fear gives, are essentially different from those of faith and love. By
the former he is viewed as an avenger, by the other as a father and a friend.
One keeps the soul under slavish principles, and shuts out love; the other
brings the soul in sight of rich favor, and casts out slavish fear. Of
consequence, the former forbids delight and pleasure in any duty or service of
religion; the latter feels the ways of wisdom all-pleasant.

THE sinner thus come to himself, but not to GOD, to whom he never saw himself
farther off than now, finds, in opposition to all his former imaginations, that
what he needs is a new heart to be created in him, and another, a right spirit
to be put within him; and he finds it is equally unattainable by him as to
create a world out of nothing; for he knows he has no ability or fitness for
the work. -- He is totally blind, to all the things of the spirit of GOD, he
don't see or feel things as the bible represents them; don't hate sin for its
nature, but for its punishment; don't love religion for its excellency, but
only for the safety it gives hope of. -- He sees he don't venture his all on
the merit of CHRIST alone, or trust his truth; he has no faith. -- He cannot
trust the word of a GOD, he has tried every mean for it all in vain; he is as
full of pride and unbelief as ever, and his sin, guilt, and condemnation
increasing by all he thinks and all he does. -- Which introduces the following
things, and in the following order, viz. -- 1. That the wound of his case is,
he is wholly destitute of the first principles of holiness. This shows why his
heart will not yield to GOD, it is because there is no principle or spring of
right action there. He sees now why his duties could not help him, because they
must be like himself, as wide from morally right, as unlike GOD, and the
commanding law, as he himself is. Just so, he sees, of course, is the utmost he
can do; and so he finds it is not in man to direct his steps; now he learns the
mournful truth, "thou have destroyed thyself." A clear conviction of this, will
naturally, 2. Introduce a suspension of arms in his opposing, quarrelling
heart. The sinner naturally practiced his opposition by a living disobedience
to the whole revealed will of GOD; and now since his convictions, his
opposition has been especially pointed against faith, as the only means of
justification; he has showed his enmity by refusing to trust his polluted soul,
his guilty conscience in the hand of CHRIST for pardon and cleansing. CHRIST
has bidden the sinner to come to him, with all his sin and guilt, and he should
be delivered; but the sinner has said, it will not do, he will not accept me 'till
I mend a little; I must get rid of some sins first, and get some more goodness
in my heart; so he has indulged his enmity against the way of salvation by
faith alone. And because he could not get deliverance in his own way, he
thought hard of GOD, of the gospel, of all who would not encourage him in his
way of acceptance; and would not be pleased with the way of life, as concerted
by the wisdom of GOD. But now, since he sees his heart, and all its
propensities are thoroughly perverse, and all its schemes for acceptance just
like itself, all directly contrary to GOD and his way, and as such, the very
height of iniquity; he says, No wonder GOD has not accepted me! I thought there
was some reason and goodness in my duties, and schemes for acceptance, but I
see, I am convinced, it is quite otherwise; I am all sinner, and all that is
mine, is like myself; no wonder GOD could not regard any thing I did! Now I see
"they that are in the flesh cannot please GOD." This is my case, he and I are
contrary the one to the other. Oh! miserable state that I am in, to to be
pitied of all beings! Lost and cannot help myself, blind and cannot see the only
help; proud and will not yield to JESUS CHRIST. And because GOD would not
change to me, my heart has wrangled against him, and all his ways, but
especially his way of saving sinners as written in the bible. But now I see the
reason of all my misery is from my willing self. -- 3. Therefore nothing can be
more just than eternal destruction to my soul; not one thing done in heaven
righter than this; the sentence in its dreadful weight is just as right as GOD
is right; for these things were all revealed to me in the word of GOD, and made
exceeding plain; but I have gone all my life directly against their testimony.
I have sinned willingly, knowingly, allowedly against light, knowledge,
warnings, love, and mercies. Such measures I have consented to, and been
pleased with; of course, the consequent punishment is my own, and GOD is just.
If, according to his word, he dooms me now to eternal burnings, that blessed
world, my guilty soul, and all creation must applaud it just. The sinner don't
hereby consent to his own damnation, it is impossible, but is convinced of
perfect reason in the curse of the law, and of perfect justice if it should be
executed.

NOW if mercy is displayed, in a revelation of CHRIST, in his own grace and
perfect sufficiency, to the sinner's actual apprehension; and so he should be
changed into the same image, the excellency of this work would be manifest to
this person to be of GOD; consequently all the praise must evidently belong to
him; which cannot be secured to the proper object in any other way. Now this is
the grand design of divine goodness by the gospel, to secure happiness to
believing sinners, and all the glory to sovereign grace. -- Wherefore, when the
sinner is brought to these views of himself, as all-sinner, and GOD a righteous
judge, then mercy in full consistence with justice, referring to the atonement,
says, "deliver him for I have found a ransom." Then the spirit of all-revealed
truth, in the same instant, presents to the sinner's mind, in the light of the
word of truth, that glorious CHRIST, which the gospel always offered him, and
with this manifestation to the understanding, he effectually touches the will,
loosing it from its natural engagements and bondage, and turning the set of it
to holy objects; the first and chief of which, is, as was said, at the same
time revealed in the understanding, and so is seen in his divine glories; the
will thus loosed, under the agency of the Holy Ghost, determines all for him,
makes an ardent choice of him, as a seen complete redeemer, on him the soul
rests, and the affections immediately center; i. e. he believes the word of
GOD; of consequence, the soul must have light and love, and joy and peace. Such
is that regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost which the scriptures speak
of. Such is that receiving CHRIST by faith, or by seeing and believing what he
has done for sinners, wherein the work of GOD in the sinner's heart primarily
consists. At the instant of the sinner's thus seeing truth and reality in what
the bible says of CHRIST and his righteousness, and so finding relief in it
equal to his case, which is faith, he is justified. And so you have an account
of the commencement of living faith, which from the nature of the case must
exclude all other faith from any place in this affair. Such faith appears in
every view to be right, by its universal correspondence to the bible, and
answering all the intentions of divine faith. -- Whereas every other faith
leaves the subject destitute of all these operations and powerful effects.

II. THE second rule of trial is, true faith always affects the mind, in a
manner answerable to the nature of its objects; but so dead faith never does.
In a general manner, both these sorts of faith have the same objects. The true
believer, and the deceived believer, can subscribe the same confession of
faith; they both believe there is a GOD, a Redeemer, a Holy Ghost, a bible of
divine authority, a christian sabbath, a necessity of faith to justification, a
future judgment, and approaching eternity, but the point in question is, which
of these sorts of believers is suitably affected by what he believes in these
cases, by this the belief itself is determined to be genuine. For substance and
shadow are not more different, than these two notions of faith, according to
Heb. xi. 1.

HERE we should descend to particulars; but will it be to any purpose? It Is to
be concluded, that a number here are now resting on dead faith; and that this
is far the greatest number, perhaps ten to one; probably much more. And this
sort are so generally secure, and in their own opinion safe, that there is
little reason to expect a fair hearing, especially in an affair so disagreeable
as trials of the truth of faith. However the power of GOD makes use of hearing
for the purpose of begetting faith, (as nature does in common cases;) and
possibly conscience may have begun already to disturb some of you. Are there
not some here, perhaps of the looser sort whose wicked lives have shocked and
weakened the strength of their hopes; or whose consciences have had more
influence against the stupifying tendency of dead faith; who have had some
secret misgivings at what was spoken of the sinners lost estate, his
convictions, or his saving change? Did not your conscience, my hearer, tell
you, thou have never known that, nor that; thou have never seen things so;
never felt such a change? etc. -- May that divine mercy; that open fountain,
which takes motive only from itself, accompany the following illustrations with
conquering light to your souls, as well as sweet confirmation to every humble
spirit.

1. BOTH these sorts of faith profess to agree, there is a GOD: A being of all
perfection, who can do all things, and is worthy of all reverence and
obedience, and whose eyes are in every place beholding the evil and the good.
Now the question is, how does our faith of this divine existence affect us?
Natural conscience will say, surely the belief of such a being should solemnize
the heart, make it not only afraid of sin, but endear all his will, and humble
the soul to habitual reverence and universal obedience. And the language of
scripture is, Let all the earth fear the LORD, and all the inhabitants of the
world stand in awe of him," Psalm. xxxiii. 8 -- And Prove. iii. 5, 6, Trust in
the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not to thine own understanding. -- In
all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Here let the
conscience of every person speak, does your faith of GOD so influence and
govern your heart, and life? What says conscience? Or do you find that in spite
of all your belief about GOD, his power and presence, your heart will have its
way? Will be stupid, vain and trifling, roving after sensual objects, cold and
wandering in the most sacred employments? How then does your faith affect your
heart in a manner answerable to the nature of its object? The object of your
faith now, is the perfections and presence of Jehovah, but your heart is just
as it was, or would be without such belief; no commanding solemnity upon it;
you can have all your common thoughts of GOD, without any effect at all upon
your heart. Are not these the speaking lineaments of dead faith? Now living
faith of this object, purifies the heart, cleanses from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, and enables to perfect holiness in the fear of GOD, 2 Cor. vii. 1.
There is joy and peace in believing. He who has not these effects, has a dead
faith, it is not the very substantiating evidence of its object as true faith
is, Heb. xi. 1.

2. BOTH sorts of believers say, that JESUS CHRIST is the only savior. Dead
faith yields a sort of assent to all the scriptures say about CHRIST, and may
follow him for the loaves, i. e. for some worldly or selfish advantage; it
would be thought to believe his sufficiency, suitableness and excellency, yea,
it may call him the chief of ten thousands, and altogether lovely; but they are
empty words; for it neither trusts his sufficiency, nor is pleased with his
suitableness, nor loves his excellency. When a false believer goes to his GOD,
the medium of his access is always the goodness of his heart or life, past
duties, earnestness, honesty, the pityableness of his case, or some other
personal qualification, but never CHRIST'S merit and righteousness alone. But a
christian believes, and so is governed according to the scripture account of
that only savior. Does he save his people from their sins, -- he who believes
it repairs to him with all his guilty burdens for relief. Is CHRIST'S
righteousness the only medium of access to GOD, and acceptance with him, living
faith enables to rely on that, exclusive of all other placating considerations.
If CHRIST executes the great offices of king, priest and prophet, divine faith
looks to the first for all acts of power and sovereign dominion, both to subdue
and destroy all its enemies, looks to, and depends on the second, for all
pardon and cleansing; and on the last, for all light and teaching. Faith
derives all its sin-subduing, heart-purifying, soul-enlightening virtues from
the same CHRIST whom it believes to be exalted for that very purpose. As a
christian believes him to be the chief of ten thousands, he treats him
accordingly, by supreme affection, and all-governing regard. Indeed, choice and
delight attend divine faith, in all its exercises toward its numberless divine
objects: "Faith works by love." Are they, like the first and chief of them, all
pure; then faith purifies the heart. Is CHRIST the LORD strong and mighty,
faith takes sanctuary in all dangers, from all its adversaries, in him. As
faith sees the will of GOD is our sanctification, so it sets the LORD, and his
illustrious examples, before our eyes, and makes the soul ardent, by every
means, after holiness. CHRIST is "the way" from all evil, to all good,
accordingly he who believes it can rid himself of no sin, of no penal evil, but
by him; can obtain no inward blessing or outward relief but by him. CHRIST is
"the truth" of all he pretended, of all ancient types and prophecies, and of
all the soul needs; accordingly faith trusts him without reserve, sees him in
the long train of Mosaic types, and in all the prophets, and goes to him boldly
with all its wants. In short, to them who believe he is precious, and so true
faith stands distinguished from every counterfeit. "The life" that is in CHRIST
gives being to faith, and all it does, wherein consists most emphatically its
essential difference from every other notion of faith.

3. THEY both profess to hold the divine presence, necessary and universal
efficacy of the Holy Ghost, in all spiritual and evangelical productions. A
false professor holds the indwelling of the spirit of GOD, as the common
privilege of christians, and can say for it, "if any man have not the spirit of
CHRIST, he is none of his," Romans viii. 9: -- and yet he can be easy, year after
year, in a total estrangement to him, and ignorance of his efficacies. He
fancies himself to be taught by the word of GOD, which never gives divine
knowledge, but as the Holy Ghost invigorates it for that purpose, and without
which that spirit does never so teach. He hopes, however, he has some small
measure of the spirit, (and small measures will serve them who desire none)
because he is sober, performs duties, and has some concern about his soul; and
especially if providence smiles upon him, and he has some unexpected
deliverance, and prosperity, then he hopes this unseen blessing is somewhere
about him; and he is much easier with these deluded suppositions than he would
be if he really thought the Holy Ghost was there. -- Whereas true faith gives
sense of impotence (...) hopelessness to every divine efficacy with him: Knows
it is by the spirit of GOD that all its works are wrought. And accordingly, a
christian opens to him, relies on him for all manner of divine efficacy with
the word, its only immediate mean; and he has answerable experience, according
to the variety of the word, and the needs of his heart and life, for he has
"received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of GOD, that he
might know the things which are freely given him of GOD," 1 Cor. ii. 12. And
these are not rare things, but matters of daily and hourly experience with a
christian, and so his faith affecting him answerably to its object, determines
it the only gospel faith. But this is such a sort of an affair, unnatural to
mankind, that it may be asked, how shall I know whether I have the Holy Ghost
dwelling in me, according to the promise of CHRIST, or not?

ANSWER. -- 1. The indwelling of the spirit, is only manifest by the indwelling
of bible truth, if therefore scripture truth dwells with you, and is wrought
into the temper and habit of your mind, it is the alone work of the Holy Ghost,
and the stated evidence of his indwelling, John vii. 38, 39. -- 1 John ii. 27.

2. OF consequence, if all ungodliness, and especially your own, is the object
of your habitual aversion, and the contrary points of holiness, the objects of
your soul's bias, it is evidence of this indwelling spirit, Gal. v. 16, 17.

3. THE spirit of CHRIST, is a spirit of prayer, of praise, and of free and
intimate communion with GOD; if you have these, just as the bible requires and
describes them, it is not only evidence he is there, but it is the very work of
the Holy Ghost that you feel, and are actuated by, Ephesians. vi. 18. Romans viii. 26.
Ephesians. v. 18, 19, 20. John xvi. 13, 14.

4. BOTH these sorts of faith confess the divine original and authority of the
bible; and yet one never affects the reader suitably to the notion of pure
divinity. This is the reason why multitudes, who if an earthly king, or even a
natural father, should speak, threaten, command or promise to them, they would
receive impression answerable to the thing spoken, and the authority of the
speaker; yet when they read or hear the bible, they have no answerable effect,
though they say it is the word of GOD to them; and so the word, not being mixed
with faith, never profits them. Their souls are not united to the truth they
read, and so never get the sincere milk of it for nourishment, but wither and
die in the midst of gospel plenty; just as when the digestive powers of the
stomach are not employed on the food received, so no nourishment, is secreted,
the body must pine and die. At the same time living faith, viewing the holy
book as a fountain of truth and light, the soul derives actual nourishment,
feels its quick and powerful virtues, and it proves to be the word of GOD, by
working effectually in them that believe. But to see the distinction, we should
be a little more particular; and say,

1. THERE are in the word of GOD, commands, both moral ones, founded in the
nature of their cases, and enforced by divine authority; and positive ones,
founded only in the will of GOD. Dead faith owns all this, but never affects
the reader with any commanding sense of authority in the precept, or yielding
subjection in his heart. Whereas by true faith the mind sees authority and
majesty, as well as reason and goodness in the command, and is bowed to
unfeigned obedience, and so the word of the LORD is powerful.

2. THERE are also in the word of GOD, promises, both absolute ones, without
any condition, because they contain the first qualifications, and are therefore
the only fountain for those who have none; and conditional ones, which convey
their goods to those actually furnished with their condition. An ungodly
believer reads these as he does other scriptures, but has no sense of the rich
treasures lodged in them, nor does his faith ever seize upon them, and draw
them out. He reads about the covenant of grace, which is composed of these
great and precious promises, but he regards it not as a summary of the
loving kindness of the LORD proposed to his soul; nor does ever bow to its
bands, or taste its sweetest mercies. Whereas in all these is the life of true
faith; and unless these gracious words of the covenant and its promises, with
their divine certainty, had been the soul's relief, it must have perished in
many an adversity.

3. THERE are doctrines also, by which the man of GOD may be thoroughly
furnished to every good work. To these true faith gives heed as to the
instructions of its GOD, its father, and its friend. By these a true believer
is made light in the LORD, and wise unto salvation. They are a light to his
feet, and a lamp to all his paths. -- But they are daily a savor of death unto
death to a dead believer. It Is with this sort of people, as of old with
Jerusalem, the words of their peace are before their eyes, but the things of
their peace, contained in those words, are totally hidden from their eyes, Luke
xix. 42.

4. THERE are stories, examples, and penalties in the word of GOD, by which the
different sorts of professors are very differently affected. Divine faith sees
the whole moral system acted out in the two former, as it were, in instances
before its eyes; and so seeing the will of GOD illustrated in them, is
furnished with patterns for heart and life. It sees in these stories and
examples scripture promises made out in facts, to faith of its doctrines, and
obedience of its commands; and the penalties as surely executed on the want of
both. But dead faith though it may be amused and diverted by them, never takes
these admonitions or gets such divine wisdom from them. And the scripture
styles them fools, who though they have so great a price in their hand, have no
heart to improve it: so the effect produced by faith determines its kind.

5. THESE two sorts of faith agree in some sort of assent to the morality of
the sabbath; that fixed memorial of creation and redemption; that picture of
soul-rest in CHRIST now, and of endless rest with him in glory. Professing
christians, in general, allow the whole day is the LORD'S; but dead faith is so
little affected with its divine designation, that if interest or humor calls,
if pleasing example, custom, or company requires, in front of his belief, the
professor can infringe upon its borders, trifle with its obligation, and serve
himself with it, in thought, if not also in word and deed. If he escapes the
civil lash, and popular censure, it is well enough; and yet affirms the sacred
precepts about it, and the dreadful effects of its profanation. Whereas belief
of the holiness of the sabbath, will dispose and bind the heart to be in
temper, and practice just what it is in profession. Both these sorts of
professors read, and allow the divinity of that remarkable rule for sabbatizing
in the fifty-eighth of Isaiah, and two last verses; and one of them feels
divinely bound to act it out sincerely; they of this sort make a business of
it, not in show only, but in spirit, to keep holy the sabbath day. While the
other never goes much further than appearances, and often in them visibly
defective. Hence the wide difference so evident among professors about
sanctifying the sabbath. -- And to their different measures very different
consequences correspond; the one sort has acceptance with GOD, the other has
none; the one has peace on this head, the other has none; one is a sweet savor
unto GOD, the other a stench; because to one sort the sabbath is a weariness,
and their hearts tired with its restraints, say, "when will it be gone?" While
the other does more than call it a delight; it is to them "the holy of the LORD
and honorable." And these employ the day, in every part, with a holy mind, and
heavenly business; but the other are always destitute of both. So the former
are approved of GOD, their conscience, and the law, while the latter are
condemned of all. True faith is always operative, and influences soul and life
according to its objects; but other faith is not so; and this makes the visible
difference among professors.

6. BOTH sorts affirm a necessity of faith for justification in the sight of
GOD, and a christian both sees what to believe for that purpose, and that there
is necessity of it; but the formalist never sees either. A believer knows that
the merit of what CHRIST did, is his only and sufficient source of hope; others
can say it, but they never believe it. True faith in justification always
corresponds exactly to the divine testimony concerning CHRIST; such an
atonement, such a righteousness, the sensible sinner feels need of, and this
GOD requires him to believe; and he who finds himself all-sinner, and all he
can naturally do, all-sinful, will rejoice at sight of a righteousness, to
perfection sufficient of itself, and wrought out on purpose for the believing
sinner; on this he trusts alone, by this he is made just, and on this score
exclusively he has abundant acceptance. True faith always has the thing it
believes, and produces the genuine effect, Heb. xi. 1. Romans v. 1, etc. but dead
faith gives no divine possession, produces not one divine effect; so the
believer is blessed with faithful Abraham, the other remains the same that he
was. But it may be said, "justification is to me a dark affair; how shall I
know whether I am justified or not?"

ANSWER. -- 1. Justification is not a matter of experience; it is a great
change, but it is merely relative. It lies not in the frame of the mind, but in
the relation, which the person as a sinner bore to a righteous GOD, and his
law. All the claim a sinner has on GOD, is wrath; all the title he has in law,
is curse. Now, in justification, that claim, and this title are totally solved;
his relation to GOD and the law, as a sinner, is made wholly void; so he is
dead to the law, that he might, in consistence with the law, be made alive unto
GOD. Justification therefore is the absolving sentence of the judge.

2. BY the gospel method of saving men, no person is justified, but upon
knowledge of his hopeless ruin, as has been shown, in every way, but by CHRIST,
and what he has done; for only by such knowledge is the natural preventive of
saving faith removed; "the whole don't need a physician." Doubtless, therefore,
if thou have never yet so come in sight of thy own self, thou art still
unjustified: For with GOD, only the poor and needy find mercy.

3. JUSTIFICATION is naturally followed with freedom of conscience. In a state
of sin, the conscience is always in bondage by guilt, which is its own feeling,
that it must suffer for doing wrong. This felt necessity of suffering, takes
its life and strength from GOD and the law; but the sinner's relation to GOD
and his law, as a sinner, is made void in justification; of consequence the
conscience must be freed from its guilty bond: -- "Being justified by faith, we
have peace with GOD;" i. e. the account is settled with the avenger, by what
CHRIST did, now imputed; whereas to his own view, he always knows he is the
sinner still.

4. JUSTIFICATION is always followed by sanctification. Sanctification don't
consist in outwardly doing right; but it consists in such purifying of the
conscience, as knowledge of divine objects necessarily makes; "beholding his
glory we are changed:" which objects are no sooner known than loved, and so
give spring to all practical holiness. Justification is in order of nature, but
not of time, before sanctification; "whom he justified, them he glorified," by
beginning their heavenly holiness at the same time. As soon as GOD caused
Joshua's iniquity to pass from him, his filthy garments were taken off, and he
was clothed with change of raiment, Zech. iii. 4. Justification is instantly
perfect, but sanctification only then begins, and increases to perfection in
glory. True faith, just as it is, the substance of these things, effectuates
the design of them, in the believer; in every point of which efficacy, it is
entirely distinguished from all other faith.

7. THE subjects of living and dead faith both say there is an inseparable
connection between holiness and happiness: But they differ widely in their
notions of both parts of the connection. They alike read and profess, that "the
pure in heart shall see GOD;" and the believer knows what that purity of heart
is, as it stands distinguished from the most religious outward life in the
world; he knows also the connected certainty of seeing GOD, and what it means,
and that the connection takes place now, or never. Accordingly he hungers and
thirsts after righteousness; cries out of the oppression of sin; longs for more
purity, as the only way in which to enjoy GOD, the sum of all his happiness. --
He wars against the first risings of sin in his heart, and his only relief from
it, is in sight of atoning blood, from which alone springs up repentance and a
sight of pardon. -- His prayer is, let the Lord speak, and make my heart sound
in all thy statutes, then shall I not be ashamed. Whereas other professors, if
their lives are outwardly regular, in their own sense, they are well enough;
holy enough; and if they can but make up an indolent hope-so, they are happy
enough. As to such happiness as consists in the light of GOD, they put all that
to the account of another life. So differently are they affected by their faith.

THESE two sorts of christians differ widely in their notions of good works;
both hold a necessity of them, but one sort know they must be the produce of
living faith; in this sense is true, "the living, the living, they praise thee,
the dead praise thee not." They who believe, maintain good works, Tit. iii. 8;
-- while the other sort set down for such, all their sober, well-meant,
religious actions, if not some others. To make a good work, the first sort
consider the original, motive, and view of an action; the other, only the
seeming beauty of the thing done, regardless of its internal qualities, or
relation to the law. Hence arise several observable events.

1. SOME professors, though they know their lives and manners are
unexceptionable enough, yet cannot be easy with themselves, because they don't
see GOD, and feel the divine life; their views are low and sensual, the love of
GOD is not shed abroad in their hearts, nor they governed by faith, it is
distressing, and they cannot be easy. Others, in the mean time, though they see
and feel none of these things, as indeed they never do; are easy and happy, as
long as they can keep up their usual regularity and hope-so's. This is their
holiness, and their sense of it is their happiness: "Verily they have their
reward."

2. SOME professors are ever apt to be jealous of their hearts, lest, after
all, they should be some way seduced and deceived by them; they have a watchful
eye over them, they dare not trust them. Indeed for want of a sight of divine
grace, are often fearful to admit the most precious things of the everlasting
covenant, for their comfort and relief. While others are forward enough, very
forward to catch a piece at wisdom's table, without regard to order; if they
can get hold of a promise, no matter by what right. This is a reason why the
purest gospel-preaching is no more useful; GOD'S people are often shy to take
the full latitude of its blessings for their help; and false professors will
apply them for their hardening. The disciples all said, "LORD is it I," except
Judas, -- Mark xiv. 19.

3. SOME professors, in time of trouble, run speedily to the throne of grace,
to the feet of mercy; they say each, "it is the LORD, what would thou have me
to do?" and hear him say, "by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit, to take away his sin." Then comes prayer, "LORD humble
me! cleanse my soul, and heal me!" And then, "remove thy stroke away from me."
But others fly only to means, to schemes, in which to terminate their hopes. Or
they sit down and say, "ah! it is the common lot of all men, and we must take
our chance with the rest."

4. SOME professors heartily prefer the closest gospel preaching, they seek and
prize it, and the more distinguishing it is, the better. But with others he is
the best and most agreeable preacher, who dwells in generals; troubles not
their ears with those nice and heart-disturbing distinctions. Their hopes are
fair, and their hearts are easy, and they choose to have them kept so. If
sinners are alarmed, they are disturbed; if saints rejoice, their envy rises.
Indeed if all is quiet, they are well, but if Zion prospers, they repine: And
if they themselves are urged with downright bible truth, they will not bear it.
Yet all the while holding they are sinners, and must be holy, or no hope of
heaven. So totally destitute of any thing answerable to their belief, are all
false believers.

8. ALL profess to believe a future judgment and approaching eternity. And with
some their faith makes them real, present things, and they are suitably
affected with them. They have a view to the coming of the LORD, in all their
ways; and to live like dying and accountable persons for all they do and say.
For "he that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure," 1 John iii.
3. But others know they must die, and after that come to judgment; yet they
live on, in pursuit of sensual objects, corn, wine, oil; crying peace, peace,
'till sudden destruction comes upon them. They are concerned about many things,
but least of all how to know CHRIST, and be found in him. -- Of all this, the
lives of the multitude are a flagrant proof; they hold these truths in their
unrighteousness, and on them is the wrath of GOD revealed. Vain men! says St,
James, "can faith save you?"

III. THE third and last trial proposed was, true faith produces just such
effects as the scriptures ascribe to true faith. -- But not one of them does
any other faith produce.

1. ONE notable effect which the scriptures ascribe to divine faith is, that by
mean of it a sinner is made a just person in the sight of GOD. And yet it is not
possible any action of a sinner's heart should do this; for then it is something
in that act, which gives it its divine worth and efficacy. And if any act done
by a soul can from its own goodness and value justify a sinner before GOD,
there was no need of CHRIST, according to Gal. ii. 21. This would make faith a
work of the law, by supposing that act of the sinner, had in itself, some
quality answerable to the nature and design of the law, which is an absurdity
in terms, a natural impossibility; upon which therefore, and upon all such
supposed works, the inspired apostle fixes despair of justification, Romans iii.
20. Faith then justifies a sinner only as the perfection of CHRIST'S lawful
righteousness is its matter or thing believed. The case is this. -- When a
person is brought to see himself all-sinner, GOD makes him believe what the
bible says about CHRIST as the divine savior, by showing him the truth of it,
which he never would, or could see before; for faith is the gift of GOD, only
to such as see themselves." In this believing, GOD justifies him, while yet
ungodly, Romans iv. 5. By accounting that perfect righteousness which CHRIST
wrought for sinners, to this person, as he always said he would to such as
believe it. And then, on the same account, he purifies his conscience, and
takes him for one of his own people, Ephesians. i. 4 to 7. So he is said to be
justified by faith, because it could not be done 'till he believed the
justifying truth. But no sooner does he believe the truth, than that truth sets
his soul at liberty: "The truth shall make you free." Now this faith actually
operates just so to the sinner, as the scripture said it would. But there is no
other faith which is capable of producing any such effect.

2. THE scriptures ascribe our title to all new covenant goods, to faith.
Believers are all the children of GOD by faith, Gal. iii. 26. They are heirs to
all divine blessings by faith, Ephesians. ii. 8. Their whole salvation with all its
mercies, is through faith, 2 Timothy iii. 15. Whereas dead faith has no title, but
to that wrath which is revealed against its own unrighteousness. But to be
particular;

1. A BELIEVER has right to the favor and acceptance of GOD. -- That believing
sinners have divine rights the unerring word affirms. -- John i. 12, "As many
as received him, to them gave he exousian right, tekna Theou genesthai, to be
children of GOD." Rev. xxii. 14, "They that do his commandments," which is the
case of believers only, "have right to the tree of life," i. e. to CHRIST and
all his benefits. The word is exousia. And by the same right they enter in
through the gates, to enjoy all the privileges of the holy city. Their right by
heirship is also very familiar in the gospel; "if children, then heirs." The
word is kleeronomoi, for they hold by law all that is given them: Therefore
"heirs of GOD, and joint heirs with CHRIST, whose is the possession and
distribution of all things. In the same sense believers "inherit the promises,"
have and hold them by right of heirship; so they have "an inheritance among all
them that are sanctified." -- And so every believer "inherits all things." Two
things naturally prevent men of these rights; one is, the subject is a willing
sinner, always sins with all his heart. But this preventive is removed
entirely, when, upon sight of CHRIST, he is enabled to believe the lawful
righteousness of the gospel: and when thereupon, by imputation, it becomes his
own. For thereby he is perfectly justified, and instantly begins to be made
holy. And though he will never have any lawful holiness, naturally his own; yet
CHRIST having engaged by covenant to maintain and promote his sanctification to
final glory, this believer is admitted into christian rights, as if he was a
true natural son. His rights also are more sure, and more happifying, than if
he was naturally a true son. The other thing which naturally excludes from
these rights, is, the unsatisfied demands of injured justice and the law. But
these CHRIST has fully answered, by atonement equal to their nature. There
remains, therefore, nothing, on the part of justice, or the law, or on the part
of the believer, to keep him out of favor; and he may now, hourly claim
acceptance in the name and right of his redeemer, transferred to him,
inviolably confirmed on him through believing. So now, "he who was afar off, is
made nigh by the blood of CHRIST." -- "He is our peace, who has made both one,
having broken down the partition, and abolished the enmity." Of consequence,
"GOD is not ashamed to be called the believer's own GOD and father."
Accordingly his constant language is, "come unto me," "walk with me;" "ask what
ye will and it shall be done," "trust in me nothing doubting," "I will give
thee the desires of thine heart." "I have loved thee with an everlasting love,"
"I will never leave thee nor forsake thee;" "but will deliver thee in six
troubles and in seven;" nay, "all things shall work together for thy good."
Believers are not at liberty to use these rights or not, but are bound to claim
accomplishments; "do as thou have said," "fulfill the word on which thou have
caused me to hope." But dead faith is as strange and ignorant to all these
things, as an infant to philosophy, or a pagan to the love of GOD; and never
comes nearer than, "what have thou to do to take my covenant into thy mouth?"

2. FAITH has title to all necessary temporal goods. For this, GOD has engaged
his infallible truth, "verily thou shall be fed," Psalm. xxxvii. 3. -- "All
these things shall be added unto thee." -- "Trust in him and he shall bring it
to pass." -- "He shall give thee the desires of thine heart." -- "He heals
all thy diseases, redeemeth thy life from destruction, crowns thee with
loving kindness and render mercies, and satisfies thy mouth with good things,"
Psalm. ciii. Yea, no good thing will he withhold from faith. But it may be said,
where then is faith to be found? For who, or where is he, who is thus blessed
with good things?

ANSWER. -- 1. You must not judge of the rights of faith by every defect, or
outward want of its subjects; but by the express letter of its grants, made and
secured to it in the covenant of truth.

2. YOU are not to judge every professor to be a true believer; nor any an
unbeliever, merely for some outward trouble or want, for the poor in this world
are often rich in faith, and their portion is safe and sure, though not all yet
dealt out.

3. BUT if any man is lacking in the spiritual mercies of the covenant, it is
evidence he is lacking in faith, to which these divine rights are all secured.
But if he be needy of outward goods, it is no evidence he has not such, and all
such as are necessary, good, and best for him, at present.

4. HE who would experience more of these rights of faith, must understand,
believe, and put to trial what our LORD teaches -- Matt. xvi. 24 to 26, "If any
man will come after me," and so find what his joint heirship with me imports,
"let him deny himself, and take up his cross." This is christianity; faith
first took place in total self-denial, and ever after pines, or prevails, on
the use or disuse of this cardinal doctrine; the old rule still stands as good
as ever, "according to thy faith be it unto thee." And so it comes to pass,
that as often, and in the same degree, as a christian seeks, or indulges his
sensual or selfish life, he loses in the life of faith; on the contrary, just
so much as is ceded to this, is lost to that.

5. ON the whole, the rights of faith are all certainties, "ye shall ask what
ye will and it shall be done." The desires and prayers of faith, (and truly no
other ever reach the ears of a covenant GOD) are filial, "not my will, but
thine be done." Accordingly he who knows what, when and how, is best, has
reserved the execution of all the rights of faith to himself, that they may
certainly all take place, infallibly and universally, according to his covenant
engagements, that no believer may ever be ashamed, world without end. Here is
the patience of faith, waiting the will of GOD, in every thing, as the
husbandman for his harvest. And here is one instance of the assurance of faith,
always knowing that in due time we shall reap, if we faint not. Indeed, as a
GOD of nature, he gives food to the ravers, and sends his sun and rain on the
unjust; but as a covenant GOD, in which character especially faith has to do
with him, the rule is, "thou will prepare their heart, and cause thine ear to
hear." But men generally finding many things flow from the GOD of nature, as
such, care not on what right they come; so a covenant GOD is not in all their
thoughts; these at best are dead believers.

3. FAITH has right to deliverance from troubles. "Call upon me in the day of
trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me." -- "Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the LORD delivers him out of them all." On
such truth, faith fixes, and is sure of deliverance; but as to when and how, is
never sure beyond the letter of a promise. If the christian is prepared with
patient faith, and so with mortification, or self-denial, enough to improve
deliverance to the purposes of the promise, he may expect it speedily, because
"he will exalt them in due time, 1 Pet. v. 6. -- So true faith has harbor, and
anchor-hold by which to ride out every storm; while dead faith, easy 'till
trouble comes, is forced to sink, or fly like chaff before the wind.

4. FAITH has right to spiritual mercies here and hereafter. -- Grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withhold from those who walk uprightly." The
extent of faith's claims is the letter of the promises, and so for things not
named there, it says, "if the LORD will, we shall live and do this, or that."
Yet on spiritual goods especially, faith may insist, knowing already that the
will of GOD is our sanctification," and that it is his good pleasure to give us
the kingdom. Whereas dead faith insists on temporal goods, and hesitates only
about spirituals.

3. THE scriptures ascribe assurance to faith -- "Let us draw near in full
assurance of faith, Heb. x. 22. Now as faith is a believing the scipture
account of things, so the assurance of faith, is the sensible clearness and
strength of the evidence, on which faith in that case stands. Therefore the
apostle, Col. ii. 2, calls it the full assurance of understanding. Consequently,

1. ASSURANCE of faith is not assurance of our own good or safe estate. Such
assurance cannot in itself be distinguished from a false confidence, and if it
could, would generally be of little continuance, and less use; nor does the
scripture use the word in this sense at all. Isa. xxxii. 17, speaks of CHRIST'S
righteousness, the consequent peace with GOD, and the sensible certainty of the
things believed. As to 1 John iii. 19, it speaks of the assurance of hope,
which supposes the assurance of faith as above described. It Is as evident,

2. THAT in case of true faith, there is always as much assurance as faith,
never more, never less. For faith is knowledge of divine objects, or things
believed, and the evidence of truth in that case, makes faith's assurance. --
So they must agree, and be inseparable. So the gospel came to the
Thessalonians, in much assurance or sensible certainty, as to its matter, 1
These. i. 5.

3. IT IS as evident that hope, and its assurance, of which in Heb. vi. 11,
differ much from the case of faith. Christian hope rises from a sense of
interest in, or title to, those matters of promise which are objects of faith;
and the assurance of hope, is the sensible certainty of such interest. Hence
this is the grand object of self-examination; therefore the apostle, in the
last-mentioned text, directs us to give diligence to have our hope clear.
Experience makes hope, Romans v. 4, but not faith; and this hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of GOD is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost
which is given to us: Of these dead faith knows nothing at all.

4. THE scriptures ascribe to faith, a remarkably humbling virtue. It beholds
the glory of the LORD, and in the light of it shows the person to himself, "in
thy light, we see light." Hence nothing more natural to a christian, than,
"behold I am vile." In this, true and false faith differ, one has as much
humbleness of mind, as it has of believing; the other has just so much
religious pride. To one, a smile of GOD is the only mean of humbling; only the
supposition of it, with the other, is the food of its pride. Supposed
appearances of grace and love of GOD, have always just so contrary effects on
them. The one always claims some goodness of heart of its own, the other never;
so one has boasting, the other none. The subject of the one is always bad
enough in himself to be condemned now, the other always too good. Therefore
with the one, the judgments of GOD are right, but with the other, too hard.

5. THE scriptures ascribe to faith a peculiar efficacy to please GOD. --
"Without faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. xi. 6. True faith hearkens
to his voice, receives his testimony, regards his honor, trusts his truth,
does his will, and these are its life and only delight; not one of which is
true of any other faith. Nothing is more natural to the former than "thy will
be done." The other always resists the manifest design of the will of GOD. The
one submits to his correcting hand, the other submits and pleases in nothing,
"he is angry with the wicked every day."

6. THE scriptures ascribe to faith a purifying virtue, "beholding his glory,
we are changed into the same image." It assimulates the soul to its objects;
and of course, begets self-loathing, and abhorrence of every sensual taste.
Thence the believer's prayer is, "cleanse me, O LORD, from secret faults;"
"purge me with hyssop, that I may be clean." Dead faith may occasion a
reformation of life, though, in that, its influence is from selfish views; but
it never makes evangelical purity, because it never sees evangelical objects,
the only patterns of, and incentives to holiness.

7. THE scriptures ascribe to faith, a divine life and spiritual growth. -- "I
live by the faith of the son of GOD," Gal. ii. 20, and "your faith grows
exceedingly," 2 These. i. 3. -- So now, a christian becomes fruitful in every
good work, and increases in the knowledge of GOD, only through believing. It Is
by faith that he grows in grace, and in the love of GOD; and so goes from faith
to faith, gets clearer views of GOD, and consequently more self-emptying
experience of himself; and so grows up toward the stature of such as be
perfect. Whereas dead faith, never having divine life, can never divinely grow;
hence the evident difference in point of life, spirituality, and growth among
visible christians.

8. THE scriptures ascribe to faith, a strange power to bear up under trials.
Faith is so the substance, and present evidence of the glorious power, and
sufficiency of CHRIST, that it "strengthens with all might, in the inner man,
unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness," Col. i. 11. This
strength and support to the believer is by the spirit of truth, Ephesians. iii. 16.
-- So that he can endure as seeing him who is invisible, Heb. xi. 27. He has
sense of a present GOD, "lo I am with you;" and so of his righteousness and
mercy, his encompassing arms, his wisdom to order, and his sovereign power to
save, with the never-failing truth of his covenant engagements, to issue this
trouble for some divine purpose, "all things shall work together for good."
Faith can see a necessity of this trial, in this manner, and at this time, "if
need be ye are in heaviness." It knows there is a kind design, "whom I love I
rebuke and chasten." Hence a christian can approve his troubles, "'it is good for
me that I have been afflicted." In every furnace of affliction, true faith has
one like the son of man, ever present. So it can be joyful in tribulation, and
thankful for its kind design, and precious effects. While dead faith either
murmurs or despairs, is senseless, or sullen under correction. Hence GOD often
removes their stroke, saying "why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will
revolt more and more."

9. THE scriptures teach us that access to GOD is by faith, Ephesians. iii. 12, "in
whom we have boldness, and access with confidence, by the faith of him." Faith
has access to GOD in the following cases.

1. IN the habitual views of the mind. A christian knows that GOD, with all his
perfections on, is where he is; "thou GOD see me." He knows the eye of GOD to
see, his ear to hear, his arm of power to help, his mercy to pity, and his
fullness to supply, are always present. A believer, considered in that
character, knows that he lives and moves, and thinks and speaks in GOD. He can
truly say, "I am not alone, because the father is with me." And yet he is no
more terrified than the bush was burned; but has close access to him, sight and
sense of him. He lives, and walks, and works, in fellowship with GOD, 1 John i.
7. This is the life of the believer's life; but the thought of it is deadly, to
dead faith.

2. IN ejaculatory communion. -- The living christian is ever, now and then,
whispering in the ear of his GOD, Oh for more holiness! Oh to have this heart,
nature, humor, passion, more mortified through knowledge of thy glory! Oh for
direction in my way, for ordering my affairs, for help in this duty, for
support in this trial, for strength to endure this hardship! True faith has
ever something to say to its GOD, pleading, praising, confessing, or something;
and something to hear from him in his word, by the spirit thereof, teaching,
quickening, reproving, and such like. They who walk in the light, as GOD is in
the light, have constantly such fellowship one with another, 1 John. i. 7; --
that is, HE and they.

3. IN devolving heavy burdens upon him. -- "Cast thy burden upon the LORD, and
he shall sustain thee." Many a time the christian's heart must sink under its
pressing weights, of sin, cares, business, or affliction, if it were not for
this relief. But faith seeing room and reason for it, and finding absolute
need, delivers over its concerns according to the precept, and finds relief
according to the promise. Dead faith can only ease the heart by sight of
natural means, or supposed prevalence of some personal consideration with GOD,
or by a mere indolent presumption of a favorable issue.

4. IN special duties, whether public, secret or private. -- Faith has
directly to do with GOD in duties, by it the soul comes to its seat, and orders
its cause there. It comes to GOD himself, leaning on the beloved, and receives
instructive answers from his word and works. While dead faith plays off, with
its long dry forms and tools, and receives no answers, but from imagination, or
pre-conceived design.

5. IN sudden and unforeseen occurrences. -- Whether they are prosperous or
adverse, faith instantly says, "'It Is the LORD, let him do what seems him
good." It can bid welcome to, and be thankful for, the most sudden corrective
incident, as well as be humbly surprised with mercies. They alike show that GOD
"is good, and does good, and his tender mercies are over all his works." Yea,
if the believer sees second causes, or wicked instruments in his affliction, he
knows they may design evil by it, but that GOD means it for good. True faith
will kiss the rod, and love the humbling stroke; in all which dead faith is
just the reverse of it.

10. AND lastly. -- Christian faith is victorious faith. "This is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our faith," 1 John v. 4. Faith presents such
reality and excellency in divine objects, as attracts the mind away from things
of sense, and fairly solves their strong dominion. It Is faith raises the
christian above the world, and daily carries him, with a gentle gale, over the
frowns, the smiles, and shifting changes of the creatures. By this his
corruptions are subdued; by this he conquers Satan and the world; by this he is
supported in adversity, prevails at the throne of grace, and lives at ease,
amidst all the enemies of his peace: "For where the spirit of the LORD is,
there is liberty;" "and his soul shall dwell at ease." But dead faith has
either stupid security, or else has bondage through fear of death eternal.
Faith has two scenes to conquer through, viz. this life, and the hour of death;
in both of which unfailing conquest is already sure from the mouth of GOD, not
with design to anticipate the utmost exertion of all its virtues, but to
invigorate them.

1. FAITH has to conquer through the (...) violence, and the sly intrigues of
its numerous enemies in the present life. For all this, its strength and skill
is hid with CHRIST in GOD, "our springs are all in thee;" and "our sufficiency
is of GOD." The believer then may boldly say, as numerous and mighty as his
enemies are, "through GOD I can rush through an host," and through him "can
leap over a wall." In this manner have GOD'S people always found their way
through this vale of tears; the road is the same, faith's enemies still the
same, our sinful natures, and almighty helper both the same. Hence the history
of the nature and situation, the trials and conquests of faith, in the sacred
book, are most adapt to every one of us. It Is an ignorant mistake in this
point, to dream that we stand on a higher stage of natural abilities and
advantages, than gospel subjects a thousand years ago; it renders the bible of
little use, and damps the heart, and perplexes the path of the believing
warrior now. If the bible was a collection of lives and trials, strange
escapes, and final joys, of some godly persons in this present age, commended
to our certain belief, and constant imitation, with sufficient assurance to us
of an equally happy issue; would it not seem a more engaging directory than it
is now? The only reason must be because the path was streaked, and all the
patterns set by human nature in its present state, and in our own times. Now
faith sees exactly that advantage in the bible as it is; sees the facts in the
same point of easy and engaging light, sees the examples for our instruction
and imitation, equally instructive, equally imitable by the weakest christian.
They are set before us on purpose "that he may run that reads;" and so
calculated that "wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein." From this
treasury the believer, whatever his other circumstances are, may be thoroughly
furnished to every good work." From this armoury, equipped for the whole war,
-- "Lo I am with you," and "my grace is sufficient for you," will make any
believer of them courageous, whatever is his exigency. Indeed a christian needs
no more than to believe GOD, in order to be quite sure of all he can need,
"there is no want to them that fear him;" "he is ever mindful of his covenant,"
"and will withhold no good thing from them who walk uprightly." And he has not
only said all we need, but it is sure, "his word is settled in heaven," and "he
cannot deny himself." These things only believed, will make the subject "wax
valiant in fight, turning to flight whole armies of aliens." It will
immediately appear, that the world and all the creatures, present things, and
things to come, are within the rights of living faith, When it is seen to be the
word of GOD, "that all things shall work together for good," and "ye shall ask
what ye will, and it shall be done," and "nothing shall be impossible unto
you," etc. then faith will be victorious in all trials, and not 'till then.
Dead faith cannot be victorious in any thing, because it cannot take the bible
for truth, so cannot affect the subject by its spirit or grace, nor ever does.

2. DIVINE faith is victorious in death; there it conquers the conqueror. The
believer, like Sampson, and like his savior, always conquers in death, and
dies in his last conquest. Indeed death to a christian is a different thing
from what it is to any other; while it is a curse to others, it is a blessed
privilege to him. But all the privilege he has in death, he has by what he
believes; the savior's conquest becomes his own by believing it. He knows
death in no sense can have dominion over him, because his own savior, has
conquered it in every sense, and in right of that conquests he triumphs. Indeed
he don't expect to be hyed away, through endless tracts of pathless space, to a
heaven beyond the stars; but as what separated him from GOD here, was yielding
to flesh and sense; so what kept him out of the heavenly state, was his
confinement to this body; of course, release from that must be commencement of
the heavenly state, absent from the body, is to be present with the LORD, 2
Cor. v. 6, 8. As GOD is present every where, and his immediate enjoyment is
heaven, so all, but in the body, is glorious heaven. Faith sees this, and is
sure enough of the blessed vision, and glorious enjoyments, the instant which
succeeds his dissolution. In the midst of which GOD has promised, and faith
enjoys "perfect peace," "the mind is stayed on him." When nature's bonds are
loosed, he is at the church of the firstborn in glory; the same instant faith
is swallowed up in vision, and the long struggling spirit leaping from its own
confinement into boundless day and liberty, leaves the gasping cottage to the
long-proved truth of GOD, for a glorious resurrection; then to be resumed with
glorious advantage, and everlasting pleasure; itself claiming for JESUS' sake,
the immediate and freely offered embracements of present divinity, and mingling
itself, most welcome, with angels and the spirits of the just made perfect,
sees the glory, feels the joys, and shouts the songs of that Jerusalem. Now it
sees, in their boundless original, the wisdom, power, grace and love, that made
and maintained it, enlightened, turned and guided it, strengthened and
preserved it, from moment to moment, without weariness, to this
never-to-be-finished rapture. The christian, now glorious, remembers his sins,
and wonders! Remembers his deliverances and comforts, and adores their native
fountain! He sees the glories and the GOD he loved, and crowds his harp upon
the highest key! He is now in heaven; and wherever the service of his
dear-loved Maker and Redeemer requires his attendance, whether immediately
tracing and adoring the searchless deeps of holy truth; or set to guard some
pilgrim yet in flesh, Rev. xxii. 9; or darting on behests to further stars;
whatever his special employment is, which doubtless is assigned to please and
improve his natural turn of mind, he is in perfect satisfaction. And that which
crowns every moment of that existence is, it is fixed beyond the reach of
change, to the present undeceivable assurance of the inhabitant for ever and
ever.

NOW let us reflect a little on a point so much out of common view, and yet of
such vast and critical importance. And what does the subject suggest more
naturally than,

1. THEN he whose faith is a dead faith is yet in his sins, and every moment in
danger of endless fire, let his religion, and his hopes be what they will. He
is a child of wrath by nature, even as others, has as much need of being
renewed and changed as any person in the world; but his dead faith has done
exactly nothing toward it, to this very hour. It may have deceived him, but it
has not saved him; it may have given him strong-grounded hopes, but it has
given him no well-grounded hopes; "there is a way which seems right unto a
man, but the end thereof is death." This is doubtless the case with the most of
people, both old and young, and of every character; which will abundantly
appear, by comparing their evident want of genuine christian experience, with
the scripture character of a believer. Dead faith may seem right to him who has
it, in almost every thing, but it never answers, as face answers to face in a
glass, to the scripture account of saving faith. Indeed he who has it, never
brings his faith fairly to trial in the bible court; "ye think (says our LORD)
ye have eternal life there, but they are they which testify of me," John v. 39.
He always first admits a favorable bias to his case, and then goes to the
bible; as Luke xvi. 15, -- "Ye are they which justify yourselves, but GOD
knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed among men, is
abomination in the sight of God." So he goes on "deceiving and being deceived,"
'till he is "given up to strong delusion, to believe a lie." And doubtless
multitudes go into eternity with this lie "in their right hand," therefore have
they "no bands in their death." Now this was not said of abandoned wretches, as
is often supposed, but of such false hopers, Psalm. lxxiii. In this character
there is a decree of eternity against him, "cursed be the deceiver," for "he
deceives his own heart, his religion is vain." The person we speak of is going
toward destruction every moment; and though his dead faith makes him hope,
"what is the hope of the hypocrite when GOD takes away his soul?" Reader if
this be thy case, thou art of those "who think themselves to be something, when
they are nothing, and deceive themselves." Thy dead faith makes thee easy, but
it cannot make thee safe; it can harden, but it cannot quicken thee. With a
deceived believer his hopes make him believe; but with a true believer his
faith makes him hope. If these very hints don't at all alarm thee, let it mind
thee, thee to have confidence without evidence, or hope without sensible title,
is proof of hypocrisy." It Is common with unconverted believers, to hope their
faith is true, but only low and weak; not considering that the lowest and
weakest life of an infant always stirs, and breathes; but their dead faith
never stirs, never breathes after GOD, holiness, divine communion, or any
divine object as such; there is no beauty in them that they should be desired.
They want ease, safety, happiness, but never want the right sort, never in the
right way. Their relation to GOD is very different from that of christians, his
wrath was never removed from the former, his love never shall be from the
latter. To one sort he is a judge and avenger, to the other a father, friend,
and savior; accordingly dead faith makes a sort of fear of GOD, but makes no
love to JEHOVAH, while living faith works all by love, and casts out slavish
fear. To the subject of dead faith, let me say in pity, your faith is not
comfortable, "there is no peace to the wicked;" it don't please GOD, "he is
angry with you every day." It don't agree to the bible, because it is not the
work of GOD; it looks elsewhere for food, for CHRIST'S words judge and condemn
it, John xii. 48. It don't agree with the way of salvation by faith alone, it
always inclines you to say, "I have done thus and thus, or been such and so,"
when you think of acceptance; so never rests on what CHRIST has done; so
certain it is that when you appear before him, he will say, "I never knew you,
depart from me ye cursed." And don't this alarm you? Don't your own reason tell
you that dead faith cannot save you? Why don't you stop and say, "what good will
this profession, or these false hopes do me, since I am going to appear before
GOD?" "Had I not better now, while I have opportunity, suspect the worst, call
all my hopes in question, realize my danger, and try to see myself worse, as
much worse at heart, than the profane, as my proud religion has seemed to set
me before them." For truly by this, have you always opposed and slighted the
believer's CHRIST, and the true spirit, and happiness of the bible. Who knows,
but of an heir of hell, as you certainly be now, you may yet become a christian
and have everlasting life? Which will naturally excite the anxious enquiry,

2. WHAT should an unconverted person do, that he may get a living faith? Which
gives occasion to observe, if you ever hear this question answered, by any
directions, to do, at all, you may at once be sure, the answer did not come
from the bible. Two things will always make this evident; one is, the directed
doer, is already dead, 2 Cor. v. 14 -- Ephesians. ii. 5. The other is, living faith
is GOD'S gift, Ephesians. ii. 8. -- Phil. i. 29. Men have natural power as creatures,
and by it may perform actions, but it is not now in the power of nature to do
any thing in the manner in which the gospel requires obedience; "without me ye
can do nothing." To come to GOD is the work of faith, therefore says our LORD,
"no man comes to the father but by me." With this an unbeliever immediately
quarrels, although it is as plainly scriptural as any thing at all; CHRIST
"came not to send peace, etc." Mat. x. 34, etc.

QUESTION. Must an unconverted person then, sit still, and professedly do
nothing; or go on in his sins allowedly, vexed with plain scripture?

ANSWER. -- 1. He who don't see himself as the scriptures describe him, will do
nothing of this sort, viz. coming to GOD, or believing on any consideration.

2. HE who does so see himself, but is not pleased with it, will work in
proportion to his conviction, and nothing shall hinder him, and he will think
himself better than he was before, in front of plain scripture.

3. HE who has this sight, and is pleased with it, which is the case only of a
believer, knows that he did nothing evangelically 'till he believed the gospel,
and that what he did do, was the food of his pride, and not the relief of his
soul.

BUT you will say, what shall be said to a poor sinner? -- Answer 1. -- Say as
the bible does, "The soul that sins shall die," and "he that believes not
shall be damned." -- Say also, "CHRIST came to save sinners, even the chief,"
and "he that believes shall be saved." 2. -- If he ask for doing, tell him as
the bible does, "the whole law;" that nothing less than perfect righteousness
can begin to relieve him. Tell him, if he sit still here, he must die, but in
the LORD there is righteousness and strength too. On the whole,

(1.) HE must see himself, heart and life, just such as the bible describes to
be the objects of GOD'S wrath, for want of perfect righteousness, which
righteousness he cannot get but by believing.

(2.) HE must see CHRIST, just as the bible represents him, in all his own
glorious fullness of grace and love, and lawful fulfilling righteousness, and be
brought to rest, peace and pleasure in both these views.

(3.) AND for this purpose he must have a faith just such as the bible speaks
of, or never can be saved.

(4.) HE may be assured that on his believing what the bible says of CHRIST and
his righteousness, he shall be saved; and that GOD does enable thereto such as
see themselves too vile for any other relief.

3. THERE are a few things which greatly increase our danger of delusion in
this great affair. One is, there is an universal natural propensity in mankind
to work for life; it was an excellency in his original constitution, but is now
his snare. Another, is as common a fondness for what in matters of religion, we
call our own. A third is, that, as a consequence of the former, every part of
the saving religion, to corrupt nature is all unnatural. The consequence is,
every thing which in matters of religion, results from our own minds, as its
original, is wrong; and nothing but what derives from GOD, through CHRIST, and
so according to scripture, in matters of religion, is to be depended on; nor
may we without guilt hesitate a moment about any thing that evidently does so.
But then you will say, "straight is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leads
to life," and, "no wonder few there be that find it." The delusions which are
made out of this state of the case are numberless; we will be confined to two
or three generals.

1. UNBELIEVERS generally persuade themselves they do believe. -- And they may,
in general, look on the bible as divine, but their belief lacks the
abovementioned discriminations of true faith; it has no such divine original,
is of no such divine efficacy, don't agree with the bible-ascriptions to faith.
The subject of true faith always knows it comes from above; others don't, nor
ever can know this of their belief. Living faith, as its character, imports,
lives and grows, which a dead belief does not. It makes delight in all divine
objects, which theirs does not. There are two texts of scripture which this
sort of believers cannot take pleasure in; one is, "I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy." The other is, "depart from me ye cursed." And yet they will
go on believing contrary to St. James, "that their faith can save them."

2. MULTITUDES agree that it will not do to trust to believing only, for
acceptance with GOD; there must be concern, or reformation, or duties, or
something beside barely believing the scripture righteousness. And this
fulfills the text, Isa. lv. 8, 9, "Your ways are not my ways, as the heaven is
higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways." Just so is the
way of acceptance with GOD by believing CHRIST'S perfect righteousness alone,
than the patchwork way, which can make delusion, and damnation, but cannot make
justification and salvation; -- as both St. Paul, and St. James bear witness,
Romans iv. 3, James ii. 23.

3. ANOTHER religious delusion which arises from our natural enmity against the
gospel is, that if faith alone is the mean of justification, it must also be
the whole of religion, and so we will do nothing in obedience to the commands,
only believe what CHRIST has done; and so we are exactly at the religion which
St. James had commission to destroy. CHRIST by his obedience perfectly answered
the law as a covenant of works, and so paved the way for a sinner's acceptance,
when he relies solely on that medium; consequently, no matter who, or what the
sinner is, who so relies by faith, "though he were dead, yet shall he live." --
No matter how vile a person, or how great a sinner. But CHRIST did nothing to
the law as a rule of common living for his people. -- Consequently, unless they
are holy, i. e. of ardent choice, observe and obey the law in common life, it
will prove they are not justified; but that their faith is the dead sort; for
only by such works can their pretensions to faith be justified. If faith does
not produce such works, it is dead, being alone, James, ii. 17.

4. WE may in the last place make some inferences from what has been said, of
those who have living (...)

1. YE did not acquire it. -- "Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost," Tit. iii. 5. "Not for your sakes do I this,
says the LORD GOD, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your
own ways," Ezekiel. xxxvi. 32. A sight of this makes and maintains humility; the
want of it is the occasion and life of religious pride. And he who don't
habitually see it, will suffer by the latter; as he who does will be happy in
the former.

2. GOD did not do all this for you, because ye were better than others. The
glory of GOD is the best object of design for the creator, and all the
creatures; this may be secured by his saving the worst, rather than any other.
With this view all scripture examples concur, as well as doctrines. There were
many needy widows in Israel in the time of the famine, but only to a heathen
one, was Elijah sent. Many lepers also, but only to a Syrian was healing given,
Luke iv. 25, 27. At this, they of the synagogue will always have wrath; but
it is evident from the scriptures that real sinfulness is no bar to the
salvation of him who believes the divine testimony about CHRIST; though
designed wickedness is always a qualification for hell. Consequently, men's
notions of their own goodness may prevent their salvation, but their real
badness, duly seen, cannot. Therefore they who are loaded down with sin and
guilt, by coming to CHRIST, i. e. by believing the perfection of his merit with
GOD, are welcome, Matthew. xi. 28. And poor publicans, who can see nothing but
badness about them, are accepted, rather than they who trust in themselves that
they are righteous, Luke xviii. 9 to 14. If therefore we consider saving grace
as taking any (...) from the subject, (which indeed it does not) it would be
his sensible badness beyond any other. And to this agrees the pointed knowledge
of fact in every child of GOD in the world. This was the case with Paul, who
says he was the pattern for them who should afterward believe unto life, and
it must be so in all, that GOD may have the glory of saving sinners, 1 Timothy i.
15 to 17.

3. HE don't maintain his kingdom in you because you make good use of his
grace. His favor could not turn on such a hinge if it was true, grace in such
a case, would lose both its name and nature. The fact is, he "works all our
works in us," "both to will, and to do of his good pleasure," Phil. ii. 13;
which is the apostle's grand argument on christians to duty. Similar to which
is that to Titus, ii. chap. 11 to 14. So that the believer is a debtor for
every degree of faith, and for every duty thereby performed. Therefore James
says, iv. chap. 6, etc. He gives more grace, viz. to the humble, and thence
takes his argument to urge all manner of duties in the following verses. For
says John, i. chap. 16, "of his fullness have we all received," "and grace" to
improve "grace."

4. THE believer's province, is to endure, as seeing him who is invisible. GOD
is a spirit, and so his nature, and all his perfections are hidden to every eye
among men, but that of faith. But of believers it is said, "we all, with open
face, beholding as in a glass" (a looking-glass which shows the face truly, and
close at hand, such is the word of GOD to faith,) "the glory of the LORD, are
changed into the same image." This beholding is of infinite use; it attracts
and assimulates the beholder to the object; it solves his sensual attachments;
it attempers the soul to holy employments, confirms it in obedience, makes all
the ways of wisdom pleasant; emboldens the soul to hazardous enterprises,
saying, "the LORD is at my right hand, I shall not be moved," Psalm. xvi. 8. It
makes him safe, "that he will fear no evil." Steadies him against all inferior
frowns, or flatteries; furnishes such equal relief, that the christian language
is "whom have I in heaven but GOD, and there is none on earth that I desire
beside him." And though faith always sees that he is a consuming fire, the
sight is solemnly sweetened by this view, and is the argument to hold fast, and
serve him acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, Heb. xii. 28, 29. This
view of divine glory, and its improvement, are peculiar to faith. This and
every sight of the glory of GOD, is in the light of that covenant, of which
faith knows "he is ever mindful." Therefore his severer atributes, are as
sweetly precious as his milder ones, which is never the case of any other
faith. In this light, to true faith, GOD is all father, own father, natural
father. Hence all the freedoms, all the expectations, confidence, and sanctuary
of believers. In these views alone the christian can endure in both serving and
suffering.

5. IT IS peculiar to a believer, in that character, to live in sight of
himself: "In thy light we see light." This shows why faith can never make
pride, but always "hides pride from man;" and so actual faith, and
gospel-humility must be inseparable. Hence a proud christian is a natural
falsehood. This clears the text, "he that trusts to his own heart is a fool;
and cursed is he who makes an arm of flesh his trust." Nothing but faith can
entirely shut out boasting. "See thou a man wise in his own conceit, there is
more hope of a fool than of him." Hence also self-loathing, self-renouncing,
and self-denying are peculiar, and perfectly natural to christianity. So the
christian's life must be entirely a life of faith; and he must know in full
latitude that all his springs are in GOD.

6. THEREFORE it is faith only, that can ever see, and habitually view JESUS
CHRIST, as the bible represents him. No person but the believer can see all in
GOD, and nothing in himself, therefore to none is he precious, but those who
believe; but to these nothing can be more so. A christian, from what he sees in
GOD and knows of himself, sees the most absolute need of the righteousness and
offices of JESUS CHRIST, in order that any of those treasures, should flow to
him. There is fullness of grace and glory, but how shall a sinner get them? (for
such the believer always sees himself,) it cannot be, but in a way that agrees
to the nature of an unchanging GOD; and how can there be such a way, since his
unchangeableness naturally seals up despair to those who have sinned? No way
but through that atonement by means of which GOD is just, while he justifies
the ungodly. This therefore is the believing sinner's only refuge, only medium
of hope, for present, or future, temporal or eternal goods. Of all these things
his only account is in the bible, this makes the word of the LORD precious: And
the only medium of actual communication is believing that word; hence faith is
called precious. By this the christian constantly looks to GOD, considering
himself a sinner, and as such having no right, but relying entirely on the
truth of the word about the certain and perfect satisfaction, fullness and grace
of CHRIST, there set forth to him; and in this way only, receives all sorts of
mercies which he has from a covenant GOD; and to which he became entitled by
the atonement which he believes as reported in the word. And if he is still
needy and destitute of any spiritual blessing, it is wholly because he don't so
come for it, "for he that asks receives;" this is an absolute rule. And if
he is destitute of any temporal mercy, it is certainly either because it is not
good for him, at present, or because he don't ask for it. The latter is owing
to some false riches; in the other case he can say without reserve, "thy will
de done."

7. OF consequence, a christian must be one who has the highest veneration for
the plain language of the bible. If the bible tells him, that men, and even all
orders among them, are "children of wrath by nature," and "dead in trespasses
and sins," with him, it shall stand for their moral character drawn by the
direction of the Holy Ghost. Let religious pride, enmity, and profaneness join
the opposition; he has two supports to his faith, one is divine report, the
other is his own knowledge. The same upholds his heart against the empire of
pride, in believing that we are, in the most absolute sense, "without
strength," as to self-relief. If the bible teaches that we may be justified by
only believing what GOD has said, it shall stand with every one who is going to
heaven, for the saving article. If, in this affair, the word of GOD plainly
excludes all manner of consideration for any thing done by men, he wrangles not
one thought at it, for he has learned to believe whatever GOD says. If GOD has
said, the whole of salvation is of mere grace, he takes it without dispute for
a certainty. In short, whatever he finds the bible says, is instantly put
beyond all debate, for he not only sees it the mind of his Maker, and Redeemer,
but the grand and most sacred charter of all his hopes for time and eternity.
Thus every christian approves, delights in, esteems, and to his power will
maintain, what the plain bible tell him is the will of GOD. If CHRIST puts
importance on every jot and tittle of his word, so does his child, they have
the same spirit. And indeed this distinguishes the sheep from the goats. No
person, but a believer, can in the divine sense, say "thy word is truth," or
"thy word is the joy of my heart," any more than he can call JESUS, LORD,
without the spirit of GOD.

8. THEN a believer is one who lives by faith. Though we are fallen so far into
the dreggs of RUIN, as that the TERM, believer, and the phrase, live by faith,
are become matters of common banter and scoff, epithets of reproach, and even
the drunkard's song; yet such is the light of reality in which divine objects
are seen and known by faith that instead of weakening by such means, it waxes
stronger and stronger; "this path of the just is like a shining light which
shines more and more, 'till it" blazes "into perfect day." -- And "the gates
of hell cannot prevail against it." In front of all sorts of opposition, a
christian believes the various and mighty evidences of a divine existence, and
is accordingly governed thereby, he lives as if there was a GOD, and so his
faith appears to be a rarity in the world. He believes what the scriptures say
about the perfection of CHRIST'S righteousness, and its design to be the sole
ground of sinners trust; and his belief in this case also governs him into
single dependence on it exclusively; he knows every good gift comes out of that
font, to it therefore, all his views repair, and of its "fullness he receives,
and grace for grace." He lives in sight of the divinity of the bible, it is "the
light of his feet, and a lamp to all his paths;" he believes it the stated
vehicle of the Holy Ghost, so he hears it, reads it, feels it, and acts it out
in common and divine life. He lives in sight of uncertainty, and vanity, in all
the things of this life; certainty and sufficient reality in those of another,
in sight of himself a sinner, and of CHRIST, as his "wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and everlasting redemption." He serves GOD, endures as seeing
him, and has a constant view to the recompense of reward. So his heart and life
are governed by faith; he lives by the faith of the son of GOD. Of consequence,

9. A TRUE believer is distinguished from all others in that his works justify
his faith. It Is as peculiar to a true christian to be governed by his belief,
as it is to true faith to produce correspondent works. There is no way to
support a claim to the christian character, but by scriptural fruits of faith.
If a person appears to be divinely governed by his faith, it is evidence enough
to men, that he is born of GOD. And the want of this not only leaves no such
evidence, but is evidence enough of the contrary. So that a person may always
judge of himself, and on all the necessary occasions be judged of by others, by
the evident divine influence his religious faith has upon him. If christian
professors appear not to be governed by the christian faith, it is evidence, let
them have as much faith as they will, that it is of the dead sort, and therefore
not operative: -- "Faith, if it have not works, is dead, being alone." If a
minister or a magistrate, a parent or a child, a husband or a wife, a master or
a servant, the youth or aged, who profess, or secretly think, they have the
christian belief, have not the effects and fruits which the bible ascribes to
its faith, in forms plain enough to be understood by all who read or hear them,
their faith is condemned, because it don't make gospel works. A grand design of
the bible is to show plainly to all these distinctions of persons just "what
manner of persons, they ought to be;" that by its plain divine directions,
"they may be thoroughly furnished to every good work," in their respective
places; and there is in it a complete plain set of instructions to all these
sorts of persons for this purpose, and nothing wanting. Now these instructions
are believed or not; if believed, that belief will infallibly bring out those
very things in life; if then those same things are not in life and
conversation, it is certain they are not believed in the book; therefore, "by
their fruits ye shall know them," Matthew. vii. 17 to 21. For whoever believes
the righteousness of the bible, will "be filled with the fruits of that
righteousness, which are by JESUS CHRIST to the glory and praise of GOD," Phil.
i. 11. And they who don't so believe, Jude says, "their fruit withers, they are
without fruit, twice dead." To this purpose our Savior says, Matthew. xiii. 23,
he who receives the seed of the word into good ground, understands it, and
bears fruit accordingly. From this, CHRIST takes his rule of judicial conduct
to all under the gospel; if they bear fruit answerable to their means, it is
well, but if not, they shall be cut down as barren trees, Luke xiii. 9. For he
knows "every good tree brings forth good fruit, and cannot bring forth evil
fruit," and just the contrary is true of all the rest, Matthew. vii. 17, 18.
Hence that remarkable summary of the whole affair, Col. i. 3, etc. "We give
thanks to GOD, since we heard of your faith in CHRIST, for the hope which is
laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of
the gospel, which is come unto you, -- and brings forth fruit -- in you,
since the day ye heard of it, and knew the grace of GOD, in truth." Which makes
the following things plain enough. scil.

(1.) THAT every person has his common character, as a candidate for eternity,
with all the truths and duties which concern it, drawn before his eyes in the
bible; and beside this, has his special character, as minister, magistrate,
husband, wife, parent, child, or any other in the world, drawn equally plain,
with all the truths and duties which concern that also, in which he has the
whole mind of GOD about him, in general and particular respects, and all he
needs to be, and know and do.

(2.) THAT it is the whole duty, the happy privilege, and so the saving
article, for each to believe the things, that, in his general or particular
character, as much concern him, as peace of conscience, acceptance, daily
acceptance with GOD, and eternal salvation of his soul concerns him.

(3.) THAT such as do (...) believe them, will infallibly be such in life and
conduct, as the things respecting them, so believed, require they should be,
and tend to make them. And consequently, that such believing makes persons, in
all their characters, just such as the bible requires they should be; and the
not so believing is the universal reason why they remain unlike the bible in
life and conduct; defective and guilty in their places, and ripe for aggravated
damnation.

(4.) THAT this, of consequence, is the grand manifest distinction between true
believers, and deceived ones. -- "In this is manifest the children of GOD, and
the children of the devil: He that does not righteousness, is not of GOD, 1
John iii. 10.

10. AND lastly. -- The grand reason why all these things depend entirely and
absolutely upon faith, is, that they may be perfectly free for any; as free for
the worst as any. GOD is no respecter of persons, he would as soon have a poor,
despised, or profane person become a believer as any in the world; i. e. he has
no regard to the world's greatness or men's goodness. Those who are already
publicans and harlots, are as welcome, as kindly welcome to believe and live as
any at all; nay, none are welcome 'till to their own knowledge they are as
destitute of goodness as those: For CHRIST came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance; and has prepared destruction for such as sin, that grace
may abound. Now the whole bible witnesses this freeness of divine grace; but
how could it be, unless faith alone were the means? The worst of men may
believe what GOD tells them; but what goodness can they have to commend them to
favor? and yet all the proclamation is to sinners. He calls sinners; grace is
offered to sinners, lost sinners, wretched, poor, blind, naked sinners, and for
example gloriously saved Saul, the chief of them. They have no works at all but
damning ones, but they can believe the gospel account of mercy brought by
CHRIST, as well as any. And for this reason believing alone is the mean of
acceptance with GOD. -- "Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace,
to the end the promise," or matter of salvation, "might be sure to all the
seed," i. e. to all who believe, and so appear to be of the elect, or seed of
Abraham, "not to that only which is of the law," i. e. Jewish believers, "but
to that also which is of the faith of Abraham" i. e. are Gentiles, and so have
nothing else to depend upon but faith. -- Romans iv. 16.

THE consequence of all this is,

1 THEY who have notions of a good heart in them, or any thing about them
pleasing to GOD, without CHRIST, as received in faith, or in believing, cannot
be accepted.

2. THAT their mouths will be stopped, and they all guilt before GOD at last,
because he did not require any point of personal goodness to commend them to
his acceptance, but that they would believe his own account of grace and glory
offered freely, and they would not.

3. THAT such as will believe his own account of CHRIST'S perfect
righteousness, and so see enough in it, and put their souls upon it, "shall not
perish, but have everlasting life;" however base the person, or however great
the sinner; and that for all these purposes the bible, its own Holy Ghost, the
righteousness, strength, and free grace of CHRIST are near enough.

4. AND as a consequent of all, the righteousness of divine conduct will be
perfectly clear, in the certain destruction of all who were too righteous to
submit to salvation by faith, which rejects all personal goodness in
justification; and will be accordingly glorified by saints and angels forever.
And all his perfections as glorious in the salvation of those who were
destitute enough of self-goodness to depend on mercy. And so we find the
ultimate design of divine revelation, is, that they who will not believe
perfect truth, may be made manifest, and punished answerable to their contempt
of divinity; and that they who believe, and put themselves on mercy, may not
fail of the utmost perfection and happiness of their natures by CHRIST; and so
GOD be glorious in all his works, through his only son our LORD, forever and
ever, AMEN.

BOOKS to be sold by WILLIAM GODDARD, at the PRINTING and POST OFFICE, at the
Sign of SHAKESPEARE'S Head, in PROVIDENCE.
LARGE and small Bibles. Testaments. Common Prayer Books. Psalm Books. Watts's
Lyric Poems. Derham's Astro and Physico-Theology. The Spectator. Adventurer.
Keyster's Travels. Apophthegms of the Ancients. Adventures of a Guinea. History
of Two Orphans. Bailey's Dictionary. Universal Gazetteer. Hervey's Meditations.
Dodderidge's Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul; his Hymns and Sermons
to young People, and Treatise on Education. Religious Courtship. Pilgrim's
Progress. Alleine's Alarm. Cocker's Arithmetic. Dilworth's Spelling Book. The
Writings of Dr. Gill, Rev. Mr. Benjamin Lord, Rev. Mr. Isaac Backus, and other
Divines, of Europe and America. The Rights of Colonies ^^^^^mined. A Treatise
on Economy. The Death of Abel, and Trial of Abraham; -- with a Variety of
Tracts, religious, political and entertaining.

To be sold also at the same Place, an Assortment of Books in Navigation, and
near Gunter's Scales.

N. B. WEST'S celebrated Almanac, for 1766, will be published in August next,
at the abovementioned Place, where Paper, Almanacks, other Books, or Cash will
be given for clean Linen Rags, old Sail Cloth and Junk, for the use of the
New England Paper Manufactory, just established in the Town of Providence, --
to the Success of which, every real Friend to this Country, as Opportunity
presents, will undoubtedly contribute.

July -- 1765.

