THE WORSHIP and PRINCIPLES OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND: A SERMON, Preached at the
Opening of CHRIST'S CHURCH, IN GREAT-BARRINGTON, ON CHRISTMAS DAY, M.DCC.LXIV.

By THOMAS DAVIES, A. M. AND MISSIONARY FROM THE SOCIETY.

PROVIDENCE: N. E. PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM GODDARD, AT THE POST OFFICE.
M.DCC.LXV.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE CANDID READER.
IT IS at the earnest desire of the church people in Great-Barrington, and not
from any inclination of appearing in print, I send the following plain and
inelegant discourse abroad; and as there are some expressions in it, may appear
harsh, and the facts they relate to, improbable in a land of liberty, and where
the oppressors can justly claim but toleration, I think it expedient to
advertise the reader of those facts, and then leave him to judge of the
expressions.

Some of the first settlers of the town of Great-Barrington were Dutch people,
who professed themselves Lutherans, and engaged and paid a Lutheran minister
for coming among them four times every year. When the English came among them,
they joined in settling two dissenting ministers, and contributed largely to
build the meeting houses in Great-Barrington and Sheffield; but could receive
no benefit from either, as they did not believe the principles of Calvinism,
constantly taught in both, and could not have their children baptized unless
they would openly profess it. -- Being desirous, their children should receive
the sacred ordinance of baptism, they were obliged to go thirty or forty miles
to a Lutheran minister, for that purpose. Seeing they received no advantage
from the dissenting minister, and hired one of their own, they applied to the
town to consider their circumstances, and to allow them a part of the taxes
they paid Mr. Hopkins, to help pay their own minister for visiting them; but
this reasonable desire was rejected with disdain, and invectives: However they
made no disturbance, but attended Mr. Hopkins's meeting, until he compelled
them to leave it, by preaching the misterious notions of absolute and
irrespective decrees, and the augmentation of good and happiness to the moral
system, by the introduction and abounding of sin, etc. Upon this they became
uneasy, and told him they could not, in conscience, come to hear, and have
their children learn such doctrines for the gospel. Some of the English
labored under the same uneasiness, and could not admit the doctrines he
constantly taught, to be true, and according to the revealed will of GOD:
Nevertheless if he believed them, he might preach them, but he ought not to
compel others to hear and learn them; which however was in some measure the
fact; for when some who were dissatisfied, absented for a few days from his
meeting, he instigated, from his desk, his people to prosecute them with the
utmost rigor of the law: The consequence was, several aged and sober men were
put into the stocks, and two into the public goal; -- their crimes were very
atrocious, they could not, in conscience, come to hear preached what they could
not believe; -- but they were Lutherans. -- One Englishman, Mr. Hamlin, was
more criminal, yet, he was old, sick and lame, so that he could not go abroad;
but then he was a churchman. Call you this liberty of conscience? -- It Is the
same that was granted to churchmen, when presbyterianism, in days of that
arch-hypocrite Oliver Cromwell, had rule. It Is liberty upon the same footing
that the papist court of inquisition grants to protestants, of punishing the
body for the good of the soul; the same as our progenitors, those famous
patrons of religious liberty, allowed the Quakers, of fines, stripes,
imprisonments, and death; and yet this is boasted of as a merritorious deed,
whilst they proclaim their indulgence, and lenity to all, by words. But to
proceed; in process of time, the Lutherans, Called Lutherans, because they
embrace the principles of Dr. Martin Luther, a German divine, who about the
year 1517, opposed the errors of the Roman church; upon which many of the
nobility, clergy and common people joined with him, effected the reformation of
several whole electorates and kingdoms. -- His opinions are now held by most
Protestant churches, a few only excepted, of the Calvinists. BAYLEY.


together with some of the English there, became acquainted with the doctrines
and worship of the church, and in September 1762, they invited me to visit
them; I did, and preached there, etc. when some of the Dutch and English
declared their conformity to the church, put themselves under my pastoral care,
and I have visited them as often as was consistent with my other engagements,
and have prevailed with sundry other missionaries to do the same; and when no
minister was there, they constantly assembled upon the Sunday, and performed
divine service, according to our book of common prayer, and read good printed
sermons. From this time, that they were regularly embodied in the public and
avowed profession of the church of England, 'twas reasonably presumed, they
would no longer be compelled to attend at the dissenting meeting, to hear what
they did not believe; nor be obliged to pay taxes to support the dissenting
teachers, the which they had hitherto done; -- but what signifies reason,
justice, and conscience, when in competition with passion, will, and interest!
The truth was loud; and clamorous threatenings were thundered out, that if they
would not come to meeting, they should suffer fines and imprisonment; but when
that had no effect, upon better advice, the execution was suspended, and
changed into railing, calumniating, and anathemas, and a more rigorous
collecting of their rates to pay Mr. Hopkins, whom they did not hear; to
support the propagation of what they believed erroneous. The church people
began, and before the rates for another year were due, as I think, they raised
a large and elegant church, and hired a young candidate for the ministry, as a
reader, and steadily attended the worship of the church. Seeing they had
expended so much money, for the church, and in every respect were known
professors thereof, 'twas presumed they would now forego obliging them to pay
to Mr. Hopkins; but like those which the wise man tells us are never satisfied,
they more strenuously insisted upon the rates, and because the money could not
be raised exactly when called for, some had their goods distressed and sold, at
under rates; and ten of the more aged and sober men, were sent to the public
goal, until the rates were paid. Time would fail me to relate the particular
aggrevations which attended these oppressions; these are easily conceived, when
the characters of the oppressors are known. Notwithstanding all these
oppressions, and the violent opposition made, the church people have
unanimously proceeded, and have expended large sums of money, In a piece wrote
at Great-Barrington, and published in the Boston Gazette, September 17, 1764,
it is asserted, that the persons who are at the chief expense in this
undertaking (that is in building the church) declared for the church of England
to escape rates, and save money. It Is evident the author ran foul of truth with
his eyes open, it being said by the dissenters that the churchmen will ruin
their estates in building their church. It Is certain they have expended tenfold
larger sums* than if they had continued nonconformists, and this voluntary. As
to escaping rates, if Mr. H -- s was the author of that piece, he must know, by
a notable instance of craft, that he was mistaken, which instance was, that
when the taxes were gathering of the church people, for Mr. H -- s, he went
privately to some of the Dutch families, and offered to free them from paying
him rates, if they would break off and not join with the church of England, the
which proposal they rejected, and have been forward, upon all occasions, to pay
toward the church. What credit, are honest people then to give to such
nameless stuff, and yet I know some, whether honest, or not, who love to hear
and propagate such malicious tales!
in so far completing their church, that they can conveniently attend the
public worship there. Now whoever will heartily and impartially consider these
facts, and as being done in land of professed freedom, and by a people who can
justly claim for themselves but toleration, will not think any expressions in
the ensuing discourse, sarcastical or severe.

Hoping the reader will not be hypercritical upon a juvenile performance, I
wish him health and happiness, remaining his servant in CHRIST,

THOMAS DAVIES.
NEW-MILFORD, New-Year's-Day, 1765.
The WORSHIP and PRINCIPLES of the CHURCH.
ST. MATTHEW, chap. 21, part of the 13th verse. It is written, my HOUSE shall
be called the HOUSE of PRAYER.
IF it is a maxim of unchangeable truth, that dependant creatures ought to
pray, and offer their praises to the eternal, perfect, and gracious parent of
the universe, who created, preserves, and continually can bless them; it is as
certain, there ought and must be time and place, proper for that purpose. Such
obvious truths, laying level with the lowest rational capacity, are and need
not be directly commanded or revealed; for when the truths, from which they
flow, are made clear and evident, the weakest rational can form the conclusion:
It Is true divine wisdom has given us sufficient information, in the new
testament, that some portion of time should be observed, and devoted for the
purpose of religion; and also, that some places should be set apart for the
same; although neither are particularly and expressly commanded, and why need
it? -- Seeing the hints and information there, with the reason and experience
of mankind, sufficiently show the necessity of both: For the reasons which
prove the use of the one, holds good for the other; for if some part of time
should be set apart for the purposes of religion, the same holds true as to
place: The arguments which show some particular time to be holy, or rather to
have a relative holiness, show the same concerning the other; if the first day
of the week is, in holy writ, called the LORD'S day, a place or house set apart
for the worship of GOD, is there called the LORD'S house; if no unnecessary
business should be performed on the LORD'S day, so none should be in his house;
if the former is devoted to the service of GOD, and the promotion of religion,
so ought equally the latter; if we are more peculiarly obliged to serve GOD,
and learn our duty upon the LORD'S day, we are more peculiarly bound to serve
him, and to learn in his house; the reasons for these particulars are so
exceeding obvious, I shall omit them: And as we are now convened for the public
worship of GOD, the first time, in this house, which you have erected, and is
now opened, and from hence peculiarly to be used, for the glory and the worship
of JEHOVAH, and the instruction and benefit of mankind, my business shall be
briefly to point out to you those particulars which those who attend at this
house are obliged and ought to perform, together with the happy consequences.
The text, (as used by our SAVIOR to the Jews, who had profaned the temple)
characterizes such an house, by the most eminent part of the service performed
therein, viz. prayer -- And JESUS went into the temple of GOD, and cast out all
them that bought and sold in the temple; -- and he said unto them it is written
(in Isaiah Ivi. 7.) my house shall be called the house of prayer; i. e. an
house dedicated to the worship of GOD, of which prayer is the most eminent
part. Seeing prayer is put for, and is the most eminent part of the worship of
GOD in his house, it therefore includes all the lesser or subordinate, parts of
the service to be performed there; so that our duty required in this house of
GOD, is comprehended in and expressed by this general term of prayer; Let it be
observed then, that preaching being subordinate to praying, people in most
congregations are very blameable in neglecting that part of the worship of GOD,
which is of the greatest importance, by either coming very late, or else only
hearing the minister pray.
the several branches whereof are accurately described by St. Paul to Timothy,
1 Epistle ii. 1. -- I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; which
imports both the privilege of such unworthy and inferior beings as we are, to
address that dread being, the majesty of heaven and earth, and our obligation
to perform the same, together with the method how; -- for to supplicate,
imports our privilege and duty of petitioning GOD, through the merits of
CHRIST, to pardon our sins, to turn away and remove our evils, temporal and
spiritual, for and from ourselves and others.

By prayers there, we may understand our asking for blessings, for grace, and
good things from GOD.

By intercessions, our pleading and interceding, more especially in behalf of
our fellow christians, and men every where.

By giving of thanks, is intended the privilege and obligation of returning,
and offering our praises and acknowledgments, for the blessings and unmerited
favors, we, and others, are, and may be, partakers of; all which is a privilege
so great, and a duty so incumbent, and of which the royal psalmist had so high
and adequate conception, that principally, and above all others, this was his
desire, and actual pursuit: Psalm. xxvii. 4. -- One thing have I desired of the
LORD, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD, and to enquire in his
temple. And indeed this is so eminent a privilege, so much conducive to the
honor of GOD, to beget and cherish in our minds worthy apprehensions of him,
and just thoughts of ourselves, tending so much to our present comfort, and
future happiness, and by GOD'S appointment, the requisite condition to obtain
his blessing upon our endeavors, the pardon of our sins, and that eternal life
which is purchased by CHRIST, that we ought to esteem it, as David did, the
earnest desire of our souls, and make it our constant employ, and improve every
favorable opportunity of publicly worshipping that glorious and gracious GOD,
who alone can here bless and reward us. -- That this distinguishable part of
the service of GOD might be performed in a proper and acceptable manner, we
have a most excellent, rational, pious and comprehensive liturgy, compiled by
good and wise men, which approves itself worthy to be used by all sorts and
conditions of men; calculated to raise, and increase, a spirit of true
devotion, and to fix the soul upon its holy employment; to engage the
attention, and animate the whole man; by which the true penitent may confess
his sins, bewail his infirmities, and importune for pardon; the indigent may
sue for grace, protection, and relief; the grateful shout forth his
acknowledgments; in a word, whatever concerns a sinner, or saint, in the great
work of public prayer, here is prescribed, both as to matter and method, --
that which is right, proper, pious and engaging.

The matter is collected from the holy scriptures, or in every instance
agreeable thereunto; no vain disputations; no frivolous controversies, which
speculative or enthusiastic heads have been and daily are forming, to the decay
and discredit of true religion and devotion; no newfangled notions, or bold
and uncommon, trifling and indecent expressions; which serve, where used, to
perplex and bewilder the understanding, to tickle and please the fancy, or to
turn the soul from the important and solemn work it should be about. I confess
ours is a form, I hope no christian will be offended at that, when he
considers, that if he ever prays in the congregation, he must pray by a form,
although his priest may pray extemporary; that he was baptized by a form,
received the Lords supper by a form, returns thanks by a form, is blessed by a
form, and that our SAVIOR to his disciples, GOD to the Jews, and John to his
disciples, prescribed a form.
but it is a form of such sound words, that all serious christians may use, and
which none can condemn, unless clouded by ignorance, distracted by enthusiasim,
or feared by irreligion and impiety. -- For all is addressed to the one only,
true, faithful, wise, good, just, merciful, almighty and eternal GOD, through
the merits and mediation of one only savior our Lord JESUS CHRIST, whatsoever
as a community is needful, both for body and soul, for time and eternity; for
our friends and benefactors, and even for our enemies and persecutors; and
lastly, for all mankind in their several stations, relations and conditions:
Every vice or lust which reigns in us, and we would willingly forsake and
subdue; every sin and folly we desire to have forgiven; every grace and virtue
that we need and would have given; every favor and blessing we would return
thanks for, we here may find and use the matter; which is plain, proper, and
engaging, and which, I doubt not, will appear so to every one, who will
impartially read, and understand, the book of common prayer.

As to manner or method, it begins with some selected texts of scripture read
by the minister, together with a solemn exhortation to all present; which puts
them in mind of what those texts declare, and also of all the succeeding parts
of duty which they meet to perform; calling upon them, with one heart and
voice, to the first part of prayer, which immediately ensues; by which means
all have time, and means, to compose their minds, and to consider where and
what we are, and the business we are going about, which is to kneel down, and
unitedly to confess our sins, and to pray for the pardon of them. The minister
then, as the ambassador of GOD, through CHRIST, declares the blessings of the
gospel, of pardon and remission, to all true believers and penitents: To which
is added the LORD'S prayer, by all present, with petitions, that GOD would open
our lips, and prepare our hearts to declare his praise; the which we do
standing, This was a gesture ever used of old by good men, in reading hymns of
praise, viz. Psalm. xviii. 4. -- 2 Chronicles. xxiii. 30. Nehemiah ix. 5.
by repeating a large portion of the psalms, whereby as they help to express
our gratitude, so they engage our attention, and instruct our minds into the
knowledge of GOD'S will; after which a chapter out of the old testament is read
by the minister standing, and the people sitting, to which is added, a hymn to
praise GOD for teaching us his will: We then hear another chapter out of the
new, which sets forth unto us something relative to the great work of our
redemption by JESUS CHRIST; after that immediately ensues a psalm of
thankfulness; to evidence the truth of these things we have heard, we are then
to repeat, with one heart and voice, the summary of the christian religion
called the apostles creed; we are then directed to pray to, and interceed with
our all-gracious GOD and heavenly father, for his grace, for peace, for
protection, for ourselves, for our king, and his family, for our church, and
its rulers, for all sorts and conditions of men, and as occasion requires, for
all other things needful for ourselves and others; and lastly, to return our
unfeigned thanks for our creation, preservation, and redemption by our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, and for all GOD'S favors to us and all men. One thing is
observable through the whole; every prayer, and almost every general petition,
begins with some one of the divine attributes, and concludes, through the
merits of CHRIST. Your patience will not permit my more critical or lengthier
observations, Those who would see the beauty and excellency of the common
prayer book, may consult Mr. Wheatly, Bishop Beveridge, Dr. Faulkner, and
others.
but shall conclude this part of my discourse in the words of that pious and
great divine bishop Tillotson: -- "I have been (says he) according to my
opportunities, not a negligent observer of the genius and humor of the several
sects and professions of religion: And upon the whole matter I do in my
conscience believe the Church of England to be the best constituted church this
day in the world; and that, as to the ^^^in, the doctrine and government, and
worship of it, are excellently framed to make men soberly religious: Securing
men on the one hand, from the wild freaks of enthusiasm; and on the other, from
the gross follies of superstition." Sermon on 1 Cor. iii. 15.


The great design of erecting this house, is to meet and join in the use of
public prayer; but as the knowledge of religion is requisite, in order for men's
becoming religious, and St. Paul shows we come not to this knowledge without
teaching, ( Romans x. 14) and as all men have not time nor capacity to instruct
themselves, therefore, a further design, is, that the true principles and
duties of our holy religion might be here taught and learned, the sum of which
religion is contained in these two terms, faith and repentance. -- Under the
head of faith will be taught, the existence and attributes of one eternal,
good, wise, great and self-existing GOD, who created, preserves, and governs
the universe, and all creatures; that he is to be adored, loved, and obeyed;
that when man had sinned, and had exposed himself to justice and punishment,
incapable of relieving himself, that GOD so loved the world, that he sent his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life; ( John iii. 16) -- that he assumed human nature, taught, both
by precept and example, mankind, all holy living; died a sacrafice for the sins
of the world, and thereby to make peace for us: And, having made peace through
the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him I
say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven; ( Col. i. 20) and
sealed and ratified a covenant of grace, whereby sinners may obtain pardon,
grace, and everlasting salvation. These particulars will be taught as matters
of faith; as necessary for every one firmly to believe, together with many
other consequential principles: Abstruse and needless speculations, that tend
only to confuse the ignorant, distract the weak, and advantage none, will be
omitted and discarded, as being contrary to the genius of christianity, and the
design and business of its ministers. Under the head of repentance, will, we
reasonably expect, be taught, what the grace of GOD, which has appeared
bringing salvation, ( i. e.) the offers and terms of salvation to all men,
teaches, viz. that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; ( Tit. ii. 12) i. e. to
quit and turn from all vice and immorality; all profaneness and debauchery; all
injustice, malice, superstition, and idolatry; to pray to GOD, for his pardon,
and for his grace* to do so no more; but heartily and faithfully to do what he
has required; to love, fear, and serve GOD, with all our souls, and power; to
cordially embrace, and steadfastly believe his revealed will; to govern our
passions, and live in the regular exercise of our reason; to love, and do good
to our fellow-men every where: Under each of these particulars are comprehended
many other duties, which the preacher will not fail of inculcating, in plain,
sober, and engaging words and manners. In a word, we are to expect the plain
principles of the gospel, and not the whims and notions of men; the religion
and duties which CHRIST our Savior taught, which is to promote true holiness,
and genuine godliness and honesty, and not misterious and useless speculations,
impracticable and impossible duties; which make men either proud or desperate,
where and when preached and believed.

Having thus briefly represented both the worship and principles of the church,
I shall now as briefly mention the advantages that you may reasonably expect,
in consequence of building this house, and having these particulars performed
therein. All reasonable actions are done to gain some design and end; and it
may justly be supposed, that you expected the advantages arising, would be
sufficient to recompense you for the cost and trouble you have and will be at;
that you would not contentedly suffer so many inconveniences, persecutions,
and more than hostile barbarities, and take so much pains, and expend so much
of your interest, if you had not the prospect of reaping some advantage. The
motive is good; this has ever been presented by the wise and good parent of
nature, to excite and animate mankind to be religious. The first advantage you
may expect is the worshipping GOD almighty, agreeable to your faith, and
according to his revealed will. Note, Mr. Calvin, and his scholars, make a wide
difference in GOD'S revealed and secret will: by the one, all have the offers
of life and salvation; by the other, only a few, and the rest are reprobated by
the same will. Vid. Call. inst. lib. 3. c. 24. Gill, Cole, and others.
This is most certainly a very great benefit, unto all such as are, by the
grace of GOD, willing and engaged to join heartily therein. You come here not
only to hear another pray, but to attend and join, both with heart and voice,
to pray to and praise your GOD. In other assemblies, you can but hear another
pray his own prayer, if that may be called his own which he knows not before he
prays, and remembers not afterward; whereas we ought to pray as well as sing
praises with the spirit and with the understanding also, which may be performed
here, but as things at present are, cannot be done in the other assemblies in
this land.

Secondly. -- You always hear the revealed will of GOD read, a large portion
being always appointed, so that you will always when you meet here, certainly
hear your GOD speaking and teaching you what to believe and do for salvation.
In other congregations, the scriptures are wholly laid aside for the preacher
to produce something more pleasing and excellent; just as though a glowworm
would yield a more pleasing and advantageous light than the meridian sun.

Thirdly. -- We commemorate the remarkable events of our savior CHRIST,
particularly his miraculous birth, as upon this ever joyful and memorable day,
and for that purpose we always partake of that holy and valuable institution,
by which we unworthy creatures are allowed spiritually to eat the flesh and
drink the blood of our savior JESUS CHRIST, and thereby to be evidences of,
and to show forth his death to future ages: And you, my brethren, who design
this day to come to his holy banquet, should duly remember yourselves, and so
to have examined your hearts and repented of your sins, as preparedly to be
partakers thereof, that so you may receive spiritual blessings from the sacred
appointer and author.

Fourthly. -- Another advantage to be expected, is, that the preacher will
entertain and instruct your minds, not with unreasonable mysteries, mere
speculative notions, or impracticable duties, which serve only to distract and
bewilder men's understanding; but that from the existence and perfections of one
GOD; from the wonderful love and work of one only Savior; from the agency of
one only spirit, he will proceed to explain and enforce the plain duties of a
holy life; furnishing your minds with proper arguments, and gospel motives, to
become truly holy, in heart and conversation.

Fifthly. -- Another advantage, and that not inconsiderable, will be, that your
minister will be invested with a proper commission, and with competent
authority from CHRIST, the head of the church, to execute the work of a
minister among you.

This is an advantage which the dissenters in this land can justly lay no claim
to, unless every layman has authority to ordain; which appears so glaringly
absurd, that many curious distinctions are trumped upon the ignorant, and when
these fail, it is denied what our Savior expressly declared (when he
commissioned his apostles) of lo I am with you always even unto the end of the
world. Whoever heartily considers the fate of the presumptuous invaders of this
office, under the old, and the appointment by CHRIST and his apostles, under
the new testament, and that for fifteen hundred years after, none but such as
were ordained in this line of succession, were allowed in the christian church,
as the history of all ages of the church testify, will have reason to esteem it
a privilege to be under a ministry which is justly unexceptionable in this
particular.

And lastly, to mention but this one, which crowns all the other advantages,
and for to attain this, the others are only designed as helps and means; in the
proper use of them, through the goodness and mercy of GOD, by the merits and
mediation of JESUS our common Lord and Savior, you may obtain the pardon of
your sins, the assistance and blessings of heaven, peace, unanimity, and
contentment in this present world; and in the future, when this mortal shall
put on immortality, when contention and malediction shall be confined to its
proper abode, may come the possession of that everlasting salvation, that
incorruptible crown of glory, that heavenly residence, of life, light, and joy,
which is reserved in heaven for all true and obedient christians. This, my
brethren, is a prize! worth all your striving; a reward, beyond all your doings
for the service of GOD, and promotion of religion; an advantage, that will
more, infinitely more, than recompense you, for all the scoffs, ridicule,
hatred, opposition, and oppression, cast at, and laid upon you by others; for
all the fatigue, anxiety and cost, you have voluntarily undergone and expended;
or let you be ever so liberal for the future, in completing this edifice, or
engaged in the services thereof, and of religion in general, this will
abundantly recompense you for all: This great advantage, reward, and
recompense, you must ever esteem as such; never to flatter or deceive
yourselves, as to imagine, upon the one hand, you have earned, and therefore
may demand it as wages due to you; nor, upon the other, that you ever shall
possess it, notwithstanding what you have hitherto done, unless now, and for
the future of your lives, you live agreeable to the conditions thereof; the
which is evident upon both sides, from Heb. v. 9, speaking of the sufferings of
CHRIST, verse 4, the apostle subjoins, and being made perfect, he became the
author of eternal salvation, unto all them that obey him. Here see CHRIST, and
not man, is the author and bestower of this salvation; yet you also see,
although CHRIST is both author and giver, he will bestow it upon none but such
as will obey him; so that we can have no just expectation of this, the greatest
of all other advantages, unless we faithfully and truly obey him. My time only
permits me to mention that obedience which we must perform in this house, in
order to reap the advantages proposed, which is briefly thus:

First. -- Be always careful to be here before the worship begins; and when you
enter this house, remember you enter the house of GOD; therefore drop all
ceremony to your fellow-men, all the care and concerns of your worldly business
and employment; all improper thoughts and reflections, and have Jacob's
reflection upon your minds, -- "How dreadful is this place! This is none other
but the house of GOD! This is the gate of heaven!" ( Genesis xxviii. 17) let
therefore a more solemn awe and reverence be paid here. "Keep thy foot when
thou go to the house of GOD, and be more ready to hear than to give the
sacrifice of fools: -- Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be
hasty to utter any thing before GOD," Eccles. v. 1, 2.

Seccondly. -- When the worship begins, join devoutly and engagedly therein;
let your hearts be sincerely animated, your affections discreetly warmed, and
your attention steadfastly fixed; for it is a most heinous and aggravated
provocation, to draw near GOD, with our mouths, and with our lips to honor
him, but to have removed our hearts far from him. As we are compounded of soul
and body, and as both are redeemed, we should serve and honor GOD with both;
thus St. Paul infers, 1 Cor. vi. 20, "for ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify GOD in your body, and in your spirit which are GOD'S." -- Neither
should be neglected, in the worship of GOD; but it is the service and worship
of our souls, that most excellent part of us, that is principally regarded;
that of the body is insignificant and criminal, unless conducive to that of the
soul.

Thirdly. -- When you pray for the pardon of your sins, be resolved to forsake
them; when for grace and GOD'S holy spirit, be determined and engaged to
receive, embrace, and comply therewith. When you return thanks, let a sense of
GOD'S favors and blessings be deeply imprinted in your souls, and with your
voices; let your souls, and all that is within, join in praying to and praising
GOD'S holy name.

Fourthly. -- When the word of GOD is read or expounded by the minister, be all
silence and attention to hear and learn GOD'S holy will, and your duty, taking
up a firm resolution to perform whatsoever you understand to be his will and
your duty. -- The gospel is, in St. Paul's language, the power of GOD unto
salvation, unto every one that believes; ( Romans i. 16) -- and in St. Peter's,
the incorruptible seed by which we are born again, 1. Pet. i. 23. -- From
whence you are therefore to learn what is GOD'S will, what he has and will do
for your good and salvation, and what you have to do to comply with, and come
to the possession of the same.

Fifthly. -- As the posture of our bodies, may, in the worship of GOD, be
subservient to the ends and purposes of spiritual services, some directions
might be necessary, had not those wise and good men who compiled our service
book, already to your hands laid down all those that are necessary and proper;
a little attention thereto, and use thereof, will lead your minds to discern
the propriety and expediency of them, in the worship of GOD in this house.

Lastly -- We ought to conclude the public services of religion, by heartily
joining in prayer for a blessing from GOD upon what we have heard, and what we
have performed; for although Paul may plant, and Apollos water, it is GOD that
gives the increase. -- And since the minister, who is the servant and
ambassador of CHRIST, only has authority to pronounce the blessing of GOD, you
should reverently wait, and with attention receive, joining with one heart and
one voice, in that summary conclusion, AMEN, i. e. that it might be so, that
GOD would bless you indeed.

If you, my brethren, would conduct yourselves after this manner, in the
service of GOD, and your redeemer JESUS CHRIST, in this house of CHRIST'S,
which you have with much labor and expense erected for these purposes, you
will not ever find either your cost or labor in building, nor your attention,
care, and diligence in performing these, and the other duties of our holy
religion, unrewarded; but that it will be found, from the great goodness of our
heavenly father and creator, through the merits and intercession of JESUS
CHRIST our redeemer, infinitely rewarded -- Unto whom, with the holy spirit,
let us now, and ever in this house, as it is in heaven ascribe all honor and
praise. AMEN.

FINIS.

