THE LATE REGULATIONS RESPECTING THE BRITISH COLONIES ON THE CONTINENT OF
AMERICA CONSIDERED, In a Letter from a Gentleman in PHILADELPHIA to his Friend
in LONDON.

Prosunt minus recte excogitata; cum alios incitent saltem ad veritatis
investigationem. FULB. A BARTOL. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM
BRADFORD, at the Corner of Market and Front-Streets. M.DCC.LXV.

THE LATE REGULATIONS RESPECTING THE BRITISH COLONIES CONSIDERED.
SIR,
WHEN I last wrote to you and said, "that the late measures respecting America,
would not only be extremely injurious to the Colonies, but also to
Great Britain," I little thought I was entering into an engagement, which would
oblige me to exceed the usual limits of a letter: but since you desire to have
at large the reasons in support of this opinion, and I always think it my duty
to comply with your requests, I will endeavor in the clearest manner I can, to
lay my sentiments before you.

THE American continental colonies are inhabited by persons of small fortunes,
who are so closely employed in subduing a wild country, for their subsistence,
and who would labor under such difficulties in contending with old and
populous countries, which must exceed them in workmanship and cheapness, that
they have not time nor any temptation to apply themselves to manufactures.

HENCE arises the It has been said in the House of Commons, when complaints
have been made of the decay of trade to any part of Europe, "That such things
were not worth regard, as Great Britain was possessed of colonies that could
consume more of her manufactures than she was able to supply them with."

"As the case now stands, we shall show that the plantations are a spring of
wealth to this nation, that they work for us, that their treasure centers all
here, and that the laws have tied them falt enough to us; so that it must be
through our own fault and mismanagement, if they become independent of England."

DAVENANT on the Plantation trade. "It is better that the islands should be
supplied from the Northern Colonies than from England, for this reason; the
provisions we might send to Barbados, Jamaica, etc. would be unimproved product
of the earth, as grain of all kinds, or such product where there is little got
by the improvement, as malt, salt, beef and pork; indeed, the exportation of
salt fish thither would be more advantageous, but the goods which we send to
the Northern Colonies, are such, whose improvement may be justly said one with
another to be near four-fifths of the value of the whole commodity, as apparel,
houshold-furniture, and many other things."

Idem. " New England is the most prejudicial plantation to the kingdom of
England; and yet, to do right to that most industrious English colony, I must
confess, that though we lose by their unlimited trade with other foreign
plantations, yet we are very great gainers by their direct trade to and from
Old England. Our yearly exportations of English manufactures, malt and other
goods, from hence thither, amounting, in my opinion, to ten times the value of
what is imported from thence; which calculation I do not make at random, but
upon mature consideration, and, peradventure, upon as much experience in this
very trade, as any other person will pretend to; and therefore, whenever
reformation of our correspondency in trade with that people shall be thought
on, it will, in my poor judgment, require GREAT TENDERNESS, and VERY SERIOUS
CIRCUMSPECTION."

Sir JOSIAH CHILD a discourse on trade. "Our plantations spend mostly our
English manufactures, and those of all sorts almost imaginable, in egregious
quantities, and employ near two-thirds of all our English shipping; so that we
have more people in England, by reason of our plantations in America."

Idem. Sir JOSIAH CHILD says, in another part of his work, "That not more than
fifty families are maintained in England by the refining of sugar." From
whence, and from what Davenant says, it is plain, that the advantages here said
to be derived from the plantations by England, must be meant chiefly of the
continental colonies. See notes to pages 12 and 13.

"I shall sum up my whole remarks on our American colonies, with this
observation, that as they are a certain annual revenue of several millions
sterling to their Mother Country, they ought carefully to be protected, duly
encouraged, and every opportunity that presents, improved for their increment
and advantage, as every one they can possibly reap, must at last return to us
with interest."

BEAWES'S Lex merc. red. "We may safely advance, that our trade and navigation
are gently increased by our colonies, and that they really are a source of
treasure and naval power to this kingdom, since they work for us, and their
treasure centers here. Before their settlement, our manufactures were few, and
those but indifferent; the number of English merchants very small, and the
whole shipping of the nation much inferior to what now belongs to the Northern
Colonies only. These are certain facts. But since their establishment, our
condition has altered for the better, almost to a degree beyond credibility. --
Our MANUFACTURES are prodigiously increased, chiefly by the demand for them in
the plantations, where they AT LEAST TAKE OFF ONE HALF, and supply us with many
valuable commodities for exportation, which is as great an emolument to the
Mother Kingdom, as to the plantations themselves."

POSTLETHWAYT'S univ. dict. of trade and commerce.
importance of the colonies to Great Britain. Her prosperity depends on her
commerce; her commerce on her manufactures; her manufactures on the markets for
them; and the most constant and advantageous markets are afforded by the
colonies, as in all others the "Most of the nations of Europe have interfered
with us, more or less, in diverse of our staple manufactures, within half a
century, not only in our woollen, but in our lead and tin manufactures, as well
as our fisheries." POSTLETHWAYT, ibid.
rest of Europe interferes with her, and various accidents may interrupt them.
The benefit from hence is at present immense; but in future times when America
shall be more fully peopled, must exceed with prudent management the warmest
wishes of a British Patriot.

Our chief productions are provisions, naval stores, furs, iron and lumber.
Some few colonies yield tobacco and indigo. Many of these commodities are
necessary to Great Britain; but all that she requires are vastly insufficient
to pay for her manufactures which we want. The productions of some of the
Southern Colonies may perhaps be equal to their demands, but the case is widely
different with the Northern; for in these, the importations from Great Britain
are computed to be generally more than double the value of their immediate
exportations to that kingdom.

THE only expedient left us for making our remittances, is to carry on some
other trade, whereby we can obtain silver and gold, which our own country does
not afford. Hence it is evident, that if our taking off and paying for her
manufactures, is beneficial to Great Britain, the channels by which we acquire
money for that purpose, ought to be industriously kept open and uninterrupted.

OUR trade with Spain, Portugal and the foreign plantations in the West Indies
have chiefly answered this end, though with much difficulty, the mother country
having long since drawn the As far as regulations are requisite to confine the
commerce of the colonies to British subjects and to British ships; to give
Great Britain the preference in being supplied with naval stores, so essential
to her strength at sea; with commodities necessary for carrying on her woollen
manufactures, or such articles as can bear high duties upon them, and thereby
make a considerable addition to the revenue; or as far as they are requisite to
prevent the colonies from being supplied with any thing in the place of British
manufactures, they may be reasonable. These regulations, it is apprehended,
establish the basis of the British power; and form such a firm connection
between the Mother Country and her Colonies, as will produce all the advantages
she ought to wish for, or that they can afford her. Any further attempt to
shackle some of the colonies in favor of others, or to advance the revenue in
America by restraining its trade, is but regulating by a severe exercise of
power, what wants no regulation, and losing by too much haste to gain. ( See
Notes to page15) Unnecessary and irritating restrictions, will at last cast
contempt and hatred on those substantial ones, that length of time, and the
natural reverence of Colonies for their Mother Country, would have consecrated;
for discontented minds are not apt to distinguish. "Narrow-limited notions in
trade and planting, are only advanced by, and can only be of use to particular
persons, but are always injurious to the public interests, in preventing the
full employment of our own people, and giving our rivals and competitors in
trade, the opportunity of employing greater numbers of theirs, producing
greater quantities of merchandises, and underselling us at foreign markets."

POSTLETHWAYT's univ. dict. of trade and commerce.
commercial cords with which the colonies are bound, extremely tight upon them.
Every thing produced here, that Great Britain chooses to take to herself, must
be carried to that kingdom Montesquieu, speaking of the contract made by Poland
for selling all her corn to Dantzick ONLY; and another of the like nature
between some Indian princes and the Dutch for spices, says; "These agreements
are proper for a poor nation, whose inhabitants are satisfied to forego the
hopes of enriching themselves, provided they can be secure of a certain
subsistence; or for nations, whose SLAVERY consists either in renouncing the
use of those things which nature has given them; or in being OBLIGED TO SUBMIT
TO A DISADVANTAGEOUS COMMERCE."
only -- Every thing we choose to import from Europe, must be shipped in Except
Salt from any part of Europe for the fisheries of Newfoundland, New England,
New York and Pennsylvania; and a few things from Ireland.
Great Britain -- Heavy duties have been laid on our importations from the
foreign plantations.

HOWEVER under all these restraints and some others that have been imposed on
us, we have not till lately been unhappy. Our spirits were not depressed. We
apprehended no design formed against our liberty. We for a long time enjoyed
peace, and were quite free from any heavy debt, either internal or external. We
had a paper currency which served as a medium of domestic commerce, and
permitted us to employ all the gold and silver we could acquire, in trade
abroad. We had a multitude of markets for our provisions, lumber and iron.
These allowed liberties, with some others we assumed, enabled us to collect
considerable sums of money for the joint benefit of ourselves and our mother
country.

BUT the modern regulations are in every circumstance afflicting. The
remittances we have been able to make to Great Britain, with all the license
hitherto granted or taken, and all the money brought among us in the course of
the late war, have not been sufficient to pay her what we owe; but there still
remains due, according to a late calculation made by the English merchants, the
sum of four millions sterling. Besides this, we are and have been for many
years heavily taxed, for the payment of the debts contracted by our efforts
against the common enemy. These seem to be difficulties severe enough for young
colonies to contend with. The last While the quantity of paper currency is
proportioned to the uses for it, it must be beneficial; and therefore to sink
it below that quantity, must be prejudicial.
sinks our paper currency very fast. The former sweeps off our silver and gold
in a torrent to Great Britain, and leaves us continually toiling to supply from
a number of distant springs the continually wasting stream.

THUS drained, we are prohibited by new and stricter restraints being laid on
our trade, from procuring these coins as we used to do; and from instituting
among ourselves bills of credit in the place of such portions of them as are
required in our internal traffic; and in this exhausted condition, our
languishing country is to strive to take up and to totter under the additional
burden of the STAMP ACT.

IN defense of the prohibition to institute bills of credit, it may be said,
"that some few colonies, by injudicious emissions of paper currency, did great
injury to individuals." It is true: But it is as true, that others No attempt
was ever made in this province and some others, to pay English debts any
otherwise than according to the rate of exchange; and no complaint was ever
made of injustice from the depreciation of the currency.
always supported the credit of their bills in such a manner, that their
emissions were of vast benefit both to the provinces and to Great Britain. The
inconveniences under which the colonies labored before these emissions are
well remembered, and were produced by the same cause that distresses us at this
time; that is, by Great-Britain's taking off all our gold and silver. There was
then so little money among several of them, that a stop was put in a manner to
buying and selling, and even shopkeepers were obliged to barter their goods
for food. The effect produced by these emissions was surprising -- Trade
revived; and the remarkable and immediate Value of the exports from England to
Pennsylvania at different periods.

In 1723 they were L 15 992 19 4 1730 48 592 7 5 1737 56 690 6 7 1742 75 295 3 4

In the year 1723 the first bills of credit were emitted in Pennsylvania, to
the value of L 45000. In 1728, part of the first emission being then sunk, L
30000 more were emitted. It appears from the account above, that in seven years
from 1723 to 1730, the exports increased L 32 599 8 1 sterling. -- In 1738,
great part of the preceding emissions being then sunk, there was an emission
and re-emission amounting in the whole to L 80000. In five years afterward it
appears by the account above, the exports increased near L 20000 sterling.

In later times when larger emissions have been made, the exports have
proportionably increased. In 1753 L 55000 were emitted; and in 1756 L 30000 --
In 1757, the exports amounted to L 268 426 6 6 -- Afterward our emissions were
still greater, and in one year of the war, the exports rose to more than L
700,000 sterling.

It is not pretended, that the increase of our importations is solely owing to
the emissions of paper money; but it is thought to be a very great cause of
that increase. It is undoubtedly owing in part to the increase of people by
propagation, and the influx of foreigners. But such great and sudden increases
as have been mentioned in the short space of seven or five years, from 1723 to
1730, and from 1737 to 1742, could not in any great degree proceed from the
increase by propagation; and at that time I think foreigners did not flow in
upon us in such numbers as they since have done. In the war large sums were
brought among us for the maintenance of the fleets and armies, it is true: but
that our currency was then of great utility is evident, because when the
greatest quantity of it was passing, bills of exchange were lower than they
were for a long time before, or have been since.

It may be objected, that the complaint of the scarcity of money in America,
particularly in this province, cannot be well founded, as we have lately had
such large emissions. I am very sensible how liable persons are to errors in
questions of this nature, and therefore I think myself obliged to speak with
diffidence on the subject. Perhaps the following observations may in some
measure answer the objection. 1st. About one half of the emissions is sunk 2dly
A very great part of the bills now circulating, are passing in the neighboring
provinces. 3dly. Our gold and silver are sent to Great Britain, so that but
small quantities thereof are now current among us -- and therefore we must
almost entirely rely on our paper for the medium of domestic commerce. Lastly,
It does not seem probable, that we should have heard such great complaints of
the scarcity of money, if the extreme restrictions of our commerce, had not so
generally prevented our usual methods of acquiring it.


increase of our importations showed how advantageous they were to
Great Britain. If any inconveniences were feared from this kind of currency,
means might have been found to prevent them, without utterly abolishing it: but
now, the apprehension of mischiefs that might have been more easily obviated,
has deprived us of real benefits.

PERHAPS no mode could be devised more advantageous to the public, or to
individuals, than our method of emitting bills in this province for our own
use. They are lent out upon good security, chiefly real, at the interest of
five per cent. The borrowers are allowed a long term for payment, and the sums
borrowed being divided into equal portions, they are obliged to pay one of
these with the interest of the whole, every year during the term. This renders
the payments very easy; and as no person is permitted to borrow a large sum, a
great number are accommodated. The consequences of such regulations are
obvious. These bills represent money in the same manner that money represents
other things. As long therefore as the quantity is proportioned to the uses,
these emissions have the same effects, that the gradual introduction of
additional sums of money would have. People of very small fortunes are enabled
to purchase and cultivate land, which is of so much consequence in settling new
countries, or to carry on some business, that without such assistance they
would be incapable of managing: For no private person would lend money on such
favorable terms. From the borrowers the currency passes into other hands,
increases consumption, raises the prices of commodities, quickens circulation,
and after communicating a vigor to all kinds of industry, returns in its
course into the possession of the borrowers, to repay them for that labor
which it may properly be said to have produced. They deliver it, according to
the original contracts, into the treasury, where the interest raises a fund
without the imposition of taxes, for the public use.

WHILE emissions are thus conducted with prudence, they may be compared to
springs, whose water an industrious and knowing farmer spreads in many
meandering rivulets through his gardens and meadows, and after it has refreshed
all the vegetable tribes it meets with, and has set them a growing, leads it
into a recevoir, where it answers some new purpose.

IF it could be possible to establish a currency throughout the colonies, on
some foundation of this kind, perhaps greater benefits might be derived from
it, than would be generally believed without the trial.

WITH respect to the rstrictions laid on our trade to foreign plantations, it
has been alleged, as a reason for them, "that our islands ought to be
encouraged." They ought to be: But should the interest of one colony be
prefered to that of another? Should the welfare of millions be sacrificed to
the magnificence of a few? If the exorbitant profits of one colony must arise
from the depression of another, should not such injustice be redressed?

THERE is a vast difference to be made in calculating the gains of any
particular branch of business to the public, and to individuals. The advantages
to the last may be small, and yet great to the first, or the reverse. The
statutes made to restrain the trade of the continent in "The agents for
New York, in their contest with the sugar colonies, affirmed, That their
winters being severe, obliged them to take off more of the woollen manufactures
of this kingdom ( for which they remitted gold and silver) than all the islands
(Jamaica excepted) put together; and which I believe has remained
uncontradicted."

BEAWES's Lex merc. red. If one province THEN exceeded all our West Indies,
except Jamaica, in this particular, what proportion would that single island
bear NOW to all the rest of the continental colonies?

The following account of the exports from ENGLAND to the Northern Colonies,
and to the West India Islands, will show they were nearly equal some time ago;
that those to the Northern Colonies now vastly exceed, and are prodigiously
increasing, while those to the Islands have continued nearly the same.

Northern Colonies West India Islands. 1744 L 640 114 12 4 L 796 112 17 9 1745
534 316 2 5 503 669 19 9 1746 754 945 4 3 472 994 19 7 1747 726 648 5 5 856 463
18 6 1748 830 243 16 9 734 095 15 3 Total L 3,486 268 1 2 Total L 3,363 337 20
10 Difference 122 930 10 4 L 3,486 268 1 2

From 1754 to 1758, inclusive.
Northern Colonies West India Islands. 1754 L 1,246 615 1 11 L 685 675 3 0 1755
1,117 848 6 10 694,667 13 3 1756 1,428 720 18 10 733,458 16 3 1757 1,727 924 2
10 776,488 0 6 1758 1,832 948 13 10 877 571 19 11 Total L 7,414 057 4 3 Total L
3,767 841 12 11 Difference 3,646 215 11 4 L 7,414 057 4 3

Total for the Northern Colonies, in the first Term L 3,486,268 1 2 Ditto, in
the second Term 7 414,057 4 3 Increase, L 3,927,789 3 1 Total for the
West India Islands, in the first Term L 3,363,337 10 10 Ditto, in the second
Term 3,767,^41 12 11 Increase, only L 0,404,504 2 1

The difference between the employment afforded to the manufacturers of
England, by the Northern Colonies and by the West India Islands, is still
greater than it may appear to be from the first view of the preceding account:
For a much greater quantity of East India goods is exported to the last than to
the first; and the English manufacturers consumed by them generally derive
their value from the richness of the materials, many of which are brought from
foreign countries, but those we consume, chiefly derive their value from the
work bestowed upon them. (Vide note to pages 4 and 5.)


favor of the islands, seem to tend rather toward promoting Vide Note to page
6.
partial than general, interests; and it appears to me no patadox to say, that
the public would be as great a gainer, if estates there were so "A great
advantage which the French have over the English in their sugar colonies, is
their Agrarian law, whereby monopolists are prevented from engrossing too much
land; so that the number of whites is greatly increased, the land improved,
more commodities raised, the planters obliged to a more frugal way of living,
and all things rendered cheaper. By these means Martinico can muster 16,000
fighting men; but Jamaica, which is near three times as large, only 4000."

TUCKER on trade.
moderate, that not a tenth part of the West India gentlemen who now sit in the
House of Commons, could obtain that frequently expensive honor.

IT is allowed by those well acquainted with the islands, that they cannot
supply Great Britain and these colonies with sugar and other articles, and that
they can by no means consume the productions of these colonies; yet in It is
recited in the 6th of Geo. 2d. chapter 13. now made perpetual, "that the Sugar
colonies could not carry on their trade ON AN EQUAL FOOTING with the foreign
Sugar Colonies, without some advantage and relief given to them by
Great Britain." That advantage GIVEN by Great Britain -- was to compel the
continental Colonies to take their productions at any price they please to ask
-- In short, to grant them a MONOPOLY for Sugars. This was taking from one
indeed to give to another; but goes not to the root of the evil; as the next
preceding note evidently shows. For if Great Britain should sacrifice her own
interests and those of her continental colonies still more, if it be possible,
to the interest of these islanders, they never will "carry on their trade ON AN
EQUAL FOOTING with the foreign sugar colonies," until there is the same
moderation in their estates, and the same frugality in their living. By a very
singular disposition of affairs, the colonies of an absolute monarchy are
settled on a republican principle; while those of a kingdom in many respects
resembling a commonwealth, are cantoned out among a few lords, vested with
despotic power over myriads of vassals, and supported in the pomp of Bassa's by
their slavery.
favor to them, we are almost entirely prevented from sending these
productions to any other markets. Hence it follows, that we are frequently
obliged to sell our commodities to them at so low a price, as not to pay the
first cost and freight; while we, being in a manner prohibited from getting the
West India productions, for which we have occasion, any where else but from
them, must pay extravagantly for them.

NOR is this management attended, as it is presumed, with any benefit to the
Mother Country, but with a disadvantage; either where the productions of the
foreign plantations are consumed among us, or re-exported to Europe. By the
compulsion on us to take from our islands, the price of their productions is
raised on the people of Great Britain. The Revenue would be increased by this
restriction being taken off, as we should willingly pay a moderate duty upon
importations from the French and Spaniards, without attempting to run them;
while a very considerable duty would be paid on the The restriction on the
trade of the colonies to foreign plantations for Molasses, is particularly
grievous and impolitic, as the Molasses brought from thence was distilied for
the fisheries, the Indian and Guinea trades, the profit of which centered in
Great Britain. It is said, our vessels now buy spiritous liquors on the coast
of Guinea from the Dutch.
sugars of our islands, which, instead of coming to us, would then go to
Great Britain. Besides, whatever extraordinary price we pay for the productions
of our own islands, must lessen our demand for British manufactures; since it
is an This cannot be disputed by any one who is acquainted with America. The
increase of a man's wealth there shows itself in a greater consumption of
British manufactures of all kinds. -- This reasoning in favor of the
continental colonies trade with foreign plantations is confirmed by what Sir
Josiah Child mentions of New England -- He says, -- " England, loses by the
unlimited trade of this colony to other foreign plantations, but gains by her
direct trade to Old England, from whence she exports manufactures to ten times
the value of her imports." (See the note to page 4.) What was it then that
enabled New England to pay ten times the value of her imports to England, but
the profits of her trade to foreign plantations? This appears to be a direct
authority in support of the arguments hereafter used. It seems therefore that
Great Britain of late, through too great eagerness to gather golden fruits, has
shaken the tree before they were full grown. With a little patience they would
ripen, and then of themselves drop into her lap.

"The inhabitants of our colonies, by carrying on a trade with their foreign
neighbors, do not only occasion a greater quantity of the goods and
merchandises of Europe being sent from hence to them, and a greater quantity of
the product of America to be sent from them hither, which would otherwise be
carried from, and brought to Europe by foreigners, but an increase of the
seamen and navigation in those parts, which is of great strength and security,
as well as of great advantage to our plantations in general. And though some of
our colonies are not only for preventing the importations of all goods of the
same species they produce, but suffer particular planters to keep great runs of
land in their possession uncultivated, with design to prevent new settlements,
whereby they imagine the prices of their commodities may be affected, yet if it
be (...), that the Markets of Great Britain depend on the markets of ALL Europe
in general, and that the European markets in general depend on the proportion
between the annual consumption and the whole quantity of each species annually
produced by ALL nations; it must follow, that whether we or foreigners are the
producers, carriers, importers and exporters of American produce, ye their
respective prices in each colony (the difference of freight, customs and
importations considered) will always hear proportion to the general consumption
of the whole quantity of each sort, produced in all colonies, and in all parts,
allowing only for the usual contingencies that trade and commerce, agriculture
and manufactures are liable to in all countries."

POSTLETHWAYT'S Univ. Dict. of Trade and Commerce.
undeniable truth, that what we should save in that way, would be chiefly spent
in this. It may also justly be added, that our commerce with the foreign
plantations, carries to them very considerable quantities of British
manufactures, for their consumption. See the preceding note.


IF our importations from them should be re-exported to Europe, the profits
would center in Great Britain, according to the usual course of our trade. The
statute passed in the twenty-fifth year of Charles the second, indeed mentions
this practice as injurious. It might be so, if regarded without its attendant
circumstances; but if they are taken into view, and it be considered, that if
we do not carry these productions to Europe, foreigners will, no mischief seems
likely to ensue from our becoming the carriers. See the preceding note.


THE restriction also with regard to our iron, is thought particularly severe.
Whenever we can get a better price in Great Britain than elsewhere, it is
unnecessary; whenever we can get a better price in other places, it is If
Great Britain really takes off from Sweden iron to the value of L 200,000,
according to the calculation that has been made, yet she does not lose all that
sum. Not to insist on the merely political advantage of having a commerce with
that protestant kingdom, which by being beneficial to her, may more firmly
attach her to our interest, it may be observed, that the trade of Great Britain
to Sweden, it is for iron in the gross, which is afterward worked up, and
large quantities of it re*exported; so that money may thereby be brought into
the kingdom, and a great number of hands is employed. There is a vast
difference between this trade, and that to France, from whence the importations
into Great Britain are merely for consumption, without affording any employment
to her people, or any profit by re-exportation. Besides, if the colonies can
get more by carrying their iron to foreign ports, than to Great Britain, (and
if they cannot, there is no occasion of a law to compel them to carry it to
Great Britain) they will be more able to make larger demands for British
manufactures; so that Great Britain will gain the profits of our iron, to make
up her loss by what she takes form Sweden.
prejudicial. Cargoes composed of this metal, provisions and lumber, have been
found to answer very well at the Portuguese and some other markets; and as the
last articles are frequently very low, and our foreign trade is reduced to so
few commodities, the taking away any one of them must be hurtful to us. Indeed,
to require us to send all our iron to Great Britain, is, in the opinion of some
of our most judicious merchants, to require an impossibility: For as this
article is so heavy, and such small quantities can be sent in one vessel, they
assert, that we cannot find freight directly home for one half of it.

BESIDES the circumstances already mentioned to prove the injurious
consequences of the late restrictions, there is another, which has great force
in persuading me that our trade ought by all means to be more encouraged and
extended at this time, than was formerly necessary. Our settlements then
comprehended only a narrow strip along the shore of the ocean; they were less
populous; and their distance from the sea ports being small, they were supplied
with every thing they wanted from thence, without any length of inland
carriage. But now we have penetrated boundless forests, have passed over
immense mountains, and are daily pushing further and further into the
wilderness, the inhabitants of these remote regions, must of necessity hold
very little intercourse with those which are near the sea, unless a very
extensive commerce shall enable these to supply them with such quantities of It
is apprehended, that if the greatest part of the commodities demanded by the
back country should not be British but West Indian, yet it must be beneficial
to Great Britain to promote this trade by all means. For if the country nearer
the sea grows rich by supplying them with the productions of the West Indies,
these will certainly consume greater quantities of British manufactures.
foreign commodities as they want, and at such prices as they can afford to
pay. Every restriction on our trade, seems to be a restriction on this
intercourse, and must gradually cut off the connection of the interior parts
with the maritime and the mother country.

But it is unnecessary to endeavor to prove by reasoning on these things, that
we shall suffer, for we already suffer. Trade is decaying; and all credit is
expiring. It is said that in Virginia, the sheriffs, instead of raising the
annual levies, have been obliged to make returns into the treasury, of enects
which they have taken in execution, but could not tell, as there were no
bidders for ready money.
Money is become so extremely scarce, that reputable freeholders find it
impossible to pay debts which are trifling in comparison to their estates. If
creditors sue, and take out executions, the lands and personal estate, as the
sale must be for ready money, are sold for a small part of what they were worth
when the debts were contracted. The debtors are ruined. The creditors get but
part of their debts, and that ruins them. Thus the consumers break the
shopkeepers; they break the merchants; and the shock must be felt as far as
London. Fortunate, indeed, is the man who can get satisfaction in Money for any
part of his debt, in some counties; for in many instances, after lands and
goods have been repeatedly advertised in the public gazettes, and exposed to
sale, not a buyer appears.

BY these means multitudes are already ruined, and the estates of others are
melting away in the same manner. It must strike any one with great surprise and
concern, to hear of the number of debtors discharged every court by our
insolvent act. Though our courts are held every quarter, yet at the last term
for the county of Philadelphia alone, no less than thirty-five persons applied
for the benefit of that act. If it be considered, that this law extends only to
those who do not owe any single debt above L 150, that many are daily released
by the lenity of their creditors, and that many more remove, without their
knowledge, it will not be difficult to form a judgment of the condition to
which the people are reduced.

IF these effects are produced already, what can we expect, when the same
causes shall have operated longer? What can we expect, when the exhausted
colonies shall feel the STAMP ACT drawing off, as it were, the last drops of
their blood? From whence is the silver to come, with which the taxes imposed by
this act, and the duties imposed by other late acts, are to be paid? Or how
will our merchants and the lower ranks of people, on whom the force of these
regulations will fall first, and with the greatest violence, bear this
additional load?

THESE last are to be considered in a very different light from those of the
same classes in Great Britain. There the nature of their employments, and the
plenty of money give them very little occasion to make contracts in writing;
but here they are continually making them, and are obliged to do so The STAMP
ACT, therefore, will be severely felt by these, in whose welfare the prosperity
of a state is always so much interested; and In the present scarcity of money,
the sellers of lands, negroes, etc. etc. always insist on having part of the
purchase-money in hand -- The buyers, unless they happen to be rich men, find
it impossible to comply with this term, unless they borrow money, which cannot
now be done but in very small parcels from different persons. -- Each of these
must have a bond; and each of those bonds must pay a stamp-duty of one shilling
sterling, if the sum be above ten pounds and under twenty -- and if above
twenty pounds and under forty, one shilling and six ^^nce sterling -- besides a
heavy duty on the original contract.
transfers of property, that ought, in new countries particularly, to be made
as easy as possible, will be much discouraged. From the necessity they are
under of making contracts to be executed afterward, the lower ranks of people
here are frequently engaged in law suits; and as the law is already a very
heavy tax on the subject in all parts of the British dominions, this act will
render it destructive here; for the necessities, the follies and the passions
of mankind, will not suffer them to cease from harrassing one another in that
way.

NEITHER are the merchants here by any means able to bear taxes, as they do at
home. A very great number of them there put such stocks into trade, as would be
thought large fortunes among us; and our merchants would think themselves very
happy to leave off business with such estates as the others begin with. I speak
of the merchants in general; for we have on the continent individuals who are
rich, but their number is too inconsiderable to deserve any notice or this
occasion. Besides, the interest of money being lower at home than it is here,
those who trade on borrowed stocks, can do it to much greater advantage there
than we can. Indeed, among us it is almost impossible to get money to trade
upon at any rate. How unequal, under the present disadvantages, a merchant's
commerce will be to the payment of all the taxes imposed by the STAMP ACT on
his policies, fees with clerks, charter parties, protests, his other notarial
acts his letters, and even his advertisements, experience, I am afraid will
unhappily prove.

THUS, I apprehend, that this Act will be extremely heavy on those who are
least able to bear it; and if our merchants and people of little substance
languish under it, all others must be affected. Our mode of taxation, has
always been by making as exact an estimate as could be formed of each man's
estate; by which means, our taxes have been proportioned to the abilities of
those who were to pay them. Few persons are employed in the collection of them;
their allowance is very moderate; and therefore the expense is small. No
excessive penalties, no tribes of informers, no dreadful and detestable courts
are necessary. This I imagine, is the mode of taxation, which in young
colonies, will be found to be least oppressive and destructive, and certainly
the most equal: But by the Stamp Act, the If a rich man buys land, it is
generally from the distressed, and therefore the sellers situation will oblige
him to pay for the deed, when the other insists on it; and when a man borrows
money, every body knows who pays for the bonds and mortgages.
wealthy who have money to let out at interest, or to make purchases, and
undoubtedly ought to pay the most toward the public charges, will escape these
taxes, while the whole weight of them will fall on the necessitous and
industrious, who most of all require relief and encouragement.

BUT it may be said, "That the merchants will not be affected by these taxes,
because they will raise the prices of their goods in proportion, and that at
length all taxes must arise from lands."

THIS rule seems more applicable to very populous and rich countries, where the
manufacturers and landholders through necessity or the force of fashions, have
pressing demands upon the merchants, than to such a country as this, where a
great majority of the people live on their lands in a very plain way. For by
practicing a strict frugality and industry, we may render ourselves more
independent of the merchants, than the circumstances of more populous and
wealthy states will permit the other classes of their people to be. The high
prices therefore which our merchants impose upon their goods, will discourage
the sale of them, and consequently they must "be affected by the taxes," which
oblige them to raise the prices in this manner.

HOWEVER, granting that all taxes must arise from lands; it follows, that where
the profits of the lands are small, they can bear but small taxes. The more
labor is bestowed on them, the greater the profits will be, and the taxes may
be. In old populous countries there is an opportunity of bestowing this labor,
and the manner of doing it is well understood. Thus in England, the profits of
land are so great, as to support a very large number of nobility and gentry in
splendour, and to afford means of raising taxes to an amazing amount. Nor are
the workers of the land unrewarded; for the farmers have such long leases, and
other encouragements, that they thrive and live comfortably, and many of them
are very wealthy.

How different is the case in America? The inhabitants being scattered thin
through the country, and laborers being very scarce, they think themselves
fortunate, if they can clear their land, fence it, and any how put their grain
into the ground in season. Manuring or "Further, it may be observed, that our
lands are not sufficiently cultivated, even where they are capable of great
improvement. Hence large tracts serve only to maintain a small number of
people. If we ask, why our lands (meaning in Scotland) are so ill cultivated,
besides the OBVIOUS CAUSES arising from the POVERTY and UNSKILLFULNESS of many
of our farmers, the SHORTNESS OF THEIR LEASES, and other things which will
occur upon the least reflection, it is not a little owing to a want of
inclination for agriculture, etc."

DISSERTATION on the numbers of mankind.
improving soils is not known, except in some small closes near cities; but
every one must be content with what his land will yield of itself. With this it
must be considered, that at least four fifths of the people in America, live
upon farms either of their own, or rented, and spend their small profits in
maintaining their families; and it frequently happens from the length and
severity of our winters, that the whole produce of a man's farm is not
sufficient to maintain his family and stock. Small as the value of our land is,
it is still daily decreasing, by the number of markets for their produce being
lessened; which must in time give the people an inclination to try what they
can make by manufactures.

The riches of a people are always in proportion to the number of hands
employed in works of SKILL and LABOR. Where these are few, there can be but
little wealth; and where there is little wealth, but very small taxes can be
born.




WE are informed, that an opinion has been industriously propagated in
Great Britain, that the colonies are "It is certain, that from the very time
Sir Walter Raleigh, the father of our English colonies, and his associates, had
projected these establishments, there have been persons who have found an
interest, in misrepresenting, or lessening the value of them -- The attempts
were called chimerical and dangerous. Afterward many malignant suggestions
were made about sacrificing so many Englishmen to the obstinate desire of
settling colonies in countries which then produced very little advantage. But
as these difficulties were gradually surmounted, those complaints vanished. No
sooner were these lamentations over, but others arose in their stead; when it
could be no longer said, that the colonies were useless, it was alleged that
they were not useful enough to their mother country; that, while we were loaded
with taxes, they were absolutely free; that the planters lived like princes,
while the inhabitants of England labored hard for a tolerable subsistence.
This produced customs and impositions, which, if grievous to the plantations,
must turn to our disadvantage, as well as theirs, and consequently become
detrimental to both.

POSTLETHWAYT'S univ. dict. of trade and commerce. In pursuance of this design
to bring down the pride of these PRINCELY PLANTERS, such heavy impositions were
laid in Great Britain on tobacco, that the inhabitants of Maryland and Virginia
were discouraged from raising it. Then the mother country FELT her error, and
these PRINCES were found to be very poor people. The same unhappy spirit is now
producing the same mistake. There wants but a very little more weight upon
Maryland and Virginia, to prevent their raising tobacco, and to make them and
all their sister colonies sink under their multiplied burdens.


wallowing in wealth and luxury, while she is laboring under an enormous load
of debt. Never was there a greater mistake. This opinion has arisen from slight
observations made in our cities during the late war, when large sums of money
were spent here in support of fleets and armies. Our productions were then in
great demand, and trade flourished. Having a number of strangers among us, the
people naturally not ungenerous or inhospitable, indulged themselves in many
uncommon expenses. But the cause of this gaiety has ceased, and all the effect
remaining, is, that we are to be treated as a rich people, when we are really
poor. Tully mentions a man who lost an honorable office, by the homely
entertainment he gave the people of Rome, when he could have afforded a better;
but we have lost vastly more by the imprudent excess of kindness, with which we
have treated the people of Great Britain who have come among us, at an expense
that did not suit our fortunes.

To all the disadvantages that have been mentioned, it must be added, that our
markets are much more precarious than those at home. It is computed, that one
half of the people there live in cities, and consequently there must be a
perpetual domestic demand for the productions of the earth; and foreign markets
are not far distant for the overplus. Here the quantity sold for consumption
among us is small, and most of the foreign markets are very remote.

THESE reasons induce me to think, that the colonies, unless some fortunate
events, not to be expected, should happen, cannot bear the restrictions and
taxations laid upon them by their mother country, without suffering very
severely. What then can we do? Which way shall we turn ourselves? How may we
mitigate the miseries of our country? Great Britain gives us an example to
guide us. SHE TEACHES US TO MAKE A DISTINCTION BETWEEN HER INTERESTS AND OUR
OWN. Teaches! She requires -- commands -- insists upon it -- threatens --
compels -- and even distresses us into it.

WE have our choice of these two things -- to continue our present limited and
disadvantageous commerce -- or to promote manufactuers among ourselves, with a
habit of economy, and thereby remove the necessity we are now under of being
supplied by Great Britain.

IT is not difficult to determine which of these things is most eligible. Could
the last of them be only so far executed, as to bring our demand for British
manufactures below the profits of our foreign trade, and the amount of our
commodities immediately remitted home, these colonies might revive and
flourish. States and families are enriched by the same means; that is, by being
so industrious an I frugal, as to spend less than what they (...) can pay for.

WE have examples in this province, which if imitated by others, must
unavoidably produce the most happy effects for us: I mean the examples of the
industrious, frugal, honest Germans. Their lands are as well cultivated as they
can be in this new country, and they have the good sense to require very little
provisions and clothes more than they can get from their own farms, and make
with their own hands. If we only consider for a moment the consequences of such
a conduct, should it be general, we must be convinced it must produce commerce,
since all superfluities would be exported; and the Owners having few demands in
return, that commerce would of course produce wealth.

INDEED we shall be compelled, I apprehend, generally to imitate these
examples. The late regulations, and our constant remittances to Great Britain,
have extremely lessened the quantity of money among us, and yet these
remittances are not sufficient to pay for those things we want from home.
Necessity will teach us two ways to relieve ourselves. The one is, to keep the
British manufactures we purchase longer in use or wear than we have been
accustomed to do. The other is, to supply their place by manufactures of our
own. I don't suppose our difficulties will immediately produce expert artists
among us; but as the inhabitants here generally reside on their lands, and live
in a plain rustic way, they will be able to supply themselves with many
articles. Some author, and I think Keysler, says, that in Switzerland, every
family has all the trades in it that are necessary for its use. Their work is
not, it may be presumed, at all in the taste of London or Paris, but it serves
their purpose; and their coarse clothes and simple furniture enable them to
live in plenty, and to defend their liberty. Something of this kind will be,
nay, already is, practiced by us. It is surprising to see the linen and cloth
that have been lately made among us. Many gentlemen in this city dress now in
suits produced, manufactured, and made up in this province. The cloth is not
equal in fineness to the best broad-cloth, but it is warm, strong, and not very
homely; and when the British workmen understand that they may mere with better
encouragement here than they do at home, I believe in a few years we shall have
very different kinds of cloth among us from these we now make. Instances are
not wanting to justify the most sanguine expectations on this head. Spain used
formerly to be entirely supplied with cloths from England; but in the reigns
only of their two last kings, Philip the Vth, and Ferdinand the VIth, their
manufactures have been improved to such a degree, even by that proud and
indolent people, that this commerce has entirely ceased in most parts of that
kingdom. The same thing has happened in France, notwithstanding the destructive
wars in which she has been continually involved. Switzerland some time ago
spent large sums of money in foreign commodities, but now they make excellent
cloths, and good sink, though the scheme at first labored under very great
difficulties. That country used also to be supplied by Savoy with wine; but the
Duke laying a duty upon it, the Switzers remonstrated, but in vain. At last
some of the principal men promoted the cultivation of vines, though their
predecessors had never planted any. The result exceeded their hopes. Keysler.
"The demand for the Savoyard wine daily decrased, and instead of the
precarious advantage arising form this impolitic duty, the certain revenue was
irretrieveably lost, and the industrious subject deprived of the benefit of his
labor."

"BEFORE the settlement of these colonies," says Postlethwayt, "our
manufactures were few, and those but indifferent, In those days we had not only
our naval stores, but our ships from our neighbors. Germany furnished us with
all things made of metal, even to nails. Wine, paper, linens, and a thousand
other things, came from France. Portugal supplied us with sugar; all the
products of America were poured into us from Spain; and the Venetians and
Genoese retailed to us the commodities of the East Indies, at their own price."

THE astonishing alterations in all these particulars, are too well known to
need enumeration.

THESE instances, and many others that might be mentioned, may convince us,
that nothing is too difficult for men to effect, whose hearts are filled with a
generous love of their country; and they may convince the world of the dangers
that attend provoking innovations in commerce. A branch of trade once lost, is
lost for ever. In short, so strong a spirit is raised in these colonies by late
measures, and such successful efforts are already made among us, that it cannot
be doubted, that before the end of this century, the modern regulations will
teach America, that she has resources within herself, of which she never
otherwise would have thought. Individuals, perhaps, may find their benefit in
opposing her use of these resources; but I hope very, very few, will wish to
receive benefits by such means. The man who would promote his own interests by
injuring his country, is unworthy of the blessings of society.

IT has hitherto been thought, by the people of Great Britain, and I hope it
will still be thought, that sufficient advantages are derived by her from the
colonies, without laying taxes upon them. To represent them as an "expensive
appendage of the British empire, that can no other way repay the trouble and
treasure they cost her," is certainly one of the greatest errors; and to spend
much time in refuting this notion, would be unnecessary. Every advantage
accruing to the colonies by their connection with the mother country, is amply
-- dearly -- paid for, by the benefits derived to her from them, and by the
restrictions of their commerce. These benefits have been allowed by the best
writers to be immense, and Chiefly; even the supplying her with naval stores,
etc being inconsiderable, when compared with the other advantages.
consist in the various employment and the support they afford her people. If
the colonies enable her to pay taxes, is it not as useful to her, as if they
paid them? Or, indeed, may not the colonies with the strictest propriety be
said to pay a great part of those taxes, when they consume the British
manufactures loaded with the advanced prices occasioned by such taxes? Or,
further, as the colonies are compelled to take those manufactures thus "If it
be asked, whether foreigners, for what goods they take of us, do not pay on
that consumption a great portion of our taxes? It is admitted they do."

POSTLETHWAYT'S Great Britain's true system. By the consumption of British
manufactures in America, we pay a heavier tax to Great Britain, than if they
were consumed at home. For in the bringing them here, a vast number of
merchants, factors, brokers and seamen are employed, every one of which must
have such a profit, as will enable him to support himself and his family, if he
has any, in a country where every thing is dear by reason of the high taxes.

So far was the parliament from thinking in the last war, that any further
taxes should be laid on the colonies, so convinced indeed were they that we had
exceeded our abilities in the supplies we gave to the crown, that several sums
of money were granted to us as indemnifications for the too heavy expense in
which we had involved ourselves.

The sums thus given, paid part of our debts, but we are still laboring under
the remainder.


loaded, when they might furnish themselves so much cheaper from other
countries, may not the difference between these prices be called an enormous
tax paid by them to Great Britain? May they not also be said to pay an enormous
tax to her, by being compelled to carry their most valuable productions to her
alone, and to receive what she pleases to give for them, when they might sell
them at other markets to much greater advantage? Lastly, may they not be said
to pay a heavy tax to her, in being prohibited from carrying on such
manufactures as they could have employed themselves in with advantage, and thus
being obliged to resort to her for those things with which they might supply
themselves? If these things are ture, and can they be denied! may not the
mother country more justly be called expensive to her colonies, than they can
be called expensive to her?

WHAT would France give for such expensive dominions? Would she refuse the
empire of North America, unless the inhabitants would submit to any taxes she
should please to impose? Or would she not rather afford them her utmost
protection, if ever they should be wretched enough to require it, for one half
of the emoluments Great Britain receives from them? In short, the amazing
increase of the wealth and strength of this kingdom, since the reign of queen
Elizabeth, in whose time the colonies began to be settled, appears to be a
sufficient proof of their importance: And therefore I think it may justly be
said, that THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE POWER AND GLORY OF GREAT BRITAIN ARE LAID IN
AMERICA.

WHEN the advantages derived by the mother country from her colonies are so
Vide notes to page 4.
important and evident, it is amazing, that any persons should venture to
assert, "that she poured out her wealth and blood in the late war, only for
their defense and benefit; and that she cannot be recompensed for this expense
and loss, but by taxing them."

IF any man who does not choose to spend much time in considering this subject,
would only read the speeches from the throne during that period, with the
addresses in answer to them, he will soon be convinced for whose benefit
Great Britain thought she was exerting herself. For my part, I should not now
be surprised, if those who maintain the abovementioned assertions, should
contend, that Great Britain ought to tax Protugal. For was not that kingdom
"defended by the troops and treasure of Great Britain?" And how can she be
"otherwise recompensed for this expense and loss?" If the protection of
Portugal, though no taxes are received from thence, was beneficial to Great
Britain, infinitely more so was the protection of the colonies.

SO far I must beg leave to dissent from these gentlemen, that if the colonies,
by an increase of industry and frugality, should become able to bear this
taxation, it will, in my apprehension, notwithstanding be injurious to
Great Britain. If the sum be trifling, it cannot be worth the discontent and
unhappiness the taking it will produce among so many faithful subjects of his
Majesty. If it be considerable, it must also be hurtful in another respect.

It must be granted, that it is not merely the bringing money into a nation
that makes it wealthy, but the bringing money into it by the general industry
of its inhabitants. A country may perpetually receive vast sums, and yet be
perpetually poor. It must also be granted, that almost all the money acquired
by the colonies in their other branches of trade, is spent by them in
Great Britain, and finds employment for her people. Whatever then lessens the
sum so spent, must lessen that employment. This I think will be one consequence
of the STAMP ACT: For our demand will be as much less for British manufactures,
as the amount of the sums raised by the taxes. So much the fewer British
merchants, artists, seamen and ships will be employed by us, and so much the
more distressed at first, and afterward so much the more frugal, Great Britain
will not only lose in such case, the annual amount of the taxes, but the people
of America establishing manufactures through discontent, will in time entirely
withdraw their intercourse with her -- And therefore her loss of the whole
American trade, may be justly attributed to this inauspicious beginning.
ingenious, laborious and independent will the colonists become.

It is evident from the concurrent testimony of her own most noted authors on
this subject, that Great Britain is sure of having our money at See notes to
page 4.
last; and it appears no difficult matter to determine, whether it is better to
take it in taxes or trade. -- Suppose the STAMP ACT, enforced by uncommon
penalties and unheard of jurisdictions, should pick up every piece of gold and
silver that shall wander into the plantations, what would Great Britain gain by
this measure? Or rather what would she not lose, by attempting to advance her
revenue by means so distressing to commerce?

BUT if the late restrictions shall not prove profitable, perhaps they may by
some be called prudent for another reason. We are informed that many persons at
home affect to speak of the colonists, as of a people designing and
endeavoring to render themselves independent, and therefore it may be said to
be proper as much as possible to depress them. This method for securing
obedience, has been tried by many powerful nations, and seems to be the
constant policy of commonwealths: But the attempt in almost every instance from
Athens down to Genoa, has been unsuccessful. Many states and kingdoms have lost
their dominions by severity and an unjust jealousy. I remember none that have
been lost by kindness and a generous confidence. Evils are frequently
precipitated, by imprudent attempts to prevent them. In short, we never can be
made an independent people, except it be by "If we are afraid that one day or
other the colonies will revolt, and set up for themselves, as some seem to
apprehend, let us not drive them to a necessity to feel themselves independent
of us; as they will do, the moment they perceive that they can be supplied with
all things from within themselves, and do not need our assistance. If we would
keep them still dependent upon their mother country, and in some respects
subservient to their views and welfare; let us make it their INTEREST always to
be so." TUCKER on trade.

"Our colonies, while they have English blood in their veins, and have
relations in England, and WHILE THEY CAN GET BY TRADING WITH US, the stronger
and greater they grow, the more this crown and kingdom will get by them; and
nothing but such an arbitrary power as shall make them desperate can being them
to rebel."

DAVENANT on the plantation trade. "The Northern colonies are not upon the same
footing as those of the South; and having a worse soil to improve, they must
find the recompense some other way, which only can be in property and dominion:
Upon which score, any innovations in the form of government there, should be
cautiously examined, for fear of entering upon measures, by which the industry
of the inhabitants be quite discouraged. It Is ALWAYS UNFORTUNATE for a people,
either by CONSENT or upon COMPULSION, to depart from their PRIMITIVE
INSTITUTIONS, and THOSE FUNDAMENTALS, by which they were FIRST UNITED TOGETHER.

Idem.
Great Britain herself; and the only way for her to do it, is to make us
frugal, ingenious, The most effectual way of uniting the colonies, is to make
it their common interest to oppose the designs and attempts of Great Britain.

"All wise states will well consider how to preserve the advantages arising
from colonies, and avoid the evils. And I conceive that there can be but TWO
ways in nature to hinder them from throwing off their dependence; one, to keep
it out of their power, and the other, out of their will. The first must be by
force; and the latter, by using them well, and keeping them employed in such
productions, and making such manufactures, as will support themselves and
families comfortably, and procure them wealth too, and at least not prejudice
their mother country.

Force can never be used effectually to answer the end, without destroying the
colonies themselves. Liberty and encouragement are necessary to carry people
thither, and to keep them together when they are there; and violence will
hinder both. Any body of troops considerable enough to awe them, and keep them
in subjection under the direction too of a needy governor, often sent thither
to make his fortune, and at such a distance from any application for redress,
will soon put an end to all planting, and leave the country to the soldiers
alone, and if it did not, would eat up all the profit of the colony. For this
reason, arbitrary countries have not been equally successful in planting
colonies with free ones, and what they have done in that kind, has either been
by force at a vast expense, or by departing from the nature of their
government, and giving such privileges to planters as were denied to their
other subjects. And I dare say, that a few prudent laws, and a little prudent
conduct, would soon give us far the greatest share of the riches of all
America, perhaps drive many of other nations out of it, or into our colonies
for shelter.

There are so many exigencies in all states, so many foreign wars, and domestic
disturbances, that these colonies CAN NEVER WANT OPPORTUNITIES, if they watch
for them, to do what they shall find their interest to do; and therefore we
ought to take all the precautions in our power, that it shall never be their
interest to act against that of their native country; an evil which can no
otherwise be averted, than by keeping them fully employed in such trades as
will increase their own, as well as our wealth; for it is much to be feared, if
we do not find employment for them, they may find it for us. The interest of
the mother country, is always to keep them dependent, and so employed; and it
requires, all her address to do it; and it is certainly more easily and
effectually done by gentle and insensible methods, than by power alone."

CATO'S letters.
united and discontented.

BUT if this event shall ever happen, which Providence I hope will never
permit, it must be when the present generation and the present set of
sentiments are extinct. Late measures have indeed excited an universal and
unexampled grief and indignation throughout the colonies. What man who wishes
the welfare of America, can view without pity, without passion, her restricted
and almost stagnated trade, with its numerous train of evils -- taxes torn from
her without her consent -- Her legislative assemblies, the principal pillars of
her liberty, crushed into insignificance -- A formidable force established in
the midst of peace, to bleed her into obedience -- The sacred right of trial by
jury, violated by the erection of arbitrary and unconstitutional jurisdictions
-- and general poverty, discontent and despondence stretching themselves over
his unoffending country?

THE reflections of the colonists on these melancholy subjects, are not a
little embittered by a firm persuasion, that they never would have been treated
as they are, if Canada still continued in the hands of the French. Thus, their
hearts glowing with every sentiment of duty and affection toward their mother
country, and expecting, not unreasonably perhaps, some marks of tenderness in
return, are pierced by a fatal discovery, that the vigorous assistance which
they faithfully afforded her in extending her dominions, has only proved the
glorious but destructive cause of the calamities they now deplore and resent.

YET still their resentment is but the resentment of dutiful children, who have
received unmerited blows from a beloved parent. Their obedience to
Great Britain is secured by the best and strongest ties, those of affection;
which alone can, and I hope will form an everlasting union between her and her
colonies. May no successes or suspicions ever tempt her, to deviate from the
natural generosity of her spirit -- And may no dreadful revolution of
sentiments, ever teach them, to fear her victories or to repine at her glories.

I am, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have omitted mentioning one thing that seems to be connected with the
foregoing subject.

WITH a vast expense of blood and wealth, we fought our way in the late war up
to the doors of the Spanish treasuries, and by the possession of Florida, might
obtain some recompense for that expense. Pensacola and the other ports in that
country, are convenient places, where the Spaniards might meet us, and exchange
their silver for the manufactures of Great Britain, and the provisions of these
colonies. By this means, a commerce inconceivably beneficial to the British
subjects, might be carried on. This commerce the Spaniards wish and have
endeavored to carry on. Many hundred thousand dollars have been brought by
them to Pensacola to lay out there; but the men of war on that station have
compelled them to take back their cargoes, the receipt of which, it may from
thence be presumed, would be destructive to the interests of Great Britain. --
Thus we receive less advantage from Florida, now it belongs to us, than we did
when it was possessed by our enemies; for then by permission from the Spanish
governors, to trade there, we derived considerable emoluments from our
intercourse with them.

UPON what reasons this conduct is founded, is not easy to determine. Sure no
one considers Florida in the same light with these colonies, and thinks that no
vessels should be permitted to trade there, but British shipping. This would be
to apply the acts of navigation to purposes directly opposite to the spirit of
them. They were intended to preserve an intercourse between the mother country
and her colonies, and thus to cultivate a mutual affection; to promote the
interests of both, by an exchange of their most valuable productions for her
manufacutures; thereby to increase the shipping of both; and thus render them
capable of affording aid to each other. Which of these purposes is answered by
prohibiting a commerce, that can be no other way carried on? That is, by
forbidding the Spaniards to bring their wealth for us to Florida, which is an
unhealthy sand-bank, held by a garrison, at a great expense of money, and a
greater of lives, that cannot for ages, if ever it will, yield a single
advantage to Great Britain, but that she refuses to enjoy.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5, line 10 from the top, for some, read A. In the next line, read some,
for many. Page 7, line 1 of the note, for its, read her.


