AN ESSAY ON The NATURE and FOUNDATION OF MORAL VIRTUE AND OBLIGATION; BEING A
Short INTRODUCTION To the STUDY of ETHICS; For the Use of the STUDENTS of
YALE-COLLEGE:

By THOMAS CLAP, M. A. President of YALE-COLLEGE, in New Haven.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by B. MECOM. MDCCLXV.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE the Study of Ethics makes so great a Part of an academical Education,
and there are Professors of that Science in most of the Universities in
Great Britain, I have, for many Years past, been in Quest of some System of
that Kind, proper to be recited by the Students; but can find none well adapted
to that Purpose. For though there are many Treatises which contain good Rules
of external Conduct, yet the Obligation to act according to those Rules, is not
justly stated; and several insufficient and false Foundations are laid down by
Authors of considerable Note.

It seems necessary that the Students should first be well instructed in the
true Nature of moral Virtue, and the Foundation of our Obligations to practice
it, before they read the practical Rules which are formed thereupon.

As this Treatise was designed, principally, for the Use of the Students of
this College, I have, to save the Charge of Printing, wrote in as concise a
Manner, as can be intelligible, on such a critical and metaphysical Subject. If
any Expressions should seem doubtful, I may be present to explain and enlarge
upon them: And if this should happen to fall into the Hands of any Gentleman at
a Distance, who should suppose that any Expression is capable of such a
Construction, as is not consistent with Truth, I would ask the Favor of an
Opportunity to explain myself.

In treating upon the divine Ideas, I have generally followed the Sentiments
and Expressions in Norris's Ideal World.

As this Treatise contains only short Hints or Heads to be paraphrased upon,
but few Copies are printed at present; proposing that if God should spare my
Life, and give me some Relaxation from my present Multiplicity of Business, to
publish a more full and complete Treatise upon this Subject, which I look upon
to be of great Importance, because it contains the moral Part of all true
Religion, which is the Foundation of the Whole: Though no fallen Creature can
become truly virtuous, but in Consequence of an Atonement, and the renovating
Influences of the divine Spirit: And I suppose that Men generally form their
Sentiments of the peculiar Doctrines of Christianity, according to some few
moral Principles, which they at first set out upon, relating to the Holiness
and Strictness of the divine Law, and the Nature of moral Obligation.

AN ESSAY, etc.
1. AS Ethics or Moral Philosophy, makes a considerable Part of an academical
Education, and is nearly connected with true Religion, it is of great
Importance that it should be clearly stated, and fixed upon the right
Foundation. -- Authors are generally agreed in the Rules of external Conduct,
for the general Good of Communities and particular Persons; but differ greatly
in the Foundation of the Obligation to observe those Rules, and in the
Criterion of moral Good and Evil. Most Authors have treated upon Ethics as a
System of moral Rules of Conduct, summarily comprehended in the ten
Commandments; and as the moral Part of practical Religion: But then the
separating of this from the Doctrines or Principles of Religion, upon which it
is founded, has been the Occasion of several Mistakes; and particularly this,
that many have treated Ethics only as the Laws of Nature and Nations, or a
System of civil Laws, generally obtaining among Mankind, and calculated
principally to promote the temporal Good of public Communities and particular
Persons, in their enjoying the natural Pleasures and Happiness of the present
Life. Others have, as it were, partly blended both these together, and from
thence have formed a System of what they call the Religion of Nature, whereby
every Man may obtain the Favor of God and eternal Happiness, by his own
Powers, without a Mediator or any divine Revelation. Ethics, in this View, have
very much paved the Way to Deism; and therefore have been justly opposed by
many good Men. Dr. C. MATHER (in his Introductio ad Ministerium) calls it
Impietas in Artis Formam redacta.


2. And as Men have had very different Views of the ultimate End and Design of
Ethics; so they have set out upon very different Grounds and Foundations, to
build their several Systems upon: Some upon the Foundation of Self-Interest and
Happiness; some upon universal Benevolence, and some upon moral Taste; and
others upon various other first Principles, which are either false, or but
consequential Appendages to the true Foundation. To rectify these Mistakes, and
to settle the Nature of moral Virtue and Obligation upon its just and true
Foundation, is the Design of the present Essay.

3. And, therefore,

First, I shall consider the Nature and Standard of moral Virtue.

Secondly, The Obligation, which every moral Agent is under, to be conformed to
that Standard.

Thirdly, The Way whereby we may come to the Knowledge of that Standard, and of
such a Temper and Conduct as is a Conformity to it.

Lastly, I shall exhibit a brief and general Scheme of moral Virtues and Duties.

First, I shall consider the Nature and Standard of moral Virtue.

Moral Virtue is a Conformity to the moral Perfections of God; or it is an
Imitation of God, in the moral Perfections of his Nature, so far as they are
imitable by his Creatures. And the moral Perfections of God are the sole
Foundation and Standard of all that Virtue, Goodness and Perfection which can
exist in the Creature.

4. For God is a being infinitely and absolutely perfect. He has all those
Perfections which are contained or implied in the Words good, right, excellent,
amiable, and all other Words of the like Import -- all those Perfections which
can possibly exist, or that can be conceived of by the most perfect
Intelligent: For there can be no Limitation of Perfection in a necessary and
self-existent Being.

5. Indeed we get the Idea of a Perfection from those small Degrees of
Perfection which we observe in the Creatures, and then we ascribe all
Perfections to God, in an infinite Degree; and unite them all in the Idea of
ONE ALL-PERFECT BEING.

6. So that, in the Order of our Conceptions, we conceive of a Perfection as
existing in the Creature, before we conceive of it as existing in God, and
generally (it may be) before we have any Idea of God at all. And therefore we
are apt to conceive (or, at least, to use some Expressions as if we did
conceive) some Perfections to have an independent Existence out of God, and
prior to him; and as if we would try him by that Standard, and approve of his
Qualities according as we conceived them to be agreeable to it. But this is a
great Mistake: For all Perfection is originally in God, as the primary
Foundation and Standard, and from that Fountain is communicated to the
Creatures, in various limited Degrees, according to their several Ranks and
Orders.

7. As his Being includes and comprehends all Perfection; so no Perfection can
possibly exist in the Creature, or be conceived by him, but what first existed
in the Creator: Neither can it have any innate Excellency or permanent
Existence, but only so far as it resembles Something in God, and is dependent
upon him. The Perfection of the Creature consists in his Resemblance or
Conformity to God; but the Perfection of God consists in his being what he is,
or like to himself, as the primary Standard; without any antecedent or
concomitant Rule or Standard to measure himself by.

8. Self-Existence or necessary Existence, without any antecedent Cause or
Foundation, is the first fundamental Perfection we conceive of in God; and from
that all other Perfections necessarily result; such as Eternity, Immutability,
Omnipresence, Omniscience, Omnipotence, Wisdom, etc. Indeed, all Perfection in
God is, in some Respect, one; that is, all Perfection is, in him, one simple,
uncompounded, uniform Thing: But our Minds are not capacious enough to form
such a comprehensive, clear Idea; and therefore we must conceive of each
particular Perfection, distinctly by itself, or our Ideas of them will be
confused.

9. We usually conceive of the divine Perfections under two general Heads:

1. Natural Perfections; such as Eternity, Immutability, Omniscience,
Omnipotency, etc.

2. Moral Perfections; such as Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth; which are
called the moral Rectitude of the divine Nature.

Natural Perfections, such as Knowledge, Power, etc. may exist, in a great
Degree, in a Being utterly destitute of moral Goodness or Holiness; and be
perverted to the worst Ends and Purposes, as they are in the Devils. But moral
Perfections, such as Justice, Goodness, and Truth, have an immutable Excellency
and Amiableness in them, and cannot be directly perverted, without destroying
their very Nature. There is indeed a necessary Connection between the natural
and moral Perfections of God; for Justice, Goodness and Truth presuppose some
Degree of Knowledge and Power by which they are exercised; and Knowledge and
Power must be regulated by Justice and Goodness, or otherwise they lose the
Excellency of their Nature, and are to be dreaded rather than loved.

10. When God makes a Creature, he communicates to him some Degree of his own
Perfections, though, being limited, they cannot exist in the same Form and
Manner, but under different Circumstances from what they are in the Creator.
These different Degrees of Perfection, thus communicated, constitute the
different Ranks and Orders of the Creatures. To the Inanimates he communicates
but little more than bare Existence. On the Vegetables he impresses a uniform
Motion of the nutritive Parts, with a proper Cohesion. To Animals he
communicates an animal Motion and Life, with an Instinct to preserve their
Lives and continue their Species, in which they discover a Sagacity very nearly
resembling Reason. To Man he has communicated the superior Powers of Reason and
Understanding, whereby he is capable of forming some Ideas of the natural and
moral Perfections of God and his Works; of comparing the Ideas of Things, and
of drawing just Inferences and Deductions.

11. When any Creature is endued with such a Degree of Understanding and
Reason, as to be capable of conceiving of the natural Relations of Things, and
so of the natural Perfections of God; and is also, in some Measure, capable of
understanding the Nature of Right and Wrong, or the moral Relations of Things,
as compared with a Rule of right Conduct, and so of the moral Perfections of
God; such a Being is called a MORAL AGENT and is capable of moral Virtue, and
is the Subject of moral Government and Obligation. The moral Virtue, Goodness
or Excellency of such a moral Agent, consists in a Conformity to the moral
Perfections of God, as the original Standard of all Perfection.

12. This Conformity is twofold; either internal and real, or only external and
apparent.

1. Internal or real Virtue consists in an inward Temper and Disposition of
Mind, which is like to God and conformable to the moral Perfections of his
Nature; such as Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth. And this internal,
divine Principle will naturally produce a Course of external Actions
conformable to it, as the natural Effect and Expression of it. And the ultimate
End and Design of a Person endued with this Principle, will be to act in
Conformity to the divine Perfections, and to do all to the Glory of God.

13. (2.) External or apparent Virtue is such an external Conduct as may seem
to be the visible Effect or Expression of this inward divine Principle; but, in
Reality, is not; and proceeds from some lower Motive, such as Self-Interest,
Honor, Fancy, or the like. Thus a Man may devote a considerable Part of his
Estate to public Uses civil and sacred, may be just and beneficent to his
Neighbor, punctual to his Promises, and abstain from all bodily Excesses; and
yet, in all these Things, have no Regard to God, but only to himself, to his
own Interest, Reputation or Fancy. Although the Matter of these Actions is just
and right, and agreeable to the divine Law; yet, as they do not proceed from a
true Principle and right End, they are not really virtuous, nor so accounted by
the Searcher of Hearts. Indeed the Heathen, who had no higher Principle,
generally accounted such Actions to be virtuous; but divine Revelation teaches
us, that there can be no virtuous Actions without a divine Temper of Mind, in
Conformity to the Perfections of God. 2 Pet. 1.3. Add to your Faith Virtue.
Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. -- Virtutes appellames sanctos Affectus sanctas
Cogitationes et Actiones.

Wollebii Theologiae, Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Virtutes Ethnicorum fuerunt splendida
Peccata. August.




14. Having considered the true Nature and original Standard of moral Virtue, I
proceed,

Secondly, To consider the Obligation which every rational Creature and moral
Agent is under, to be conformed to the moral Perfections of God. This
Obligation arises,

I. And principally, from the infinite and absolute Perfection of the divine
Nature: For as God is the most perfect Being, so the most perfect State of any
other Being, must consist in being like to him. As he is the only self-existent
Being, the original Standard of all Perfection, and all Creatures derive their
several Degrees of Perfection from him, he must be the only Rule and Pattern
for them; and their highest Perfection must consist in being like to the
original and all-perfect Standard. The greater Degree of divine Perfection any
Creature enjoys, the more perfect he must be.

15. Every Creature of God was originally made perfect, in his own Model or
Degree; that is, its Degree of Perfection was uniform, so as to have no Part or
Quality deficient, incongruous or repugnant to any other Part; or to have any
two Dispositions or Qualities, which, in their own Nature, or under any
Circumstances, could operate contrary to each other. The Perfection, therefore,
of a rational Creature, must be to continue in that perfect State in which he
was created: But to lose any Part of it, or to acquire any contrary Disposition
or Quality, is a Defection from the most perfect Pattern and Standard, and a
Destruction of the Works of God. This, in Scripture is called ANOMIA, a
Deviation from the perfect Law of moral Rectitude, founded in the divine
Nature. It is also called moral Depravity or Sin, and as it is the first
Principle of wrong Action, it is called Original Sin.

16. And if a Creature has deviated from this Standard of Perfection,
heretofore; that will not justify his Deviation from it, for the Time to come.
For it will remain an eternal and immutable TRUTH, resulting from the Nature of
God and the Relation of a rational Creature to him, that his Perfection
consists in a Conformity to the Perfection of God; and that notwithstanding his
former Transgression or Defect has brought upon him a present Indisposition,
Unwillingness or Incapacity of such a perfect Conformity: For such an
Indisposition or Incapacity is so far from being a Justification of his present
State, or an Evidence of his being still in a State of Perfection, that, on the
contrary, it is yet a further Deviation from the most perfect Standard; for a
rational Creature's Indisposition or Incapacity of being like to God, renders
him the more unlike to him.

17. Indeed all the Works of God, as they come from him, are perfect; and every
Part of them congruous and consistent with each other; so that whenever he
makes a moral Agent, he endues him with a perfect Disposition and full Powers
to do his Duty, and be perfect, as such a Creature: But if he afterward, by
any Means, contracts a contrary Disposition, or loses his Power, that no ways
alters the Nature of his Perfection, or the Nature of his Obligation. The
Perfection of the Creature consists in a Conformity to God, after he has
indisposed or incapacitated himself for it, as much as it did before.
Notwithstansting all he can do, the same Truth will eternally remain, that his
highest Perfection consists in a Conformity to God; and it is impossible that
any Action of his should annul or make it void.

18. It is also inconsistent with the divine Perfections to suppose that God
should release or discharge any moral Agent from his Obligation to a perfect
Conformity to the divine Perfections; or that he should substitute any other
Thing in the Room of it, as that he should only do his Endeavor, or as well as
he can, or the like. For in every Thing wherein he falls short of a perfect
Conformity to God, in the Disposition of his Mind, or Course of his Actions
(according to that Rank and Order in which he is placed among the Creatures) it
is his moral Defect, ANOMIA or Sin. And God's Favor and Approbation is
necessarily extended to his Creatures according to the Degree of their Likeness
and Conformity to him.

19. Every rational Creature and moral Agent is obliged to be perfect and
conformed to God, in the highest and strongest Sense in which that Word
Obligation, is ever used. And all those Obligations which arise from
Self-Interest, Hope, Fear, Gratitude, etc. are but low and faint, in Comparison
of this. Yea, God himself is frequently said (by way of Analogy) to be obliged
to act according to his own Perfections: But this Obligation, in a more direct
and primary Sense, is said to be incumbent upon his Creatures.

20. II. This Obligation arises, in a secondary Sense, from the declared Will
or Law of God: That is, as the Will and Law of God declare what the divine
Perfections are; and what Temper and Conduct in us, is a Conformity to them:
For this we could not certainly know, unless it was declared to us by the
divine Law; which is therefore the more immediate Rule of our Conduct. Indeed
if it could be supposed that two or more Actions, under some Circumstances,
were equally, agreeable to all the Perfections of God, then, by his absolute
sovereign Authority, he might enjoin either of them, by a particular positive
Law.

21. III. This Obligation is increased by that sovereign Power and Authority
which God has over us, as he is our Creator and we his Creatures. For as our
Existence depends upon his mere Good Will and Pleasure, we ought to exist in
such a Manner and for such Purposes as are agreeable to him, and no other. And
he being our sovereign Lord and Proprietor, it is direct Injustice to use or
dispose of his Property contrary to his Will: And therefore a Compliance with
the Will of our Proprietor, is but a Conformity to his Justice; which is one of
his divine Perfections.

22. So that all moral Virtue and Obligation, in whatever Light we view it, is
to be resolved into a Conformity to the divine Perfections; and all the real
Goodness and Excellency we can have, and all the Obligation we can be under, is
to be like to God. The Good or Happiness which results to us, from a Conformity
to the divine Perfections, or the Fear of Punishment if we neglect it, do not
properly make or create any Obligation; though they may be justly considered as
subordinate Motives and Incentives to act according to the Obligations we were
antecedently under.

23. But this Principle, that the moral Perfections of God are the sole
Foundation and Standard of moral Virtue and Obligation; has been denied by many
celebrated Authors: and several other Foundations have been substituted in the
Room of it: such as, Self-Interest and Happiness -- universal Benevolence --
moral Taste and Sense -- Conformity to Reason -- to the moral Fitness of Things
-- acting according to Truth, and the like. But all these are either imperfect
Descriptions of, or Consequences from the moral Perfections of God, or else
they have no just Foundation at all. I shall particularly examine each of them.

24. I. Some assert that a Principle of Self-Love, Self-Interest, and
Happiness, is the only Foundation of moral Virtue and Obligation, and of all
Religion. That the only Motive to Acts of Justice and Kindness toward our
Fellowmen, is that they may in their Turns do the same to us. That the only
Motive and Obligation to Obedience to the Laws of God, is to procure the divine
Favor, to obtain Rewards and avoid Punishments. That we are not bound to pay
any Regard to God, but only so far as he is subservient to us and our
Happiness. And that, whatever Men may pretend, there cannot possibly be any
other Obligation, Motive or Spring of Action, in human Nature, but only
Self-Love and a Regard to our own Interest and Happiness. To this Purpose
Campbell on moral Virtue, says, that all intelligent Agents can relish Nothing
but Pleasure or Happiness, and are universally governed by the Principle of
Self-Love Page 97.
. That they are irresistibly, in all Instances, under the prevailing Power of
Self-Love; so that we can no otherwise value or esteem Persons or Things than
according as they gratify this Principle, and serve to promote our own Interest
and Happiness P. 101.
. That the Virtue or Goodness of any moral Action, lies precisely in its
Suitableness to gratify one's Self-Love 319.
. Bp. Gastrell, in his Sermons at Boyle's Lectures, says, that Happiness is the
ultimate End of our Being and all our Actions Page 121.
. That the Power or Right of obliging is nothing else, but offering to the Mind
a Motive either of Happiness to be obtained, or Misery to be avoided -- and
there is no other Notion or Ground of Obligation imaginable P. 91, 92.
. That no Being has a Right or Power of obliging another, any further than he
has a Power of contributing to his Happiness or Misery. That God can lay Men
under no Obligation to obey him, any otherwise than by making them know that he
has Power to make them happy or miserable Page 96.
.

25. Now I concede that God has implanted a Principle of Self-Love and
Self-Preservation in all Animals: and that all Brutes and the greater Part of
Mankind are in fact governed by that alone. And it is an Instance of the Wisdom
of God in his providential Government of the World, that, since the greater
Part of Mankind, in this fallen State, are destitute of any higher or better
Principle, he has implanted this, which keeps the World in some good Order and
Regulation. Men are generally agreed, that Lying, Stealing, Robbery, Piracy,
etc. are bad; and they seem generally to hate them; not from a Sense of the
real MORAL EVIL of these Things in themselves, or their Contrariety to the holy
Nature and Law of God; but as being contrary to the Happiness of the Community,
and of ourselves. And therefore whenever we hear that any such Acts are done,
every one immediately has this Reflection, "It may be my Turn to be robbed
next, and I wish the Actor was punished, in order to prevent it." I also
suppose that a mere natural Man, in no Degree illuminated by the Divine Spirit,
cannot in any human Way, be convinced of any moral Evil in Sin, but only by the
natural ill Consequences which attend it. Since therefore this Principle of
Self-Love is implanted by God, and answers many good Ends, it is not to be
eradicated; but regulated by, and made subservient to a Principle which is
infinitely higher and better, viz. a Conformity to the moral Perfections of
God; which is the Standard of the highest Perfection of human Nature.

26. In Pursuance therefore to this Principle of Self-Love and Happiness, a Man
may thus reason with himself, I am one of the Creatures of God, placed in a
certain Rank and Dignity in the Creation, and put into a Capacity of Happiness,
under certain Restrictions and Limitations: I will therefore endeavor to
promote my own Happiness, in Obedience to the Will of God, and principally that
the Glory of his Goodness, Mercy and Wisdom might be displayed in it. And as
God has committed the Care of myself more immediately to myself, I, considering
myself as his Servant especially appointed to this Business, will, in Obedience
to his Commands, take especial Care to glorify him in this Way.

27. But for a Man to make the sole, supreme, or ultimate End of all Being and
Action to be for himself alone or his own Happiness, as the summum Bonum; and
to regard God and all other Beings, only so far as they may serve himself or be
subservient to his own Happiness, or gratify his Principle of Self-Love, is the
most absolute Inversion of the Order, Dignity and Perfection of Beings: and one
of the worst Principles that can be in human Nature: it being as great an
Absurdity, as it is to suppose, that a small Part is bigger than the Whole. And
the Man who is known to act from no higher Principle than this, as corrupt as
the World is, will hardly be admitted to any public Office or Trust in the
civil State. The Stoics seemed to have a better Notion of Virtue than this;
for they supposed that Virtue was really amiable in itself, antecedent to the
Advantage of it to Mankind.

28. Therefore all those Rules of pretended moral Conduct, which are formed
merely upon the Principles of Self-Love or a Balance of Self-Interest among
Mankind; although they may answer some good Purposes in civil Life, and as human
Laws, may keep the World from many hurtful Disorders, yet they are far from
being Rules of true moral Virtue; or Means whereby a Man may obtain the special
Favor of God and eternal Happiness.

29. II. Another Principle set up as the sole Foundation of moral Virtue and
Obligation, is universal Benevolence or good Will to all other Beings; God and
the Creatures. That this Benevolence is natural to all Mankind, and the only
Duty enjoined in the Law of Nature; and that the only Obligation we can be
under to obey any Law, is a Principle of Benevolence to ourselves and others.
To this Purpose Bp. Cumberland on the Laws of Nature, says, that all moral Laws
are summed up in Benevolence. Chap. I. 9.
And that from hence all moral Virtue may be deduced. 10.
That Benevolence is a Will to pursue every one his own Happiness, together
with the Happiness of others. 6.
That Happiness consists in the Possession of good Things. 5.
That moral Good is ultimately to be resolved into common natural Good. Chap.
III. 1.
That particular Virtues, such as Justice, etc. are nothing else but Ways and
Means of obtaining natural Good. 3.
That the only Reason why Virtue is good, is because it tends to the natural
Good of the Public. Chap. V. 5.
That there cannot be a greater Object of beatific Actions than the common
Good. Chap. V. 13.
That the Law of Nature is a Proposition which points out such an Action as
promotes the common Good, and the Happiness of particular Persons. Chap. V. S.
1.
That the Law of Nature declares those Actions only which tend to the public
Good. 10.
That the whole Force of Obligation to obey any Law, is from the Rewards and
Punishments annexed. 10.


30. Now I readily concede that Benevolence or a Disposition to do Good and
promote the Happiness of others, is one very good Principle, and an Imitation
of the Goodness of God. But this cannot be the sole Foundation of all moral
Duty and Obligation, because this would be an Imitation of one of the divine
Perfections only, exclusive of all the Rest; and every moral Agent is obliged
to imitate the divine Justice and Truth as well as the divine Goodness. To
conceive of Justice and Truth only as Parts or subordinate Means of Goodness,
is to confound our clear and distinct Ideas of the divine Perfections. If we
conceive of Justice and Truth only as subservient to Goodness, then the Justice
of God's Right of Dominion over us, consists only in its Advantage to us: and
the Justice of any Punishment inflicted by God, consists only in this, that it
is for the Good of the Creatures; and there is no Evil in God's declaring a
Falsehood, but only as it may bring Misery upon the Creatures. Which
Suppositions evidently confound our clear Ideas of the divine Perfections, and
all Morality.

31. When Man enjoyed the Image of God; and particularly participated of the
divine Goodness; he was endued with a Disposition to do Good, and promote the
Happiness of all other Beings: but since the Fall, there is but a little of
this Principle of universal and disinterested Benevolence among Mankind. And
all the Resemblance of it, in unregenerate Men, proceeds from a Principle of
Self-Love; extended to the proper Means of promoting our own Happiness. For
every Man who has not very contracted Views, will easily see that he cannot be
very happy himself, unless others about him are so too; who, in their Turns,
may help to happify him. And so, from a mere Principle of Self-Love, may
observe the Rule of Doing as he would be done by; and may at length contract a
Habit of doing some benevolent Acts, on a sudden, without any particular
Reflection upon the Principle or Motives upon which such a Habit was originally
formed. But this Principle of Benevolence, which in the present State is so
imperfect, and at best is but one of the many Perfections which every moral
Agent ought to be endued with, cannot be the sole, exclusive Foundation of all
moral Virtue.

32. It is easy to conceive of Benevolence to the Creatures, as a Disposition
to promote their Happiness: but I cannot easily conceive of what Bp. Cumberland
means by Benevolence to God. He defines Benevolence to be a Will to pursue
every one his own Happiness, together with the Happiness of others. Chap. I. S.
6.
And says he does not mean a lifeless Volition, which affects nothing; but that
whereby we execute what we desire. Chap. I. S. 4.
That Benevolence universally produces a good Effect to the Person to whom we
wish well. S. 8.
That it is an Affection whereby we desire Things grateful or pleasing to God.
S. 4.
That is, which, by Way of Analogy to Man, leaves his Mind in a State of
Tranquillity, Joy, or Complacency; which, he says may be safely ascribed to God.
Chap. V. Sec. 9.


33. Now, though we may and ought to conceive with Pleasure, that the Happiness
of God is absolutely perfect, necessary, eternal and immutable; yet we cannot
directly will, desire or endeavor that his Happiness should be either
increased or continued. His Happiness, Joy or Complacency may be the Subject of
our pleasing Contemplation; but cannot be the Object of our Volition, Desire or
Endeavor. The Supposition that his Happiness can be any ways consequent upon
our Volition or Endeavor, destroys the proper Idea of it. Indeed the
declarative Glory of God consists in some external Operations or Manifestations
to the Creature, in which we may be, in some measure, active or instrumental;
but the Happiness of God is an internal State within himself; to which we can
have no Relation, but only by a pleasing Perception or Contemplation.

But though it is so difficult to form any Idea of Benevolence to God; yet Bp.
Cumberland makes it to be the whole of Piety toward God; Chap. I. Sec. 4.
and the Sum of the Duties of the first Table of the Law: which he says consist
in a Sense or Conviction, that it is for the Interest of all, that God should
be the supreme Governor of the World, for the common Good and the Happiness of
each of us in particular. Chap. IX. Sec. 2.
And says that we ought to make ourselves acceptable to God, as the Cause of
the common Good, and consequently our own. Chap. I. Sec. 24.
By which he seems evidently to mean, that our Benevolence to God has a
peculiar Reference to him as the Governor of the World; and is a Wish or Desire
that he might govern well, with Wisdom, Honor, and Success, for the common
Happiness, and my own in particular: and in order to secure his Favor, should
endeavor to make myself acceptable to him. So that this Benevolence toward
God, seems ultimately to terminate only in Benevolence toward ourselves; or in
a wishing well to those Ways and Means which are necessary to promote my own
Happiness in Conjunction with the Happiness of others. But this whole Scheme of
the Laws of Nature, advanced by Bp. Cumberland, is fully and clearly confuted
by fourteen Arguments in the Appendix to Mr. Maxwell's English Translation of
it.

34. Another Criterion of moral Virtue and Obligation, is moral Taste and
Sense. Hutcheson on Virtue, etc. passim.
They say, that when any Man sees or considers any Action, he immediately
approves or disapproves of it, by Virtue of an internal Taste or Sense, which
he naturally has in himself; just as Things are agreeable or disagreeable to
his natural Taste. That this his Taste or Sense is the sole Criterion of Right
and Wrong, and the Standard of moral Good and Evil. And that the only
Obligation he can be under, is to conform to the inward Sense of his own Mind;
at least, that is the next and immediate Rule to him. Upon which I would
observe,

1. That so far as such a Sense or Disposition of judging of what is right and
wrong, exists in the Mind of a mere natural and uninlightened Man, it proceeds
wholly from a Principle of Self-Love, improved in the Manner I before related;
whereby, from general Observation, he fixes upon certain general Rules or
Methods of Conduct among Mankind, which he apprehends will be most conducive to
the general Good and his own Happiness in particular; and thereupon contracts a
Habit of judging upon particular Actions, as being right or wrong, upon a
Sudden, without particularly considering the Reasons, upon which such a
Judgment was originally founded. And this Sense or Judgment is right or wrong
according to the original Rules of Conduct he happened to fix upon. Some indeed
make this moral Sense to be nearly the same with Conscience. But Conscience is
the Judgment which a Man forms of his own Actions, as being agreeable or
disagreable to the Law of God: but where no divine Law is supposed (unless it
be that a man ought to make the Sense of his own Mind, the Rule of his Conduct)
then his Sense and Taste is the primary and only Standard of judging (as it is
in bitter and sweet) and so there can be no Room or Place for the Exercise of
Conscience; unless it be in judging whether a Man's Actions are agreeable to his
Judgment.

35. (2) Although, when Man was at first created in the divine Image, he had a
pleasing Taste, Sense and Approbation of every Thing which is agreeable to the
divine Perfections, yet, since the Fall, his Understanding is darkened, his
Judgment is perverted, his Taste and Relish of Things corrupted, and his Mind,
and Conscience is defiled; as we are fully taught by divine Revelation, Romans
iii. 9. etc. Both Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin. There is none that
understands. There is none that seeks after God. They are all gone out of
the Way. There is none that does good; no, not one. The best of the Heathen
Moralists taught, approved of, and practiced sundry gross Vices and
Immoralities, particularly mentioned in Bp. Cumberland's Imperfection of
Heathen Morality, Section 9.
and many other Authors. And they supposed that their Gods had as many corrupt
Passions and Vices as they had themselves. Whole Nations have allowed of and
tolerated many plain Vices, by their public Laws, particularly mentioned by Mr.
Lock. On Human Understanding, Book I. Chap. III.
And we see, by sad Experience, that even in Christian Countries, Men may
gradually grow so corrupt as to practice Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness,
Duelling, etc. without much Remorse; and, among their own Companions, will
speak of these Things with Pleasure; yea, boast of some of them as heroic
Actions. And if this moral Taste be the Criterion of Right and Wrong; then
every Man's Taste is the Rule to himself; and there may be as many different
Rules of Virtue and Vice, as there are vitiated Tastes among Mankind. Mr.
Campbell and Mr. Hutcheson wrote against one another, and plainly confuted each
others Principles, although they could not establish their own.


36. Another more plausible Standard of moral Virtue and Obligation, is Reason.
Many Authors talk much of Reason, as if it was an infallible Guide; but do not
sufficiently distinguish the different Senses in which that Word is used;
sometimes to denote the rational Objects perceived, and sometimes the
perceiving Power of the Mind.

1. Objective Reason signifies the OBJECTS perceived by our Minds; such as God,
his Perfections, Ideas and Works, as participating of some Degree of his
Perfections; together with all the various Modes and Relations of these Things
one to another. All just Conceptions and true Propositions concerning any of
these Things, are called Reason in the Object. As if I lay down these
Propositions, that Every self-existent Being is eternal and immutable. That God
is to be worshipped and obeyed by his Creatures. Most Men will say that these
Propositions are REASON, or agreeable to Reason. Now Reason, taken in this
Sense, according to Mr. Norris, signifies the Divine Ideas, or God's
Conceptions of his own Perfections, as they are in themselves, or as they are
exhibited in his Works; and may, in some Respect, be said to be God himself, as
conceived of by himself. And so far as the Divine Ideas are, in any Way or
Degree communicated to us, and are the Objects of our Conception; our Reason
seems to be an Emanation from and Part of the infinite Intelligence and Wisdom
of God, replenishing and illuminating our Minds. Reason, in this Sense, is an
infallible Guide, and comes near to the Standard I have before laid down. But I
suppose this is not the Meaning of those Authors who set up the Oracles of
human Reason, Opposition to divine Revelation.

37 (2) Subjective Reason has Man for the Subject, and signifies a Power in the
human Mind, whereby a Man is able, in some Measure, to conceive of the Objects
before mentioned, and to draw necessary Inferences and Deductions from them,
both of a speculative and practical Nature. Now Reason, considered as a Power
or Faculty in Man, though it is a very great and noble Endowment, vastly
superior to the brutal Instinct, yet it is subject to many Imperfections and
Limitations, and, in this fallen State, to many Delusions and pernicious
Errors. And this arises partly from wrong Conceptions of the Objects, and
partly from wrong Deductions from our own Conceptions. For in order to reason
right, we must have not only just and clear Conceptions of the Objects reasoned
upon (at least so far as as we pretend to reason upon them) but clear
Perceptions of the Relation of our own Ideas, in order to draw just Inferences
and Deductions from them.

38. Reason if tolerably well capable of understanding the Principles of
Self-Interest, and the necessary Means of promoting the Happiness of Mankind in
their private and political Capacity. From hence proceeded the just and
rational Institutes of the Civil Law among the ancient Romans, which were so
well calculated to promote their public Peace and natural Happiness. Yet even
in these Things, Reason is but an imperfect Guide; for in some Countries many
evident Vices, plainly detrimental to the natural Happiness of Mankind, were
allowed by the public Laws. But then Reason goes but a very little Way in
determining the Principles of human Actions, considered as moral, religious, or
acceptable to God, or relative to the future Happiness; unless a Man reasons
upon the Data of divine Revelation. Indeed Revelation supposes Man to be a
rational Creature, capable of understanding the Propositions designed to be
communicated to him, of comparing one with another, and of forming a consistent
Scheme of the whole. But then there must be some Data or first moral Principles
given by God himself, for human Reason to act and build upon, or otherwise he
has no sure Foundation for any just Inferences and Deductions. Thus if a Man
sets out upon this Principle, that his own Happiness is the sole and ultimate
End of his Creation; or that a Conformity to his own Sense and Taste of Things,
is the only Thing necessary to procure the divine Favor and eternal Happiness,
how justly soever he may reason upon these Principles, yet if they prove to be
false, the whole Superstructure will fail him.

39. Besides, Reason considered as a mere Power or Faculty in Man, cannot
possibly be the Criterion of Virtue, or the original Standard to which human
Actions ought to be conformed; since it is only a Power in us to find out and
know what that Standard is, and the Measure by which we try the Conformity of
our own Actions to that Standard; as a Scale or Pole is the Measure by which we
determine the Conformity of an Edifice to the Plan laid by the Architect.
Reason therefore, considered as a Power in us, supposes a superior Standard by
which our Actions are to be tried; which is the moral Perfections or Law of
God, to which our Actions ought to be conformed.

40. Furthermore; Reason, considered as a mere human Power or Qualification can
never have such a transcendent Excellency and Dignity, as to be the Criterion
of the divine Favor, Approbation and eternal Felicity, or claim such a supreme
Authority and Empire, as to be the Foundation of all moral Obligation; for this
would make Man, or one of his own Faculties to be his supreme Lawgiver and
Governor. And it is plainly contrary to the clearest Dictates of Reason we are
Masters of, to deny this supreme Dignity and Authority to the infinite
Perfections of God, and yet to give it to such a subordinate, limited and
imperfect Thing as human Reason, I say not this to depreciate or decry human
Reason, but to allow its just Excellency and Dignity, without making of it to
interfere with the eternal, immutable, and absolute Perfections of the
all-perfect God.

41. Besides, human Reason, without evident Data or Principles to proceed upon,
especially under Prepossessions and wrong Inclinations, is very various in its
Dictates; so that what appears to be reasonable to one Person or Nation,
appears to be utterly unreasonable to another; and that even in some of the
plainest Instances of Virtue and Vice, which one would think might be better
regulated even by the Principles of Self-Interest and Happiness.

42. Lastly, Reason is of such a general Nature, as that it cannot be the
special Criterion of moral Virtue and Obligation; for if so, then every
Thought, Word or Action in Mathematics, Law, Mechanics or Agriculture, which
is agreeable to Reason, would be a moral Virtue; which I think no Man ever yet
asserted. There must therefore be some Criterion or Rule to determine moral
Virtue and Obligation, which is more particular and precise than the general
Idea of human Reason.

43. Some confound Reason with Conscience, and say that God has implanted in
every Man a natural Conscience, whereby he is able, with his own Reason, to
know what is right and wrong, and the Will of God, and to act accordingly. Now,
Conscience is the Judgment which a Man forms concerning his own Actions, as
agreeable or disagreable to the Law and Will of God: and this ultimately
resolves the Rule into the divine Law; and as the divine Law results from the
divine Nature and Perfections, this Rule is so far right, and the same which I
have before laid down. But then Reason is not the Law itself, but only the
Means to find out the Law. And Conscience is not the Law itself, but only his
Judgment upon the Law; which Judgment is sometimes right and sometimes wrong:
which plainly supposes an antecedent superior Standard.

44. V. Another supposed Foundation of moral Virtue and Obligation, is the
moral Fitness of Things. They say that there are certain, necessary, eternal
and unchangeable Relations and Fitnesses of Things; which necessarily determine
the Will and Actions of God, and ought to determine the Will and Actions of
Men: and that the highest Obligation that any Being can be under, is to be
conformed to these moral Fitnesses. To this Purpose Dr. Clark says, that there
are certain necessary and eternal Differences of Things, and certain
consequential Fitnesses or Unfitnesses of the Application of them, one to
another, founded unchangeably in the Nature and Reason of Things. On natural
and revealed Religion, P. 185.
That the same necessary and eternal different Relations, which different
Things bear one to another, and the same consequential Fitness or Unfitness of
the Application of them, one to another, with Regard to which the Will of God
always and necessarily does determine itself, -- ought likewise constantly to
determine the Wills of all subordinate rational Beings; to govern all their
Actions by the same Rules, for the Good of the Public. That these eternal and
necessary Differences of Things, make it fit and reasonable for Creatures so to
act: they cause it to be their Duty, and lay an Obligation upon them so to do;
separate from the Consideration of these Rules, being the Will and Command of
God. P. 150.
That these eternal moral Obligations are in perpetual Force, merely from their
own Nature, and the abstract Reason of Things. P. 151.
And that the original Obligation of all is the eternal Reason of Things. P.
191.
But have the Gentlemen who talk thus, any clear Ideas of what they mean by
these THINGS, whose Nature or Properties are necessary, eternal and immutable?
Where are these Things to be found? Are they Creatures? or, Are they the
eternal Creator? If by these Things they mean the divine Nature, Perfections,
or Ideas; and if, by the Fitnesses of Things, they mean the Unity, Harmony or
Congruity of the divine Nature, Perfections, or Ideas; or our just Conceptions
of them, then they mean something that is real; and I readily allow that these
Things, or Objects of Conception, are necessary, eternal and immutable; and
that the Will and Actions of God are necessarily determined by his own
Perfections; and that a Conformity to them, is the Foundation of all moral
Obligation in Men. But to suppose that God's Will should be necessarily
determined by any Thing, even by abstract Justice, Goodness, or Truth,
considered not as his own Perfections, but as Things out of, distinct from, or
independent of himself, is highly absurd. For this is, in Effect, to suppose
the Existence of other Beings, necessarily and eternally existing, which are
superior to him, and to which he is bound to be conformed as the Measure and
Standard of his Perfection. Or if by these Things are meant the Creatures, or
any Actions or Properties in them or resulting from them, or any Entia Rationis
or Creatures of Imagination; then these temporary or fleeting Things can have
no eternal or immutable Existence, Relation or Fitnesses, or any such supreme
Excellency or Authority, so as to be the Foundation of all moral Obligation
either in God or Man.

45. VI. Another supposed Foundation of moral Virtue and Obligation, is a
Conformity to Truth. Mr. Wollaston says, that we ought to treat every Thing as
being what it is. That we ought to conduct toward every Person and Thing in
all the Relations it stands in to us and other Things, as being what in Truth
and Fact it is. That these Relations may be expressed in many true
Propositions, which may be affirmed and denied by Actions as well as Words:
that every Action which implies the Truth of any true Proposition is morally
right: and that every Action which implies the Denial of any true Proposition
is morally wrong. And that the Virtue or Viciousness of any Action consists
wholly in this, that it is an Affirmation or Denial of some true Proposition.
Religion of Nature, Sec. 1. passim.
Now if Truth is taken essentially for one of the moral Perfections of God,
then a Conformity to this Perfection, in our Temper and Actions, is so far
right, and agreeable to the Rule I have before laid down. But if Truth be taken
in a general and metaphysical Sense, to signify only the Truth of Facts, and
the natural Relation of Things, I think the Morality of any Action cannot be
determined by it. For all Facts may be conceded as true and brought into a
Proposition, and yet the Question of Right and Obligation, may still be as
undetermined as ever. As, what Obligation am I under to act or not act in such
a Case? What Actions are the Denial of such a Proposition? and what is the
Crime of denying a true Proposition in Actions, or even in Words, upon a
Supposition that there is no moral Law antecedently existing which forbids such
a Denial?

46. As suppose I am poor and needy and my Neighbor is rich and has more than
he is likely to want, may I not privately take and use some of his Goods?

A. says, if you take and use your Neighbor's Goods, you treat them as being
your own, and practically declare that they are your own; when in Truth they
are not: and you practically deny the Truth of this Proposition, that they are
your Neighbor's; and so you are guilty of Lying.

B. replies No; for I have a Right to take and use my Neighbor's Goods, under
these Circumstances; and my using them is no Declaration that they are mine, or
that they are not his. Here all the Facts are conceded, as in Truth they are;
and yet the Right remains undecided, and will remain so until it is decided by
some moral Law or Rule which results from the divince Justice or Truth, viz.
That every Man ought to have the sole Use of his OWN; or, that it is unjust to
use another's Property without his Consent.

47. And supposing that all Vices are to be resolved into Lying; by what Rule
does it appear, that Lying is a moral Evil?

Wollaston says 'because it is a Denial of Facts that are true.' But there is
no Crime in that, if there be no antecedent moral Obligation not to deny them.
Therefore, to lay it down, as a first Principle, that we are obliged to keep to
historical Truth, is to lay that down as a first Principle, which needs a
preceding one to support it. And therefore it is ultimately to be resolved into
this fundamental Principle, that we are obliged to be conformed to the eternal
and immutable Justice and Truth of God. Without this, a Conformity to the Truth
of Facts or historical Truth, can only be a natural Convenience, at most; but
has Nothing in it of the Nature of moral Virtue or Obligation.

48. VII. Another supposed Standard of moral Virtue and Obligation, is Right
and Wrong. That whatsoever is morally right, is a moral Virtue; and whatsoever
is morally wrong, is a Vice. That the highest Obligation of every moral Agent
(whether God or Man) is to be conformed to that which is right, and to abstain
from that which is wrong. That every Man naturally has in his own Mind the Idea
of Right, and by this, as the ultimate Standard, he judges of all Beings and
Actions, beyond which there is a ne plus ultra. To which I reply,

49. (1.) That the Idea of Right plainly contains these three distinct Ideas;

First, The Idea of a Rule or Standard, to which any Action or Thing ought to
be conformed, in order to its being denominated Right.

Secondly, The Idea of the Thing that is conformed to the Standard.

Thirdly, The Idea of the Relation of these two Objects, that the latter is
conformed to the former.

If the Mind sees a Conformity of the Action or Thing to its Standard, then it
judges it to be right; and if it sees a Nonconformity, then it judges it to be
wrong. Therefore the Idea of Right, cannot be the Idea of the Standard itself,
but is an Idea subsequent to and consequent upon it; and plainly presupposes a
superior Standard to which the Thing ought to be conformed in order to its
being denominated right.

50. (2.) This Principle sets up a Thing which is not God, to be a Standard for
God; a Rule to try him by, and to which he ought to be conformed. Which is to
suppose a Being or Thing antecedent to the first, and higher than the highest;
which is manifestly absurd. Indeed by observing various Instances of the
Conformity of Things to their Standard, a Man may get a general abstract Idea
of Right, before he has the Idea of God; but then, if he traces back his own
Ideas to the first Source, he must recur to one eternal and self-existent Being
who is the Original and Foundation of all Perfection and Standard of all that
is right -- Here he comes to a ne plus ultra, and not before. And to set up any
Thing which is not God, as being eternal, immutable and independent, is to set
up another God, with some of his essential Properties, and as a Standard
superior to him.

51. (3.) The general, abstract Idea of Right, being a Conformity of a Thing to
its Standard, there will be as many and various Ideas of Right, as there are
Standards of Conformity. Thus a right Line is made by a strait Rule or Scale. A
Traveller takes the right Way, when he takes that which will bring him quickest
or easiest to the Place designed: that being the Standard of Right in his Mind.
A natural Man, when he does that which he conceives to be most for his own
Interest and Happiness (which is his ultimate End) does what he conceives to be
right: and a Man acting under the Direction of divine Revelation, makes a
Conformity to the divine Nature and Perfections to be his Rule and Standard of
Right. And every Man conceives that to be wrong, which is a Nonconformity to
the Standard he fixes upon, let it be what it will. But if it could be supposed
that a Man has no Standard of Right in his own Mind, then the Idea of Right
itself immediately vanishes; for there can be no relative Ideas where there is
no Conception of the Subjects from whence those Relations result. Indeed, if by
Right is meant the divine Perfections, especially God's Justice and Truth, or a
Conformity to them, as the original Standard; this is the same Criterion I have
before laid down. But if by Right is meant any Entity or Relation necessarily
existing out of God, not derived from him or dependent upon him, and to which
he is obliged to be conformed, as the Standard of his Perfection; such a
Conception is a mere Imagination, and is, in Effect, a setting up of another
God not only besides him, but above him; which is so far from being the
Foundation of true Religion and Morality, that it seems to be a Kind of
Idolatry.

52. VIII. The last supposed Foundation of moral Virtue and Obligation, which I
shall mention, is Obedience to the Will and Commands of God, with this ultimate
View, to obtain his Favor and Rewards, and thereby to promote my own
Happiness. This is the same Principle I mentioned before; but only Obedience to
God is here proposed as a subordinate Means to promote Self-Interest, as an
ultimate End. But I conceive that the Nature of an ultimate End is not at all
altered or made better, by the Goodness of the subordinate Means proposed in
order to obtain it. Although I am never so careful to do that which is agreeable
to the divine Law, yet, upon this Principle, I regard God only as he is
subservient to me; for if I obey him upon no other Motive but only the expected
Wages, I view him only as a Servant to me. And though I should suppose, that he
has an infinitely better Disposition and greater Capacity to reward and happify
me, than all other Beings, and so should value his Favor above all the World
(...), yet still this does not alter the Nature of (...); I still esteem and
value him only (...) the best of Servants, or as a Being most subservient to my
own Interest.

53. Upon this Principle, the Obedience paid to God, is of the same Nature and
Kind with that which is paid to an earthly King. We regard the King or supreme
Magistrate, as such, only as he is subservient to the Good of the Community and
my Good in particular; and if we believe that he has the best Disposition and
Capacity to promote these Ends, of any Man that we know of, this is the highest
Regard we can ordinarily have for an earthly King, as such. But there is an
infinitely different Kind of Regard to be paid to God upon the Account of his
own intrinsic Excellencies, and Perfections, antecedent to the Consideration of
his being our Creator, Benefactor or Governor. And if we do not serve God from
an infinitely better Principle than we serve an earthly King, there is no
Probability that ever we shall obtain the Reward of eternal Happiness.

. 54. Some other Authors have laid down other Foundations of moral Virtue and
Obligation; but it will be needless to mention any more; since whatever
fundamental Principles Men may build upon, considered as distinct from and
independent of the one self-existent, eternal, immutable and all-perfect Being,
they will, upon Examination, be found to have no real, permanent and stable
Foundation at all.

55. Finally, some Treatises on Ethics seem to build upon almost all these
several Foundations, confusedly mixed together, without any Distinction of
their Nature, Order and Relation; which leave the Mind confused, and unsettled
upon any real Foundation at all. Grove's Ethics.
But so far as these latter Principles may, in any Sense, be admitted, it is in
the following Order and Relation, viz.

1. The divine Perfections are the primary, the ultimate and sole Foundation
and Standard of all moral Virtue and Obligation.

2. The Law or Will of God is the next and immediate Rule to us, as it declares
what these Perfections are; and what Temper and Conduct in us, is a Conformity
to them. Which also creates an additional Obligation, as he is our sovereign
Lord and Proprietor.

3. Reason is a Power or Faculty in us whereby we are, in some Measure, able to
understand this Law, compare our Temper and Actions with it, and judge of their
Conformity to it.

4. By a Course of reasoning and judging upon any Law or Rule, we acquire a
Habit of judging on a sudden, in particular Cases, without distinctly
recollecting the Principles or Reasons upon which we formerly judged. If this
be all that is meant by moral Sense, Taste or Instinct, it may be conceded.

5. The greater Part of Mankind are, in Fact, governed by a mere natural
Principle of Self-Love; and a Regard to the public Good, so far as they
conceive their own Interest and Happiness to be involved in it. And in those
who are endowed with a higher Principle, Self-Interest may be an additional
Stimulus or Incitement to do that which was an antecedent Duty.

56. Having shown that the moral Perfections of God are the sole Criterion and
Standard of all Perfection and Obligation in the Creature; and the
Insufficiency of all other Foundations; I proceed,

Thirdly, To show, That divine Revelation, is the only Way and Means whereby we
can know what the Perfections of God are, and what Dispositions and Conduct in
us, are a Conformity to these Perfections. I suppose that the Angels and
glorified Saints in Heaven, by their own Reason, could not so perfectly find
out the Perfections and Will of God, but that there is a Necessity of some
particular Revelations and Directions: And that Adam, in a State of Innocence,
could not, by his own natural Reason, know what Use he might make of all the
Trees in the Garden: and therefore God told him, that of every Tree of the
Garden he might freely eat; but of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, he
might not eat, nor so much as touch it. It is certain that Man, in his fallen
and darkened State, stands in Need of divine Revelation to instruct him in the
Nature and Perfections of God, to teach him his Duty, and how to obtain a
Restoration to the divine Favor.

57. It is highly probable, if not certain, that all that imperfect Knowledge
which the Heathens had of the Nature and Will of God, they received by
Tradition from Noah, and the Revelations made to the ancient Patriarchs and
Prophets; and especially from the Writings of Moses. Plato says, that all Laws
came originally from divine Revelation: De Legibus.
And that Virtue is not by Nature or Instruction, but by a divine Gift. Dialog.
Meno.
Mr. Jenkins, in his Reasonableness of Christianity, says, that whatsoever
there is of Excellency in the Philosophy of the Heathens, is owing to
Revelation, Vol. I. P. 256.
Clemens, President of the College in Alexandria, A. D. 192, says, that the
Greek Philosophers took their main Principles out of Moses and the Prophets.
Stromata, Lib. I. and V.
Almost all the ancient Fathers, especially Eusebius Praep. Evangel. Lib. I.
Cap. VI. and IX. and Lib. XIII. C. XII.
and Theodorit Therapeutica.
illustrate and confirm this, in a great Variety of Instances. Hermes
Trimegistus, the famous Egytian Priest, is said to have conversed with Abraham,
when he went down into Egypt, and thereupon to rectify the Egyptian Theology in
several Things. Sanchoniathon, the Phaenician, who, in the Time of the Judges,
wrote a History of the World, says he took the principal Parts of it from the
Writing of Jerubbaal, Priest of Jehovah, or (as it is expressed in Greek)
Hierumbal, Priest of Jeuo. The mosaic Writings were spread far and wide in the
extensive Reign of King Solomon, and in the Babylonish Captivity; and were
probably carried, by the Queen of Sheba to the uttermost Parts of the Earth.
Some devout Jews dwelt in every Nation under Heaven, Acts ii. 5.
who, doubtless, carried the old Testament with them. Daniel, who was Master of
the wise Men of Babylon, taught the Knowledge of the true God; and gave such
Demonstrations of his Perfections, as that Nebuchadnazar and Darius commanded
all Nations, People and Languages to serve the God of Daniel, upon the severest
Penalties, Dan. iv. 29, and vi. 26.
And that they might the better know who this God was, and how to serve him; it
is probable that Daniel made or procured the Greek Translation, spoken of by
Aristobulus a famous Jew of Alexandria, and Peripatetic Philosopher, mentioned
in the second Book of Maccabees, B. ii. C. 1.
who says there was a Greek Translation of the Writings of Moses, etc. before
the Time of Alexander and the Persian Empire; and that Pythagoras, Socrates,
Plato and Orpheus critically searched the Writings of Moses, and took their
principal Sentiments out of them; and, in many Instances, transcribed the very
Words. Eusebius. Praeparat. Evangel. Lib. xiii. C. xii.
The Septuagint Translation was made near three Hundred Years before Christ,
and was generally read by the Philosophers and Historians of all Nations. Most
of the Heathen Moralists wrote after that Translation was made; and the best of
them, after the Publication of Christianity. So that the Supposition which many
have made, that whatever the Heathen Philosophers, in Fact knew, they knew by
the mere Light of Nature, without any Help from divine Revelation, has not the
least Foundation: and I cannot easily conceive how any Gentleman of Reading
could fall into such a Mistake. And indeed it is impossible to know what the
mere Light of Nature could have found out, in Matters of Religion, unless we
could find some Person or People, who were so separated from the Rest of the
World, as that we could be sure they received Nothing from Tradition or divine
Revelation.

58. It is certain that the ancient Babylonians, Egyptians, etc. had some clear
Knowledge of the Creation, the primitive State of Happiness, and especially of
the Flood; which historical Facts they could not know, but by Tradition or
Revelation. And so far as the Knowledge of these historical Facts grew faint,
or was disguised by Fables; so far the Knowledge of the divine Perfections and
moral Duties failed with it; insomuch that several of the remoter Nations, as
the Hottentots and the Inhabitants of Madagascar, had NO Idea of God at all,
until it was, of late Years, communicated to them by the Europeans; as is
evident from sundry Authorities quoted by Mr. Lock on human Understanding,
Book I. Chapter IV.

59. I was well acquainted with a Negro, who was a Man of superior natural
Powers and made a Profession of Religion, who told me that he was born in the
Island of Madagascar and lived there till he was above thirty-four Years old;
and in all that Time never had a Thought of the Being of a God, a Creator, or
Governor of the World, or a future State after Death. Dr. Williots, in his
Sermon on the Light of Nature, relates a Story of a Man in France, who was born
deaf and dumb, yet was very knowing, active and faithful in the common Affairs
of Life: and, upon a solemn Trial before the Bishop, by the Help of those who
could converse with him by Signs, was judged to be a knowing and devout
Christian, and admitted to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which he
attended for many Years, with all the Signs of high Devotion, such as Elevation
of the Hands, Eyes, etc.: at length a large Quantity of hard Wax was taken out
of his Ears; upon which he could hear; and, after a While, could speak and
read. He then declared, that while he was deaf, he had no Idea of a God, or
Maker of the World, or of a future State; and that all he then did, in Matters
of Religion, was purely in Imitation of Others.

60. It is possible that a Man, by contemplating his own Ideas, the visible
Works of Creation, and the Course of Causes and Effects, might, by Degrees,
find out the Being and Perfections of God; but it is probable that he might
live many Years, perhaps his whole Life, before his Thoughts would take much of
a Turn upon these invisible and metaphysical Objects. But after these Things
were suggested to him by Others, and he was set in earnest to reason upon them,
he would find the most clear and undoubted Evidence of a self-existent and
eternal Being. For there is a plain Distinction between a Man's seeing the
Evidence of a Proposition, when it is fairly proposed to him by another, and
his finding it out of himself, or suggesting it to his own Mind. Thus there are
many important Truths in natural Philosophy and Mathematics, which, when they
come to be fairly proposed, were never doubted of; such as the general Laws of
Attraction, the Weight of the Atmosphere, Rules of Fluxions, etc. and yet it is
probable that these Things never came into the Mind of any Mortal, till they
were suggested by the great Genius of Sir Isaac Newton. Yea, there are some
plain Truths, very useful to Mankind, in Surveying, Navigation, etc. such as
that The three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones; which probably
never entered into the Mind of one Man in an Hundred, either by his own
Suggestion, or by the Instruction of Others.

61. As it is doubtful how far Men would have found out the Being and
Perfections of God, if there never had been any Kind of Revelation; so it is
more doubtful how far they would have found out moral Duties; any further than
Experience would have taught them sundry Rules how to promote Self-Interest,
and the common Happiness of the Community. Authors frequently speak of the Law
of Nature as the great fundamental Principle of all moral Duties; and yet they
give very different, if not contrary Definitions of it. The most ancient and
most generally received Definition, is that in the Jus Civil. viz. Jus
natural est quod Natura omnia Animalia docuit. Justiniani Institut. Lib. I.
Tit. 11.
A Law which Nature has taught all Animals (Man and Beast.) This Definition is
confuted by Bp. Cumberland, who says that by the Law of Nature, the best
Civilians understand the Law of Nations; Chap. V. Sec. 2.
and he defines it to be a Rule to promote the common Good, and the Happiness
of particular Persons. Chap. V. Sec. 1.
This Definition is confuted by the Author of the Appendix, before mentioned;
and he defines it to be a Law of the great Morals of Nature's Institution. Page
40.
And this, he says, is agreeable to the Sense of most Authors who have wrote
upon it. And yet it seems a great Impropriety in Language and in Thought, to
feign Nature to be a Person, vested with a Capacity and Authority to institute
a Law for all Mankind; and tends to mislead the Mind. And yet he says, in
another Place, Page 163.
that the Law of;Nature is precisely the same with the divine moral Law,
limited to those Things which are noticed by the Light of Nature. But what
those Things are, no Man has ever yet pretended to determine with any clear
Evidence. Lord Bolingbroke says, that the Law of Nature is the Law of Reason.
Vol. 5. P. 83.
And I observe that whatever fundamental Principle any Man fixes upon, let it
be what it will, he calls it by the Name of the Law of Nature.

62. It is equally difficult to form any precise Idea of what is commonly
called the Religion of Nature. It is generally understood to be certain
Principles of Religion and Rules of Conduct, which the ancient Heathen Priests
and Philosophers found out by the mere Light of Nature, without any Help from
divine Revelation. But it is certain that they expressly disclaimed such a
Guide; and, in Imitation of Moses, they ascribed all their religious
Institutions to divine Inspiration. Plato says that all Laws came originally
from divine Inspiration; De Legibus and Minos.
that Virtue is not by Nature, but by a divine Gift. Meno.
Socrates says, that Men become Good, as some become Prophets, not by Nature,
but by divine Inspiration. Socrates apud Aeschinem, Dial. I.
Homer says that Minos, the famous Cretian Lawgiver, received his religious
Institutions from Jupiter, by nine Years Conversation with him. Upon which
Plato observes that Homer represents him as the greatest of all his Heroes; and
that none would dare to oppose his Institutes. Minos.
Although this was a Fiction, yet it shows the universal Sense which the
Philosophers, Priests, Lawgivers, Poets and the common People had of the
Insufficiency of the Light of Nature, and of the Necessity of a Revelation. All
the Religions which were publicly established or practiced in the World, were
supposed or pretended to come originally from divine Inspiration; and all that
was right and good in them, really did so, i. e. was taken, by Tradition, from
the ancient Patriarchs or the Revelations made by Jehovah to Moses and the
Prophets; though the Priests rather chose to ascribe them to those Gods who
were best known to the common People, in order to gain greater Credit and
Authority with them. Upon which Account Clemens Alexandrinus expressly calls
them Thieves. Stromata Lib. I. and V.
So that, as Dr. Leland justly observes, There never was any such Thing as mere
natural Religion, abstracting from all divine Revelation, professed in any Age,
or in any Nation in the World. Leland on deistical Writers, Vol. II. P. 344.
It is evident that all those modern Systems which are palmed upon us under the
Title of the Religion of Nature, so far as they are right, are a Collection,
from divine Revelation, of those Parts or Principles of Religion which are most
obvious to human Reason, or seem more immediately conducive to Self-Interest.
See Discourses on this Subject by Dr. Tho. Patten, late Fellow of C. C.
College, Oxon; and Dr. Abrabam Tailor, in the Lime-Street Sermons.
The Notions of the Light of Nature, which the deistical Writers have advanced,
in order to undermine and supercede the Necessity of Christianity, are fully
confuted by Dr. Leland, in his View of deistical Writers.

63. Indeed some Men have attempted to prove, from Scripture, that the Light of
Nature is sufficient for Salvation, and that there is no Need of divine
Revelation; particularly from Romans i. 20. The invisible Things of him, from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen; being understood by the Things which
are made; even his eternal Power and Godhead. I have before conceded, that when
the Existence of God is once suggested to Men, and they are led in earnest to a
due Contemplation of the Works of Creation, they would find the most clear and
incontestible Evidence of the Being of a God. But then the Apostle no where
asserts that Men, of their own mere Motion or Suggestion, would, in Fact, have
come into such rational Inquiries, without those Notices and Suggestions which
the Heathen generally had, from Tradition and divine Revelation. For God did
not leave himself without Witness among the Heathen, in that the Light which he
gave to the Jewish Church, did, in so considerable a Measure, shine among them,
in all successive Ages. And yet, notwithstanding all the Light they had, in all
these Ways, they are expressly said not to know God, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 5.
i. e. not to have such a Knowledge of him, as is necessary in order to
Salvation; which indeed the wisest of them acknowledged, by their Inscription
on the Altar -- TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Acts xvii. 23.
Whom, the Apostle says, ye ignorantly worship; him I declare unto you. They
also urge that Text in Acts x. 34. God is no Respecter of Persons; but, in
every Nation, he that fears God and works Righteousness, is accepted of
him. But it is not said that any did so, by the mere Light of Nature, but
rather in Consequence of their receiving divine Revelation. For these Words
were spoken of Cornelius, who, though a Roman Centurion, was posted at Joppa,
not fifty Miles from Jerusalem; where he had Opportunity to be well acquainted
with the Jewish Religion, and probably with the Gospel; though, at first, under
some imperfect and disadvantageous Representations; and therefore he needed
better Instruction by the Apostle Peter, who was blamed, by some judaising
Christians, for preaching to the Gentiles, whom they, through a national Pride,
were not willing to receive into the Christian Church. They also urge Romans ii.
14. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do, by Nature, the Things contained in
the Law, -- which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts. But Mr.
Pool, in his Critics, mentions it as the most probable Opinion, that the
Apostle here speaks of the converted Gentiles; for which he quotes several of
the best Commentators, who say this Sense is apparent from the whole Context:
and they who suppose the Words may, in some Sense, be applied to the
unconverted Gentiles; suppose that their Knowledge of the Law, extends no
further than to leave them inexcuseable and self-condemned. Dr. Williots, in
his Sermon on this Text, says, that the Design of the Apostle is to convince
the judaising Christians of their Error, in refusing to admit the Gentile
Converts into their Communion: and tells them that the Gentiles, who had not
the Law of Moses by natural Generation and Descent, as the Jews had; yet, upon
their being converted to Christianity, did as fully keep the divine Law, as the
Jews: which shows that the divine Law was now written in their Hearts, by the
regenerating and sanctifying Influences of the Holy Spirit. And in this Sense,
he says the Phrase Law written in their Hearts, is evidently used in the
Prophesies of Gospel Times; particularly Ser. 31.33, 34. I will put my Law in
their inward Parts, and write my Law in their Hearts, and they shall no more
teach every Man his Neighbor, -- for they shall all know me, from the greatest
to the least. He concedes, that when God at first created Man, he wrote his Law
upon his Heart; but, by the Fall, this Character is so obliterated, as that
there is now, no saving Impression of it, unless it be written again, by the
renewing Influences of the divine Spirit.

64. But though Men, by the Light of Nature, might find out so much of the
moral Law as is plainly coincident with Self-Interest, yet they could not
possibly discover a Mediator, or Satisfaction for Sin, or any Way whereby a
sinful Creature might obtain Reconciliation with an offended God. Indeed many
have supposed that they could obtain a Pardon by the mere Mercy of God, without
a Mediator or any Satisfaction; but this Supposition has arisen wholly from
their Ignorance of the Holiness and Justice of the Divine Nature and Law, and
so of the great Evil and just Demerit of Sin.

65. Divine Revelation fully informs us, that our highest Duty and Obligation
is to be LIKE TO GOD, and conformed to his moral Perfections: and the divine
Law being a Transcript of the divine Nature, fully declares what Temper and
Conduct in us, is a Conformity to that Standard. This is the principal, leading
Sentiment which runs through the whole Bible. It is the Epitome of the moral
Law delivered by Moses. Lev. xi. 44. Ye shall therefore sanctify your Selves.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. -- So Chap. xix. 2. Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord
your God am holy. This is again repeated in Chap. xx. 7. This is the Substance
of the moral Precepts delivered by our blessed Savior and the inspired
Apostles. Matthew. v. 48. Be ye therefore perfect as your Father, which is in
Heaven, is perfect. Be ye merciful as your Father which is in Heaven is
merciful. 1 Pet. i. 16. Be ye holy, for I am holy. Be ye Followers of God (or
Imitators of God) as dear Children. -- As Man was at first made in the moral
Image or Likeness to God, so the Recovery of that Image is his greatest Duty
and highest Perfection. Coloss. iii. 10. Put on the new Man which is renewed in
Knowledge, after the Image or in Conformity to the Image, of him that created
him. So Ephesians. iv. 16. Put off the old Man, which is corrupt; and Be ye renewed
in the Spirit of your Minds; and put on the new Man which after God is created
in Righteousness and true Holiness. 1 Cor. x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God; that is, that the
glorious Perfections of the divine Nature might be exemplified and displayed in
all your Conduct. The moral Perfections of the eternal and self-existent Being,
are the primary Foundation and Standard of all Perfection in the Creature; and
to which he ought to be conformed, according to that Rank, Model, or Order in
which he is placed in the Creation.

66. Particularly,

1. Every rational Creature ought to be conformed to God, in his Holiness.
Holiness is the moral Rectitude or Perfection of the divine Nature; and
comprehends all that can be called or conceived of as good, right, amiable or
excellent, of the moral Kind. The sacred Oracles fully explain and illustrate
this comprehensive Perfection; so far as the Knowledge of it can be conveyed by
human Language: and special Illumination gives a more clear and realizing
Conception of it. Sanctitas est Entis rationalis Bonitas moralis.
Sanctitas est omnis Perfectionis Basis.
Sanctitas Dei est Excellentia ejus moralis.
Van-Mastricht Theologia. Lib. II. Cap. XII.


2. In his Justice. Justice is a permitting every One to have or enjoy his own:
or, it is a rendering to every One his Due, whether it be that Good or
Happiness, or that Misery and Punishment which is due to him, or which he
deserves, according to his Temper and Conduct.

3. In his Goodness; which is a Disposition to do Good and communicate
Happiness to other Beings, so far as is consistent with other Perfections.

4. In his Truth; which is a Declaration in Words or Actions, of Things as they
really are in themselves; or, at least, as they appear to our Minds.

67. These are the Elements of all that is morally good. And as every Duty is a
necessary Consequence of an inward, divine Disposition of Mind; so, from these
divine Principles necessarily flow and result every moral Duty to God, our
Neighbor and our Selves. -- I shall therefore, in the

Last Place, exhibit a brief and general Scheme of moral Virtues and Duties;

I. To God. As,

1. To love him. Love is a pleasing Approbation of any Object; or such an
Approbation of an Object, as is accompanied with Pleasure. And this arises both
from the Amiableness of the Object in itself; and from a similar Disposition of
Mind; whereby a Person is disposed to approve of, to be pleased with, and
delighted in such an Object. And as God is the most perfect, amiable and
excellent Being, we ought to love him with all our Hearts and Souls; and other
Beings only so far as they bear a Resemblance to him, or for his Sake.

2. To fear him. A Principle of Assimilation to God necessarily produces a Fear
of doing any Thing which may gain his Displeasure or Disapprobation; for this
necessarily implies some Contrariety or Dissimilitude.

3. To trust in him and depend upon him, in the Way of our Duty. This
necessarily flows from a realizing View of the divine Perfections; especially
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness.

4. To worship him. An internal Sense and Approbation of the divine
Perfections, will necessarily exert and express itself in external Words and
Actions; which also have a Tendency to strengthen and increase the Sense and
Habit of our own Minds, and to produce the same Disposition in the Minds of
others.

5. To repent of Sin. A Mind which is, in the main, conformed to the moral
Perfections of God, will necessarily be displeased with and hate every Thing
which is contrary thereunto; which will always be accompanied with a Grief and
Sorrow; especially as the Fault is within himself.

From this same Principle, all other Duties to God may, by the Assistance of
divine Revelation, be easily deduced.

68. II. Those Duties which more immediately respect our Neighbors or Mankind
in general. The same divine Principle will dispose us to view all Mankind as
the Creatures of God, originally made in his Image (and still retaining some
Dispositions which may in some Respects be called good) as Fellow Subjects to
the same King, as Fellow Servants of the same Lord; and treat them according to
the Rules of Justice, Goodness and Truth. Particularly,

1. We should love them. That is we should approve of and take Delight in what
is good in them; as it bears a Resemblance to some of the divine Perfections.
We ought indeed to hate their bad Dispositions and Actions, but not their
Persons: especially since we don't know, but that they may yet be the Objects
of God's eternal Favor: We ought, at least, to love them with a Love of
Benevolence: and endeavor to promote their temporal and eternal Happiness; so
far as is consistent with other Duties. And that from a Principle of Obedience
to God who has commanded us to love our Neighbor as ourselves and to do good
to all Men. And for this Reason, because to do so, is to be like to God and the
Children of our Father which is in Heaven.

2. We ought to conduct toward them according to Justice. We should never
invade the Right and Property of another: but freely permit him to use and
enjoy whatsoever is his own. And that because we hereby act according to the
Nature and Will of the supreme Proprietor of all Things; who has commanded us
to render to every one his Due -- to owe no Man any Thing; and not to defraud
or go beyond our Neighbor in any Matter. And that because the righteous Lord
loves Righteousness; and that to do Justice is more acceptable than Sacrifice;
and that diverse Weights and diverse Measures are an Abomination to the Lord.

And as to punitive Justice, or rendering to every Man that Misery or
Punishment which is his due; so far as any Man is, by the Word or Providence of
God, made his Minister to execute Wrath on him that does Evil, he is bound to
do it according to the Justice and Law of God, and those subordinate Rules
which are given him to judge by.

3. We ought to observe Truth in all our Words and Declarations: so as never
designedly to deceive our Neighbor. For Truth is an essential Perfection of
God and cannot be infringed upon by us, without a practical Denial that God is
true. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4. He has styled himself the God of Truth; has commanded us
to speak the Truth. Ephesians. iv. 25. And has declared that he hates a lying
Tongue.

4. Every Man ought to perform the Duties incumbent upon him as a Member of
Society, or as resulting from the various Relations he stands in to others.
From divine Institutions and human Compacts, various Relations arise, such as,
Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Magistrates and Subjects,
Fellow-Citizens, or Members of lesser Communities having an equal Right with
ourselves; from which many Duties do result, according to the Rules of Justice,
Goodness and Truth; of which many Authors have treated largely and well: all
which are to be observed in Conformity to the divine Justice and Law. Render
therefore to every one their Due. Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor,
Tribute to whom Tribute, etc. Whatsoever Things ye would that others should do
unto you, do ye the same to them.

69. III. Those Duties which more immediately relate to ourselves. From the
same Principle of Justice and Goodness, every Man, considering himself as one
of the Creatures of God; ought to endeavor to promote his own Happiness, as
well as the Happiness of others; and therefore ought to cultivate and improve
his rational Powers and moral Habits; to regulate the Appetites and
Inclinations of his Body, so as to render it the most proper Organ of his Soul:
and in general to promote his own Perfection and Happiness; so far as is
consistent with those Duties which more immediately relate to God and his
Fellow-Men; acting with a principal View of Conformity to the Perfections and
Law of God; and with a subordinate and additional Stimulous or Incitement of
acting according to natural Inclination and Self-Interest: as a Means appointed
by God more fully and effectually to incite him to do that which was his
antecedent Duty. But to act upon this last Motive alone, without any Regard to
the former, is to act upon a Principle very little superior to the brutal
Instinct.

70. This is a short and general Scheme of all the Duties incumbent upon Men,
together with the Foundation of the Obligation they are under to perform them.
Upon these Principles a Man may safely and profitably read the common Systems
of Ethics; which, though they are generally built upon wrong Foundations, yet
the external Rules of Practice are generally right and good. For Self-Love,
extended to a public View of Things (that is, the Interest which each
Individual has in the public Good) will, in most Instances, lead Men to the
same Rules of external Conduct, as result from a Conformity to the divine
Perfections. And since such a Conformity does naturally produce our own Good
and Happiness, we may take the inverse Method; and, by observing what is most
conducive to our own Good, may, in many Instances, find out what is agreeable to
the divine Perfections; though in a much more uncertain and imperfect Manner.

71. For in this inverse Method of finding out our Duty, some Errors have crept
into most Systems of Ethics; and one which I apprehend to be very gross, viz.
That, in many Cases, it is lawful for Men to LIE; particularly to Persons who
are not of Years of Discretion; to those who are sick, mad, or non compos
Mentis; to Enemies; and generally in all Cases where a Man can save himself or
his Friend from any unreasonable Suffering. The Authors generally go upon this
Principle, that the sole Criterion of moral Good, is natural Good or Happiness.
That the Evil of Lying, in any Case, does not consist in Contradiction to
Truth; but in the Injury it does to others. Therefore it is lawful to lie in
all Cases where no Injury accrues to any particular Person; or, upon the Whole,
more Good than Hurt. Some Authors (who think it is a little too barefaced, or
contrary to the common Sense of Mankind, to assert, in express Terms, that it
is lawful to lie) say, that an Untruth or false Assertion, in such Cases,
becomes no Lie; or, if it is so called, yet it is no Crime. Mr. Grove, in his
Ethics, Part II. Chap. XI. says this is now become pretty generally the Sense
of the learned World. See Grotius de Jure Pacis and Belli, Liber III. Cap. 1.
Puffendorf de Jure Naturae and Gentium Observat. 250. In Eng. Book IV. Chap. 1.


72. However consistent this Opinion may be with the Principles of these
Authors, or how generally soever it may be received, yet it plainly appears to
be contrary to the immutable Truth and Law of God. And I fully agree with the
great Dr. Ames, that the Essence of a Lie consists in the designed Falsehood
asserted; and not barely in the Injury which attends it, though that is an
Aggravation; and that every Lie is a Sin, abominable to God. Amesii Medulla
Lib. II. Cap. 21. De Conscientiae Casibus, Lib. V. Cap. 53.
Indeed it may be demonstrated that this Principle is contrary to
Self-Interest, taken in a large extensive Sense, as including the Interest
which each Individual has in the general Good of Mankind, for a long Course of
Time. For this Opinion and Practice will necessarily destroy all Faith and
Confidence among Men: and I never can believe a Man, in any Case where I can
imagine that he can suppose it will be for his own or his Friend's immediate
Interest to tell a Lie.

73. But as every Man will run the Venture of his own Interest as he pleases; I
think we can build upon no certain Foundation in Morality, but the divine
Perfections and Law. Truth is an eternal, immutable and inflexible Perfection
of the divine Nature; and cannot be limited, even in our Conceptions, by any
other Perfections: as the Exercise of the divine Power seems to be limited by
Wisdom; but it never can be wise in God to act contrary to his own Truth. A
Conformity therefore to this Attribute, must be perfect and without Exception;
and no Fault of our own or others, can give us a Dispensation, in any Case to
act contrary to it. The divine Law, in this Case, is absolute and without any
Limitation. Ephesians. iv. 25. Put away Lying. Speak the Truth every Man to his
Neighbor. 1 These. iv. 6. Let no Man go beyond, or defraud, his Neighbor, in
ANY MATTER; for God is the Avenger of such.

74. As to the Instances of approved Deception pretended to be found in
Scripture; they are all easily solved by this one Distinction. There is a plain
Distinction between my asserting a Proposition which is false; and my asserting
a Proposition which is true, and another through a Mistake, not of my
Proposition, as it is really intended by me, but of some relative
Circumstances, draws a false Inference from what I said. In this Case he
deceives himself, through his own Rashness and Want of Consideration. And if it
be in a Case in which I am under no Kind of Obligation to tell him the whole
Truth, or every Truth which has any remote Relation to what I said; then it is
no Fault in me, to let him alone, to deceive himself. And that even though, by
knowing his Disposition, I expected beforehand, that he would make such a
wrong Inference. But if I was under any Obligation, by the divine Law, my own
Promise or otherwise, to tell him the whole Truth in that Matter, and do not;
then indeed I am guilty of a great Fault by my Neglect: but that alone does not
constitute a Lie in the first Proposition. But then my Assertion must be in
plain and express Words, which being taken according to the common Use of
Language, or other known instituted Signs, shall truly convey my Ideas. For if
I use any Kind of Equivocations or mental Reservations, with a Design that he
should misunderstand me, then I deceive him, and that in such a Manner as is
but little, if any Thing better than a plain Lie. But if he, from my Words,
takes up the true Proposition, as it was contained in my Mind; and then
inconsiderately draws a false Inference from it, and acts accordingly; he
deceives himself and not I.

75. As suppose, I see a Madman with a Sword in his Hand, pursuing another, who
is at present out of Sight; and I tell him, that four Minutes ago I saw him go
into such a House, and he thereupon supposes, that he is there now, and
accordingly goes in there to seek him: and I don't tell the Madman that I
afterward saw him come out, and go another Way: this is no Lie or Deception in
me; for I told him the Truth and the whole Truth, so far as I was obliged or
undertook to do it: and what followed was his mistaken Inference from the Truth
which I told him. Indeed if he had asked me if I believed that he was there
now, and I had answered Yes, I should have been guilty of Lying. But then I
might have refused to give him any Answer at all, without any Violation of
Truth.

76. So in Stratagems in War: if I retreat or flee before my Enemy; and from
this Action he infers that I am beat, discouraged, or will fight no more: and
so pursues me with Precipitation, and gives me an Advantage against him; and
then I turn back and take it, as I before designed, I am guilty of no Lie or
active Deception: I only let him alone to deceive himself, by not revealing to
him a Truth which I was under no Obligation to discover. But if I strike my
Colors, hold up a Flag of Truce, or use any other known, instituted Sign of
Submission or Cessation of Arms; and he thereupon comes to me unarmed; and I
fall upon him and kill him; I am guilty of perfidious Lying and Murder; because
I acted contrary to my own Declaration.

77. This Distinction and Rule is plain: all the Danger in the Application of
it will be this; -- a Man, in some Cases, may think himself not obliged to
discover a Truth, when he really is obliged, from the Principles of Justice,
Truth or Goodness. But a precise Determination of the Boundaries of Obligation,
in all such Cases, would require considerable Time, and does not belong to the
present Question. Upon the whole therefore it appears, that a Man ought not, in
ANY Case, or under any Circumstances whatsoever, knowingly to declare or assert
any Proposition or Thing which is a Lie, false or untrue: and if he does, he
contradicts and implicitly denies the Truth and Law of God.

These Things, duly considered, will be sufficient to direct us how to
distinguish between the justifiable and unjustifiable Instances of seeming or
supposed Deception, recorded in the sacred Scripture.

The CONTENTS.
The Nature of Ethics Page 9 Virtue consists in a Likeness to God Page 3 GOD AN
ALL-PERFECT BEING Page 4 The natural and moral Perfections of God Page 5
Perfection in a Creature Page 6 Of a moral Agent Page 7 Of moral Perfection and
Obligation Page 8 Of the Will and Authority of God Page 12 Other supposed
Standards of moral Virtue Page 13 Of Self-Love Page 13 Of Benevolence Page 17
Of Benevolence to God Page 20 Of moral Taste and Sense Page 22 Of Reason Page
25 Of Conscience Page 30 Of the moral Fitness of Things Page 30 Of Conformity
to Truth Page 33 Of Right and Wrong Page 35 Of Obedience to God from
Self-Interest Page 38 Of the Necessity of Divine Revelation Page 41 The Heathen
Philosophers acquainted with Scripture Page 42 Of Ignorance without Revelation
Page 44 Of the Laws of Nature Page 47 Of the Religion of Nature Page 48 Natural
Religion not proved by Scripture Page 50 Natural Religion essentially defective
Page 53 The Elements of all moral Duties Page 53 A Scheme of moral Virtues and
Duties; 1st. to God Page 56 2dly, to our Neighbor; 3dly, to our Selves Page 59
How far Duty and Interest may coincide Page 60 Of Lying and Equivocation Page
61 Of Deception Page 63 Of Stratagems in War Page 65
ERRATA.
Page 22, L. 24, read 34. III.

Page 25, L. 14, read 36. IV.


