Mr. WELLES's Election SERMON, May 10th, 1764.

PATRIOTISM DESCRIBED AND RECOMMENDED, IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT, AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE
ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 10th, 1764.

BY NOAH WELLS, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH OF CHRIST IN STANFORD.

IF I forget thee, O Jerusalem! let my right hand forget her cunning; if I do
not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief joy. PSALMIST. Brethren, my hearts desire, and
prayer to God, for Israel is that they might be saved. APOST. PAUL. Omnium
societatum nulla est gravior, nulla carior, quam ea quae cum republica est
unicuique nostrum: Cari sunt parents, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares: Sed
omnes omnium Caritates patria una complexa est: Pro qua, quis bonus dubitet
mortem oppetere, si ei sit profuturus? Cr^. NEW LONDON: Printed by TIMOTHY
GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY, M.DCC.LX.IV.

AT a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, holden at HARTFORD, on the Second Thursday of May, A. D. 1764.
ORDERED, That EBENEZER SILLIMAN, and ABRAHAM DAVENPORT, Esq'rs, return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Rev'd Mr. NOAH WELLS, for his SERMON delivered
before this Assembly on the 10th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may
be Printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'y.

PATRIOTISM described and recommended.
LUKE VII.5. FOR, he loves our nation, and he has built us a synagogue.
ONE objection which the enemies of christianity have made to the
gospel-institution is, that it no where recommends a public spirit and the love
of our country, or annexes any rewards to those patriot-virtues, which formed
the distinguishing characteristic of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and raised
those celebrated republies to the highest pitch of power and opulence. -- But
whoever examines divine revelation with candor, will soon see that this is a
groundless and unreasonable charge. -- It Is true, that intemperate zeal for the
prosperity of a particular people, -- that strong and unbridled passion for the
national glory, which was what they understood by love to their country, and
which, after all the encomiums lavished upon it, often prompted to great
injustice to other nations, has no place in the scheme of christian morals, nor
is it fit it should. Such a temper and conduct, instead of a beauty, would be
really a blemish and defect, in a revelation designed to subserve the general
good of society, and promote universal love and benevolence to all mankind. And
had our savior and his apostles, in the name of God, animated the Jewish
nation to a warm zeal for their country and its liberties, -- had they promised
divine and eternal rewards to the exercise of this virtue, this, in the then
present disposition and circumstances of the nation, would doubtless have been
construed as a lawless attempt to subvert the constitution, and foment a spirit
of sedition and rebellion in the state, -- But if by love to our country be
meant a well-tempered zeal for the public-good; -- if an earnest desire for the
welfare of the community to which we belong; -- if a cordial and disinterested
affection for our fellow subjects; -- if well-meant wishes for the national
happiness, and the most active endeavors to promote its true interest,
consistent with the general laws of charity, and the universal obligations of
benevolence to the whole human race; -- if this be the true notion of
patriotism, and conveys the most rational idea of that truly amiable and
generous virtue; it is no where so effectually taught as in the sacred oracles,
-- no where carried to so high a pitch of perfection as in the word of God. --
Most certainly that charity which seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13.5.
will exert itself for the good of others; -- that christian law of our divine
master, which commands us to love even our enemies, Mat. 5.44.
will not suffer us to overlook and neglect our friends; -- that principle of
universal benevolence which shines on millions, and incircles all mankind in
its friendly embrace; will scatter its warmest and kindest influences on our
dear country; -- and those precepts which require us to maintain such a noble
spirit of disinterested love to our brethren, as to lay down our lives for
their sakes 1 John 3.16.
, would surely engage and animate us, even to die for the good of the
community, if called by divine providence so to do.

ACCORDINGLY, there never was so glorious an instance of this noble and
generous virtue, as we see exhibited in the life and actions of our blessed
REDEEMER, the divine author of this institution. Warm with a generous, a
disinterested benevolence to mankind; he laid down his life for their
redemption: Animated by a true spirit of patriotism, he gave the most signal
proofs of love to his country, and manifested the sincerest affection for the
Jewish nation, from whom he sprung, according to the flesh. Hence arose that
amiable concern he expressed for the miseries he foresaw coming upon them, in
his moving and pathetic lamentation over Jerusalem, recorded by the
evangelists. Luke 13.34.
Hence were those kind endeavors he used to prevent these evils, by checking
the tumultuous spirit then kindling amomg them, and engaging them to a
peaceable subjection to the Roman government. And to this, may we not add, it
was owing, at least in part, that, as he declared he was not sent, except to,
the lost sheep of the house of Israel Mat. 15.24.
; so the whole of his public ministry was confined to that nation, and all
those glorious and beneficent miracles he wrought, were limited to the country
that gave him birth? May we not view these miraculous operations, in one
respect, as so many solid attestations of true patriotism and striking
evidences of love to his country? In this view, no doubt, they were considered
by the men of that age: And therefore when the elders of the Jews apply to him,
with a request from the Roman centurion, that he would come and heal his
servant; they recommend him as one who was eminently possessed of this virtue,
and as such, a very proper object of our Savior's regard. -- 'He is worthy,
(say they) for whom thou shall do this, for he loves our nation, and he has
built us a synagogue. -- He was a Roman officer: But as he was posted in Judea,
he considered it as his country, and testified his affection to it, by
public-spirited actions. Whether this centurion was a proselyte to the Jewish
church, or not, appears to me very uncertain. Mr. Pool's continuators upon the
parallel place Mat. 8, rather think he was not, though some interpreters suppose
he was. Our Savior, in the commendation he gives of his great faith, seems
rather. I imagine, to consider him as one who had hitherto lived in Paganism,
and therefore his great faith in the power and grace of Christ was the more
remarkable on that account "I have not found (says he) so great faith, no not
in Israel." And in this view his building the Jews a synagogue will appear a
more notable and striking instance of public spirit and love to his country.
And though he was probably educated in idolatry, yet such was his regard for his
fellow subjects among whom he lived, that he cheerfully contributed to the
support of the Jewish religion, and generously built them a synagogue, for the
worship of the God of Israel, at his own expense. The true patriot will not
abate of his love to his country, or desert its interests, barely because the
religion therein professed and established, differs from his own: So far from
it, that if there be nothing in such religion repugnant to the general laws of
reason and morality, or subversive of the natural rights and liberties of
mankind; he will look upon himself obliged to promote it, and cheerfully
contribute to its support. This then was the virtue, on account of which this
Roman officer was recommended by the Jewish elders, as worthy the notice of our
Savior, and of which Christ accordingly testified his approbation by going and
healing his servant. And in this view the words afford a proper argument for a
discourse upon the virtue of PATRIOTISM, and naturally lead us to consider this
noble principle in its nature, -- properties, -- and effects.

TRUE PATRIOTISM then, considered as a principle, is the same thing with public
spirit, or a generous love to our country, -- a regard for the happiness of our
fellow creatures, especially a tender concern for the welfare of our
fellow subjects.

SELF-LOVE, or a regard to our own happiness, is an innate and inextinguishable
principle in the human mind: But then, -- that we are not born for ourselves
only, -- consequently are not to confine our views to our own private interest,
separate from that of the community, much less in opposition to it; is a
genuine dictate of reason, philosophy, and revelation. -- From the first dawn
of life to its final period, we are necessarily dependent. -- First and
principally indeed, upon the great author of nature; but next and subordinately
upon our fellow creatures with whom we stand connected. As we advance forward
in life, these reciprocal dependencies and connexions, and consequently the
social obligations thence resulting, multiply and increase. Our happiness and
security, or rather the springs from whence they derive, branch out into
innumerable channels, and demand a correspondent attention. If therefore a
principle of self-love, prompts us to seek our own particular happiness,
because it is ours; the same principle must induce us to love our country and
seek its welfare, because our own is involved in it, and inseperably connected
with it. And thus even from self-love and a desire of happiness, we are
directed to seek the good of the public, and yield obedience to that apostolic
precept, -- look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others Phil. 11.4.
. In this view of the case that observation is verified, --

"That true self-love and social are the same."

This principle of benevolence begins with ourselves -- Family connexions and
private friendships are its next objects. -- It spreads on to our neighbors
and acquaintance. -- Our country feels its cherishing influence next. -- Still
it expands and widens till it comprehends all the human species, and finally
incloses the whole creation in the friendly and generous circle. SELF LOVE but
serves the virtuous mind to wake,
As the small pebble stirs the peaceful lake;
The center moved, a circle strait succeeds,
Another still, and still another spreads,
Friend, parent, neighbor, first it will embrace,
Our country next, and next all human race,
Wide and more wide, the o'erflowings of the mind,
Take every creature in, of every kind;
Earth smiles around, with boundless bounty blessed,
And Heaven beholds its image in his breast.
Pope's Essay on Man: page 86.


HENCE it appears, that though patriotism has its origin in selflove, and is
ever consistent with it; yet it is widely different from, or rather directly
opposite to the principle that commonly goes under that name. The true patriot
has a noble and exalted notion of happiness: He does not confine it to his own
personal interest and convenience, or limit it to the contracted circle of his
family, or particular friends; but comprehends in his idea of it the welfare of
millions, and especially includes the safety and prosperity of his dear country
in the account. And while the selfish man confines his views wholly to his
private interest, and meanly coils himself up it the narrow and dirty shell of
his own personal safety, and happiness; the true patriot, ever studious of the
public good, and concerned for its prosperity; ardently desires its happiness,
and warmly interests himself in its various vicissitudes. The miseries of his
country awaken his inmost grief and compassion. At sight of the public
calamities, his benevolent heart bleeds. He rejoices in its emolument, and
feels the noblest satisfaction in its safety, prosperity and glory. However
flourishing his own private affairs are; if his country is in danger, and the
public happiness interrupted or insecure: -- Is it involved in the calamities
of war, -- ravaged and depopulated by foreign enemies, or weakened and rent by
civil discord, domestic faction, and intestine strife: -- Does it groan under
the iron rod of despotism and tyranny, or has its foundations sapped by a
prevailing spirit of anarchy, levellism, and irrefrenable licentiousness: -- If
public credit runs low, and a general temper of diffidence, distrust, and
disaffection to government prevails: -- If economy, and industry,
manufactures, navigation, and commerce, those sources of wealth, and unfailing
springs of public prosperity, dwindle and decline: -- And on the other hand,
idleness, contention, intemperance, dissipation, and prodigality, increase and
abound. -- In a word: -- If righteousness, charity, peace, truth, faithfulness,
and liberality, together with those other amiable and salutary virtues, so
directly tending to "exalt a nation," evidently fade and languish; and the
opposite vices, which are a "reproach," a shame and ruin to a civil community,
become fashionable and prevail: -- These things will affect the true patriot
with the most keen and sensible anguish, will dispirit his happiness, and damp
his joy amidst the highest tides of domestic prosperity, or the greatest
affluence of personal and family enjoyments. -- He who does not thus feel for
his country, is a stranger to this noble and generous impulse: -- He who
regards his own interest above that of the public, is a concealed enemy to the
state: -- He who pursues his own little affairs at the expense of his
fellow subjects, and does not prefer Jerusalem above his chief joy; whenever
there happens a competition, will sacrifice the public happiness to his own
private convenience; -- will commence a rebel, a traitor to his country; and,
if he has opportunity, rob and plunder the public, to promote his own paltry
purposes and designs.

TO LOVE our country then, -- to desire its prosperity, and warmly interest
ourselves in its various vicissitudes, is part, and but part, of this noble
virtue of patriotism. -- Some men have so much honesty, as not to hurt the
public; but have not zeal enough for its welfare to do it any good. They are
proof, perhaps, against any temptation to injure it; but will never exert
themselves for its happiness. -- Their love to their country is much like that
cold, ineffective charity, mentioned by the appostle Jam. II. 16
, which barely says, " -- be ye warmed and filled"; but after all its pretended
good wishes, "does not profit" is of no avail to the object of it. If all men
were of this indolent and lukewarm disposition, government must soon be
unhinged, the foundations of public peace and happiness disolved, and the
safety and welfare of the community become a prey to the first invader. Would
we merit the glorious character of patriots, we must not only wish, but act for
our country's good. Our love to the public must exemplify itself, in
public-spirited actions and services, equal to our abilities, and proportionate
to the utmost extent of our power and influence. -- The true patriot,
therefore, is one who allows his country a share in his thinking hours. He is
studious of its welfare, thoughtful of its happiness, and plans and projects
for its safety. Civil government is absolutely necessary to public happiness.
But without good laws, and wholesome institutions, government cannot subsist.
At least, it can never answer those salutary purposes for which it was
appointed, in any tolerable degree. And to frame these laws, -- to adapt these
rules and maxims of government to the genius of the people, the circumstances
of time and place, and the various exigencies of the state; demands the study,
the wisdom and skill of the politician.

BUT the legislator is not the only man who studies and plans for the good of
the public. Whoever projects any thing conducive to the welfare of his country,
though it be but to the throwing out a hint that may be improved to that purpose:
-- He who invents any new and useful arts of life, or makes or communicates any
valuable improvements in those already found out; is so far forth a patriot,
and deserves his country's thanks: Especially the man who studies to promote
its best interests, to curb the vices and reform the morals of a degenerate
age, and to introduce and cherish the amiable, the beneficial virtues of
christianity among his fellow-men, is highly deserving of that character: And
he who refuses or neglects these things, when it is in his power, is no true
friend to the public: -- Nay he is an enemy to his courtry, in proportion to
the value and importance of his neglected services.

FURTHER still; -- love to our country requires, that we act, as well as study
and think, for the public good. -- The situation of our country may be such, as
to demand the utmost exertion of our power and influence in its behalf: And the
duty we owe the public, requires a cheerful compliance with this demand. The
true patriot is one, whose purse, as well as his heart, is open for the defense
and support of his country. "His liberal soul devises liberal things," and his
generous hand is over ready to execute his liberal purposes. -- As a ruler,
every well-concerted and public-spirited measure, is sure to meet with his
approbation, and gain his suffrage. -- As a subject, he scorns to be stingy and
parsimonious, when the safety or welfare of his country calls for his
assistance. When any noble and generous design is on foot, that has a friendly
aspect upon the community; -- be it for the reformation of manners, -- the
promotion of learning, -- the advancement of virtue and religion, or any thing
that tends to the public emolument; -- then, in proportion to this ability, he
will be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. 1 Timothy
VI.18.
-- In a word: -- As love to the public is his ruling passion, considered as a
member of society the grand object of his ambition is, to shield it from
danger, and promote its welfare. In pursuit of this he is indefatigable and
undaunted. Nor hope nor fear can shake his resolution, or warp him aside from
his duty. The most lucrative considerations, are no temptations to him, to
betray his country, or desert its interest. To bribery, he is an avowed enemy.
He disdains the mean and dirty arts of corruption. To rise upon the ruins of
his country, or sacrifice its interest to his own private schemes, or the
narrow and contracted views of a party: -- To enrich himself at the expense of
the community, or fatten and riot on the public spoils, his generous soul
abhors. Love to his country is his predominant principle. -- He is unwearied in
his attempts to promote its happiness. -- Not even insensibility in the public,
of his benevolent purposes; nor the most ungrateful returns for his well-meant
wishes and services, can damp his patriot ardor, cause him to discontinue his
attempts in its favor, or discourage him in the noble and generous pursuit.
When his country is invaded and demands his service, he despises danger, and
boldly hazards his life in its defense. He gallantly opposes his breast, to the
drawn swords and spears of its enemies; he nobly resolves to procure its
safety, or shed his blood in the generous conflict, "and bravely die in the
last ditch." -- Thus engaged is the true patriot in his country's behalf. --
His heart and his head, -- his tongue, -- his pen, and his hands, -- his
estate, -- yea and even his life too, are ready at its service, and devoted to
its interest, whenever they are called for.

BUT it is not every pretended regard for our country, or zeal for the public
welfare, that deserves the name of publicspirit. There are hypocrites and
impostors, wild enthusiasts and frantic zealots in patriotism and politics, as
well as in religion. Too often the restless spirit of disaffection and
discontent, -- the wild zeal of ambition and faction, or the ungovernable fury
of sedition, treason and rebellion, assume the mask of patriotism, artfully
mimic the air of public-spirit, and endeavor to obtrude themselves upon the
world for a disinterested regard for the common happiness. But it is not
difficult for a discerning eye to detect the imposture, and unmask the cheat.
Men of this cast and complexion, under all these specious disguises, have some
selfish scheme at bottom, which a little attention will serve to lay open and
expose. True public spirit has its source in benevolence and kindness to our
fellow-men, It Is near, akin to that heavenly wisdom described by the apostle,
James 3.17.
which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy; or rather like
its si^ter virtue, charity, I Cor. I3. 4, 5.
it suffers long and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil. It Is a prudent zeal for the public, chastized by
reflection, calm steady and dispassionate in its operation, -- in its influence
most beneficent and kind. Whenever therefore, under pretense of concern for the
public, men appear four and morose; forward, bold, and assuming, -- cruel,
fierce, angry, and vindictive, or loud and boisterous in pursuit of any
favorite scheme; and seem to aim their resentments, rather against the persons,
than the vices of those they oppose; there is great reason to suspect their
honesty; it is almost certain some foul design lurks beneath this fair outside,
and that they are really cheats and impostors at heart. Men of this sort, are
ever ready to clamor, and find fault, with the conduct of all public measures
in which, they have no hand: Especially, if crossed in any favorite purpose,
they at once set up a cry; -- the country is in danger; the public is ruined;
-- when probably, all the business is, that themselves are out of power, or
they meet with opposition in prosecuting some private scheme, or party project,
injurious to the country, or destructive of the public happiness. But so argue
against the being and excellence of public-spirit, from these pernicious arts
of ill-designing men, is just as illogical and absurd as to conclude, that
because there are hypocrites and pretenders in religion, therefore religion has
no existence, and virtue no real charms. On the contrary, it is a convincing
argument in its favor: -- It Is a clear evidence that there is indeed something
truly excellent in the substance, when even the shadow is captivating: The
reality needs must be valuable, since the bare appearance is thus capable to
conceal the deformity of vice, and render even wickedness respectable. As
counterseit coin, speaks an intrinsic value in the true; so this
mock-patriotism, by which ill-designing men impose upon the world, loudly
proclaims the excellency of true public-spirit, and abundantly proves its
innate sterling worth.

And truly with the highest reason. -- For this virtue is no beneficial in its
consequences, than truly amiable in its nature and properties. Wherever it
prevails among a people, it has a kind and salutary influence, and is ever
productive of the happiest effects. Next to the blessing of Heaven upon a
country, it is the firmest foundation of social happiness, the most sure and
unfailing spring of the public safety, prosperity and glory. Did it universally
govern, universal tranquillity would be the consequence: -- In proportion to its
influence in a community, the public felicity is secure. To trace it in all its
happy consequences, and enumerate the many advantages resulting from it to a
people among whom it generally prevails, requires more time than is at present
allowed me, were I equal to the task. Suffice it to say, -- that the liberties
of a people will be safe; -- their lives, persons, and properties secure; --
the important interest of learning promoted; -- and virtue and true religion
encouraged, in proportion to the prevalence of patriot-principles and
public-spirit among them.

LIBERTY is the glory of a community, the most firm and unshaken basis of
public happiness. This gives an inexpressible charm to all our enjoyments: --
It imparts a relish to the most indifferent pleasures, and renders the highest
gratifications doubly delightful. It smooths the rugged brow of adversity, and
endears and enhances every acquisition. -- The want of this will abate the
value of all the comforts of life. The imbittering circumstance of precarious
property: -- The grating reflection, that life and all its enjoyments, lie at
the mercy of a tyrant, and are liable, every moment, to be ravished by the
lawless hand of violence; -- mars the relish of every gratification, and throws
a melancholy gloom upon all temporal enjoyments. But wherever public-spirit
prevails; liberty is secure. There men may freely think for themselves, and
publish their sentiments on religion or government, without molestation or
fear. For as liberty is the source of so much public-happiness; he who is a
patriot, and wishes well to his country, must needs be a fast friend to it, a
warm and strenuous advocate for it, whatever rank in the community he sustains.

FOR the same reason our lives, persons, and properties will be secure, in
proportion as this generous. principle prevails. The safety of these is
inseperably connected with civil liberty, which, as we have heard, is a genuine
consequence of publicspirit, They never can be wrested, from us but by cruelty
and oppression, -- vices which can have no existence in a patriot-state. In
possession of these blessings we are therefore secure, unless, by our crimes,
we make a foreiture of them to the public: But this we never shall do, if we
ourselves act under the influence of this virtue.

LEARNING is another great and inestimable blessing to society, -- a shining
ornament to a country, and productive of the happiest consequences. Imagination
can scarce paint the superior condition of that state, where learning, science,
and the liberal arts flourish; to that of a rude and unpolished people,
overrun with barbarism and ignorance. But learning is both the nurse and
offspring of public-spirit, in different views. It Is impossible therefore that
it should be discouraged, or its important interests neglected, where this
noble principle governs. It Is the character, the genuine tendency of
public-spirit, to promote social happiness in all possible ways. As learning,
therefore, has such a kind and salutary influence on the good of society; it
must needs be the object of the true patriot's kindest regard: -- what he will
most tenderly promote and cherish, and ever show himself a warm friend and
patron to its important interests.

ON the same principles, religion and virtue must ever be the object of the
patriot's care, and every thing done to encourage and promote it, where
public-spirit, prevails. The genuine principles of christianity; -- that spirit
and temper which the gospel inspires all its true votaries with, has the
kindest influence upon public happiness, both in a natural and moral respect.
It Is direct tendency is, to reform the vices, and correct those corrupt
dispositions of the human heart, which, in their operation, are ever inimical
to society, and subversive of all the important interests of mankind. In the
room of these it implants and cultivates the virtues of justice, truth,
loyalty, faithfulness and charity, so friendly to social-happiness, and
certainly productive of public peace. And besides all this, true religion and
public virtue, recommend a people to the divine protection, and engage the
smiles of heaven for their safety and prosperity. -- This interest, therefore,
will necessarily engage the attention of the true patrior. In proportion as he
loves his country, he will regard religion, and labor to promote it. He will
carefully attend its sacred institutions himself, and generously contribute to
support its worship and ministry. If he loves his nation, he will build it a
synagogue, and promote it is religious interests to the utmost of his power,
because he knows the public happiness, which ever lies near his heart, is
necessarily dependent upon, and inseperably connected with, this great and
important concern.

IN fine: -- The prevalence of this principle would have a most happy influence
upon the religious, the literary, civil, military, and commercial interests of
a people. It would be one of the most powerful checks upon those vices in
particular, which strike at the very being of society, and directly threaten
its ruin; while it animated all ranks and orders in the state, to acquire and
cultivate those virtues, which are most conducive to its happiness.

DID the civil rulers of a people, for instance, thoroughly imbibe this
generous spirit, how happy would the community be under their administration?
This would be a sure preservation against pride and unbounded ambition: It
would prevent peculation, lawless power, and undue stretch of prerogative; and
be an effectual curb upon oppression, tyranny and arbitrary rule. -- On the
contrary, it would induce them to consider and conduct themselves, as the
fathers of the peoples, -- as the faithful guardians of their liberties,
properties, and lives; -- as raised, by divine providence, to their elevated
stations, not for their own grandeur and ease; but for the health and happiness
of the community. In this view king David considered his elevation to the
throne of Israel. -- He perceived that the Lord had established him king over
Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake. 11
Sam, V.12.
.

THIS principle would animate gospel ministers to a faithful discharge of the
important duties of their office. Love to their country would extinguish the
hateful spirit of bigotry, superstition, and thirst of dominion; and inspire
the amiable virtues of humility and meekness, candor, catholicism, and true
christian love. It would be a powerful spur to industry, -- would make them
studious and laborious in their great work, diligent and zealous in propagating
the benevolent principles of christianity, and especially careful to enforce
the great duties of charity, and loyalty, the true gospelpatriotism, so
frequently taught and so forcibly recommended by the precepts and example of
their divine master.

NOR would the good effects of this principle, upon subjects and the body of
the people in general, be less visible and happy. Idleness, prodigality, and
intemperance, so pernicious to society, would disappear; and a spirit of
industry, frugality and good economy take place, in proportion as
patriot-virtue gained ground, Fraud and knavery in dealing, -- a spirit of
contention and litigation, -- deceit, cheating and lying. smuggling and illicit
trade, will vanish; -- and truth, justice and equity, -- good-faith, probity
and honor, in all civil contracts and social commerce among men, will abound
and flourish in a patriot-state, -- To add no more: -- Public-spirit will
totally extirpate the malignant seeds of disaffection and disobedience to
authority, -- crush the spirit of sedition and rebellion, and cultivate and
cherish the true principles of loyalty, submission and peace; -- virtues most
friendly to society, and eminently conducive to the public safety and
prosperity.

THUS have I attempted to exhibit a portrait of this amiable and salutary
virtue, in its general nature and consequences. -- Were the design executed to
the life, it would command universsal respect: -- Did the picture answer to the
original, it must needs charm every beholder, and conciliate the esteem and
veneration of every rational intelligence.

WHAT then remains, but to urge and press it upon all ranks and orders in the
state, to acquire and cultivate this generous principle? -- Ever to act the
influence of it themselves, and labor to encourage and promote it in others?
Thus to do, is the indispensable duty of every member of society, as such, and
what their own personal interest and safety demands. The relation we all stand
in to the public, renders such a conduct highly reasonable and becoming: And as
our own particular happiness is dependent upon, and inseperably connected with,
the safety and prosperity of the whole; a suitable regard to that must
certainly induce us to wish well to our country, and labor to promote its
welfare by all lawful means. -- Do we need examples to fire us with ambition,
and urge us on this glorious pursuit? Both sacred and prosane history abound
with many shining instances of this heroic virtue, in the celebrated names of
antiquity there recorded. -- I have mentioned the example of the blessed JESUS,
who was eminent for this and every other virtue. -- Moses, the illustrious
leader of Israel, and Paul, the great doctor of the Gentiles, were both
inspired with this laudable principle in a very exalted degree. The Jewish
laws-giver, nobly prefers death, to the ruin of his nation; and rather than
survive the public calamity, begs that his name might be blotted out of the
book of GOD, the public register in which the living were enrolled Exodus
XXXII.32. It is well known the Hebrews kept registers or catalogues of the
names of their people that were alive, and when they died their names were
erased or blotted out. In allusion to this Moses's wish is to be understood; --
q. d, Either be thou pleased to slay me and them together, or spare them and me
together. Stackhouse Hist. Bib. in loco.
. -- The christian apostle, highly as he valued his gospel privileges, and a
regular standing in the church of CHRIST; could even wish himself accursed from
CHRIST, -- anathematized, or cast out of the communion of the faithful, and
scourged with all those corporal punishments, which usually attended
excommunication in that age, Romans IX. 3. I am not certain I have hit upon the
true interpretation of these words. Some expositors read them in a parenthesis,
thus, ("I did wish myself accursed from Christ.") i. e. before my conversion I
was willing to be separated from him, as my brethren, the Jews now are, and
therefore I know how to pity them, as I was once in their circumstances. Dr.
Doddridge reads the words thus. -- I could even wish myself accused after the
example of Christ. i. e. to suffer crucifixion, the death which he submitted to
commonly called an accursed death, might it serve to promote the conversion of
my brethren the Jews. But as the word, "anathema," here used, was the common
term by which excommunication was expressed in the Jewish church, I rather
think the apostle uses it in that sense, to denote his willingness of being cut
off from the communion of the faithful, as above explained.
might it subserve the best interest of his nation, and be productive of their
restoration to the favor of God. -- In what warm and pathetic strains does the
sweet singer of Israel breath forth his patriot-ardor, and express his cordial
wishes for his country's good? Psalm. CXXXVII.5, 6.
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem! let my right hand forget her cunning: If I do
not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: If I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief joy. -- And what shall I more say? for the time
would fail me to tell of Gideon, of Barak and of Samson; of Jeptha, of David
also, and Samuel, and of the prophets, Heb. XI. 32.
who were no less remarkable for love to their country, than for a firm faith
in divine providence, and an unshaken trust and confidence in the living God.
-- Greatly famed also, for love to their country, were the celebrated republics
of ancient Greece and Rome. -- Their Philosophers, poets, orators, legislators,
heroes, -- in short, their very peasants and mechanics, gloried in the name of
patriots: And while this spirit continued to operate among them, though very
deficient compared with true gospel patriotism, they rivaled, in point of
secular grandeur and public happiness, the most celebrated nations upon earth.

BUT we need not ransack the records of antiquity, or range among the monuments
of Athens, Sparta, and Rome, to find a patriot character worthy of imitation.
-- Britain too, can boast her heroes, -- nay more, she can glory in her
patriot-kings. Not to mention her HENRY'S, EDWARDS, and a WILLIAM of blessed
memory, -- the several princes of the house of BRUNSWICK, who in a happy
succession of half a century, have filled and adorned the British throne, are
eminently deserving of that character. -- Princes, who disdained to lay the
foundation of their greatness, in an undue stretch of prerogative, but nobly
chose to reign in the affections of their subjects, and establish their
dominion in the hearts of a free, a loyal, and happy people. -- And behold the
good effects! Never did Great Britain enjoy such a series of domestic peace and
tranquillity, as under their administration. Never was the national glory
carried to so high a pitch, as in the last and present reign. To the generous
efforts of this principle, inspired by the great father of his subjects,
assisted by the wise councils of a truly patriot ministry, and happily diffused
from the throne through the various orders in the state, we are indebted,
(under God,) for the many glorious victories and conquests, obtained in the
late war. -- Victories that will astonish posterity: -- Conquests that will add
fresh luster to our history, and adorn the British annals 'till time shall be
no more. -- Victories and conquests, which have curbed the overgrown power of
France, bounded the ambition of the grand-monarque, humbled the haughty pride
of Spain, added a prodigious extent of territory to the British dominions, and
finally terminated in a happy and glorious peace. -- These bright examples of
this generous virtue, and the happy consequences attending the practice of it,
both to the public and ourselves, are so many powerful incentives to fire our
ambition, to warm us with a cordial and disinterested love to our country, and
inspire our breasts with true patriot zeal. Let us then lay aside all mean,
selfish and party principles, and nobly aspire to the glorious character of
patriots and true friends to the public. -- This is a duty incumbent upon us
whatever rank in society we sustain. -- But it is eminently so upon, rulers, --
upon those who are exalted to posts of honor, and places of public trust. --
As therefore, his HONOR'S command, has ordered me into the desk on the present
occasion, this must be my apology, while, with all proper deference, and yet
with a freedom becoming the ministerial character, I address the political
fathers of my country, -- the legislative body of this colony in general court
assembled.

WORTHY and much esteemed senators: --

ONE very striking and instructive title given to rulers, in the sacred
oracles, is that of "Gods." -- This, while it expresses the dignity of their
character, serves to remind them of the great and important duties of their
post. They are gods by office; and it highly concerns them to imitate the
glorious fountain of power and goodness, in the god-like attribute of
benevolence and doing good to mankind. You are exalted, by divine providence,
to distinguished honors and most important betrustments in the state. --
Honors, the more shining and elevated, as they flow from the spontaneous
suffrages of your fellow subjects: -- Betrustments the more sacred and
inviolable, as they carry in them the highest testimonies of the unseigned
respect and confidence of a free, grateful and loyal people. -- In return for
these marks of esteem and affection, your people challenge your patriot care.
-- They expect, they justly expect that you love your country and build it a
synagogue: -- That you tenderly regard the public happiness, and faithfully
improve your opportunity and talents to promote its interest in church and
state. A moderate share of political knowledge, under the influence of this
principle, will make a man a good ruler; while the greatest talents without it,
do but render him the more dangerous to society, and utterly unfit to be
entrusted with the conduct of public affairs. -- A selfish and contracted
temper in any member of society, is a great blemish: -- But in a ruler it is
odious, -- it is shocking, -- I had almost said, unpardonable. Your honors well
know, that the great, the original end of civil government, is the good of
society; and to promote the safety and happiness of the public, its grand and
ultimate object. Your obligations, therefore to love your country and seek its
best interest, are proportionable to your elevated rank in life, and hold pace
with your superior opportunity and advantages for these benevolent purposes.
Opportunity, how precarious! -- Advantages, how uncertain! -- This day we
behold a breach, a vacancy in your honorable board, occasioned by the death,
the justly lamented death of one ANDREW BURR, esquire of Fairfield, for many years
a judge of the probates, chief justice of the county court, and one of members
of council, in the colony. He was taken ill while attending the assembly at New
Haven, in October last, and died there soon after the session caded.
, who, for a course of years, had shared the honors of his country, and
faithfully discharged the trust reposed in him, in sundry very important
offices of government. But he is now gone! -- Death, inexorable death, deal to
the cries of his family, -- deaf to his country's most ardent prayers and vows,
has stripped him of his robes of honor, discharged him from the obligations
therewith connected, and laid him level with those that hold the lowest rank in
life. -- Rulers, though gods by office, scripture and experience, attest "must
die like men." How alarming the admonition! -- How quickening the consideration
to the utmost diligence and faithfulness in their great work!

THE necessary qualifications of magistracy, and the various duties of their
high station, in their legislative, judicial and executive capacities, your
honors, I presume, are not unacquainted with. They have often been enumerated
and urged upon these occasions, and I need not repeat them. Suffer me, however,
to mention one political evil, which, among many others, seems loudly to call
for a speedy redress. -- I mean the great multiplicity of needless disputes and
contentions in the law. This colony, perhaps, above any in his majesty's
dominions, has been long famed for this litigious disposition. And it is so far
from being abated, that the number of lawsuits, in the year past, is probably
much greater than in any preceding year. Whether this temper and practice be
owing to the free nature of our civil constitution, the genius of the people,
or to what other cause, is perhaps, difficult to say. Certain it is, however,
that such a spirit is ruinous, in its operation, to individuals, and highly
injurious to the public happiness. There is little doubt, but the time and
money, needlessly spent this way, would much more than defray all the public
expenses of the colony. Besides the ill blood it tends to create, what a
prodigious drain must this be to the government? How does "eat like a canker,"
prey upon the very blood and vitals of the community, and loudly threaten its
ruin, unless speedily checked? Whether increasing the costs of suit, and making
it more expensive to go to law, would have a tendency to discourage the
practice; or whether any proper and effectual remedy can be applied in the
case, I will not presume to say. If the disease is not incurable, it loudly
calls for the help of the political physician: And, I trust, your honors,
deeply sensible of the great importance of it, will leave no means unattempted,
to put a speedy stop to the growing mischief. May the father of lights, the
inexhaustible fountain of truth and goodness, replenish your minds with wisdom,
faithfulness, justice, fortitude, love to your country, and every ruling
virtue. May public-spirit be the predominant principle of your conduct, -- ever
animate your debates, and direct your councils and deliberations for the public
happiness. Under the governing, influence of this, you will exert your
authority, in your several stations and departments, to reform the morals of
the people under your government. -- To punish and suppress the awful
prevalence of immorality, profaneness, intemperance, uncleanness,
sabbath-breaking, neglect of public worship and every other vice. -- And
promote and encourage virtue and piety, by enacting new laws, if need be, for
these salutary purposes, and faithfully executing those that are in force. And
while you show yourselves the noble patrons of christian liberty, the faithful
guardians of the unalienable rights of conscience, to the sober dissenters
among us, of every denomination; we justly expect the continuance of your more
peculiar and distinguishing regard, to the constituted churches of this colony,
as established by law. These, certainly, demand your patronage. -- They justly
claim the countenance, the encouragement and support of a christian magistracy,
by whose laws they are expressly established, and under whose protection they so
long flourished and increased. Let the interest of learning also share your
paternal regard. This is intimately connected with the public happiness, and
the care of it properly falls within the province of the civil magistrate. May
our college and and inferior schools, therefore, constantly engage your
attention, and still be the objects of your patriot-care. And may their
important interests more and more flourish under your wise administration. Thus
will you answer the just expectations of your constituents, and approve
yourselves the true friends and fathers of your country. The present generation
will rise up and call you blessed, -- your memories will be embalmed to
posterity, ages yet unborn will honor and revere your names; and what is still
infinitely more, if you are faithful to God and your country, you will ever
long meet the final plaudit of your supreme judge, and share in those endless
honors and divine joys which, through Christ, are the promised rewards of
distinguished virtue and goodness.

I NOW turn to the ambassadors of Christ, the kind father of his people, and
the great benefactor of the universe. --

REVEREND fathers and brethren. --

WE too are concerned, intimately concerned in the interesting subject before
us. -- Next to the glory of his father, a spirit of disinterested benevolence,
and the most generous love to mankind, was the governing principle in the life
and actions of our divine master, and it ought to be so in his disciples and
servants, especially the officers of his household, the ministers of his
everlasting gospel. Our character is that of ambassadors of peace, and heralds
of divine mercy and grace to a perishing world. -- To publish the glad tidings
of salvation; -- to win souls to Christ; -- to beseech sinners, in his name, to
be reconciled to God; -- to open up to mankind the unsearchable riches of
divine grace, and explain and enforce the whole scheme of gospel-duties and
christian morals: -- Thus to subserve the best interest of society, and promote
the eternal happiness of our fellow-men, is the great end of our office, -- the
honorable, the important business in which we are employed. We are placed as
sentinels upon the walls of Zion, to guard against sin, the worst enemy of our
country, and sound the alarm in God's holy mountain. We watch for souls, as
they that must give account, Heb. XIII.17.
and woe be to us if we are unfaithful. For, as they who turn many to
righteousness, will shine with distinguished luster in the kingdom of glory; so
they who are unfaithful in the christian ministry, and do the work of the Lord
deceitfully; contract aggravated guilt, and expose themselves to a most awful
and intolerable doom. But next to the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost; a principle of true patriotism and public-spirit, a sincere
regard to the best good of society and a generous, disinterested benevolence to
mankind, will be found the most animating spring to industry, the noblest
incentive to diligence and faithfulness in our great work. The gospel we
preach, is a system of benevolence and love, and all its doctrines and precepts
promotive of social happiness. This virtue of patriotism, therefore, so
congenial to our profession, and so peculiarly ornamental and becoming the
sacred character, it highly concerns us to acquire and cultivate; -- ever to
act under the influence of it ourselves, and, both by example and precept,
labor to recommened it to others. While, therefore, we study to show ourselves
approved, unto God, workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word
of truth: II Tim, II.15.
Let us, together with the great gospel-doctrines of repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts XX.21.
faithfully inculcate the relative duties of christianity, and urge upon our
hearers the important virtues of truth, justice, sobriety, charity, peace,
loyalty and obedience, so peculiarly ornamental to the christian character, and
so eminently subservient to the public tranquillity and happiness. In a word: --
Let us see to it that the genuine principles of the gospel rule and govern in
our hearts. This will make us faithful to our great master, -- faithful to the
best interest of our people, -- generous friends to our country, and warmly
solicitous to promote its welfare and happiness.

To conclude: -- As public-spirit and love to our country is universally
incumbent on every member of society, let all ranks and orders of men from the
highest to the lowest, be ambitious of this amiable character, and cordially
unite their endeavors to promote the public happiness. If we consider, my
brethren, the very happy constitution we are under, both civil and
ecclesiastical. -- the mild and gentle form of our government, both in church
and state, and the peculiar and distinguishing privileges of a public nature we
in this colony enjoy: As no people under heaven, have more reason to be
satisfied and pleased with their situation; so none can possibly be under
stronger obligations to maintain public-spirit, and love to their country than
we. We are not inthralled by lawless tyranny, or oppressed with the galling
yoke of despotic and arbitrary rule. We have no temptation to wish for the
wings of a dove, that we might quit our country, and fly away to some lonely
desert and be at rest. To Gallic slavery, to Romish persecution and spiritual
bondage, (blessed be God,) we are utter strangers. Still we taste the dear, the
delightful sweets of liberty, in the free and unrestrained choice of our own
rulers, as the return of this joyful anniversary, once more happily attests.
For a long time we have sat under the sweet and refreshing shade of the
mantling vine. Let us not then, by our sins and licentious conduct, provoke
almighty God, "by whom kings reign," to strip us of our dear privileges, and
teach us, too late, the value of them, by the briars and thorns of the
wilderness. On the contrary: -- let each one, deeply sensible of the worth of
these inestimable privileges, see to it that they testify a proper regard for
them, by a faithful, thankful and religious improvement of them. This will be
the most likely means, under divine providence, of their continuance and
perpetuation. Let us all do our faithful endeavor to reform those vices in
ourselves, which are inimical to society, and destructive of public happiness,
and then use our influence in our several stations, to promote a general
reformation. To do this our gracious sovereign, the father of his people, has
earne^^^y exhorted us from the throne. His royal proclamation, Proclamation for
the reformation of manners, published by his present Majesty in the first year
of his reign.
seconded by the chief authority of the colony, calls upon all ranks and orders
in the state, to unite their endeavors, and engage, heart and hand, in this
truly laudable design. And how guilty, how inexcusable will those in
subordinate authority, -- will ministers of the gospel, and, in short, all the
subjects be, if we neglect to concur with this pious intention of our rulers,
and refuse to engage in the salutary work? How shall we answer it to God or our
own consciences, to the present age or posterity, if, by our criminal neglect
or abuse of these rich blessings, we make a forfeiture of them to God and the
king? To prevent this, let all be exhorted to "put on charity" which is the
great band of society, and spring of public-happiness. Let love to God, love to
our country, and love to all mankind, ever reign in our hearts, and direct and
govern all our actions. In particular, let us, above all things, be solicitous
to obtain the saving blessings of the gospel of Christ, and have the various
graces and virtues of the christian character inwrought in our hearts and
regulating our lives. -- That so speaking the truth in love, we may grow up
into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: From whom the whole
body, fitly joined together, and compacted, by that which every joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love. Ephesians. IV. 15,
16.
Amen.

FINIS.

