AN ADDRESS TO THE Rev. Dr. Alison, the Rev. Mr. Ewing, etc. BEING A
VINDICATION OF THE QUAKERS.

AN ADDRESS TO THE Rev. Dr. ALISON, the Rev. Mr. EWING, and others, TRUSTEES of
the Corporation for the Relief of Presbyterian Ministers, their Widows and
Children: BEING A VINDICATION OF THE QUAKERS From the ASPERSIONS of the said
TRUSTEES in their LETTER published in the London Chronicle, No. 1223. To which
is prefixed, the said LETTER.

BY A LOVER OF TRUTH.

Magna est Veritas and prevalebit. PRINTED in the YEAR 1765.

A LETTER from Philadelphia, August 22, 1764, taken from the London Chronicle
No. 1223.
OUR Indian War still greatly distresses our Frontier Counties, great Numbers
are driven from their Habitations, and Want and Poverty force many to live on
their Plantations, though they never go to Bed without Danger of being cut off by
the Savages before the Morning. This was the Fate of some Families lately, who
were our Neighbors and intimate Friends some Years ago, while they lived in
the interior Counties. They murdered a Woman with Child, cut the Infant out of
her Womb, and made her and it most horrid Spectales of their Cruelty. They
also, not many Weeks ago, stole down through the Inhabitants and massacred a
Schoolmaster and his Scholars in a most barbarous Manner. These Murders are
generally committed by Indians who lived either near or among the Europeans in
the Time of Peace; they know the State of the Frontiers, and how to distress
them, and steal off without Discovery. These Indians are the Remains of a Part
of the Indian Nation from whom we bought our Lands. They are a free independent
People; they are no Subjects of England, as some believe, nor did they ever
give up their National Independency; they have been in Alliance with England,
but still have all the Powers of a free Nation, and make War and Peace with us,
as with others, as they please. The Quakers are chiefly in our three interior
Counties, as they were the first Settlers; and the five Frontier Counties are
settled in general with People of other Denominations, chiefly Lutherans, and
Dutch and English Presbyterians, with a Mixture of Baptists and the Church of
England. In all our Troubles the Quakers, at least a Quaker Faction, have
secretly supported the Indians, held Treaties and Correspondence with them in
our Wars, and bestowed on them Arms and Ammunition, and Tomahawks, even when
they were murdering our Frontier Inhabitants. When a Peace was concluded, if we
may use an Indian Idiom, they wiped away the Blood shed by the Indians without
obliging them to return our Captives. We put 500 l. into the Hands of our
Governor, who entrusted it to our Provincial Commissioners, to redeem our
Captives so shamefully deserted; but we did not receive above a Score, if so
many, notwithstanding our utmost Endeavors. The very Indians who lived among
us, and had done us great Mischiefs, during the War, sat in the Council with
the Nations to whom they belonged, and concluded this Peace: And even in Time
of Peace, before this War broke out, they told the Inhabitants among whom they
lived, that they had scalped and carried them into Captivity, and would do it
again. The War broke out, and in a few Days above 750 Families were driven from
their peaceable Habitations, were forced to adandon their Cattle, Crops, and
Household Furniture, nay many were glad to escape without bringing Bed ^^^ths
and wearing Apparel with them, and they lived in Wig-wams like the Indians,
hardly sheltered from the Inclemency of the Weather. When ready to perish for
want of the Necessaries of Life, our Society sent them 150 l. as we wrote you
Word; and soon after Collections were made by every Religious Society in this
City (the Quakers only excepted) though they were earnestly pressed to contribute
to their Relief: Even the Roman Catholics, unasked, generously made a
Collection for their Relief. You desired to know the Reason why the Quakers
were so backward, I really can give none that they have assigned, save this,
that they knew other Societies would relieve them, and they would afterward
assist, if there was occasion; but had all taken this cold Method, many of them
must have perished; and though their Distresses are still great, and though it is
acknowledged even in our Assembly, that 100,000 l. would not pay their Losses,
yet they would do Nothing then, nor now, to help them: Yet, during the last
War, they expended 5000 l. in Presents to the Indians, while they were
drenching our Frontier Settlements in the Blood of the distressed Inhabitants.
We know no Reason for this Conduct, but an envious Temper, because the Frontier
Counties, who are of different Denominations, must share the Power with them,
that they now abuse; and to prevent this, they have, in forming the new
Counties, ordered it so, that but ten Representatives are sent from five
Frontier Counties, and twenty-six are sent from the three Interior Counties,
under the Quakers Influence. These Frontier Inhabitants complain that they are
not fairly represented, or else they had not been such Sufferers; and as the
Charter allows every County at least four to represent them, they desire this
Charter Privilege; and this occasions, as far as I can judge, all our Quakers
Uncharitableness. No Men were ever fonder of Power. The Frontier Inhabitants
exposed to daily Incursions of the Indians, formed a Party of Volunteers to go
and destroy some Indian Town, near our Borders, on Susquehanna; accordingly 116
Men marched almost to their Towns, and were informed that 50 of those Indians,
against whom they had set out, were on their March against the Frontiers. They
returned and overtook the Indians, and routed them at the Munsey Hill on
Susquehanna. They then proposed to follow their Blow, and applied to Colonel
Armstrong, who commanded the Provincial Forces. Two Hundred Volunteers went out
with him, and 150 Provincials; but the Indians among us gave Notice to our
Enemies, and they escaped; but our People destroyed about 300 Acres of Corn,
and burnt their Dwellings, and returned enraged to find that an Indian Town of
about twenty or thirty Persons had now informed their Friends, against whom our
Men had marched, and who were perfidiously playing the same Pranks as they did
last War; they marched to their Town and cut off some of them, others fled to a
Borough named Lancaster, and there they came and cut them off. This the Quakers
have painted as a Massacre and a most horrid Murder, though it was no more but
what our People suffered on all Occasions. After their Corn was destroyed, and
that troublesome Nest were obliged to remove, a Party of Indians among the
Inhabitants that carried the Enemies Arms and Ammunition, and had conducted
them into the Settlement, and assisted in murdering the Inhabitants, applied to
the Quakers, and they found Means to bring them down to Philadelphia, and have
maintained them at the Expense of the Province. Afterward some of the very
Indians that were beat at the Munsey Hill, and that had their Corn destroyed,
sued for the same Privileges, and were brought to Philadelphia, and maintained
by the Province. This inflamed the Resentment of a Number of the Inhabitants on
the Frontiers, and about 500 came down well armed, without forming themselves
into Companies, determined to cut off these Enemies. The Indians were then
under the Governor's Protection, and at the Request of the Quaker Faction were
guarded by a Company of the King's Forces. These Insurgents declared they were
Loyal Subjects, and had fought the King's Battles since Braddock's Defeat, and
would not do what looked like Rebellion, though they thought it exceeding hard
that they should be obliged to pay Taxes to maintain their Enemies. They
complained of Grievances and Sufferings that would have drawn Tears from
Stones; the Mayor of our City, two leading Members of the Assembly, and the
King's Attorney General, and about ten Ministers and Gentlemen, were at the
Conference, and they were solemnly promised a Redress of Grievances, if they
appointed two of their Number to lay them before the Governor and Assembly, and
returned in Peace to their Dwellings: This they did; and marched Abroad and
Home with Decency above 100 Miles, paying every One for what they had on their
Journey. But they are still without Redress of their Grievances. This has
inflamed the Quaker Faction, who are foolishly attached to the Indians, and is
made a Plea for withholding their Charity. We have been able to do Nothing to
spread the Gospel either among the Indians or the Europeans since the War broke
out: We have assisted and are determined to assist the distressed Inhabitants;
and we rejoice that through your Liberality, a kind Providence has enabled us at
any Time, when their Distresses grow very great, to give them Relief.

AN ADDRESS TO THE Rev. Dr. Alison, the Rev. Mr. Ewing, etc.
REVEREND SIRS,
IN the London Chronicle, No. 1223, is a very extraordinary Letter, dated at
Philadelphia, August 22, 1764, which, though not signed with your Names, carries
evident Marks of your being the Authors. I confess it gave me real Concern to
find that Men of your holy Function, could cooly and deliberately publish to
the World so many defamatory Untruths, as that Letter contains, against a
Society of People, whose Merit and virtuous Demeanor, ever since the Settlement
of the Colony, had gained them the Confidence and Esteem or the Public. You
have therein endeavored to make the prudent Policy of the Government appear
criminal, by wickedly misrepresenting its Transactions; and, having done this,
you impute the imaginary Crimes to the Quakers with the uncharitable Design of
rendering their Conduct obnoxious to their Sovereign and odious to Mankind.

WITH this View it is, you allege, That the Quakers have secretly supported
the Indians, held Treaties and Correspondence with them, in our Wars, and
bestowed on them Arms and Ammunition and Tomhawks, even when they were
murdering our Frontier Inhabitants. I am at a Loss what Words to use in
remarking on this Charge. I am not fond of using harsh Ones, and yet when the
Manner of making it, and the Heinousness of the Accusation is considered, every
honest Mind must determine none can be found too severe. The Charge is general,
and in the Affirmative, and therefore by the Policy and Reason of all Laws
ought to be proved before it is credited; otherwise the most abandoned Wretch,
may at any Time take the Life, and ruin the Reputation, of the most innocent
and virtuous on his bare Assertion. And indeed, a great Writer observes, that a
general Charge in a Libel ought not to be credited, though it was supported by
the Oath of the Libeller. The Laws of the Land are made to punish Offenders,
and no one ought to be publicly disgraced before he has had an Opportunity of
vindicating his Innocence. The Crime you accuse this People with is High
Treason. The Courts of Justice have ever been open to receive your Informations
against them, and the Government ready to inflict the Punishment on Men that
deserve it. Had you then the least Proof of the Facts, What Reason can be
given, why the same Malice and Ill Will have not prompted you to bring them to
Justice, which induced you thus publicly to defame them in your Letter? Your
Duty to the Community, and your Loyalty to your Sovereign, should have incited
you to the First: The Rules of Morality and the Precepts of the Religion you
profess and publicly teach, should have detered you from the other. How then
shall we account for this Breach of the Duties of Morality and Religion? Why
did you not make this Charge before some proper Judicatory, instead of
publishing it in a Libel? It must be because you were conscious it sprung from
the wicked Invention of your own Brains, and therefore impossible to be
supported.

BUT permit me to ask you, when, where, and how was this heinous Offense
against your Sovereign and the Government committed by the Quakers? If you
cannot tell the Time, Place, or the Manner, were you, or ten Thousand like you,
to make the Charge even upon Oath, you must not expect to be credited -- And if
you can give such Information, how dare you conceal an Offense of High Treason
from the Government? Is your Loyalty so faint, and your Virtue so low, as not to
be powerful enough to prevail on you to discharge your Duty to your King and
your Country?

AFTER making this Charge against the Quakers in general, you descend to say,
"at least a Quaker Faction" have done this. Pray inform us how many compose
this Faction? If they are numerous, it affords you a better Opportunity of
fixing it on some of them, and of bringing them to Justice. If a few, how base
and wicked is it in you, Reverend Sirs, to endeavor from the Crimes of a few
Individuals, supposing your Accusation to be just, to calumniate the Reputation
of a whole Society? Fifty Seven Presbyterian Ruffians attacked the Indians, the
ancient Friends and Allies of the English, who had been long peaceably settled
at Conestogo, a Place far within the inhabited Parts, and barbarously murdered
in cool Blood, disarmed Men, helpless Women, and innocent Infants, when on
their bended Knees protesting their Innocence, and with uplifted Hands
imploring their Lives. Now, would you think it just in the Quakers to impute
these horrid Deeds to your whole Society, and publish them to the World in the
London Chronicle? I am sure you would not. -- But why then, Reverend Sirs, have
you so widely deviated from that golden Rule, Do unto others as you would they
should do unto you? Think of this Question -- Think seriously of it on your
Pillows -- think of it in your Pulpit and when at Prayers; and, if no Remorse
or Penitence is the Effect of your Reflections, your Hearts must be harder than
the Nether Millstone. For it is written, Who so privily slandereth his
Neighbor, him will I destroy." And, "with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged.

I DO not mean to deny, that there are some weak and wicked Men, among the
Quakers. There are, and ever will be such among all Societies. Was not this a
Truth, the P -- y Faction, (to whom it seems you have united against your
Sovereign's Interest COPY of a circular LETTER.
Philadelphia, March 30, 1764.
Our General Assembly having adjourned for a short Time, to consult their
Constituents, whether an humble Address should be drawn up and transmitted to
his Majesty, praying that he would be pleased to take this Province under his
immediate Protection and Government; that is, whether the Freemen of this
Province should petition the King, that we may be REDUCED to the Form of a
King's Government.

The Presbyterians here, upon mature Deliberation, are of Opinion, that it is
not safe to do Things of such Importance rashly; our Privileges by these Means
may be greatly abridged, but will never be enlarged.

We are under the King's Protection and Government now as much as we can be for
he will never govern us in Person; and it is of no great Consequence whether
his Deputy be recommended by the Proprietaries, or by some other great Man by
his Majesty's Approbation.

Our Charter is in Danger by such a Change, and let no Man persuade you to the
contrary. There has been a half-yearly Meeting of the Quakers in this City, but
this Change of Government has not been proposed in their Meeting, as we can yet
understand, nor is it approved of by the Heads of that Scociety. [A gross
Falsehood!]

This Affair is in all Probability, a Trap laid to ensnare the unwary, and then
to cast an Odium on the Presbyterians for ruining or attempting to ruin the
Province. The Frontier Counties are now suing for a Redress of Grievances, and
we have the greatest Reason to believe, that it is no more than an artful
Scheme to divide or divert the Attention of the injured Frontier Inhabitants
from prosecuting their Petitions, which very much alarm them. [ Another
Falsehood, for they had no Reason to believe any Thing of the Kind] For these
Reasons we would earnestly recommend it to you, to lose no Time in advising all
under your Influence, whether of our Denomination or others, from signing any
such Petition.

Signed per Order, GILBERT TENANT, FRANCIS ALISON, JOHN EWING.




) would never have had the least Pretense to represent this Society as disloyal
to the Crown, and against contributing to the Defense of the Province. It was
the Folly and Rashness of one Man, that furnished them with the Means of giving
their Misrepresentations of the Conduct of the Assembly an Appearance of Truth,
at a Time when the House had given the most evident Proof of their Obedience to
the Royal Orders. And it is this officious, mischeivous and ambitious Man,
against whom alone you have heretofore made the Charges, which you now impute
to the Society, of holding Treaties and Correspondence with the Indians, and
bestowing on them Tomhawks in Time of War, -- with how much Justice and Truth,
you and he alone can determine. The Dexterity and Success with which you and
your Party have used the Follies of this Man, to abuse and discredit the
Society he unhappily belongs to, are now fatally notorious. The Task of
reciting all the Mischiefs which he has brought on the Society, the Disgrace he
has, and is continually subjecting them to, his wild Schemes to promote his own
Importance, the Numbers his absurd Conduct has driven from the Society, and the
other Effects of his fickle, yet headstrong impetuous Temper, would take up
more Time than I can at present spare: I shall therefore only add, that
Confusion and Discredit have constantly attended the Affairs of those who have
had any Connections with him; and that it would have been happy for the
Society, and the Liberties of Pennsylvania, if they had never had any
Fellowship with a Person of his Disposition: For your Malevolence will never
want a plausible Pretext for Misrepresentation and Slander against the whole
Society, while he continues a Member, and your Consciences will permit you to
aggravate the Follies of an Individual into heinous Crimes, and to impute them
to the Society in general, who either never thought of them or gave them
Opposition.

I shall now leave this high Charge against the Quakers, which, without one
probable Circumstance attending it, rested solely on your mere Assertion. And
how much Credit ought to be given to that, I shall make evident before I
conclude.

THERE are some Men who, determined to succeed in their Designs, are utterly
regardless of Truth, and so indifferent to the Shame of being detected in a
Falsehood; that they never reflect whether the Facts they affirm are true or
false. This Part you have acted; being determined at all Events, to destroy the
Reputation of the Quakers.

BUT when I consider the Falsehoods you, and your Adherents, have had the
Hardiness to publish, with this Intent, even upon the Spot where they might be
easily detected, I the less admire at your Wickedness in publishing your
venomous Slanders in England, where they might chance not to fall in the Hands
of those who were able to refute them. In some of your inflammatory
Publications you did not scruple to assert, that the Assembly had employed the
Public Money in hiring the Indians to destroy the back Inhabitants. But though
the Author of the Preface to Mr. Galloway's Speech, soon after taxed you with
downright Lying on the Occasion, you have never thought fit to deny the Charge,
nor indeed will you ever be able to wipe off the Infamy with which you have
thereby covered yourselves. I must beg Leave, however, to repeat some of that
Author's Words, as I think them very expressive of your Conduct. Are there not,
says he, Pamphlets continually written and daily sold in our Streets to justify
and encourage a Spirit of Riot and Violence? -- Are not the mad armed Mob in
those Writings instigated to imbrue their Hands in the Blood of their Fellow
Citizens; -- by first applauding their Murder of the Indians, and then
representing the Assembly and their Friends as worse than Indians, as having
privately stirred up the Indians to murder the white People, and armed and
rewarded them for that Purpose? -- LIES, Gentlemen, villainous as ever the
Malice of Hell invented; and which to do you Justice, not one of you believes,
-- though you would have the Mob believe them.

To proceed, -- In hopes that some of your slanderous Slime might stick, you
wickedly assert, That when a Peace was concluded, they (the Quakers) wiped away
the Blood shed by the Indians without obliging them to return our Captives;
confessing at the same Time that the wiping away the Blood is an "Indian Idiom"
for making of Peace. I say you have wickedly asserted this, as I am convinced
that you must at the very Time have known, that the Messages of Invitation to
the Indians were sent by the Governor; that the Negotiations were conducted by
him, with the Advice of his Council; that the Peace was concluded, or the Blood
wiped away as you term it, by the same Authority; and that the few Quakers who
attended the Treaty, were never consulted on the Occasion, and even the
Provincial Commissioners were but seldom treated with that Respect. Had either
of these been the Case, the Measure you complain of would have been at least
recommended. -- If this Step was prudent or necessary, it was the Province of
the Governor, and those who had the Management of the Treaty under their
Direction, to insist on and enforce it. And, if any Persons are culpable, they
must be those whose Duty it was to obtain a Restitution of the Captives, and
not those who had the Inclination without the Power. But if, Reverend Sirs, it
was your Opinion, that it was the Duty of others, besides the executive Part of
Government to oblige the Indians to return our Captives why did you not perform
this important Service? It was as much in your Power as in that of the Quakers;
and some of you actually attended the Treaty. Was it because you at that Time
had really but little Concern about the Captives? Or was it because you had not
then resolved to lay aside the arduous Duties of your sacred Offices, for the
Sake of Politics and becoming Politicians? -- Give me leave to tell you
seriously, that the Zeal you, and those you can influence, have lately shown in
vilifying the Quakers, is thought, by the sensible moderate Men of every
Persuasion in the Province, to be owing to your political Designs. It is
imagined, that you expect you shall, by rendering the Quakers odious, recommend
yourselves to the Proprietors, and thereby the easier engross all Power, and
reduce all other Societies, the Church of England not excepted, to your Will
and Pleasure, as your Society have in a great Degree already done in several
other of his Majesty's Colonies.

IN the next Sentence you tell us, that you put L. 500, into the Hands of the
Governor, who entrusted it to the Provincial Commissioners, to redeem our
Captives so shamefully deserted. I am obliged to you, Gentlemen, for this
Discovery. It seems then that the Authors of so many bold Untruths and
uncharitable Censures, as are contained in the Letter before me, are the same
Persons who gave into the Governor's Hands L. 500, for the Redemption of
Captives. -- And when I have Recourse to the Receipt signed by the Governor for
that Money, I find it was paid by the Corporation for the Relief of
Presbyterian Ministers, their Widows and Children, -- not out of your private
Purses, or from any Contributions of your Society in this Province, as you have
left the World to conclude; but from the charitable Donations of the good
People of England, Scotland and Ireland, for this very Purpose, and not for the
Purpose to which you have applied the Bulk of those Donations. Wherein then
does your Charity consist? Is it in abusing your Neighbors, and assuming the
Charity of others to yourselves? But are you not yet ashamed to keep the Amount
of this Donation a Secret from the World -- and not give an Account thereof
either to the Contributors in Europe, or to the People of this Province? The
first have a Right to expect it, because the Money was theirs, and it was given
by them on this express Condition; and the latter, because it was given to
relieve them from an Expense which otherwise they must have necessarily
provided for.

And are you not also ashamed to say, that the Governor entrusted the Money to
the Provincial Commissioners; when you know in your own Consciences, that they
never received a single Farthing, or had the least Direction in the Disposal of
it; but that it was entrusted by Governor Hamilton, to two Gentlemen of your
own Religion, for the Purposes you intended it, and for which they are
accountable to the Governor? To prove that you must have been conscious of
this, and, that the Captives were not so shamefully deserted by the Public as
you represent, but that their not being relieved, was owing to a sudden Turn of
Indian Affairs; I shall insert a Copy of a Note sent by one of you to the
Secretary, and by him laid before the Commissioners. viz.

Dr. Alison presents his Compliments to Mr. Secretary Shippen, and sends him a
Copy of the Minute relating to the Money allotted to the Redemption and Relief
of Captives, together with a Copy of the Receipt Mr. Hamilton gave for the
same. He would observe on this Matter, that the Money was joined with some
Public Money, put into the Hands of Commissioners, sent to Pittsburgh, to
forward down, and to relieve the Captives expected to be restored by the
Indians, in Consequence of the Treaty of Lancaster. -- But as from the
unsuccessful Turn Indian Affairs took, little Room was afforded to lay out the
same; it is expected that most of this Sum, lies yet unapplied.

If the Province Commissioners think fit to lay it out for the Relief of the
Poor People, who have been delivered up to Colonel Bouquet, and will render
such particular Accounts of the same, with former Distributions and
Disbursements, as may satisfy the Donors, or otherwise if they will return the
Money to be laid out by those who advanced it, they will either Way give
Satisfaction.

Jan. 28, 1765.

IN all this Time, it seems you have disposed of but L. 500, and you have
lately requested the Governor and Provincial Commissioners to settle the
Accounts thereof. What the Amount of the Collection was is uncertain to us; it
may have been L. 5000, or more. -- You have confessed there is a Balance
remaining in your Hands; which to be sure you will not venture to appropriate
to any other than the Purposes intended by the Contributors, without their
Assent. -- If this be really your Design, Might you not as well have laid
before the same Gentlemen, the whole Accounts of this charitable Donation,
containing the Amount thereof, the Sums you have expended, and the Balance now
remaining in your Hands? This would be acting the Part of Men of Honor and
Honesty. It would give the Contributors in England the Satisfaction the are
entitled to, which they have often complained of the Want of; and which they
will undoubtedly find out Measures to compel you to do, should you trifle with
them much longer.

I will follow you still further in your boasted Charities to the back
Inhabitants. When ready to perish for want of the Necessaries of Life," you
say, "our Society sent them L. 150, and soon after Collections were made by
every Religious Society in this City, the Quakers only excepted. It is not my
Inclination to depreciate from the Charities of any Religious Society; nor
would I willingly employ my Pen to so odious and unchristian a Purpose. This
kind of Work, I would choose to leave to such Lovers of Defamation and Falsehood
as are the Authors of the Letter in question. I have Reason to know, that there
are many worthy Religious and Loyal Subjects among the Presbyterians in this
Province; and I am confident there would be yet many more, had you confined
yourselves to the Duties of your sacred Functions, and never dabbled in
Politics. A Science you do not understand; or did you, you could not put your
Knowledge in Practice, consistent with your Stations in Life, and the Offices
you have undertaken. The Influence you have among your People in the City, the
Authority you have assumed over all the Presbyterian Clergy, and their
Congregations in the Country, to which the Majority of them implicitly submit,
as is plain by the ready Obedience they paid to your Circular Letter,
describing the Change from a Proprietary to a Royal Government, as productive
of their Ruin, and the great Industry and Pains you have taken to render the
latter odious, must have had some Effect with them, and cooled, if not totally
alienated the Affections of many from the Person of their Sovereign. For this
Piece of Service, his Majesty and Ministry have few others to reward but
yourselves, and a noted Church of England Clergyman, who has by uncommon
Effrontery repeatedly imposed on the Clergy of Eminence in our Mother Country.
-- But it is more than probable, that the Time is near when you will all be
stripped of your borrowed Plumes. -- Pardon this Disgression.

IT is I say, a Task no ways agreeable to me, to compare the Conduct of
different religious Societies: And yet when the Slanders published by the
Ministers of one Sect, render the Comparison necessary for the Vindication of
another, there needs but little Apology. I shall therefore lay before you,
those Sums of Money which the Quakers have generously bestowed on the Frontier
Inhabitants to relieve their Distress, and to restore Peace to our Borders in
which those poor People were so much interested.

IN the Year 1755, the Quakers, affected with the Distresses of the Frontier
Inhabitants, who were then attacked by the French and Indians, were the only
People that sent them any Relief. -- They raised in the City of Philadelphia,
upwards of Five Hundred Pounds, and faithfully distributed it among them. --
The Friends in the Country also joined in this Charity, and dispatched several
Wagon Loads of Provisions for the Subsistence of those who were rendered
destitute of the Necessaries of Life. Who were to be relieved? -- not Quakers,
for you agree the Quakers are chiefly in the three interior Cities. They were
People of other Societies, and principally of your own. At this Time your
Bowels of Compassion were not even moved, -- all your Charity lay fast asleep!
-- What a grateful Return have you then made for this early and seasonable Act
of Benevolence! For their Charity you have given them Abundence of Slander and
Abuse -- And for Brotherly Love and Good Will toward your Society, you have
endeavored to ruin their Reputation as a People with all Mankind.

AND, at the very Time you sent up the L. 150, you mention, to the Frontiers,
the Quakers in the Country Meetings also made Collections for the same Purpose,
and sent up several Sums of Money to relieve the Distresses of the poor People;
and you have acknowleged in one of your former Publications, that some worthy
Individuals (among the Quakers) in the City, contributed on the Occasion. It is
true, the Quakers as a Society, did not at this Time raise any Money in the
City. -- Their Reasons were, -- That the Application for Relief was first made
to other Societies -- to whom it came naturally first, as their People were the
Objects in Distress. However, the Quakers in the City, had a Meeting on the
Occasion, and upon Enquiry, found that the Sums of Money which had been already
collected were so liberal, that they were more than sufficient to answer the
present Purpose. -- And so it afterward proved; for a Part of the Money sent
up to Cumberland and other Places, remained in the Hands of the Persons to whom
sent, undistributed for many Months after. -- And yet this did not prevent
their resolving (as appears by their Minutes) that they would largely
contribute in the Winter Season, when in all Probability, the Distresses of the
Frontiers would demand much greater Relief. -- In Pursuance of this Resolution,
it is well known upwards of L. 500, was subscribed, a Part of it disposed of,
and a Part remains for want of Objects: As does likewise a great Part of the
Money raised several Years before by your Missionary in Europe for the same
Purpose.

THESE were the only Motives that prevented the Quakers from contributing at
this Time, as they had done before, to the Relief of the Frontiers. To have
added to the Sums then raised for this Purpose, would have been Wantoness, not
Charity, would have savoured more of Pride than Prudence. But any Reason suited
your Purpose better than the true One, as you were determined to defame a whole
Society of People, the Objects of your Envy and inveterate Malice, which was
out of your Power to do, while you adhered to Truth. You therefore after
racking your Invention to find out a Falsehood to serve your Purpose, assert,
We know of no other Reason for this Conduct but an envious Temper, because the
Frontier Counties who are of different Denominations, must share the Power with
them which they now abuse. It seems then the Quakers have Power. And permit me
to ask you why should they not? Are they not in every Respect as much entitled
to it as any others? -- Have they not Life, Liberty and Property to be
represented and protected as well as others? And have they not given as full
Proof of a faithful and loyal Attachment to their Sovereign and his Government
as those of any other Society, and much more than those of your own who have
been under your particular Influence? It is true, you have taken great Pains to
represent the People of that Society as principled against granting Aids to the
Crown, and against paying the Taxes for the Defense of the Province. You have
made Use of a Petition presented to the Assembly, set on foot by a mischievous
wrongheaded Man among them, who, with all his Art and Influence, could obtain
but 29 Persons besides himself to sign it; and you have basely imposed it on
the World as an Act of the whole Society, though you well knew that the Assembly,
even when composed of a great Majority of Quakers, have granted several Hundred
Thousand Pounds to the Crown, for those very Purposes. You have also taken
Advantage of the Conduct of the same obstinate Person, in refusing to pay his
Taxes; though you knew there were not one in a Thousand of that Society, but paid
them with as much Cheerfulness as any of the King's Subjects.

GREAT as your Enmity is to Quakers, you cannot, Rev. Sirs, charge that Sect
with having ever attempted to behead or depose their Sovereign, or with
treasonable Conspiracies, Murders, Riots, or illegal Opposition to Government.
On the contrary, it is well known to the World, that this Province was first
settled by Quakers; it is Government carried on, and it is Peace and Welfare
promoted, by Measures founded on Wisdom and Prudence; the best Legislative
Regulations were made, and Justice administered with the strictest Rectitude at
Home, while Peace and Amity were carefully cultivated with the Natives abroad;
and those very Indians, whose Interest it was to destroy the White People,
were, by their consummate Policy, made instrumental in promoting the Settlement
and Welfare of the Colony. And the same Policy had still continued, and the
Happiness of the People been equally promoted, had not Proprietary private
Interest interfered and prevented.

PERMIT me, before I leave this Point, to contrast the Conduct of the Quakers
with your own, and those under your Influence. The Quakers have ever virtuously
exerted themselves in favor of the just Rights and Liberties of Mankind, and
have endeavored to restrain the Proprietary Power within its proper Bounds:
You, on the other Hand, have joined with that Power, in the foolish and vain
Expectation of usurping the Whole. -- The Quakers have ever supported the
Government, its Laws and Constitution, and that against all rebellious Riots
and Attempts to tread it under Foot: You, and those under your Influence, have
been either the Principals or Abettors of all the Riots that have been
insolently raised in Defiance of Government and its Laws, as your many
insidious Writings, and the Letter now before me will testify. The Quakers, at
the Request of the Government, united with others in defending it against the
Rioters: But the Congregation under your Care, one or two at most excepted,
were either passive, if not joyful Spectators of the imminent Danger, or
intermixed with them, abetting and encouraging their horrid Design. The
Quakers, when they found Life, Liberty and Property were no longer secure under
a P -- y Government, did, from a perfect Confidence in their Sovereign, unite
in petitioning for a Royal Government; while you were employed in spreading
Disaffection to the King, and an Aversion to a Kingly Government among your
whole People; and in prevailing not only on the Men, but even Children at
School to petition against it. -- The Quakers have expended many Thousand
Pounds toward restoring Peace to, and relieving the Distresses of the Frontier
Inhabitants, and the Redemption of Captives, though scarcely any of their Society
are settled there; while you have only contributed a pitiful L. 150, for one of
these Purposes, though the People of your Society were the very Objects that were
to be benefited and relieved. Thus, Reverend Sirs, had you the least Degree of
Candor, you would confess, that the Quakers have uniformly shown by their
Actions that they are governed by the Principles of Reason, and are Friends to
good Government: That while they have with Steadiness promoted the true
Interest and Happiness of the Country, and opposed the arbitrary and tyrannical
Measures of a private Subject, they have at the same Time exerted themselves in
maintaining and defending even the Government that was occasionally oppressing
them, against every audacious Attempt that has been made to destroy its Laws,
and annihilate its Power. And, to do you Justice, Gentlemen, I must confess,
you have not been less uniform in the Execution of your Plan of trampling on
all Government and Order: For it is well known it was those under the Influence
of one of you, that formed the Riot in Gov. Morris's Administration, which was
intended to intimidate the Assembly into the arbitrary and unjust Measures of
the Proprietaries. -- It was People of the same Society, that perpetrated the
Murders at Conestogoe and Lancaster, which you can, consistent with your
Religion, even endeavor to justify. It was the same People that committed that
daring Insult on the Government at Germantown, and have since that seized and
destroyed the Goods of the CROWN, and impudently declared, "that they were
better Judges of what was right to be done in America, than their Sovereign and
the British Parliament united." You formerly joined with the Proprietaries
against the Assembly, contrary to your own and the Rights of your Fellow
Subjects, and you now unite with the same Power against the Rights of His
Majesty himself. Uniformly you have acted indeed, but with how much Reputation
and Credit to yourselves and your Society, the candid Part of Mankind will
hereafter determine.

BUT this Want of Charity in the Quakers proceeds as you allege from an
envious Temper, because the Frontier Inhabitants must share the Power with
them. To prevent this, you say, they have in forming the new Counties so
ordered it, that but ten Representatives are sent from five frontier Counties,
and twenty six from the three interior Counties under the Quakers Influence. It
is no uncommon Thing to find Men who have invented a Falsehood to promote their
wicked Designs, to lose themselves when they attempt to offer Reasons in
Support of it. This certainly is your Circumstance; for can there be any Reason
or Cause for envying a Power which the Frontiers do not enjoy, and which you
declare the Quakers have so ordered, that they cannot exercise it. -- This weak
Reason for the Quakers Uncharitableness I shall leave at present for you to
mend, or to invent a new One, as shall be most agreeable to you. -- But why
would you venture thus, without the least Foundation, to impute to the Quakers
a Passion which it is here so well known, may, with the strictest Justice and
Propriety, be charged to yourselves. Envy, and a Thirst after Power, are your
characteristic Passions. Envy at the Increase, Happiness and Promotion of the
Church of England and the Quaker Religion, is what destroys your Peace, and
renders you thus restless and tumultuous: And Thirst after Power, never to be
satiated until all other Societies are reduced to your Domain, is the chief
Motive of your late Conduct. It requires no great Depth of Penetration to
perceive this Truth. -- Should the Frontiers succeed in their unreasonable
Demand, which has sprung entirely from your Policy, the Legislative Power would
be in the Hands of your Sect, and your whole Scheme of Dominion executed at
once. Hence arises your Complaint that the Frontiers are not justly
represented. And do you then seriously think, that a People who have thus
grossly abused the Share of Power they at present enjoy, who have trampled on
all Laws both human and divine, to gratify their frantic Rage and superstitious
Fury, and who have spurned at, defied and insulted the Powers of Government
itself, should be entrusted with more? This Question, if I am right in judging
from your past Conduct, you will certainly answer in the Affirmative: For you
seem determined to succeed in your Plan at all Adventures. Hence it is that you
deserted the sacred Duties of your Profession for the Sake of Politics. Hence
it is that you have long since laid your Schemes to render your own Sect the
most numerous and powerful in America. Hence it is that all those Riots and
Tumults which have put an End to all Government in the Province, encouraged and
countenanced by your Performances, have arisen. And from these Motives have
proceeded all your false Clamours, groundless Abuse and infamous Calumnies
against the Quakers, whose Merit has recommended them to that Confidence of the
People of other Societies, which your own never could obtain; and whose Conduct
in Support of the Government and its Laws against the most wicked Attempts, has
been a Mountain of Opposition in your Progress to lawless Power, the great
Object of your Wishes. Be not deceived, Rev. Sirs, your Plan is not so deeply
laid as to conceal these solemn Truths from Persons of other Professions: They
see your Designs, and it is much to be regretted, that the Eyes of those
unhappy Men, who have long been made the Dupes of your Folly and Wickedness,
were not also opened, that they might see the Ruin which your Doctrines and
Conduct must lead to, sooner or later.

BUT to proceed in manifesting the Weakness of the Foundation upon which you
attempt to erect your Power: The Charter, you say, allows to every County four
Members at least to represent them, and that the Frontiers "desire this
Privilege." Here you discover the Folly of Divines when they undertake to
expound Temporal Laws. In the Year 1701, the Province and Territories were
united in Legislation; they consisted of six Counties, three in each: The
Proprietor and People finding the Original Frame of Government defective,
agreed on a new Charter; the whole Number of Representatives was settled at
Twenty-four, i. e. four for each County. And therefore the Charter, in erecting
and proportioning the Legislative Authority of the Counties then laid out;
declares, in. 2. That there shall be an Assembly yearly chosen by the Freemen
thereof, to consist of four Persons out of each County; making in the Whole the
Number intended. -- But as there was then a Probability, from some Differences
subsisting between the Members of the three Counties of the Province, and those
of the three Counties of the Territories, that they would separate in
Legislation, in the subsequent Part of the Charter a Power is given to them for
that Purpose: And, in case they should separate, it was further declared, that
the Inhabitants of each of the three Counties of this Province should not have
less than 8 Members to represent them in Assembly, without the least Direction
for the future Regulation of the Conduct of the Government, in forming new
Counties.

IMMEDIATELY after the Execution of this Charter, the Province and Territories
separated; and each of the three Provincial Counties elected and sent to the
Seat of Legislation 8 Members, making up the Number 24, as the Charter
directed. And the three Lower Counties sent 18, i. e. Six for each County, to
their Assembly; I suppose by Virtue of a Law made for that Purpose. Hence the
Meaning and Design of the Charter appears to be no more than to ascertain the
Number of Members for each of the Counties then in being; and to limit that of
the Provincial Assembly to 24, leaving the subsequent Legislatures to grant
such a Number of Representatives to the new Counties, if any should thereafter
be erected, as upon Consideration of their Circumstances should appear prudent
and safe. Any other Construction of the Charter must be absurd and unjust.

IT is scarcely possible to ascertain the Number of Representatives that ought
to be in any Country, and much less in a new One, on equitable Principles. I
know of no Rule to fix their Proportions, but the Number of Taxables, and the
Quantity of Money they pay toward the Defense and Support of the Government.
And as the Number and Quantity of these are subject to continual Increase and
Changes, even this Mode must be attended with Difficulties if carried strictly
into Practice.

HOWEVER, let us for once agree on this as a Rule, as we know of no better at
present, and thereby examine into the Justice of the Complaint of the Frontier
Counties, that they are not equally represented. To determine the Matter, we
must fix on one County as a Standard: None can be settled as such with more
Propriety than the County of Philadelphia, because it is the most opulent and
numerous, and contains a greater Number of Men, who understand Government and
Laws. Now the County of Philadelphia contains about 8300 Taxables, and pays
toward the Support and Defense of the Government annually, upwards of L.
12,400, and sends eight Members to represent it in Assembly. Calculate the
Number of Members which the five Frontier Counties ought to send, by the same
Rule of Proportion; and Lancaster, York, and Northampton, will be found to be
entitled to send no more than what they now have a Right to send by the Laws in
force; Cumberland one more than it ought, and Berks one less. Philadelphia
County has 8321 Taxables, pays L. 12,466, Taxes, sends 8 Members.

Taxables. Taxes. Members. Lancaster has 5635, pays L. 6198. sends 4 by Law,
and is entitled to 4 York, 3302, 2641, 2 2 Berks, 3016, 2412, 1 2 Cumberland,
1501, 1200, 2 1 Northampton, 1989. 1392. 1 1 10 10

In Proportion to the public Taxes paid by any Part of the Province, we must
naturally conclude there is an Interest to defend; so that whatever Number of
Members Cumberland County may require to defend a Property that pays L. 1200,
it must naturally follow, that Philadelphia County which pays above ten Times
that Sum, should at least have ten Times the Number of Representatives, and the
other Counties in the same Proportion.


Thus you find, upon a candid and fair Examination that the Complaint which you
have wickedly infused into the Heads of the Frontier Inhabitants against the
Quakers, is without the least Justice or Foundation The Frontier Counties are
upon the whole, as fully represented as the first and principal County in the
Province. -- Indeed they are not equally represented among themselves, as one
of them enjoys the Right of sending one Member more than it ought, and another
sends one less.

BUT supposing the Frontier Counties had not been equally represented -- Why is
this Charge made against the Quakers? Was not the Number of the Representatives
established by an Act of the whole Legislature, in which the Governor, whom you
will allow was not a Quaker, had an equal Share? And permit me also to remind
you that the Inhabitants, at the Time they petitioned for these Counties to be
formed out of the old Ones, never requested in any of their Petitions to have a
separate Election. -- All the Inconveniences therein complained of, were the
Distance from the Courts of Justice, and the Difficulty of attending them to
bring Malefactors to Justice, or to recover their civil Rights, when invaded.
And the Government might have remedied the Mischiefs pointed out to them, and
left the People of these Counties to attend the Election of Representatives in
the old Counties, without any reasonable Complaint, as has been done in two
neighboring Provinces.

BUT what fully evinces the Absurdity of some of the back Counties complaining
that their Interest suffers by the interior Counties having a greater Number of
Representatives than they, and shows that they have been put upon this Measure
to answer Party Purposes, is, that they have generally elected a Part of their
Representatives from among the Inhabitants of Philadelphia, owing to their
having hardly any Persons of sufficient Liesure and Property in their own
Counties, who would be at the Trouble and Expense of serving them in that
Capacity. So that if they were to have an additional Number allowed them, they
would be obliged to elect them from the City likewise, which would make the
Balance, if at present against them, still greater in their Disfavour. Even
those Members who are chosen among themselves, can scarce ever be got to attend
more than half a Sessions, alleging, that they cannot afford to be absent so
long a Time from their Families and Business; and I am convinced, that if those
Counties were obliged to send 8, or even 4 Members each, to the Assembly, from
among their own Inhabitants, and their Wages to be paid by the County, we
should have much louder Complaints on that Head, than any we have yet had for
Want of Representatives.

I shall add to the Evidences already given of the charitable Disposition of
the Quakers toward the Presbyterians on the Frontiers, what you mention in
your Letter of their having bestowed L. 5000, in Presents to the Indians,
notwithstanding you have so severely censured them on that Account. What the
exact Sums were, which these People have expended in Presents to the Indians, I
cannot ascertain; though I doubt not but they were considerable, as their
Contributions to public Services generally have been: They may perhaps have
amounted to the Sum you mention. I am however fully persuaded, that the
greatest Benevolence and public Spirit, were manifested by their Conduct on
this Occasion; and the Facts will I think prove it.

A FEW of the Quakers, when they considered the Friendship which had subsisted
between the first Settlers of the Province and the Indians; the repeated Acts
of Love and Benevolence, which the former had on all Occasions shown to the
latter; the Cordiality and brotherly Union which had continued without ever
being broken, from the Dawn of the Colony to the Time of the late Indian
Hostilities; were prevailed on to think that some extraordinary Cause must have
given Rise to such a Change of Conduct in the Indians, from whom they and their
Predecessors had received such Proofs of Humanity and Friendship. They also
reflected, that little Security was to be expected in the military Way, as the
Disputes between the two Branches of the Legislature, obstructed the Aids that
were necessary for that Purpose: In Assembly, Saturday, March 25, 1758. A. M.
AN Address from the Trustees and Treasurer of the Friendly Association for
regaining and preserving Peace with the Indians by pacific Measures, was
presented and read, offering the Loan of a Sum of Money to the Government, for
defraying Expenses incurred by some late Conferences with Tedyuscung, etc. and
such other Expenses as may hereafter arise in negotiating Indian Affairs, till
further Supplies shall be granted for the public Service. -- Ordered, That the
Thanks of this House be given to the said Friendly Association for their
seasonable and generous Offer. -- Resolved, That this House do recommend it to
the Provincial Commissioners, to borrow of the said Friendly Association, such
Sum or Sums of Money as may be sufficient to answer the present Indian Demands;
and that they (the Representatives) will use their Care and Endeavors to
secure the Repayment thereof, when further Supplies shall be granted for
defraying the Expenses of the current Year.



That the Frontiers were then bleeding in every Quarter, the People in the
utmost Consternation, and the Country every Day more and more deserted for want
of Protection. These Things, I say, led them to think, that if the Indians
could be brought to a Conference with the Government, an Explanation of their
Aggrievances, if any, might be obtained, and those Aggrievances redressed; that
Peace might be restored to the desponding Inhabitants of the Frontiers, and the
ancient Friends of the Province be taken from their new Allies the French, and
restored to the British Interest; which, at that Time, in America, had the most
unfavourable Appearance. With this public spirited Design did a few of the
Quakers associate, and subscribe a large Sum of Money, to assist the Government
in holding a Treaty with the Natives. Several other Societies of the same
peaceable Principles, joined in the Contributions. -- They assumed the Name of
the Friendly Association, and that with great Propriety, as their View was only
to promote Peace, and to restore the lost Friendship of the Indians. Their
Measures were made known to the Governor, and afterward to the Proprietors,
Extract of a Letter from the Proprietaries, to the Friendly Association,
September 5, 1760.
"IN so dangerous and critical a Situation of Affairs, as has fallen to our Lot
for several Years past, and which has deeply affected us, on Account of the
Distresses of the back Inhabitants of the Province in particular, it is a great
Satisfaction to us, to find you have with the Approbation of the Governor,
given your Assistance, to endeavor to bring back the Indians to a peaceable
Temper of Mind, and a Sense of the good Treatment we had a Right to expect,
from the constant kind and brotherly Behavior of our Government toward them;
such a Conduct is very praiseworthy, and demands our best Acknowledgements."



and by them approved.

IN pursuance of this Policy, first thought of, and recommended to the
Government by the Quakers. Invitations were sent to the Indians, and the Treaty
at Easton held with them. And it is a Truth too notorious to be denied, that
from the Arrival of the Messengers from the Governor at Tiagon, a Northern
Settlement of Indians, the salutary Effects of this Measure were obvious.
Hostilities immediately ceased on our Northern Frontiers, a Stop was put to the
most cruel Devastations, and Peace for a Time restored to those unhappy People,
which the Province at that Time was unable to procure from any other Measure
whatever.

AFTER this the first Treaty at Easton was held; the Trustees of the Friendly
Association attended it, and offered their Purse and their Services to the
Government; the Governor cheerfully accepted their Presents, and gave them to
the Indians in their Names, together with another from the Government.

AND, at the second Treaty at Easton, the Trustees again waited on the Governor
with a written Address, and offered their Service; he was pleased to approve of
their Conduct, agreed to accept their Presents, and invited them to attend the
Treaty; which they accordingly did, to the Satisfaction of the Governor, with
whose Approbation their Presents were at this Time also delivered to the
Indians.

THE good Effects of these, with several subsequent Treaties, were soon felt;
the Frontier Inhabitants were made easy, many Lives were saved, the Complaints
of the Indians against the Proprietors were settled, and a fortunate Issue put
to their savage Depredations; which could not otherwise have been effected,
without an immense Expense of both Blood and Treasure. Thus benevolent and
charitable, and founded on the wisest Policy, were the Presents given by these
People, with the Approbation of the Governor, to the Indians, which you,
Reverend Sirs, have basely represented as proceeding from a greater Respect and
Regard for the Enemy, than for the People of the Province.

THAT the Indians have had frequent just Causes of Complaint against the
Proprietaries and their Agents, may be seen in a Pamphlet written in
Pennsylvania, and published by J. Wilkie, Bookseller, St. Paul's Church Yard,
London, entitled, An Enquiry into the Causes of the Alienation of the Delaware
and Shawanese Indians, from the British Interest;" and also in a Work
entitled, "An Historical Review of the Constitution and Government of
Pennsylvania, printed for R. Griffiths, Bookseller, Paternoster Row. Nay, so
many and frequent are the Instances of Injustice being done to the Indians by
British Subjects, that Accounts of them have at length reached the Throne, and
occasioned several wise and humane Orders to be issued, for the Prevention of
the same in future. In several of the American Gazettes was published a
circular Instruction, dated December 9, 1761, to the Governors of the different
Colonies, of which the following is an Extract, viz.

WHEREAS the Peace and Security of our Colonies and Plantations upon the
Continent of America, does greatly depend upon the Amity and Alliance of the
several Nations and Tribes of Indians bordering upon the said Colonies, and
upon a just and faithful Observance of those Treaties and Compacts, which have
been heretofore solemnly entered into with the said Indians, by our Royal
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of this Realm. And whereas, notwithstanding the
repeated Instructions which have been, from Time to Time, given by our late
Royal Grandfather, to the Governors of our several Colonies upon this Head, the
said Indians have made, and do still continue to make great Complaints, that
Settlements have been made, and Possession taken of Lands, the Property of
which they have by Treaty reserved to themselves, by Persons claiming the said
Lands, under pretense of Deeds of Sale and Conveyance illegally, fraudulently
and surreptitiously obtained of the said Indians: And whereas it has likewise
been represented to us, that some of our Governors, or other chief Officers of
our said Colonies, regardless of the Duty they owe to us, and of the Welfare
and Security of our Colonies, have countenanced such unjust Claims and
Pretensions, by passing Grants of the Lands so pretended to have been purchased
of the Indians. We therefore taking this Matter into our Royal Consideration,
as also the fatal Effects which would attend a Discontent among the Indians in
the present Situation of Affairs, and being determined upon all Occasions, to
support and protect the said Indians in their just Rights and Possessions, and
to keep inviolable the Treaties and Compacts which have been entered into with
them. Do hereby strictly enjoin and command, that neither yourself, nor any
Lieutenant Governor, President of the Council, or Commander in Chief of our
said Province, do, upon any Pretense whatsoever, upon Pain of our highest
Displeasure, and of being forthwith removed from your or his Office, pass any
Grant or Grants to any Person whatsoever, of any Lands within or adjacent to
the Territories possessed or occupied by the said Indians, or the Property or
Possession of which has at any Time been reserved to, or claimed by them." --
"And it is our further Will and Pleasure, that you forthwith cause these our
Instructions to you to be made public, not only within all Parts of our said
Province, inhabited by our Subjects, but also amongst the several Tribes of
Indians living in the same; to the End that our Royal Will and Pleasure in the
Premises may be known, and that the Indians may be apprized of our determined
Resolution to support them in their just Rights, and inviolably to observe our
Engagements. G. R.

AND from His Majesty's Proclamation, dated October 7, 1763, is the following
Extract, viz. And whereas great Frauds and Abuses have been committed in the
purchasing Lands of the Indians, to the great Prejudice of our Interests, and
to the great Dissatisfaction of the Indians; in order therefore to prevent such
Irregularities for the future, and to the End that the Indians may be convinced
of Our Justice, and determined Resolution to remove all reasonable Cause of
Discontent, We do, etc.

You next proceed to relate the Feats of the Provincials and Volunteers, in
destroying the Indian Towns, and their Corn; and to give an Account, such as it
is, of that noble and heroic Action of destroying the Indians at Conestogo and
Lancaster. Let us have it in your own Words, for I think there is something
curious in them; They (the Volunteers) say you, returned enraged to find that
an Indian Town of about 20 or 30 Persons* had now informed their Friends
against whom our Men had marched, and who were perfidiously playing the same
Pranks as they did last War; they marched to their Town and cut off some of
them, others fled to a Borough called Lancaster, and there they came and cut
them off. This the Quakers have painted as a Massacre and most horrid Murder,
though it was no more but what our People suffered on all Occasions. In this
Representation of the Murders at Conestogo and Lancaster, you have asserted
several of the grossest Falsehoods, misrepresented several Circumstances, and
omitted the most essential and material Facts: -- For, give me Leave to ask
you, what Foundation have you for asserting, that these miserable Victims to
the Rage of Enthusiasm, ever gave the least Information to the Enemy of the
Volunteers design; You, or those whose barbarous Murders you palliate and
justify, have taken great Pains to procure some Proof of it, but in vain. Had
you succeeded, you would no doubt have laid them before the Government, to show
that they were Enemies, or at least that they adhered to the Enemies. But
Nothing of this kind has been done; and therefore the whole Province must be
convinced, that all your Accusations against them are founded in Policy, not in
Truth. They were indeed invented after the Fact done, to palliate a Deed which
must excite in every humane (...) utmost Abhorrence. For it is unfortunate for
(...) that the very Perpetrators of the horrid Act at the (...) it was done,
gave a very different Reason, viz. That they were Heathens, and therefore
should be cut off from the Face of the Earth. -- But let us enquire in what
Light the Governor, Council, and Assembly, of the Province, looked on these
barbarous Actions. Let us inspect the Messages which passed between them, and
your Misrepresentations and Falsehoods will appear glaring and wicked indeed.
-- In a Message from the Governor to the Assembly, dated Dec. 21, 1763, he
expresses himself in this Manner.

I am also to lay before you a Piece of Intelligence I received from Lancaster
on Friday last, which has given me the utmost Concern. -- On the Fourteenth
Instant, a Number of People, well armed and mounted, went to the Indian Town in
Conestogo Manor, and, without the least Reason or Provocation, in cool Blood,
barbarously killed six of the Indians settled there, and would probably have
treated all the rest with the same Cruelty, had they not providentially been
abroad at that Time; and after burning all their Houses, the Perpetrators of
this inhumane and wicked Action retired.

As the Indians were seated on the Manor by the Government, and had lived there
peaceably and inoffensively during all our late Troubles, I conceived they were
as much under the Protection of the Government, and its Laws, as any others
amongst us; wherefore I thought it my Duty to do every Thing in my Power for
the immediate apprehending and bringing to Justice the Authors of this horrid
Scene; and accordingly, by the Advice of the Council, I have dispatched Letters
to the Magistrates of Lancaster, Cumberland and York Counties, requiring and
charging them to exert themselves, and endeavor, by all possible Means, to
discover and secure the Principals concerned in this outrageous Act, and their
Accomplices. I am also preparing a Proclamation, ordering and requiring all
Officers, civil and military, and all His Majesty's Subjects in this
Government, to be aiding and assisting to the Magistrates in the Execution of
the Laws on this unhappy Occasion. -- Such of the Conestogoe Indians as had the
good Fortune to escape the Fury of the abovementioned lawless Party, are now
taken under the Protection of the Magistracy at Lancaster, and are secured in
the Workhouse there, but are in great Distress for Want of Necessaries and
Apparel, having lost every Thing, except the little they had on their Backs, in
their Houses, which were burnt. -- As they do not apprehend themselves to be
safe where they are, they have, by a verbal Message by one of your Members,
requested of me that they may be removed to this City, or its Neighborhood;
and I am very ready to comply immediately with their Desire, provided you will
enable me to defray the Expense of it.

AND in another Message, dated January 3, 1764, his Honor has these Words, viz.

I WAS preparing a Message, to inform you of the cruel MASSACRE of the Indians,
in the Workhouse of the Borough of Lancaster, on the 27th of last Month, by a
wicked and lawless Set of Rioters, when I received a Message by two of your
Members, that you were already made fully acquainted with the Particulars of
that horrid Scene of Barbarity, and insolent and daring violation of the Laws.

WIDELY different indeed, Reverend Sirs, is this Description of the Facts from
that you have basely imposed on the People in England. You here find the
Governor and his Council, who are far more proper Judges of the Matter, than
Persons in your clerical Offices, -- declare, that these unhappy Indians were
seated on the Manor by the Government, -- that they had lived there peaceably
and inoffensively, during all our late Troubles, -- that they were as much
under its Protection and its Laws as any others amongst us, -- and that they
were barbarously killed, nay cruelly massacred, in cool Blood without the least
Reason or Provocation. Certainly then, let these Actions be "painted" by
Quakers or others, they convey the full Idea of a "Massacre and a most horrid
Murder." How then shall we account for the Offense you have taken at the Terms
applied to them, and your Manner of glossing over this most infernal Villainy?
Is it because you are attached to every Villain, and would screen him from the
just Punishment of the Laws, who is of the same Denomination of Religion with
yourselves? -- or because you think it no Offense to take away the Life of a
human Creature who is of a different Color or Persuasion?

INDEED, several of your Writers in favor of the Paxton Men, have before
expressed much Resentment, that the Killing of the Indians should be called
Murder. One of them in particular, speaking of the worthy Author of the
Narrative, An Abstract of the Narrative of the Massacres in Lancaster County,
was published in the Gentleman's Magazine for April, 1764. And in the Magazine
for June, was inserted a Piece, entitled, An impartial Account of the Rise and
Proceedings of the Paxton Volunteers, by way of Answer to the Narrative. This
Piece, it is said, was compiled, by Order of the Pr -- rs, from the Plain
Dealers, and other virulent Publications of the Pr -- ry Party, in hopes of
prejudicing His Majesty and his Ministers against the Quakers, as they had
formerly done by the Publication of the Brief State and Brief View, which aimed
at obtaining an Act of Parliament for rendering Quakers incapable of holding
Offices in this Government. -- The numerous vile Falsehoods, however, of the
Account published in the June Magazine, will readily appear upon the Perusal of
the authentic Documents contained in this Address.
has these Words, viz. But it seems this Gentleman was determined to avail
himself of any Thing, that he thought might bring Infamy and Odium upon the
Paxton People; and for this End he has not scrupled to call the Killing the
Indians MURDER! -- But I am persuaded this Writer, with all his Ingenuity, will
find it too hard a Task to prove it Murder. -- Now, to convince this absurd
Author, and another equally absurd who dates his Letter from Elizabeth-Town,
that it is not so hard a Task, nor does require so much Ingenuity as they
represent, to prove that the Killing of the Indians was properly and justly
called Murder, I shall give them the following Extract from a new Work,
entitled, Lex Coronatoria, viz. When a Man of the Age of Discretion, and compos
mentis, unlawfully, publicly or privately, by any external Act of Violence,
kills any reasonable Creature, in rerum Natura, under the King's Protection;
Subject, or Alien, Christian, or Heathen, attainted, or not attainted, with
Malice forethought, either express or implied; and the Party die of the Wound,
or the Hurt, within the Year and the Day, this KILLING is MURDER; and even in
the Case of a Feme-Covert, if committed with the Husband, Coercion is no Plea.
-- Vide 1 Hale, 429, 433, 434. -- Bro. Cor. 196. -- Fitz. Cor. 323.

BUT the Author of The Conduct of the Paxton-Men impartially represented (from
whom the above Quotation respecting the Author of the Narrative is made) not
satisfied with having thus exposed his Folly and Ignorance, has had the horrid
Impiety to undertake to justify, from Scripture, the Murdering of Persons in
cool Blood, even though a Man may have pledged his Faith to them, and
notwithstanding he may at the very Time be receiving from them Acts of
Hospitality and Friendship. Permit me to tell you, Reverend Sirs, that when
you, or those you are connected with, publish to the World such horrid
Doctrines as these, you do yourselves and your Cause more real Disservice than
would ever be in the Power of your warmest Adversaries: For every rational
humane Being must necessarily hold the Men who can publicly avow such Tenets
in the greatest Detestation! And you may depend that those of your Society who
now blindly follow you in thus vindicating Murderers, and in opposing a Royal
Government, will ultimately find themselves involved in much Confusion and
Disgrace.

THE next Thing that calls for my Attention is another Charge equally false and
groundless against the Quakers, -- That a Party of Indians among the
Inhabitants that carried the Enemies Arms and Ammunition, and had conducted
them into the Settlements, and assisted in murdering the Inhabitants, applied
to the Quakers, and they found Means to bring them down to Philadelphia, and
have maintained them at the Expense of the Province. Here I conclude you mean
the Moravian Indians of Nain and Weketank, two Plantations of the Brethren; for
no Other Indians remained among the Inhabitants after the Massacre at
Lancaster. These Indians you well know were Part of the Moravian Community,
converted to the Christian Faith by Missionaries of their and your Society,
lived on their Lands, and were daily under their Care. They were also received,
as Subjects, and taken under the Protection of the Government at their
particular Request upwards of twenty Years ago, by Governor Thomas; afterward,
in the late War, by Governors Morris and Denny. They had ever since lived
peaceably and inoffensively in this Situation, if the Testimony of their
Divines and others who were constantly resident among them may be credited. --
But as they were situated near the Frontiers, some of the People of the County
were suspicious that they held a secret Correspondence with the Enemy: And one
of them was charged with the Murder of one Stinson in Company with other
Indians, but was acquitted by a Jury of the County on a fair Trial. However, a
Pannick seized many of the Inhabitants, and Numbers declared, if those Indians
remained among them, they would desert their Habitations. -- Several Requests
came down to the Governor to desire their Removal to some other Place. -- He
laid them before the Provincial Commissioners, and at their Board it was agreed
that the latter, some of them being Members of Assembly, should lay the Matter
before the House, with their Opinion thereon, that it was absolutely necessary
that these Indians should be removed into the interior Parts of the Province,
-- where their Behavior might be more closely observed. -- Upon which the
House resolved, that the Expense of their Removal and Support while it should
be necessary, be defrayed by the Government. And it is well known to the
Governor and the Board of Commissioners, that the Quakers never interfered in
the Matter, nor indeed had they the least Connection with these Indians. This,
Reverend Sirs, is the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, relative to the
Transaction you impute to Quakers. -- It was a mere Act of Government to
prevent the Evacuation of the Settlements adjoining to Nain and Weketank, and
indeed of the whole County of Northampton. How then could you charge this Fact
to the Quakers without Blushing? You might with equal Justice and Reason impute
the Murders at Conestogoe and Lancaster, or the late Death of the Emperor of
Muscovy, to them.

BUT since you are so violent in censuring the Measures taken by the
Government, permit me to ask you, What Method would your Wisdom, Prudence and
Humanity have dictated to you, had you had the Power in your Hands? The
bringing of them down to Philadelphia it seems you censure as highly criminal,
and therefore no doubt but this would be your last Resolution: Would you have
driven them into the Woods, and obliged them to seek Protection from the Enemy,
and of Consequence to unite with them in their Barbarities against us? You
certainly would not have done this: Common Prudence, nay common Sense forbid
it. -- A Measure of this Kind which would strip them of the Necessaries they
had laid up for the Winter Season, must have justly enraged them and rendered
them our most dangerous and inveterate Foes. I say most dangerous, because
besides adding to the Number of our Enemies, the Men were intimately acquainted
with the interior Parts of the Province, and would no doubt have acted as Spies
and Conductors to Parties of foreign Indians, to the utter Destruction of the
Country. -- But one Thing else remained that could be done, and this I make no
scruple of saying, I doubt not but your Humanity and Christian Love toward
them would have pointed out to you: I mean, to deprive them of their Arms, coop
them up in a Pen or perhaps some strong House, and put them all to death, Men,
Women and sucking Infants, in one general Massacre. This, to be sure,
Gentlemen, would have been excellent Policy, it would have rendered these
suspected People inoffensive indeed, and removed from the Minds of the Frontier
Inhabitants all Apprehensions of Danger from them. -- Am I too severe in this
Censure? -- Must we not suppose that the Men whose wicked Hearts without the
least Qualm or Remorse can invent a Falsehood with the iniquitous Design of
bringing into Disgrace a whole Society of People, can take Offense at others
for calling the most horrid Scenes of Infernal Cruelty and Cowardice by their
proper Names Massacre and Murder, and can even vindicate the Perpetrators of
the Savage Acts, would not hesitate to act on such Principles?

DISAGREABLE as it is to me, and unnecessary as it must appear to every candid
Mind, after refuting such a Number of malignant Charges against the Quakers, to
wade through all the Untruths contained in your Letter, yet since I have
undertaken it, I shall proceed. The very next Sentence to the one I have
remarked on, contains another Falsehood. You assert, that afterward some of
the very Indians that were beat at the Munsey-Hill, and that had their Corn
destroyed, sued for the same Privilege, and were brought to Philadelphia, and
maintained by the Province. -- Here I again conclude your dark Expressions mean
the Wighalousin Indians, -- for none others sued for the Protection of the
Government, or were brought down after the Moravian Tribes. -- These Indians
were lately in the Barracks, and if any of them were in the Engagement of
Munsey-Hill, why have you not informed the Government and proved the Fact? -- I
call on you to do it yet. And if you do not, will not all Men unite in
determining that your Delight is Falsehood and Defamation, and that you are,
notwithstanding your religious Professions, lost to all Sense of Morality and
Religion?

BUT suppose some of those Indians were brought down with the Wighalousin
Tribe. The Censure cannot remain with the Quakers, -- for this Transaction
which you have wickedly imputed to them was also the Act of the Government.
These poor Indians, most of whom are converted to the Christian Faith, being
our Friends, and apprehensive of Danger, not only from the violent Rage of the
Frontier Inhabitants, but from the Enemy Indians; sent Messengers down to treat
with the Governor respecting their State of Insecurity. And in their
Conferences with him, entreated the Protection of the Government, and requested
that they might come down and live among us. -- The Governor convinced of their
Sincerity, warmly recommended, the Matter to the Assembly, who agreed to the
Measure, and to provide for them during their Residence among us. This will
appear from the following Message, viz.

I lay before you the Minutes of several Conferences I have held with Papounan,
and some other Indians, who live at Wighalousin, on the River Sasquehanna. I
have no Reason to doubt that they have disclosed to me all that they really
know of the present State of the Indian War, and of the Causes assigned by the
Enemy Indians in their Neighborhood for their renewing Hostilities against us.
-- They have intimated to me that they, and a few others, with whom they are
connected, being really our sincere Friends, are uneasy at their present
Situation, and would incline to come and live among us, if we would receive and
protect them. They have been very importunate with me for an immediate Answer,
alleging, as they have been very kindly treated by us, if this Overture should
be likewise favorably accepted, that it would confirm those who are already
well disposed, and also incline many others, who are at present in Arms against
us, to sue for Peace.

THE Commissioners who are joined with me in the Disposition of the public
Money, were made acquainted with this Affair; and though they agreed with me as
to the Expediency and Utility of the Measure, yet as it would be attended with
Expense, and the public Funds were nigh exhausted, we did not think proper to
go into it. -- I therefore recommend it to you to consider this Matter; and if
you concur with me in Opinion that this will be for the public Service, and
will provide a Fund on the Occasion, I desire you will give me your Answer as
soon as possible, that I may no longer detain the Indians, who are impatient to
return Home with my Messages.

IN Answer to this, and to what the Governor had informed the House, respecting
the Murder of the Indians in Lancaster County, the Assembly sent his Honor the
following Message, viz.

May it please your HONOR,
WE have taken into our Consideration your Honor's Message of the Twenty first
Instant, and are extremely concerned to hear of the unprovoked Cruelties
committed on the peaceable Indians, settled on Conestogoe Manor.

We thank the Governor for communicating this Intelligence, and the Indian
Conferences, to us; and for the Measures he has taken to have the Perpetrators
of this horrid Barbarity, and their Accomplices, apprehended and brought to
Justice.

We will provide for the Expense of removing and maintaining such of those
unhappy People as have escaped the Fury of the abovementioned lawless Party;
and desire your Honor will be pleased to order them to be brought down to some
Place of Safety, as soon as it can conveniently be done.

We shall also make Provision for the Support of the few friendly Indians at
Wighalousin, on the Susquehannah, who incline to come and live amongst us,
whenever your Honor shall think proper to incite them into the interior Parts
of the Province.

Signed by Order of the House, ISAAC NORRIS, Speaker.


THUS you find, and indeed you well knew it before, that this Measure which
your Malice has imputed to the Quakers, took its Rise with the Governor, and
was approved of by both Branches of the Legislature. A Measure consistent with
sound Policy, as it prevented an Increase of the Number of our Enemies, and
added to those of our Friends. And as much so with Humanity, as it afforded
Protection to those that demanded it, and relieved them from the Necessity of
uniting with the Enemy, and the Perpetration of Cruelties that their
Consciences disapproved of.

TO unfold to the World all your Falsehoods is a tedious Task, not from the
Difficulty of refuting them, but from the Number you have the Art of throwing
into a small Compass. You next assert, that these Indians, at the Request of a
Quaker Faction, were guarded by a Company of the King's Troops. You, or some of
you, Gentlemen, were on the Spot, and you must know the Facts to be as I shall
now relate them. -- The Government receiving daily Accounts of the avowed
Design of the Rioters, to destroy the Indians in the Barracks, removed them to
the Province Island, a Place of difficult Access, and more distant from the
Danger of being surprised: Flats were prepared to carry them off to some Place
of Safety, in Case the Rioters should put their rebellious Threats in
Execution. -- But the cold Weather coming on, and the River being full of Ice,
both the Government, which was then destitute of any Mode of defending them,
and the Indians themselves, became uneasy at their Situation. This drew a
Request from them to be removed to Sir William Johnson's, and prevailed on the
Governor to gratify them. They were accordingly sent under the Care of Capt.
Robinson, of the Regulars, from hence to Amboy, in New Jersey; Governor
Franklin having, at the Request of Governor Penn, readily assented to their
Passage through that Province. But from some Reasons of Policy, the Governor
and Council of New York refused them Admittance into that Government. General
Gage finding, that the Governor of Pensylvania had thought it advisable to put
them under the Military," resolved, "that they should not be abandoned by the
Escort, and ordered them back, with Directions to the Captain, to receive any
Orders the Governor of this Province should judge proper to give. The
Governor's Message to the Assembly on the Occasion, is as follows, viz.

GENTLEMEN,
The Indians who were lately seated by the Government on the Province Island,
were, at their own earnest Request, sent off in a Body by me, under an Escort,
on the fifth Instant, with an Intention of removing them, through the
Governments of New Jersey and New York, to Sir William Johnson, to whose Care
and Protection, as they were not in a State of Security here, I recommended
them.

I took the Precaution of acquainting the respective Governors of those two
Provinces with this Measure, and requested that they would be pleased to permit
them to proceed unmolested, and furnish them with Passports. The Governor of
New Jersey, with great Politeness and Kindness, complied with my Request; but,
to my great Surprise, I received a Letter Yesterday from the
Lieutenant Governor of New York, acquainting me that he, by the Advice of his
Council, had forbid their Entrance into that Province. Being thus disappointed,
I am under the Necessity of ordering those poor Creatures to return again to
this Government, and am heartily disposed to do every Thing in my Power to
afford them that Protection and Security which, under their Circumstances, they
have an UNDOUBTED RIGHT to expect and claim from us, and shall be glad of your
Opinion and Advice in what Manner this can most effectually be done. I have
ordered the Secretary to lay before you Governor Colden's Letter, a Copy of the
Minutes of the Council Board of New York on the Occasion, and a Letter I
received from General Gage; the latter of which will show how much we are
obliged to the General for the kind Part he has taken in this Matter.

JOHN PENN.


To which the Assembly answered.

May it please your HONOR,
WE have taken into our Consideration your Honor's Message of the Sixteenth
Instant, with the Letters therein referred to, and are pleased to find the
Governor so heartily disposed to afford the Indians he mentions that Protection
and Security which, under their Circumstances, they have an undoubted Right to
expect and claim from us. We should be very glad, if it was in our Power, to
point out the Manner in which this can most effectually be done; but as our
"Opinion" must be founded on the Information we have received, we can only
mention such Measures as appear to us at present to be most reasonable;
submitting our Sentiments to the Judgment your Honor may form from any
Intelligence you have since received, or any Circumstances that may hereafter
happen.

We observe, with particular Pleasure, the kind Part General Gage has taken in
this Matter, in protecting these Indians, and directing the Escort, on their
Arrival in this City, to receive "such Orders as you shall judge proper to give
them.".

As this humane and prudent Step of the General is equally calculated to secure
these unhappy People, and preserve the internal Peace of this Province, while
our own Troops are engaged in the Defense of our Frontiers, we shall be obliged
to your Honor, if you will please to return his EXCELLENCY OUR THANKS for this
generous and seasonable Act of Goodness.

The Indians, we apprehend, will be sufficiently protected by the Companies
that compose this Escort, while they remain here. -- When these Companies march
from hence, if there should appear to be the same Danger of any Outrage being
committed against these Indians, that there seems to be at present, we are of
Opinion, that it will be advisable for your Honor to lodge them in some Place
where they can be most easily and conveniently guarded by an armed Force, to be
raised by your Honor for that Purpose.

It will be with the utmost Regret we shall see your Honor reduced to the
Necessity of pursuing these Measures; but with an Abhorrence altogether
inexpressible we should behold "these poor Creatures," who, desirous of living
in Friendship with us, as Proofs of this Disposition quitting a Settlement that
made them suspected, and surrendering their Arms, have delivered themselves,
their Wives and Children, into our Power, on the Faith of this Province,
barbarously butchered by a Set of Ruffians, whose audacious Cruelty is checked
by no Sentiment of Humanity, and by no Regard to the Laws of their Country.

Such a Massacre we have Reason to expect from the Persons who perpetrated such
shocking Barbarities in Lancaster County, and their Abettors, unless they are
deterred by a vigorous Exertion of Power, which never can be more properly
employed than in vindicating the Honor and Dignity of a Government, enforcing
an Obedience to the Laws, and repressing the dangerous Insolence of tumultuous
Insurgents who, guided by a blind Rage, undertake by open Force to control the
Conduct of the Administration, and counteract the best concerted Measures for
the general Good.

It will therefore be agreeable to us, that your Honor would be pleased to
order the Sheriff and Coroner of Lancaster County, and the Magistrates of that
Borough, to come down, and give you the best Information that can be obtained
of the Persons concerned in these Violences; that they being discovered and
apprehended, due Punishment may be inflicted on such daring Disturbers of the
public Peace.

Signed by Order of the House, ISAAC NORRIS, Speaker.


Upon the Return of the Indians to this City, they remained under the
Protection of the King's Troops; and the brave Citizens of Philadelphia of all
Denominations (save the English, Scotch and Irish Presbyterians) formed
themselves into Companies, to support the Government and defend its Laws.

The Governor soon after sent another Message to the House, in these Words, viz.

GENTLEMEN,
I Find great Difficulty in settling, on the Footing of Law, and on the
Principles of the English Constitution, the Orders proper to be given to the
Commanding Officer of the three Companies of Royal Americans, sent here by
General Gage, to support the civil Power, as Rules for his own Conduct and
Government of the Soldiers, in Case the Indians, now under their Protection,
should be attacked, and an Attempt made to murder them. At the same Time that I
wish to preserve these poor Creatures, by all the Means in my Power, I would
not, in the Orders I give for that End, be guilty of the least Infraction of
the Laws. A Doubt has arisen whether any Orders I can give to the regular
Troops to make Use of Force and Violence against His Majesty's Subjects, though
riotously assembled, with an Intent to kill the Indians, will be a legal
Justification for their shedding of Blood in opposing and preventing the
Design, till the civil Power has first been called in, and in vain endeavored
to suppress the Tumult.

IN so tender and important a Case, I would rather err on the cautious Side,
and, to remove all Doubts, request you will seriously consider this Matter
immediately, and that, by a short Law, you will for a Time extend to this
Province the Riot Act of the First of GEORGE the First, or make such other
Provision, to remove the present Difficulty, as you shall judge most proper.

JOHN PENN.


THE Statute for suppressing of Riots, was, agreeable to this Requisition,
extended to this Province; and the Governor and his Council, in the greatest
Distress, invited the People to support him, against the lawless Violence
threatened by these Rebels, whose Cause your Pen is prostituted to vindicate.
The Governor himself appeared at the Head of the Citizens, and with the Advice
of his Council, and the Provincial Commissioners, conducted the Whole. Which of
these Facts will you have the Boldness to deny? Surely not that which the
General so plainly declares in his Letter, That the Reason of his not
permitting the Indians "to be abandoned by the Escort," was because the
Governor had thought it advisable to put them under the Military." -- But
suppose, for Argument sake, this had been done "at the Request of the Quakers,
was it not both prudent and humane? -- You will answer me, I doubt not in the
Negative; because it was, and it seems still is your Opinion, that the Indians
should be massacred; or you could not take Offense at the only Measure which
saved them from it. But will you consider a Moment, that General Gage's Conduct
was approved of by both Governor and Assembly, and they acknowledged themselves
under Obligations to him for it? -- The Governor informs the Assembly, that
they will perceive by the General's Letter, how much we are obliged to him for
the kind Part he has taken in this Matter: -- And the Assembly requests the
Governor will be pleased to return his Excellency their Thanks, for this
generous and seasonable Act of Goodness. And how indecent and foolish is it
then in a few Clergymen, to undertake to censure the Conduct of a whole
Government, and of his Majesty's General, only because it did not quadrate with
their wicked and rebellious Sentiments, destructive of all Humanity, Allegiance
and Order?

BUT as you have repeatedly endeavored to have it thought, that none but
Quakers or their Friends, have painted the Actions of the Paxton Rioters in a
horrid Light, I shall therefore give you an Extract of another Message from the
Governor, in which he expresses his Sentiments very strongly with Regard to
those People. I am sorry to inform you, says he, that the same Spirit and
frantic Rage, which actuated those who lately put to Death the Indians in
Lancaster County, still prevails among them; and that instead of having any
Remorse for, or in the least dreading the bad Consequences of their Conduct, I
have just Reason to believe they are daily strengthening their Party, and adding
greatly to their Numbers, and threaten to come down armed in a Body, and repeat
the same Acts of Cruelty on the Indians in the Barracks, in the Northern
Liberties of this City, determined to spare none who oppose their wicked
Designs. They have already given abundant Proof, that neither Religion,
Humanity or Laws, are Objects of their Consideration, or of sufficient Weight
to restrain them.

I THINK, Reverend Sirs, you will hardly say that these Sentiments were
dictated by a Quaker Faction; for among all the Faults you may find with this
Gentleman's Administration, you cannot surely charge him with any Partiality to
Quakers, whatever you may do to others. It Is however more than probable, that
his H -- r's Language is since altered with respect to those Murderers, but it
is impossible that his Sentiments should. Whence this Alteration arose is in
your Power to unfold, and you may possibly flatter yourselves, that no one else
is enabled to do it: I have, notwithstanding great Reason to expect that it
will not be long before you are fully convinced to the contrary.

DETERMINED to depress and abuse the Quakers, and to excuse the Rioters, you
are pleased to add what you say, were the Declarations of the latter, -- These
Insurgents (say you) declared that they were Loyal Subjects, and would not do
what looked like Rebellion, though they thought it exceeding hard that they
should be obliged to pay Taxes to maintain their Enemies. With what View did
you mention this Declaration? -- Was it from any foolish Hope you had, that you
could persuade Mankind to credit the Assertions of Men, whose Actions had been,
and were at the very Time flatly contradictory. -- Your moral Philosophy must
tell you, that Actions are more evidently indicative of the Mind than Words. --
Some of those Rioters were the Men that had committed the Murders at Conestogoe
and Lancaster., contrary to the Faith of the Government, the Laws of the
Country, and the Governor's Proclamation. Pushed on by the Consciousness of
Guilt, and a Dread of Punishment, mixed with an enthusiastic Rage and Hatred
against all Indians, they resolved to take up Arms against the Government
itself, prevailed with others to join them, with a View to increase the Number
of Offenders, so much as to render it dangerous or difficult to bring them to
justice. -- With this View they came down to Germantown, and from thence sent
out their Spies to Philadelphia, to observe the Conduct and Preparations of the
Government against them, continually publishing their Resolution to destroy the
Indians and all that defended them; nor was the Governor himself free from
their Menaces. And do you seriously think, Reverend Sirs, that the breaking of
Goals and murdering of Indians under the immediate Protection of the
Government, in Defiance of its Proclamations and its Laws, does not "look like
Rebellion," and that the Conduct of these Rioters in endeavoring to prosecute
their Murders were Proofs of their Loyalty? -- That they ought not to submit to
the Laws of the Land, but had a Right to trample on all Laws, both Humane and
Divine? If you do not, how could you without the highest Remorse, offer a
Syllable in Vindication of such Rebels against their King, their Country and
their God?

HAVING thus by plain and authentic Evidence refuted all your malignant
Slanders against a People whose Conduct in Life has been ever attended with the
highest Respect for Government, and the truest Loyalty to their KING, whose
public Spirit has equalled their Loyalty, and whose Benevolence and Charity to
Mankind in general has not fallen short of any one Sect in the World; I shall
conclude this Address to you, with a few serious Remarks on your Conduct, in
Hopes of prevailing on you to alter it in future, and to amend your Hearts.

To traduce the private Character of an Individual, is an Offense which every
moral Man would blush at being charged with. And to asperse the public
Reputation of a whole Society, to accuse them of Crimes of the most atrocious
Nature, punishable with Death itself, without the least Foundation, and to
publish the Accusation throughout the World in a public News-paper, is an
Offense so much more aggravated, that every good Mind must be struck with
Abhorrence at the Thought of it. Surely on a Moment's Reflection you must
acknowledge, that it is contrary to the Duty of a good Member of Society, with
the Principles of Morality, and highly inconsistent with the Precepts of the
blessed Gospel. It is an Offense that ill becomes any Man, but much more so
those that have entrered into the sacred and awful Engagements of the Ministers
of Christ, and publicly profess to be his Apostles. Must it not then give your
Friends and Hearers, who rely on you for Guidance in the Paths of Religion,
great Contempt for your Doctrines, and afflict them with the deepest Sorrow, to
find that you are Men who have been guilty of the Crime I have described.

Is it wonderful, then, that you have been able to do Nothing (as you observe)
to spread the Gospel either among the Indians or Europeans? Have you taken even
a probable Method of promoting the Truths of the blessed Gospel? -- It is
justly observed by a great and good Divine, that Persons in your Offices have
Occasion for their whole Time, to employ it in Study, Labor, and the
Performance of their Duty, and that all the Powers of Humane Nature are
scarcely sufficient to discharge it fully. I make a solemn Appeal to your own
Consciences: Have your Actions of late, discovered any Sense of this Truth; to
you an important Truth? Have you not, instead of endeavoring to spread the
Gospel, and laying out your Talent in a profitable Merchandise, been entering
into the Intrigues of the World, and the Hurry of Politics? Has not your Time
been engrossed in the Works of Ambition, in paying court to the Great, and in
learning and executing their wicked Artifices? Has it not been employed in the
Invention of Falsehoods, to calumniate a religious Society of People, who have
been long the Objects of your Envy and Hatred? Has it not been employed in
forming the most vile Untruths, to cover the most horrid Crimes, and to rescue
from Punishment, Rebels against the Government, and the Murderers of the
Innocent under it is Protection? Has it not been employed in promoting Party
Feuds and irreconcilable Discord among the People? In writing, and encouraging
the writing of false and infamous Libels, dectructive of the Reputation of your
honest Neighbors, which to them is more valuable than Life? Have you not
submitted your Judgments and Consciences to the Direction of the Proprietary
Politicians, and busied yourselves in rendering the immediate Government of
your Sovereign odious and detestable to his honest and faithful Subjects? Have
you not wrote your Circular Letters, and sent your Emissaries throughout the
Province, representing a Royal Government, as oppressive and tyrannical? Have
you not for this very Purpose, prostituted your Churches and Houses, erected
alone for the Worship of God, to hold your dirty Cabals, and to lay your Plans
for carrying into Execution the Schemes of your Political Matters? These Things
have eradicated from your Hearts, that Apostolical Meekness and Simplicity,
which eveir distinguished the Conduct of our Divine Instructor, and which ever
must be the chief Ornament of his true Ministers. You have left the Paths of
Virtue, and become Promoters of Vice; you have exchanged true Religion for
deceitful Politics; for as you have used them they may be justly defined, Ars
non tam regendi quam fallendi hominem. You have exchanged Brotherly Love, Peace
and Goodwill toward your Neighbors, for Envy, Malice and Falsehood. In fine,
was I to search the Defects of human Nature through, it would be impossible to
find any Thing more inconsistent with the Principles of Christianity, than the
whole of your late Conduct. Could you expect then that the divine Author of all
Goodness, Virtue, Meekness, Charity and universal Benevolence, would bless the
feeble and insincere Endeavors of such, Instruments? If these divine Truths,
or the Spirit of the Author of all true Religion, ever touched your Hearts, be
exhorted to turn from the Evil of your Ways, like the prodigal Son, and repent
in Dust and Ashes, that you may find Acceptance; for you cannot "serve God and
Mammon too."

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10, line 9, for [the] read [they] Page 11, line 5 from the Bottom, for
[Cities] read [Counties] Page 13, line 28, for 29, read 22.


