A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN at Halifax, TO HIS FRIEND in Rhode Island,
CONTAINING REMARKS UPON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, THE RIGHTS OF COLONIES EXAMINED.

NEWPORT: PRINTED AND SOLD BY S. HALL. M.DCC.LXV.

A LETTER, etc.
HALIFAX, Nova Scotia, January 20, 1765. MY DEAR SIR,
I THANK you very kindly for the pamphlets and newspapers, you was so obliging
as to send me. I will, according to your request, give you a few miscellaneous
strictures on that pamplet wrote by Mr. H -- p -- s, your governor, entitled,
"The rights of colonies exaamined."

His honor reminds me of the Roman poet. "Est genus hominum, qui esse primos
se omnium rerum volunt,
"Nec sunt. -- "
He seems to give a solemnity to his performance, as if the subject had not
been sufficiently handled by any other before him, but I am of opinion he falls
very short of Mr. --, who, though unhappily misled by popular ideas, and at the
head of the tribunitian veto, yet appears to be a man of knowledge and parts:
Whereas the rights of colonies examined, is a labored, ostentatious piece,
discovers its author to be totally unacquainted with style or diction, and
eagerly fond to pass upon the world for a man of letters.

I cannot forgive the honorable author in adopting for his motto the three
lines from Thompson, so little applicable are they to the present times. I
might challenge all the sons of discontent and faction, in the British
dominions, to show the least similitude between the years one thousand six
hundred and forty-one, and one thousand seven hundred and sixty-four. How cruel
and invidious is it to insinuate the most distant likeness between the two
periods? How much like sedition does it seem, to associate the present
transactions of the nation with those of one thousand six hundred and
forty-one, which soon after kindled into a civil war, and in the end overturned
the English constitution?

The honorable author might perhaps flatter himself, that, in future editions
of Thompson's liberty, commentators may insert variae lectiones of the text,
and the three lines run thus: "Mid the low murmurs of submissive fear,
"And mingled rage, my H -- p -- s raised his voice,
"And to the laws appealed."
Or perhaps some future bard may sing the present times, and HE be made the
hero of the song. The aptness is easy and striking, and the idea too pleasing
to be resisted. Narcissus, in contemplating his own image, was turned into a
daffodil. Who can think of this, and feel no pity for the pride and weakness of
man that is born of a woman.

"So have I seen, on some bright summer's day,
"A calf of genius, debonnair and gay,
"Dance on the brink, as if inspired by fame,
"Fond of the pretty fellow in the stream."
LOVE OF FAME, THE UNIVERSAL PASSION. I would fain hope that his honor's motto
is not a true portrait of the general temper and conduct of the Americans; I
would rather think the low murmurs of submissive fear, and mingled rage,
delineate only a few disappointed traders. It were to be wished that some
friend of the colonies would endeavor to remove any unfavourable impressions
this, and other pamphlets of the like kind, may have occasioned at home; lest
those in power form the general character of the colonies from such notices as
these convey, and from thence be inclined to increase their dependence, rather
than to emancipate them from the present supposed impositions. Depend upon it,
my Friend, a people like the English, arrived to the highest pitch of glory and
power, the envy and admimiration of surrounding slaves, who hold the balance of
Europe in their hands, and rival in arts and arms every period of ancient or
modern story; a nation who, for the defense and safety of America only, staked
their all in the late war; this people, I say, justly conscious of their
dignity, will not patiently be dictated to by those whom they have ever
considered as dependant upon them. Happy will it be for the colonies, yea happy
for the honorable author, if his pamphlet should meet with nothing more than
contempt and neglect; for should it catch the attention of men in power,
measures may be taken to stifle in the birth "the low murmurs of submissive
fear," and crush in embryo "the mingled rage," which now so prettily adorns the
head of his honor's pamphlet.

However disguised, polished or softened the expression of this pamphlet may
seem, yet every one must see, that its professed design is sufficiently
prominent throughout, namely, to prove, that the colonies have rights
independent of, and not controulable by, the authority of parliament. It is
upon this dangerous and indiscreet position I shall communicate to you my real
sentiments.

To suppose a design of enslaving the colonies by parliament, is too
presumptuous; to propagate it in print, is perhaps dangerous. Perplexed between
a desire of speaking all he thinks, and the fear of saying too much, the
honorable author is obliged to entrench himself in obscurity and inconsistency
in several parts of his performance: I shall bring one instance.

In page eleven, he says, It is the indispensible duty of every good and loyal
subject cheerfully to obey, and patiently submit to, all the laws, orders, etc.
that may be passed by parliament.

I do not much admire either the spirit or composition of this sentence. Is it
the duty only of good and loyal subjects to obey? Are the wicked and disloyal
subjects absolved from this obligation? else why is this passage so
marvellously penned: Philolevtherus Lipsiensis would directly pronounce this a
figure in rhetoric, called nonsense. -- Believe me, my friend, I did not quote
this passage to show my skill in criticism, but to point out a contradiction
between it, and another passage in page twenty, which runs thus: It must be
absurd to suppose, that the common people of Great Britain have a sovereign and
absolute authority over their fellow subjects of America, or even any sort of
power whatsoever over them; but it will be still more absurd to suppose, they
can give a power to their representatives, which they have not themselves, etc.
Here it is observable, that the first cited passage expresses a full submission
to the authority of parliament; the last is as explicit a denial of that
authority. The sum of his honor's argument is this: The people of
Great Britain have not any sort of power over the Americans; the house of
commons have no greater authority than the people of Great Britain, who are
their constituents; ergo, the house of commons have not any sort of power over
the Americans. This is indeed a curious invented syllogism, the sole merit of
which is due to the first magistrate of an English colony.

I have endeavored to investigate the true natural relation, if I may so
speak, between colonies and their mother state, abstracted from compact or
positive institution, but here I can find nothing satisfactory; till this
relation is clearly defined upon a rational and natural principle, our
reasoning upon the measure of the colonies obedience will be desultory and
inconclusive. Every connection in life has its reciprocal duties; we know the
relation between a parent and child, husband and wife, master and servant, and
from thence are able to deduce their respective obligations; but we have no
notices of any such precise natural relation between a mother state and its
colonies, and therefore cannot reason with so much certainty upon the power of
the one, or the duty of the others. The ancients have transmitted to us nothing
that is applicable to the state of modern colonies, because the relation
between these is formed by political compact; and the condition of each variant
in their original, and from each other. The honorable author has not freed
this subject from any of its embarrassments: Vague and diffuse talk of rights
and privileges, and ringing the changes upon the words liberty and slavery,
only serve to convince us, that words may affect without raising images, or
affording any repose to a mind philosophically inquisitive. For my own part, I
will shun the walk of metaphysics in my enquiry, and be content to consider
the colonies rights upon the footing of their charters, which are the only
plain avenues, that lead to the truth of this matter.

The several New England charters ascertain, define and limit the respective
rights and privileges of each colony, and I cannot conceive how it has come to
pass that the colonies now claim any other or greater rights than are therein
expressly granted to them. I fancy when we speak, or think of the rights of
freeborn Englishmen, we confound those rights which are personal, with those
which are political: There is a distinction between these, which ought always
to be kept in view.

Our personal rights, comprehending those of life, liberty and estate, are
secured to us by the common law, which is every subject's birthright, whether
born in Great Britain, on the ocean, or in the colonies; and it is in this
sense we are said to enjoy all the rights and privileges of Englishmen. The
political rights of the colonies, or the powers of government communicated to
them, are more limited, and their nature, quality and extent depend altogether
upon the patent or charter which first created and instituted them. As
individuals, the colonists participate of every blessing the English
constitution can give them: As corporations created by the crown, they are
confined within the primitive views of their institution. Whether therefore
their indulgence is scanty or liberal, can be no cause of complaint; for when
they accepted of their charters, they tacitly submitted to the terms and
conditions of them.

The colonies have no rights independent of their charters, they can claim no
greater than those give them, by those the parliamentary jurisdiction over them
is not taken away, neither could any grant of the king abridge that
jurisdiction, because it is founded upon common law, as I shall presently show,
and was prior to any charter or grant to the colonies: Every Englishman,
therefore, is subject to this jurisdiction, and it follows him wherever he
goes. It is of the essence of government, that there should be a supreme head,
and it would be a solecism in politics to talk of members independent of it.

With regard to the jurisdiction of parliament, I shall endeavor to show, that
it is attached to every English subject, wherever he be: And I am led to do
this from a clause in page nine of his honor's pamphlet, where he says, That
the colonies do not hold their rights, as a privilege granted them, nor enjoy
them as a grace and favor bestowed; but possess them, as an inherent,
indefeasible right. This postulatum cannot be true with regard to political
rights, for I have already shown, that these are derived from your charters,
and are held by force of the king's grant; therefore these inherent,
indefeasible rights, as his honor calls them, must be personal ones, according
to the distinction already made. Permit me to say, that inherent and
indefeasible as these rights may be, the jurisdiction of parliament, over every
English subject, is equally as inherent and indefeasible: That both have grown
out of the same stock, and that if we avail ourselves of the one, we must
submit to, and acknowledge the other.

It might here be properly enough asked, Are these personal rights
self-existent? Have they no original source? I answer, They are derived from
the constitution of England, which is the common law; and from the same
fountain is also derived the jurisdiction of parliament over us.

But to bring this argument down to the most vulgar apprehension: The common
law has established it as a rule or maxim, that the plantations are bound by
British acts of parliament, if particularly named: And surely no Englishman, in
his senses, will deny the force of a common law maxim. One cannot but smile at
the inconsistency of these inherent, indefeasible men: If one of them has a
suit at law, in any part of New England, upon a question of land property, or
merchandise, he appeals to the common law, to support his claim, or defeat his
adversary; and yet is so profoundly stupid as to say, that an act of parliament
does not bind him; when, perhaps, the same page in a law book, which points him
out a remedy for a libel, or a slap in the face, would inform him that it does.
-- In a word, The force of an act of parliament, over the colonies, is
predicated upon the common law, the origin and basis of all those inherent
rights and privileges which constitute the boast and felicity of a Briton.

Can we claim the common law as an inheritance, and at the same time be at
liberty to adopt one part of it, and reject the other? Indeed we cannot: The
common law, pure and indivisible in its nature and essence, cleaves to us
during our lives, and follows us from Nova Zembla to Cape Horn. And therefore,
as the jurisdiction of parliament arises out of, and is supported by it, we may
as well renounce our allegiance, or change our nature, as to be exempt from the
jurisdiction of parliament: Hence, it is plain to me, that in denying this
jurisdiction, we at the same time, take leave of the common law, and thereby,
with equal temerity and folly, strip ourselves of every blessing we enjoy as
Englishmen: A flagrant proof this, that shallow draughts in politics and
legislation confound and distract us, and that an extravagant zeal often
defeats its own purposes.

I am aware that the foregoing reasoning will be opposed by the maxim, That no
Englishman can be taxed but by his own consent, or by representatives.

It is this dry maxim, taken in a literal sense, and ill understood, that, like
the song of Lillibullero, has made all the mischief in the colonies: And upon
this, the partisans of the colonies rights chiefly rest their cause. I don't
despair, however, of convincing you, that this maxim affords but little support
to their argument, when rightly examined and explained.

It is the opinion of the house of commons, and may be considered as a law of
parliament, that they are the representatives of every British subject,
wheresoever he be. In this view of the matter then, the aforegoing maxim is
fully vindicated in practice, and the whole benefit of it, in substance and
effect, extended and applied to the colonies. Indeed the maxim must be
considered in this latitude, for in a literal sense or construction it ever
was, and ever will be, impracticable. Let me ask, is the isle of Man, Jersey,
or Guernsey, represented? What is the value or amount of each man's
representation in the kingdom of Scotland, which contains near two millions of
people, and yet not more than three thousand have votes in the election of
members of parliament? But to show still further, that, in fact and reality,
this right of representation is not of that consequence it is generally thought
to be, let us take into the argument the moneyed interest of Britain, which,
though immensely great, has no share in this representation; a worthless
freeholder of forty shillings per annum can vote for a member of parliament,
whereas a merchant, though worth one hundred thousand pounds sterling, if it
consist only in personal effects, has no vote at all: But yet let no one
suppose that the interest of the latter is not equally the object of
parliamentary attention with the former. -- Let me add one example more:
Copyholders in England of one thousand pounds sterling per annum, whose estates
in land are nominally, but not intrinsically, inferior to a freehold, cannot,
by law, vote for members of parliament; yet we never hear that these people
"murmur with submissive "fear, and mingled rage:" They don't set up their
private humor against the constitution of their country, but submit with
cheerfulness to those forms of government which providence, in its goodness,
has placed them under.

Suppose that this Utopian privilege of representation should take place, I
question if it would answer any other purpose but to bring an expense upon the
colonies, unless you can suppose that a few American members could bias the
deliberations of the whole British legislature. In short, this right of
representation is but a phantom, and, if possessed in its full extent, would be
of no real advantage to the colonies; they would, like Ixion, embrace a cloud
in the shape of Juno.

In addition to this head, I could further urge the danger of innovations;
every change in a constitution, in some degree, weakens its original frame; and
hence it is that legislators and statesmen are cautious in admitting them: The
goodly building of the British constitution will be best secured and
perpetuated by adhering to its original principles. Parliaments are not of
yesterday, they are as ancient as our Saxon ancestors. Attendance in parliament
was originally a duty arising from a tenure of lands, and grew out of the
feudal system; so that the privilege of sitting in it, is territorial, and
confined to Britain only. Why should the beauty and symmetry of this body be
destroyed, and its purity defiled, by the unnatural mixture of representatives
from every part of the British dominions. Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and the
dwellers of Mesopotamia, etc. would not, in such a case, speak the same
language. What a heterogeneous council would this form? what a monster in
government would it be? -- In truth, my friend, the matter lies here: The
freedom and happiness of every British subject depends, not upon his share in
elections, but upon the sense and virtue of the British parliament, and these
depend reciprocally upon the sense and virtue of the whole nation. When virtue
and honor are no more, the lovely frame of our constitution will be dissolved.
Britain may one day be what Athens and Rome now are; but may heaven long
protract the hour!

The jurisdiction of parliament being established, it will follow, that this
jurisdiction cannot be apportioned; it is transcendant and entire, and may levy
internal taxes as well as regulate trade; there is no essential difference in
the rights: A stamp duty is confessedly the most reasonable and equitable that
can be devised, yet very far am I from desiring to see it established among us,
but I fear the shaft is sped, and it is now too late to prevent the blow.

The examples cited by his honor, with regard to ancient colonies, may show
his reading and erudition, but are of no authority in the present question. I
am not enough skilled in the Grecian history to correct the proofs drawn from
thence, though they amount to very little. If the Grecian colonies, as his
honor says, took such forms of government as themselves chose, there is no
kind of similitude between them and the English colonies, and therefore to name
them is nothing to the purpose. The English colonies take their forms of
government from the crown; hold their privileges upon condition, that they do
not abuse them; and hold their lands by the tenure of common socage, which
involves in it fealty and obedience to the king: Hence it is plain, his
honor's argument is not strengthened by the example of the Grecian colonies;
for what likeness is there between independent colonies, as those must be,
which took such forms of government as themselves chose, and colonies like
ours, which are in a manner feudatory, and holden of a superior.

With regard to the Roman colonies, I must beg leave to say, that the
honorable author, either ignorantly or wilfully, mistakes the facts: A little
more enquiry, or a little more candor, would have convinced him, that the
Roman coloniae did not enjoy all the rights of Roman citizens; on the contrary,
they only used the Roman laws and religion, and served in the legions, but had
not the right of suffrage, or of bearing honors. In these respects, our
English colonies exactly resemble them; we enjoy the English laws and religion,
but have not the right of fuffrage, or of bearing honors in Great Britain, and
indeed our situation renders it impossible.

If the practice of the ancients was of any authority in this case, I could
name examples to justify the enslaving of colonies. The Carthaginians were a
free people, yet they, to render the Sardinians and Corsicans more dependant,
forbad their planting, sowing, or doing any thing of the like kind, under pain
of death, so that they supplied them with necessaries from Africa: This was
indeed very hard. But there is something extremely weak and inconclusive in
recurring to the Grecian and Roman history for examples to illustrate any
particular favorite opinion: If a deference to the ancients should direct the
practice of the moderns, we might sell our children to pay our debts, and
justify it by the practice of the Athenians. We might lend our wives to our
friends, and justify it from the Example of Cato, among the Romans. In a word,
my dear Sir, the belly of a sow, pickled, was a high dish in ancient Rome; and
I imagine, as you advance in the refinements of luxury, this will become a
capital part of a Rhode Island feast, so fond you seem of ancient customs and
laws.

Instead of wandering in the labyrinth of ancient colonies, I would advise his
honor to read the debates in parliament in the year one thousand seven hundred
and thirty-three, when Mr. Partridge, your agent, petitioned the commons
against the then sugar-bill; he will there find more satisfaction upon the
subject of colonies, than in Thucydides's history of the Pelopennesian war. It
was declared in the course of that debate, that the colonists were a part of
the people of Great Britain; and, as such, fully represented in that house. The
petition then presented by Mr. Partridge, was of a very different temper from
those now sent home by the colonies; it was extremely modest, and only
intimated that the sugar bill, if passed into a law, might be prejudicial to
their charter; at the bare mention of this Sir William Young took fire, and
said, It looked like aiming at an independency, and disclaiming the
jurisdiction of that house, as if (says he) this house had not a power to tax
the colonies. Mr. Winnington, with equal warmth, added, I hope they have no
charter which debars this house from taxing them, as well as any other subject
of the nation. Here you have the opinion of two of the most eminent members of
that time; they spoke the sentiments of the whole house, and these sentiments
still continue the same. And from hence you may perceive, how little prospect
there is of the colonies gaining any point upon the footing of these new
supposititious rights; broaching such opinions will excite the jealousy of the
parliament, and you will be looked upon with an evil eye. The promoters of such
doctrines are no friends to the colonies, whatever may be their pretensions.
Can his honor be so vain as to imagine, that ten thousand such pamphlets as
his, will influence the parliament, or that they will be persuaded, by the
force of his elocution, to give up their supremacy, and right of taxing the
colonies. What purpose then can be served by these pamphlets, but to embitter
the minds of a simple, credulous, and hitherto loyal people, and to alienate
their affections from Great Britain, their best friend, their protector, and
alma matter. A different behavior would be much more prudent and politic. If
we have any thing to ask, we should remember that diffidence and modesty will
always obtain more from generous minds, than frowardness and impertinence.

The act of the thirteenth of his late majesty, entitled, An act for
naturalizing of foreign protestants, had better have been omitted by his
honor; for if that act is to be the measure of the colonists rights, they will
be more circumscribed than he would willingly choose. In that act, there is a
proviso, that no person, who shall become a natural born subject by virtue of
that act, should be of the privy council, or a member of either house of
parliament, or capable of enjoying, in Great Britain or Ireland, any place of
trust, civil or military, etc. This statute confirms the distinction I have set
up between personal and political rights. After naturalization, foreign
protestants are here admitted subjects, to all intents and purposes; that is,
to the full enjoyment of those rights which are connected with the person,
liberty or estate of Englishmen; but by the proviso, they are excluded from
bearing offices or honors.

Enlarging the power of the court of admiralty, is much complained of by the
honorable author. I shall open my mind to you freely on this head.

It is notorious, that smuggling, which an eminent writer calls a crime against
the law of nature, had well nigh become established in some of the colonies.
Acts of parliament had been uniformly dispensed with by those whose duty it was
to execute them; corruption, raised upon the ruins of duty and virtue, had
almost grown into a system; courts of admiralty, confined within small
territorial jurisdictions, became subject to mercantile influence; and the
king's revenue shamefully sacrificed to the venality and perfidiousness of
courts and officers. -- If, my friend, customs are due to the crown; if illicit
commerce is to be put an end to, as ruinous to the welfare of the nation: --
If, by reason of the interested views of traders, and the connivance of courts
and custom-house officers, these ends could not be compassed or obtained in the
common and ordinary way; tell me, what could the government do, but to apply a
remedy desperate as the disease: There is, I own, a severity in the method of
prosecution, in the new established court of admiralty, under Doctor SPRY,
here; but it is a severity we have brought upon ourselves. When every mild
expedient, to stop the atrocious and infamous practice of smuggling, has been
tried in vain, the government is justifiable in making laws against it, even
like those of Draco, which were written in blood. The new instituted court of
admiralty, and the power given to the seizer, are doubtlese intended to make us
more circumspect in our trade, and to confine the merchant, from motives of
fear and dread, within the limits of a fair commerce. The English constrain the
merchant, but it is in favor of commerce, says the admired Secondat. This is
the spirit of the new regulations, both with regard to the employing of
cutters, and the enlarged power of the admiralty; and both measures are
justifiable upon the same principles, as is the late act for preventing murder,
which executes and dissects the murderer at surgeons-hall in twenty-four hours
after conviction.

But notwithstanding the severity of this act, let me add, that no harm can
accrue to the honest and fair trader, so long as the crown fills the admiralty
department with an upright judge; such a one is Doctor SPRY, an able civilian,
and whose appointments place him above any kind of influence; yet the
honorable author of the pamphlet before me, has told us to this effect; That
it is very well known this judge can be prevailed on, very easily, to certify,
upon the acquittal of a seizure, that there was a probable cause for making it.
-- So shamefully intemperate is his honor's zeal and opposition to every
measure adopted by the government at home, that he spares not even private
characters, however worthy and respectable. I fear he knows not the high value
of a good name, and how dear it is to men of sentiment and honor.

"He who filches from me my good name,
"Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
"But makes me poor indeed."
SHAKESPEARE. To suspect the integrity of others, is not the effusion of a
virtuous mind. Those who have been long used to traffic with judges and
juries, are, from the depravity of their own hearts, easily led to believe
others even as themselves.

This libel upon Doctor SPRY, contained in a pamphlet published by authority,
may spread over the British dominions, and, however false and scandalous it be,
yet may leave a shade upon his character which can never be effaced. With what
grace, let me ask you, do such reflections as these come from the governor of a
colony, where, all the world agree, the law has scarcely yet dawned, and where
all your legal rights are decided by the strength of that faction which happens
to be uppermost.

I am not enough skilled in trade to know whether the act, so much complained
of, will do most good or most harm; and I wish others were as diffident of
their knowledge in this particular. To comprehend the general trade of the
British nation, much exceeds the capacity of any one man in America, how great
soever he be. Trade is a vast, complicated system, and requires such a depth of
genius, and extent of knowledge, to understand it, that little minds, attached
to their own sordid interest, and long used to the greatest licentiousness in
trade, are, and must be, very incompetent judges of it. Sir Andrew Freeport is
no inhabitant of Rhode Island colony. For my own part, I am still willing to
leave the management of trade with that people, who, according to the same
admired author just quoted, know better than any other people upon earth, how
to value at the same time these three great advantages, religion, commerce, and
liberty.

Here I would just observe, that, from the intelligence I have gained, the
beloved article of melasses is now plentier and cheaper, in all the New England
colonies, than when it was avowedly smuggled; and so far is the linen
manufacture of Ireland from being ruined, as his honor intimates, that never
was a greater demand for flax-seed than during the last fall, notwithstanding
the clause in the act relating to lumber. How senseless is it to imagine that
the prohibiting a few dunnage slaves to be carried to Ireland, will ruin the
manufactures of that kingdom.

Believe me, my Friend, it gives me great pain to see so much ingratitude in
the colonies to the mother country, whose arms and money so lately rescued them
from a French government. I have been told, that some have gone so far as to
say, that they would, as things are, prefer such a government to an English
one. -- Heaven knows I have but little malice in my heart, yet, for a moment, I
ardently wish that these spurious, unworthy sons of Britain could feel the iron
rod of a Spanish inquisitor, or a French farmer of the revenue; it would indeed
be a punishment suited to their ingratitude. Here I cannot but call to mind the
adder in one of the fables of Pilpay, which was preparing to sting the generous
traveller who had just rescued him from the flames.

You Will easily perceive, that what I have said is upon the general design of his
honor's pamphlet; if he had divided his argument with any precision, I would
have followed him with somewhat more of method; The dispute between
Great Britain and the colonies consists of two parts; first, the jurisdiction
of parliament, -- and, secondly, the exercise of that jurisdiction. His honor
has blended these together, and no where marked the division between them: The
first I have principally remarked upon: As to the second, it can only turn upon
the expediency or utility of those schemes which may, from time to time, be
adopted by parliament, relative to the colonies. Under this head, I readily
grant, they are at full liberty to remonstrate, petition, write pamphlets and
newspapers, without number, to prevent any improper or unreasonable imposition:
Nay, I would have them do all this with that spirit of freedom which Englishmen
always have, and I hope ever will, exert; but let us not use our liberty for a
cloak of maliciousness. Indeed I am very sure the loyalty of the colonies has
ever been irreproachable; but from the pride of some, and the ignorance of
others, the cry against mother country has spread from colony to colony; and it
is to be feared, that prejudices and resentments are kindled among them which
it will be difficult ever, thoroughly, to sooth or extinguish. It may become
necessary for the supreme legislature of the nation to frame some code, and
therein adjust the rights of the colonies, with precision and certainty,
otherwise Great Britain will always be teazed with new claims about liberty and
privileges.

I have no ambition in appearing in print, yet if you think what is here thrown
together is fit for the public eye, you are at liberty to publish it: I the
more cheerfully acquiesce in this, because it is with real concern I have
observed, that, notwithstanding the frequent abuse poured forth in pamphlets
and newspapers against the mother country, not one filial pen in America has,
as yet, been drawn, to my knowledge, in her vindication.

I am, very affectionately, Your most faithful and obedient servant, * * * * * *

FINIS.

