A DEFENSE OF THE LETTER FROM A Gentleman at HALIFAX, TO His Friend in
RHODE ISLAND.

-- AN undue Countenance given to a Spirit of popular Opposition, upon the
Principles of FALSE PATRIOTISM, has a fatal Tendency to loosen the Reins of
Government, and to throw Matters into general Confusion.

AND if the common Rights of the Subject are supposed to be the Object in View,
let it be remembered, that Liberty is never more in Danger than when it vergeth
into Licentiousness. Caesar cherished a Spirit of licentious Popularity against
the Senate. Cromwell cherished the same Spirit against the Crown and Senate.
Both set up a Tyranny of their own, subversive of true Liberty, which ever must
be founded in Law, and supported by it.

JUDGE FOSTER. DISC. HOMI. NEWPORT: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, on the
Parade. M.DCC.LXV

A Defense of the Halifax Letter, etc.
THE editor of the Halifax letter has, with much serenity and composure,
attended to the illiberal opposition, and multiplied abuse, which he and that
pamphlet have received, from various quarters. He was willing to wait the last
efforts of his malignant adversaries, before he attempted a reply. Their rage,
at length, seems to be near spent, and the troubled sea of controversy has
again almost subsided. He therefore ventures, once more, to embark upon it; and
is desirous, for his own honor, as well as for the example of his antagonists,
to conduct himself with all possible decency and moderation. Thus, when a calm
succeeds a storm, we revolve in our minds the past tumult, and cooly survey the
confusion it occasioned.

In order to justify the Halifax gentleman's letter, it is necessary to
premise, that Great Britain, during the late war, had lavished the blood of her
subjects, and spent immense sums, as well for the security of the colonies, as
her own importance and dignity. A few years ago, when Oswego and fort
William-Henry were taken, no one can forget, that these colonies were so
terrified and alarmed, that they would gladly have consented to have made even
Albany the barrier, between the French and them: But, through the smiles of
heaven, and the unanimity and bravery of the British councils and arms, the
enemy were at last brought to terms, and the colonies secured, and made happy
by a peace. The government, in pursuing such measures as it thought necessary,
to preserve the colonies from future invasions and attacks, became obliged to
keep up a large body of troops, cantoned in difdifferent parts of the
continent. Already plunged in debt, to almost an incredible amount, and
availing itself of every expedient, however burdensome, to raise supplies from
its distressed subjects in Great Britain; it was judged reasonable and
equitable to draw some advantages from the trade of its colonies, in order to
raise a fund for the maintenance and support of those troops, thus employed for
our protection. An act of parliament, levying some impositions, was made; and
we were given to understand, that the ministry were meditating such further
taxes as the exigence of things might require, and such as might, at the same
time, be least burdensome to us: Nevertheless, here it was, a discontent first
began to appear, and the conduct of the administration was arraigned, by many,
with all the petulance of children, who, by long indulgence, become impatient
of the smallest restraints.

From censuring the act of parliament, as useless and oppressive, the humor
afterward took a different turn; and we were soon told by many, that the
parliament of Great Britain had no constitutional right, no authority, de jure,
as some expressed it, to bind us by any act of their making, because we were
not represented.

Ignorance and conceit first promulged this doctrine; and as it flattered the
pride and self-love of the people, it is no wonder its progress has been so
rapid and successful. To spread the folly and mischief still more, numberless
pamphlets and pieces in newspapers were published, in which the parent country
and its administration have been treated in the most contumelious and
irreverent manner.

As the editor has been charged with falsehood and misrepresentation in these
assertions, he here begs leave, in the first place, to bring together, in one
view, several extracts from these pamphlets and newspapers alluded to, that
the public may judge for themselves, whether his assertions are well founded.

In a Providence news-paper of August 18, 1764, Great Britain is treated with
the greatest mockery and derision; and in the style and manner of a fanatic
exhorter, the writer begins with this text: "In St. JAMES's, you will find
these words, MOTHER COUNTRY." In the course of this exhortation, the preacher
names a certain nobleman of the board of trade, that, a few years ago, (he
says) enquired "if New England was an island." This is a low, scandalous,
legendary tale, purposely invented to bring contempt and odium upon the
administration. He says, It must look like a direct design of enslaving us, to
talk of the infinite obligation and debt, we are under to Old-England, for
prosecuting a war here; and how subservient we ought to be to particular
interests in Britain, in consideration thereof. When certain designs are to be
answered, dark words and phrases suit best, which really, without sense or
meaning, if properly sounded and echoed, become sacred, and effectual machines
for bringing about the purpose, i. e. to enslave the colonies. Again, Has the
government of England been at any expense in supporting the colonies of
New England? No. Is one farthing balance due to them, in the whole account,
from the first planting of New England, to this time? No. -- The tendency of
all this, is manifestly to degrade the mother country, to raise suspicions and
jealousies against her, and to blot out of the colonies every trace of duty and
gratitude. -- Again he says, he could mention many instances of treasons and
rebellions in a certain mother country. It seems a general opinion here, that
there can be no rebellion unless the pretender is concerned in it. -- Again he
says, the late acts, clogging our trade, are unnatural, highly injurious, and
not very motherly. The northern colonies have been most infamously belied,
scandalized, and injuriously treated, by a number of ignorant and envious
officers in the army and navy, etc. -- What reason can there possibly be, that
should make the gentlemen of the army or navy envious against the colonies? The
slander against them is groundless and malicious. Ingratitude, more strong than
traitors arms, has swallowed up all remembrance of their services. Such are
the breathings of our piety to those who have bled for our deliverance.

The Boston gazette of the 24th September, 1764, contains a publication, in
which are these words: I know not what wise measures Mr. Gr -- nv -- l's
political genius may suggest, for the benefit of the colonies; but I would fain
whisper in his ear, that there are millions of British subjects in America, who
have a warm sense of liberty: Many of them have as much understanding as he
himself has, and have acquired as thorough a knowledge of the British
constitution, and the rights of British subjects, as he. They smile at the
folly and nonsense of him and others, who fancy that American subjects are not
entitled to all the rights of native Britons. They have never forfeited those
rights; and therefore cannot, nay, they will not, consent to part with them.
Mr. Grenville, here maliciously pointed at, is at the head of the treasury;
and, to his vigilance and great merit, the nation is much indebted ever since
he presided there: Yet he is charged with folly and nonsense, in express words;
and the mother country is set at defiance, for the colonies will not, says the
author, consent to part with their rights. Such language as this, from
inhabitants of dependant colonies to the superior and sovereign head, is
froward, peremptory, and hostile. The paper here cited, was censured by the
present Providence writer, in the Providence gazette of October 6, 1764, a
little while before his apostasy.


A pamphlet entitled, "the sentiments of a British North-American," published
at Boston, some time past, has the following motto in the title page, taken
from Phaedrus's fables.

Asellum in prato timidus pascebat senex,
Is hostium clamore subito territus
Suadebat asino fugere ne possint capi
At ille lentus. Quaeso number binas mihi
Clitellas impositurum victorem putas?
Senex negavit; ergo quid refert mea
Cui serviam, clitellas dum portem meas.
The professed design of this pamphlet, was to arraign the measures of the
administration, relative to taxing the colonies, etc. The application of the
above fable to that subject, shows clearly the author's opinion, that under the
present parliamentary regulations, it is a matter of indifference what prince
or power we are subject to, whether a GEORGE or a LEWIS, as a certain gentleman
expressed it.

In the Providence gazette, November 10, 1764, is contained, something that is
called a dream. The dreamer before he falls asleep, introduces himself in this
manner: He that acknowleges that I am an Englishman, and tells me, at the same
time, that I am to live under laws, which I have no hand in making, and am to
be taxed where I have no representative, does but mock me. In the midst of his
Dream, speaking of the stamp duty, intended to be laid on the colonies, he
compares it to the branding of beasts. The performance is something of the
dramatick kind; and among the persons of the drama, is a master brander and his
retinue,. Who this character means, the reader must discover. In the same scene
is also exhibited, a ragged country fellow, grinning. The dreamer says, The
master brander, with his retinue, approached the pasture with great pomp, one
carrring a large silver brand, in the form of the letter S; and upon entering
the field, they began with the asses, and branded them without interruption.
Soon after he adds, A very ragged country fellow said, with a facetious grin,
that he always understood till then, that the good people of England very well
knew, that none but asses would stand still to be branded. The meaning, wrapped
up in this low, vulgar allegory, is plain. -- The letter S, denotes the Slavery
the colonies would be subjected to by the stamp duty, if they, like asses,
should submit to it. -- The ragged country fellow denotes the dreamer himself.

A piece in the New York gazette, of Thursday, March 7th, 1765, which came in
the editor's way, while these sheets were compiling, furnishes him with a
recent and palpable instance of that unfilial disposition too prevalent in the
colonies. The author of this piece first endeavors to raise a cry against the
Halifax letter, and then, exalting the rights and privileges of the colonies,
he says, If those rights and privileges are violated, what reason then can
remain, why they should prefer the British to the French government, or any
other? They may, indeed, from their present weakness, be compelled to submit to
the impositions of ministerial power, but they will certainly consider that
power as tyrannical; they will hate and abhor it, and, as soon as they are
able, will throw it off, or perhaps try to obtain better terms from some other
power. Here is an honest, plain spoken gentleman, that does not mince the
matter at all; he roundly threatens Great Britain with the defection of her
colonies, as soon as they are able.

To give the last finishings to the opinions and dogma's contained in the
aforegoing extracts, and many others which might be produced, of the same sort,
his honor the governor of Rhode Island colony, entered upon the stage, Mid the
low murmurs of submissive fear,
And mingled rage, my H -- raised his Voice;
and in a solemn, argumentative manner, assumed upon himself to prove, that an
act of parliament cannot levy taxes on the colonies, by any other authority,
but that of mere superiority and power. (See page 20 of "rights of colonies
examined.") Besides the boldness of such a position, the performance appeared
throughout ostentations, in the manner and execution; and in the matter,
disrespectful and unthankful to the mother country. The many quotations, from
ancient and modern books, abundantly evince the first. The latter shall now be
proved, by one or two observations upon it, which were omitted in the Halifax
letter.

In page 20, his honor says, In the year 1746, when Duke D'Anville came out
from France, with the most formidable French fleet that ever was in the
American seas, enraged at these colonies for the loss of Louisbourg the year
before, and with orders to make an attack on them; even in this greatest
exigence, these colonies were left to the protection of heaven and their own
efforts. This insinuation is ungrateful and disrespectful. The administration
at that time, it is confessed, was inactive and indolent, and the British
honor and interest alike neglected in all places; but the malevolence, in the
manner of the expression, is obvious; and the idea intended to be produced, is,
that the colonies were particularly sacrificed by Great Britain at that time,
for, says he, they were left to the protection of heaven and their own efforts.
What other purpose can this effect, but to impress the people with an opinion,
that they were at that time neglected by their mother country? What other
passions will it kindle, but resentment against her? What more powerful
argument can be used to withdraw the subjection of the colonies from
Great Britain, than to fill the minds of the people with doubts and distrusts
of that care and protection they might reasonably expect from her? But further,
the Duke D'Anville was enraged at these colonies for the loss of Louisbourg; as
if these colonies alone were the sole instruments of its reduction. The truth
is, without depreciating the services of the Americans, the conquest of that
place was, in a great measure, owing to the squadron under Admiral Warren,
without which, it is more than probable, it never would have been taken. But
this passage of his honor's book, is still further reprehensible, for its
disingenuity and concealment of the truth. Great Britain is charged with
neglecting the colonies, but not a word is said of the parliamentary
reimbursement of the whole charges of that expedition.

In page 15, his honor, after censuring the enlarged power of the admiralty,
and impeaching the integrity of the judge, makes the following reflection: Such
unbounded protection and encouragement given to informers, must call to every
one's remembrance Tacitus's account of the miserable condition of the Romans,
in the reign of Tiberius, their emperor, who let loose and encouraged the
informers of that age. Here, the necessary measures, contrived by the
government, to suppress the infamous practice of smuggling, is called, an
unbounded protection and encouragement given to informers; and the present most
happy state of the British nation, under a prince who is the delight of
mankind, is associated with, and likened unto, the miserable condition of the
Romans under Tiberius, one of the most wicked and voluptuous of their emperors.
These are not the effusions of a peaceable citizen, or a faithful magistrate;
and the editor unfeignedly regrets the occasion, which has produced this
remark, because he hoped never to have seen so great a sacrifice made, by the
honorable author, to popular favor. But, alas! the foul path to popularity,
must ever be strewed with the spoils ravished from the brow of royalty.

These remarks sufficiently prove the charge of disrespect to the mother
country, in his honor's book; which, together with the pamphlets and
newspapers afore-recited, will strongly mark the complexion of too many in
the colonies, when the Halifax letter made its appearance. The editor, truly
scandalized at such freedoms, and fully sensible of the bad consequences which
would follow the increase of this temper, which he has now clearly exposed to
view, ventured to publish that letter. He foresaw it would be unpopular, and
draw on him a profusion of obloquy and reproach; and the event is conformable
to his expectations: but still he is not dismayed, and he will persevere, with
unremiting zeal, till time, which will produce his best vindication, shall
convince his adversaries of their errors and mistakes. Perhaps there never was
an instance of so great a prostitution, and debasement of the human faculties,
as in the conduct of those who have appeared in this controversy against the
Halifax letter. A man might have committed blasphemy and treason, and met with
more humane treatment than has been shown the author, as appears by the Boston
pamphlet, and many detached pieces in newspapers, published against him. To
apologize for Great Britain, it seems, is the only unpardonable sin in this
meridian. The bitterness of truth is very offensive, and the Halifax letter has
dared to speak it out. Had the matters therein contained, been destitute of
truth, it would have been treated like the lie of a day, and as soon
disappeared; but the rage and venom thrown out against it, is an unerring proof
of its merit, and the authors most honorable testimony. The following points
were all the Halifax letter intended to prove, to wit:

That the New England colonies privileges, as corporations created by the
crown, are fixed and ascertained by their charters.

That these charters give them no exemption from the jurisdiction of parliament.

That no grant of the king could exempt them from this jurisdiction, because
the common law, out of which it is derived, confessedly reaches the colonies,
and brings with it that jurisdiction, and announces its force and operation
over them.

That the house of commons consider themselves as representatives of every
British subject, wherever he be; and therefore to every useful and beneficial
purpose, the interests of the colonists are as well secured and managed by such
a house, as if they had a share in electing them.

That the late act for regulating trade, etc. is founded upon the necessities
of the administration, which must be supposed to have adopted the best methods
it could, to raise those moneys intended to be applied for the protection of
the colonies. And,

That the employment of cutters, and enlarging the power of the admiralty, can
be accounted for no otherwise, than from the apprehension of the legislature,
that smuggling, in some of the colonies, required further and severer remedies.

This was the whole purport and design of the Halifax letter: If any satyr or
ridicule, against the author of the rights of colonies, was occasionally
interspersed, it was fairly and justly invited, by the vanity of an attempt,
which was no less than to annihilate the parliamentary jurisdiction in the
colonies.

In opposition to this inoffensive pamphlet, the editor of it is assailed by
two very distinguished personages; both of them esteemed the exactest models of
politeness, urbanity, and softness of manners, perhaps in America. The first
retailed his labors in the Providence newspapers. The second has fabricated a
pamphlet of thirty-two pages, printed at Boston. They shall, in the few
following remarks, be called, for brevity's sake, the Providence writer, and
the Boston writer. The Providence writer shall be first taken notice of.

He accuses the Halifax gentleman of want of candor, for charging the
honorable author with maintaining, that the colonies have rights independent
of parliament. So far from retracting the charge, the editor does now aver,
that this dogma has been asserted by his honor in the most open and express
manner. It can be proved, even from public files and records, that the
parliamentary authority has been ludicrously treated by him. He and his
followers, now unable to mantain the doctrine, upon any principles, founded
either upon the nature of government, common sense, or prudence, are at length
become ashamed of their indiscretion, and have no means of acquittal, but to
deny, with confidence, that they ever maintained it. The editor, however,
continues his accusation, upon the expression of his honor's book alone,
without availing himself of any foreign aid; but he confesses, it will be
difficult to convince the Providence writer of this, till the meaning of words
shall be adjusted by some authority, to which his obedience may be exacted. To
what purpose will it be to make use of signs, if their signification may be
twisted and varied just as a writer pleases? Does not his honor say, in plain
English words, that the common people of Great Britain have not any sort of
power over the Americans, and that they cannot give a power to their
representatives which they have not themselves. Is not the inference from these
expressions as clear as the sun, that these representatives have no power over
the Americans? And if the representatives, i. e. the house of commons, have no
power over the Americans, an act of parliament can have no power over them, for
the house of commons is a constituent branch of the legislative, and their
concurrence absolutely essential to the making of every act: Yet the Providence
writer, with the most inexcuseable prevarication, would fain melt down this
plain, striking denial of parliamentary jurisdiction, to mean no more than
this, that it was his honor's belief, that according to British principles of
government, the subjects of America ought not to be taxed in parliament. This
rude and violent perversion of plain English, cannot deceive any body that will
consider but a moment.

The editor thinks this a proper place to thank the Boston writer for a little
assistance. In page 5 of his book, he confesses and laments that the aforegoing
expressions of his honor involve a sophism, unworthy of him; and to do the
Boston writer justice he has detected the fallacy which escaped the Halifax
gentleman. His honor, however, may not take it so kindly, and will begin to
suspect, that he is in perils from false brethren; for certainly, the Boston
writer has given a specimen of his disingenuity, to say no worse of it. Every
body must allow this is acting a double, insincere part. A friend should rather
have concealed the fault, than exposed it: But the ruling passion of the Boston
writer totally absorbs him; and the cause itself is rather to be sacrificed,
than a single ray of his superior discernment should be eclipsed. -- He is,
however, entitled to a further compliment from the editor, for he allows his
honor's expression to be an implicit denial of the authority of parliament,
which is the same, in substance, as an explicit one; and the editor can see no
difference in the two modes, except in the disguise and cunning, which are, by
no means, the talents of a fair and candid enquirer after truth. Here, it is
hoped, that, with the reinforcement of the Boston writer, the reader will be
convinced that the charge upon his honor is fully made out.

But should it be still thought, that his honor has not expressly denied the
jurisdiction of parliament, yet the tendency of his pamphlet will be found
equally mischievous. If we are taxed, (says he) without our own consent; we are
in the miserable condition of slaves. Page 4. In this place, he has combined
together the idea of slavery, with that of being taxed without our consent,
which is very artful, and an effectual way to extinguish all regard to acts of
parliament.

It is easy to foresee, from the slightest knowledge of the temper and genius
of a free people, as the English are, that whenever they are made to believe,
that the authority, which takes money out of their purses, is not founded in
equity, they will soon refuse obedience to it. And, therefore, supposing all
that has been said on this subject, by his honor, or any other, to have gone
no further, than only to question the equity of taxing the colonies without
their being represented; the effect of such reasoning, upon the minds of the
people, will be equally as dangerous to the peace and order of government, as a
downright denial of the authority of parliament would be. So that it is a poor
evasion for the patrons and promoters of such doctrines, to say, they only
humbly call in question the equity of exercising the parliamentary
jurisdiction; or, that according to British principles of government, the
Americans ought not to be taxed in parliament; for the morality of any action
is determined by its consequences: And if such opinions, however dressed up,
will be found to have weakened the ties of obedience, the mischief is great;
and the guilt of it will fall upon the heads of those who have promoted such
opinions.

The Halifax gentleman says, that he had endeavored to investigate the natural
relation, between the colonies and the mother state, abstracted from compact.
The Providence writer, remarkable for the cleanliness of his ideas, says, this
is rank nonsense; that the mother country and colony have no natural relation.
The editor could, on this occasion, add a modicum to the Providence writer's
stock of knowledge, by various extracts from books, and thereby justify the mode
of expression in the Halifax letter: But he is relieved from further
elucidating this point, by the Boston writer, to whom he again pays his
compliment of thanks, for his assistance, in transferring to the Providence
writer, the rank nonsense charged upon the Halifax gentleman. In page 31, the
Boston writer has shown, that there is a natural relation between a mother
state and its colonies; so that the Halifax letter is fairly quit of the
absurdity, by a majority of two voices against one: But should it be thought
otherwise, the editor leaves the point to be decided between them. The policy,
in the opposition to the Halifax letter, must appear new and singular. The
amiable couple, who form this opposition, instead of being united, counteract
each other; and, like the legs of Nebuchadnezzar's image, composed of iron and
clay, will soon break to pieces.

The Halifax gentleman says, "that acts of parliament derive their authority
from the common law." "If so, says the Providence writer, the jurisdiction of
parliament must be subordinate to the common law." Not so neither: And the
issue of stupidity shall be fairly tried. Sir Edward Coke says, indeed, right,
that the jurisdiction of this court is transcendant, etc. But from whence is it
derived? Could this jurisdiction form and create itself? No: It is the common
law, founded upon long usage and consent, which has placed an uncontrollable,
transcendant jurisdiction in that court, even to alter and amend the course and
direction of various branches of the common law itself. If the Providence
writer could trace a different source of this jurisdiction, or account for it
better, he ought to have done it; but his silence is a proof that he could not.

He charges the Halifax gentleman with unbounded folly, and then makes him say,
that parliamentary jurisdiction can be extended, occasionally, into every
kingdom of the world. But there is no expression in the letter that will
warrant any such construction. It says, The jurisdiction of parliament is
attached to every British subject, wheresoever he be. And this is, indeed, true
of all subjects in the British colonies. It is there, this jurisdiction is now
disputed; and they at present are the subject of this controversy. Therefore,
the general expressions, wheresoever he be, according to the rules of
argumentation, must mean, and be interpreted, in the colonies. Lord Coke says,
The common law extends to all places granted under the broad seal. Therefore it
necessarily extends to, and operates in, the colonies. It there maintains and
asserts the jurisdiction of parliament over them. Shall the editor be still
asked for a better, or stronger authority, to justify his opinion?

In one paragraph of the Providence news-paper, the Halifax gentleman is twice
charged with impudence, with the most aggressing impudence. This is indeed very
clever; and what is it for? Why he has presumed to say, "that a representation,
if allowed, would be of no real use to us." Is this so criminal? Have patience,
gentle reader, and be not astonished at the editor's calmness. Michael, the
archangel, would not bring a railing accusation against the Devil. -- Bitter
words, and opprobrious epithets, are harmless things, and prove nothing. It is
the social and moral conduct of a man, that forms his character in life. The
meanest wretches are the most dextrous at all the artillery of low abuse; and
to excel in this respect, is only to sink in fame.

The Halifax gentleman says, It is the opinion of the house of commons, and may
be considered as a law of parliament, that they are the representatives of
every British subject, wherever he be. In saying this, his intention was merely
to conciliate the minds of his countrymen, and to produce in the colonies a
quiet submission to the measures of parliament, by letting them know, that they
have no reason to complain, because, in the opinion of the house of commons,
though they are not in fact represented, yet their properties and interests are
equally regarded with those of their fellow subjects in Great Britain. But it
seems this prudent and commendable endeavor of the Halifax letter, meets with
the usual personal invective from the Providence writer. Must not he, and his
whole tribe, stand condemned, in the judgment of all sober and moderate men,
for wickedly misleading the people, under the deceitful guise of liberty? Is
not he a better friend to the colonies, who tells them the plain truth, and
would fain prevent the increase of those prejudices and idols of the mind,
which, if suffered to grow wild, will infalliably be hurtful to the present
age, and to posterity.

The Halifax letter says, that a merchant, though worth L.100,000 sterling, if it
consists only in personal effects, has no vote in election of parliament
members. The Providence writer says, it is false. To prove that it is false, he
cites justice Powys's argument, in the case of Ashby and White, who says, In
some boroughs, every potwaller may vote; in some, residents; and in others, the
outlying burgesses, etc. What then? Does this prove it false? A man may be
worth L. 100,000 sterling, personal estate, and yet be neither a freeholder, a
burgess, a potwaller, or a freeman, of any corporation in Great Britain; and
therefore may have no right to vote. So that it remains yet undeniably plain,
that a man of that fortune may be unqualified to vote; and it is undoubtedly
true, that there are many such in Great Britain, who cannot vote at all. But
the matter is scarcely worth the writing of a single word, and should here have
been unnoticed, had it not been for the charge of falsehood.

The Halifax letter affirms, that copyholders in England, of L. 1000 sterling
per annum, cannot vote. Here the Providence writer gives him the lie again. --
Thou parragon of truth and goodness, does it follow, that because the statute
of the 9th of Anne qualifies a copyholder for life, of L. 600 sterling per
annum, to be a knight of the shire, that therefore copyholders may vote? It
clearly does not. "Copyholders are a servile tenure: They are not free and
common socage; and therefore fall short of the dignity, the immunities, and the
independency of that freehold tenure, which, for more than three hundred years,
have constituted an elector of knight of the shire." This doctrine was fully
established, by a very learned man, with whom the Providence writer is not yet
acquainted; and it was confirmed by the statute of the 31st of the late king,
which enacted, "That after the 29th day of June, A. D. 1758, no copyholder
should vote for a knight of the shire, under penalty of L. 50 sterling," etc.
-- The lesson of humiliation is hard to learn; but painful as it is, the
Providence writer should here begin the work: And, for his encouragement, let
him remember that his credit will raise in proportion to the decrease of his
pride; and that meekness will restore to him, what he has lost by his arrogance.

The employment of cutters, and enlarging the power of the admiralty, contained
in the act of parliament, was complained of by the honorable author. As these
measures seemed grievous to the colonists, the Halifax gentleman conceived,
that if he could give any satisfactory account of the motives, which induced
the administration to adopt them, it would not be unacceptable to such persons
as had not considered of the matter, and would rather soften the colonists,
than provoke them against those measures: Accordingly he resolved the causes of
the new regulations, into the necessity of the thing. In all states,
punishments must rise in proportion to offenses. The more flagrant these are,
the more severe should those be. This will be admitted by every body.
Corruptissima respublica, plurimae leges, says Tacitus. But it seems the
Providence writer thinks these proceedings arbitrary and useless, because, he
says, "there has been, for years past, little or no smuggling carried on in
these northern colonies, but in the article of melasses." The editor here
readily grants, that the trade of foreign melasses, though illicit, is by far
the least injurious of any: And he, with truth, can say, that that species of
trade entered very little into the charge of smuggling, brought against the
northern colonies. But does this Providence writer imagine, that the editor has
such a dastardly, temporizing spirit, that he dares not speak out what every
body knows to be true? Is it not notorious, that a most iniquitous, smuggling
trade has been long carried on, from several of the colonies, to Holland, and
other foreign European countries, to the vast prejudice of Great Britain, and
her manufactures? And there is not the least kind of doubt, if the new
instituted court of admiralty should be abolished, and the men of war and
cutters withdrawn from their stations, but this same trade would be renewed,
and practiced in such a manner, as to elude the contravention of custom-house
officers, however faithful and vigilant they might be. Can any one be so
ignorant of the world, as not to know, that money is almost become the supreme
good; and that the obligations of conscience and duty, are but feeble
restraints, when prospects of great gain present themselves? This is true every
where. The inclination to smuggle is equally prevalent in many parts of
Great Britain, the isle of Man, etc. The means used to check it, in those
places, are rather more rigorous than here: And the editor is not yet
persuaded, "that the people of New England are such philosophers and divines,
compared with those of Great Britain," that their virtue is proof against the
allurements of mammon. He thinks it no breach of charity to say, that if the
fear of confiscation and forfeiture was removed, the king's revenue would be as
little regarded by these New England philosophers and divines, as by any other
people, though the law of both tables should look them full in the face: And he
will pay them no compliment, at the expense of truth. -- For suchlike
sentiments as these, the Halifax gentleman is threatened, by the Providence
writer, with something that looks like a legal prosecution. He says, there has
been little or no smuggling in the colonies. What violence does this unhappy
devoted man commit against the dictates of his own heart. The editor here
confesses, he feels some indignation, mixed with pity, toward a person, who
is so lost to every manly sentiment, that the words of his mouth have no
interpretation: His tongue and his heart are for ever at variance. To be
threatened with a prosecution, from this Providence writer, is, indeed, enough
to try one's patience. The editor thinks, however, he is secure, at present, in
his own innocence; but when his crimes become so great, that those whom he has
betrayed demand restitution in a court of justice, for his falsehood and
perfidy: When his conscious guilt shall afford no solace to his mind; then he
may be driven to take shelter under the wings of a party, to screen himself
from the resentment of his injured and abused clients.

The editor here takes his final leave of the Providence writer.

The second that has honored the Halifax letter with his animadversions, is a
Boston writer, who has published a pamphlet, entitled, A vindication of the
British colonies, against the aspersions of the Halifax gentleman.

The treatment some of the most respectable characters, in the
Massachusetts Bay, have met with from this writer, left the editor no room to
doubt what would be his own fate, and he is not disappointed.

In the first page, he says, all who grow outrageous, are disgustful. This has
so great a likeness to the original, that one could take his oath, he was
sitting for his own picture. His features open and spread with almost the first
stroke of his pen. KNOW THYSELF. This single saying of old Chilo, the
Lacedemonian, suitably impressed upon his mind, would have prevented his
writing this pamphlet, and saved the public much pain, because, all who grow
outrageous, are disgustful.

"So, J-m -- y, -- so, so, J-m -- y, -- so, J-m -- y, so.

BOSTON NEWS-PAPER. The editor has, with great travail and perseverance, waded
through this dreary waste of 32 pages. In attempting to explore it, Chaos
seemed to be come again. The patience he exercised, on that dark and gloomy
occasion, has fitted him for any misfortune or disappointment in life. Pain, he
will no more consider as an evil. Nay, should he be forced to pass the Stygian
river, and drink its poisonous vapors, it would be more than Elysian, compared
with the misery of reading through this pamphlet.

How deep the darkness? and the groan how loud?
And far, how far! from lambent are the flames?
This pamphlet has answered two purposes: First, to scatter, upon the author of
the Halifax letter, the most unprovoked abuse: And secondly, by an
unaccountable fatality, to sustain and confirm the principal argument contained
in that letter. Though the Boston writer is fairly foiled, he shall find, in
the editor, a generous antagonist, for he will not rob him of his weapons.

The Boston writer says, "It is certain, that the parliament of Great Britain
has a just, clear, equitable, and constitutional right, power, and authority,
to bind the colonies, by all acts wherein they are named. Every lawyer, nay,
every tyro, knows this. No less certain is it, that the parliament of
Great Britain have a just and equitable right, power, and authority, to impose
taxes on the colonies, internal and external, on lands as well as on trade.
Here he will certainly appear, in the opinion of his associates and adherents,
to have surrendered up all at discretion, and betrayed his whole party; for the
above passage contains a most unreserved and solemn recognition of the
absolute, unlimited authority of parliament over the colonies. The warmth of
the expression, and the care taken to shun all ambiguity, indicates the zeal of
a new convert; for that he is a new convert, will appear from a passage in his
first pamphlet, which he cites in page 27 of his present performance, in these
words: When the parliament shall think fit to allow the colonists a
representation in the house of commons, the equity of their taxing the colonies
will be as clear as their power is at present of doing it without, if they
please. Hence it is evident, that when he wrote his first pamphlet, the equity
of taxing the colonies depended, in his opinion, upon their being, in fact,
represented in the house of commons: for when that should be allowed, the
equity of taxing would be as clear as their power is at present, etc. Thus
there was a time, when the Boston writer was a mere tyro; it is a pleasure to
acknowledge, that he is now become a lawyer. The rights of colonies asserted, of
which this Boston writer was the author, was almost universally censured at
home. This sufficiently accounts for his veering about.


It will afford some amusement to observe here, that the present Providence
writer was the author of the dream, taken notice of in page 8. The reader may
recollect, that he there says, "He who tells me, that I am to be taxed where I
have no representative, does but mock me." The reader will also remark, that,
in the preceding paragraph, the Boston writer says, that the parliament of
Great Britain may constitutionally and equitably tax us, and yet we are not
represented. This will naturally produce some very diverting images. The scene,
at length, opens, and discovers this amiable pair of writers; one of them
dreaming, and the other mocking him. Mercy on us! what a group would this
furnish, for the grotesque genius of a Dutch painter?

Upon the whole, the Boston pamphlet, however barren it may be in some
respects, affords a large field for the critical talents of a Prosodian, or an
Auceps Syllabarum, which was a character given by Cicero to some lawyers of his
time; but as the editor does not boast such acquirements, he can have no kind
of controversy with the Boston writer, after the ingenuous confession he has
made of his new political principles. He has disarmed, by this very commendable
declaration, the little resentment the editor had against him, for the personal
abuse his piece contains: Therefore, he freely forgives, and at the same time
congratulates him, on the happy conviction of his errors. But the work of
repentance should not stop here; it is to be feared the honorable author is
yet an unbeliever, and his conversion should be made a point of. When this is
done, his honor and the Boston writer should adjust, together, the fallacy
detected in his book: For though the argument was not any ways affected by that
fallacy, yet it impeaches his honor's understanding; or, at least, his candor.
When this is well settled, the terms, natural relation, between a mother state
and its colonies, should be discussed between him and the Providence writer.
And when peace and unanimity are restored within their borders, they should
form a new plan of operations, and depute one of their body to attack the
Halifax letter; but they should, in all good policy, agree not to contradict or
confute each other; for, besides the additional trouble they give their
antagonist, they weaken and destroy the ground they stand upon.

As the particular remarks upon the Providence writer are, in a great measure,
applicable to the general contents of the Boston pamphlet; and as this latter
contains nothing new, but is rather inferior to the former, both in the method
and argument; it would be but dull repetition to say any thing further upon it.
The editor, therefore, will take his leave of the Boston writer; but must first
balance the sing-song, with part of that celebrated character of Cassius, (to
compare small things with great) which Shakespeare has put in the mouth of
Caesar.

-- He hears no music:
Seldom he smiles; and smiles in such a sort,
As if he mocked himself, and scorned his spirit,
That could be moved to smile at any thing.
Such men as he, be never at heart's ease,
Whilst they behold a greater than themselves.
And therefore are they very dangerous.
It is proper here to record, what, perhaps, may appear, a few years hence,
almost incredible. At the general assembly of this colony, held at
East-Greenwich, on the last Monday of February, A. D. 1765, the deputy governor
went down to the lower house, with this harmless Halifax letter in his hand,
and requested them to take it into consideration, and pursue such measures
against the printer, or pamphlet, as they should think fit. Some warm members
pushed on this motion, and, in their anger, seemed to have forgot, that the
liberty of the press was sacred, and the greatest bulwark of British freedom:
They represented the pamphlet as a libel, insisted that the printer should be
sent for, and some were for burning the pamphlet by the hands of the common
hangman. This was in the genuine style of eastern despotism, and reminds the
editor, that he has somewhere read of "two young ladies, in India, who were
shut up for life in a box, thick set with pointed nails; one for having had a
love intrigue, and the other for not disclosing it." The issue of this affair
was, there were members in the house, of virtue and moderation, who saw nothing
offensive in the pamphlet: And the application of the deputy governor only
served to show, that our senators, in this instance, were neither acquainted
with, or actuated by, the true principles of the British constitution.

While we lament how thin the partition is, between excess of liberty and
absolute tyranny, it should be a pleasing consideration, to every man in the
colony, that his liberty and property are subject, in the last resort, to the
care and animadversion of the mother country.

The opposition to the Halifax letter, however choleric and fretful it be,
bodes no evil to the editor. He does not mean to be vain, when he says, that he
is independent in spirit, and in circumstances; he has not a wish which seeks
its gratification from the smiles of popularity: If he had, the arts of
adulation and duplicity lie open to his choice, and would yield him the same
harvest which brings a triumph to those, who prefer present fame to all other
considerations. -- He now takes leave of the public, and of his adversaries,
his private concerns will not permit him to continue the dispute any longer,
whatever insults he may receive. Besides, he thinks it wisdom to discontinue a
controversy, which his antagonists have already made personal, and therefore
can answer no end, but to sour and provoke one against the other: Recrimination
throws no light upon the enquiry, and the subject becomes lost in a torrent of
abuse. Hae nugae, seria ducunt in mala. "The madness of others shall be a
lesson to him." He will give no occasion for the further production of human
depravity and baseness, lest he should lose that philanthropy, which, at
present, administers to him the greatest contentment, next to that he derives
from the esteem and friendship of good and virtuous men.

APPENDIX.
SINCE the aforegoing sheets were committed to the press, several vessels have
arrived from London, and brought intelligence, that the act of parliament, for
levying a stamp duty on the colonies, is actually past: That, upon this
occasion, not a single member in the house of commons spoke against taxing
America; nor would one of them even introduce a petition, which should impeach
the parliament's right: That one member, in particular, said, "that where the
colonies stand on such high pretensions of independance on the supreme
legislative authority of Great Britain, there is no moderating any thing." His
majesty's speech, at opening the present sessions, is also come over; wherein
he says, he "relies on the wisdom and firmness of parliament, to promote
obedience to the laws, and reverence to the legislative authority of
Great Britain." In answer to this speech, both houses, in terms equally strong,
have ecchoed back to the throne, the king's pleasure, and declared their
resolution to maintain due respect to this authority.

These proceedings at home, have completed the defense of the Halifax letter,
beyond even the power of cavil or chicane. The parliament, by passing the stamp
act, have determined the question respecting their right of taxing the
colonies, in such a manner, that no prudent or sensible man will ever hereafter
dispute it.

Although the rights of colonies asserted and proved, has been vainly puffed,
in a London news-paper, by some hungry bookseller, as a piece proper for the
instruction of both houses of parliament, yet the event has shown, that not a
single member is one grain the wiser by it. The other pamphlets and
newspapers, published in America, with the petitions and remonstrances, sent
home by the colonies, were TOO BOLD, TOO FREE; and, as it is said above, not a
single member would present one of them to the house: But, on the contrary, it
was declared, that the pretensions of independency in the colonies, would not
admit of any moderation toward them.

The reader is here entreated to look back a little into the Halifax
gentleman's letter. In page 5, speaking of his honor's pamphlet, he says, It
were to be wished, that some friends of the colonies would endeavor to remove
any unfavourable impressions, this and other pamphlets, of the like kind, may
have occasioned at home; lest those in power form the general character of the
colonies from such notices as these convey; and from thence be inclined to
increase their dependence, rather than to emancipate them from their present
supposed impositions. Again, This people, (of Great Britain) justly conscious
of their dignity, will not patiently be dictated to, by those, whom they have
ever considered as dependant upon them. In page 16, he takes notice of the
conduct of the house of commons, in the year 1733, when the Rhode Island agent
presented a petition against the then sugar bill, containing pretensions
somewhat similar to those now set up; and then says, From hence you may
perceive, how little prospect there is of the colonies gaining any point, upon
the footing of these new supposititious rights. Broaching such opinions, will
excite the jealousy of parliament, and you will be looked upon with an evil
eye. The promoters of such doctrines are no friends to the colonies, whatever
may be their pretensions. Can his honor be so vain as to imagine, that ten
thousand such pamphlets as his, will influence the parliament; or that they
will be persuaded, by the force of his elocution, to give up their supremacy,
and right of taxing the colonies? If we have any thing to ask, we should
remember, that diffidence and modesty will always obtain more, from generous
minds, than frowardness and impertinence. -- Whether the Halifax gentleman has
prophesied truly or not, let his enemies now declare? Whether he has deserved
the foul usage he has received, let the public now speak? If, instead of our
high pretensions to independance, fomented and spirited up by those gentry who
oppose the Halifax letter, we had modestly represented our poverty and
inability to pay taxes, or pointed out to the parliament any other more
suitable, or less burdensome method of taxation, we should have been listened
to, with an indulgent and parental ear: We should have found the British
legislature, like APOLLO, rewarding our merit, instead of punishing our
presumption. But, alas! the fatal shaft is sped; and those who, from
principles of false patriotism, have led the colonies into these errors, will,
so long as taxes are felt by us, deserve the execration and reproaches of their
countrymen, whom they have thus betrayed and enthralled. At present, nothing
remains, on our part, but a dutiful submission. If the late measures seem hard,
let us compare our condition with other nations and countries, and learn
contentment. The honorable author must now weep in silence, for what his
lucubrations have not been able to accomplish. The Providence dreamer, during
the remainder of his restless, disappointed days, must submit to the mockery of
those who acknowledge the parliamentary jurisdiction. The Boston writer, who
cannot relish liberty, unless it be stained with the mixture of licentiousness,
should take a lesson from his present bad success, and venture no more to
disturb the harmony of the best constitution on earth; but rather seek out some
other region, more agreeable to his troubled spirit, and unquiet imagination.

Sed fugite, O miseri, fugite, atque ab litore funem
Rumpite!

