Mr. DORR's ELECTION-SERMON, May 9th, 1765.

(...) to be nursing Fathers to the Church of CHRIST.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT,
At HARTFORD; ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION; MAY IXth, 1765.

By EDWARD DORR, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in HARTFORD.

HARTFORD; Printed by THOMAS GREEN, at the HEART and CROWN, opposite the
STATE-HOUSE.

At a General Assembly of the Go^^^^^^ and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut; Holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May, Anno Dom. 1765.
ORDERED, That DANIEL EDWARDS, and SAMUEL TALCOTT, Esquires, return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Rev. Mr. EDWARD DORR, for his Sermon delivered before
this Assembly, on the Ninth Instant; and desire a Copy thereof, that it may be
Printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, By GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
ISAIAH, XLIX. 23. AND KINGS SHALL BE THY NURSING FATHERS; AND THEIR QUEENS THY
NURSING MOTHERS: --
IT IS a melancholy truth, confirmed by the history of all nations, that the
rulers of this world have generally set themselves in opposition to the
interest of true religion, and the cause of CHRIST. Although mankind have
always been sensible that a proper veneration of, and regard to the DEITY, and
a just sense of our obligation unto him, is the best, and indeed the only
security of civil government; and hence have very naturally concluded that
civil rulers ought to provide for, and support the public exercises of
religion: yet, such have been the unhappy mistakes and prejudices they have
labored under, that wherever the gospel has been sent among a people, the
powers in being, instead of nourishing, have too often set themselves to
oppress and persecute the church of CHRIST. This was the case for the first
three hundred years after the publication of the christian scheme, it met with
violent opposition from all orders and degrees of men, from the powers of this
world, and the powers of darkness also; and even till this day, the religion of
the gospel labors under much oppression from the greater part of civil rulers.
It Is strange indeed, that it should be so! One acquainted with human nature,
who only considered the genius and temper of christianity, how friendly it is
to civil government, and how careful of its just rights, would never imagine
this could be the case; for it is certain, that the gospel above all other
religions, instructs mankind in the duties they owe unto their lawful rulers;
and on the severest penalties, urges the observance and the practice of them.
But yet, experience shows, that it has met with little proper encouragement
from the greater part of civil rulers. However, we have reason to hope that it
will not always be so: sacred writ gives us ground to expect happier times in
the latter days; when christianity shall spread itself far and wide, and cover
the earth, as the waters do the seas; when every knee shall bow to CHRIST, and
every tongue proclaim his praises; when kings and princes, instead of opposing,
shall employ their power and influence to protect and favor the church of
CHRIST. To use the language of the text, Kings shall be nursing fathers, and
queens nursing mothers to it; -- they shall bow down with their face to the
earth, and lick up the dust of its feet: i. e. they shall nourish and protect
the church, and pay all due honor and regard to it. I am sufficiently aware,
that this prophesy had a primary reference to the Jew's return from the
Babylonish captivity; and that it had a partial accomplishment, when Cyrus,
Artaxerxes, Darius, and other Persian monarchs issued royal mandates in their
favor, and brought them back unto their own land. It had also a further and
more glorious accomplishment when Constantine, Theodosius, and other Roman
emperors publicly patronized christianity and established it in the world.

And whenever the scepter is put into the hands of a pious and religious
prince, this prophesy has still a further fulfillment. However, I take it to be
plain, that nothing which has ever yet happened, in any measure comes up to
those glorious things, which in this chapter, and elsewhere are spoken of the
city of GOD; and that it has a particular reference to the last happy days,
when the mountain of the LORD's house shall lift itself up above the top of the
mountains, and the top of the hills, and shall cover the face of the whole
earth. When all nations shall look to Zion and be saved. But I mean not to
enter largely into this matter; thus much may fairly be infered from the text,
that civil rulers ought to be nursing fathers to the church; and that we may
look for a time when they will really be so. I shall therefore on this occasion
only endeavor to show, I. How civil rulers are to be nursing fathers to the
church. And then, II. Point out the reasons of it, or show why they are to be
so --


Here then let us enquire, I. How, and in what ways civil rulers are to be
nursing fathers to the church of CHRIST?


To this, I answer,

1. They are to protect and defend it from the malice and insults of all its
enemies. The church of CHRIST has always had its enemies in the world, who
either in a more open and public, or in a more secret and concealed manner
have sought its ruin. And many times for wise and holy purposes, Divine
Providence has permitted them greatly to prevail; so that the hearts of GOD's
faithful ones have almost fainted, and the church to all appearance been on the
brink of ruin. This particularly was the case soon after the first planting of
christianity in the world, many enemies causelessly rose up against it; and
though some lucid intervals came between, some times of quiet and of rest; yet
the church labored under a dark cloud, a series of oppression for near three
hundred years together; during which time, no less than ten persecutions,
severe and cruel persecutions followed one upon the back of another. And often
since, GOD has permitted the enemy greatly to prevail, and to raise many cruel
storms of persecution against the church of CHRIST. The history of the faithful
in almost every age and country will produce many instances of this: nor may we
hope that the church will ever be free from enemies; to besure, before the last
happy times, prophesied of in my text, and elsewhere, when CHRIST shall have
the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession; when kings shall be nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers to
it. The church is now in a militant state; and we may always expect that the
Dragon will persecute the woman. Satan and wicked men will always set
themselves against the people of GOD, and say of Jerusalem, let us raze it, let
us raze it even to the foundation.

Now it is the duty of civil rulers to protect and defend the church, and people
of CHRIST from the insults of all their enemies, and not suffer the adversary
to hurt or take away their privileges. They are indeed to protect and defend
all, in the enjoyment of their just rights, and not suffer the stronger, like
beasts of prey to oppress and devour the weaker. They are armed with power and
authority for this purpose. And especially should this their authority be
exercised for the protection of the church -- not indeed that the civil
authority are to persecute others, for not being christians; CHRIST never
called for fire from heaven to devour his adversaries; but they are to restrain
those that set themselves against the church, and not suffer the enemy to vex
and to destroy it.

2. Civil rulers are to suppress all immorality and vice, and to encourage the
practice of virtue and piety. -- Immorality and vice is highly detrimental not
only to the civil, but especially to the religious interests of mankind. It
sets itself in opposition to them, and in proportion as the former increases,
the latter must decay. While on the other hand, virtue and piety are an honor
and an ornament to a people, and the best security, both of church and state.
Civil rulers should therefore set themselves to encourage the one, and to
discountenance and discourage the other. They are by office bound to oppose
evil men, and evil things, and to support and assist the good. By divine
institution, they are to be terrors to evil doers, and a praise to them that do
well. For this end they are armed with power and authority, and are ministers
of God to execute vengeance on them that do evil. I am sensible indeed, that
many sorts of immorality and vice lie secret and concealed from public view,
and fall not properly under the cognizance of the civil magistrate, nor are
they punishable by the state; but others are open and public, such as
profaning the name of GOD and religion, fraud, theft, injustice, intemperance,
uncleanness, etc. These are properly within the jurisdiction of the civil
magistrate, and he ought to support religion, by employing his power and
influence to discountenance and discourage them, and to promote and encourage
their contrary virtues. And the eyes of good rulers will be open upon the
faithful of the land, that they may dwell in their sight; they will early
destroy the workers of iniquity, and cut them off from the land.

Again,

3. Civil rulers are to support and maintain religion, and to provide for the
public exercises of it. -- Religion cannot be supported and maintained in the
world, without some expense. Though the service of the gospel is not
burdensome, like that of the law; yet, in the nature of the thing, there must
be some expense attending the public profession and practice of it. This the
civil magistrate is to take care of, and make suitable provision for. When GOD
condescended to take upon himself the more immediate government of the Jewish
nation, as their king, he not only instituted and appointed a religion for them
to attend upon; but obliged the rulers of the people, as his substitues in
government, to take care, that the public exercises of it were kept up and
maintained, and the necessary expenses of it provided for. And all along, under
that dispensation, we find good rulers taking care of these things. David made
provision for building the temple, and Solomon carried it into execution. And
whenever civil rulers have been careless, and neglected this part of their
trust, GOD has severely reproved them. Nehemiah contended with the rulers, and
rebuked them, because the house of the LORD was neglected, the tithe withheld,
and the priests, GOD's ministers in religion, not duly supported. And it is
evident, that under the law, a very ample provision was made, for the public
support and maintenance of religion, and all the officers of it, even by GOD
himself. -- Nor was this a notion peculiar to the Jews; all nations, as far as
history looks back, have adopted, in substance, very much the same sentiments.
Even the heathen, who had only the dim light of nature, have been sensible,
that the public profession and practice of religion, was a benefit to the
state, and absolutely necessary, to the safety and security of civil
government. Hence, wise legislators, in all nations, have made early provision
for this. All ancient history, justifies the truth of this observation. So that
it is hard to find, among mankind, any nation or people, wherein any regular,
civil polity, has been established, who have not made some kind of provision
for the support and maintenance of public worship, in some form or other. A due
veneration of the Deity, and sense of our obligations to him, being the best
security mankind can possibly have, of the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of
their lives, liberties and properties. Hence, atheism and infidelity have been
odious every where; and the public has always made provision to instruct
mankind in the duties of morality and virtue, and to support the worship of
GOD. Christian princes have also ever adopted the same sentiments. Constantine,
Theodosius, and all the first christian emperors, made it one of their earliest
cares, publicly to patronize religion, and to provide for, and support the
ministers of it. This practice has been continued ever since; nor is there at
this day, any christian state, or nation in Europe, where no public provision
is made for the establishment and support of religion. Britain, from the most
early ages, has had her establishments. The public support and maintenance of
religion is liberally provided for, in the land of our forefather's nativity.
The christian religion is a part of the common law, and the king, and all in
authority, are bound to support it. Our fathers, the first settlers of this
country, brought with them the same sentiments; and in almost all the several
governments in New England, made early provision for the support of a learned
and orthodox ministry. Very particular care for this purpose, was taken by the
legislative authority, in this colony, not only by enabling every town and
society, to support the ministry, by a rate or tax, laid on the polls, and
rateable estates of all their inhabitants, but by obliging them to settle a
minister. The support and maintenance of public worship, our fathers considered
as a debt due from individuals to the public; and undoubtedly imagined the law,
as it then stood, had created such a fund as would be sufficient for that
purpose, in all succeeding generations. I mention these facts, not as
demonstrative proofs or arguments of the point in view; but only to show, that
the doctrine of religious establishments, however faulted by many, is a
doctrine that approves itself to the human mind; otherwise it is scarcely to be
imagined, that the wisest and greatest legislators in all ages, and among all
nations would have so generally adopted it. I well know, that the notions of
mankind, have been almost infinitely various; and that some have carried it a
great deal further than others; yet common sense has taught all, that as GOD is
to be worshipped, worshipped in public as well as in private; public care, in
some shape or other, should be taken, to provide for it. -- After all, I am not
insensible, that in most instances, civil rulers have gone a great deal too
far, over and above establishing and supporting that religion which they
accounted most agreeable to the Deity, and most beneficial to the state: They
have oppressed and persecuted others, who happened to differ from them, in
their religious sentiments, even though they were peaceable members of civil
government. And many times, bitter persecutions have been raised, about mere
trifles. I am far from justifying, or even pretending to extenuate any conduct
of this kind. The rights of conscience are sacred, are unalienable; every man
is under higher obligations to his Maker, than he is, or can be, to any earthly
rulers whatever; and should therefore be left at liberty to worship GOD
according to the dictates of his own conscience, provided his principles and
practice are such, as give no just umbrage, no disturbance to the state. But
then, on the other hand, all that are dissenters from any religious
establishment, have reason to expect is, that they be protected in the quiet
and peaceable enjoyment of their lives, liberties and properties, and in the
free and undisturbed exercise of their own religion. They cannot, I apprehend,
claim the peculiar favors of the state, or an exemption from contributing, in
some just proportion, to support the religion of it. -- I am very sensible,
that this is one of the tenderest and most delicate points that can well be
touched upon, that civil, rulers too generally have, and may again abuse their
power; and, under pretense of supporting truth, oppress and persecute the
innocent. -- However, there is an extreme on the other hand; and it is possible,
at least, we may have verged too much toward that: But to prevent all
misapprehensions, I beg leave to add further here, that every establishment, of
a religious kind, ought to be made on the most generous, catholic principles;
none should be denied the privileges of it, but for very material points
indeed; little differences of opinion, about mere modes and ceremonies, or
nice, speculative points of controversy, that don't greatly affect practical
godliness and virtue, and have no pernicious influence on the state, ought not
to exclude any from the benefits of it. I add further,

4. That civil rulers should profess religion themselves, and set good examples
of obedience to it. -- The divine law requires this of all men; of the high as
well as of the low, of the rich, as well as of the poor; of the greatest
prince, as well as of the meanest subject. None is above subjection unto GOD,
none so high and elevated, as not to be bound to bow the knee to the KING of
kings, the sovereign Lord and Ruler of the universe. If those in the most
dignified stations, are ashamed of CHRIST, he will be ashamed of them, when he
comes in his own glory, in the glory of the Father, and with his holy angels,
to judge both quick and dead. Civil rulers then, as men, are under the same
obligations with their neighbors, with other men to profess the religion of
CHRIST, and to pay obedience to it; but as men advanced to high and elevated
stations in life, they are under peculiar obligations unto this, because their
examples, as they are either good or bad, have a mighty influence, either to
reform or debauch a people, and deluge them in immorality and vice. If we look
into the word of GOD, we always find, that when a good and religious prince
ascended the throne of Israel, religion flourished through the nation, and the
worship of GOD was duly attended every where; while on the other hand, when an
idolatrous prince reigned, idolatry and wickedness became general among the
people. Mankind are always apt to imitate their betters: when those in lower
life, see those above them religiously bending the knee to GOD, and paying
obedience to his holy laws; religion then becomes fashionable, and all account
it an honor to obtain that character. But when great men contemn the laws of
CHRIST, and live in open opposition to them, the infection naturally spreads
through the land, and the giddy multitude are easily borne away by the force of
their evil examples. The universal history and observation of mankind in all
ages will confirm the truth of this; nor has it ever been known, when princes'
courts have been greatly corruted, but that the people in general have been
corrupted too. Civil rulers then, men in dignified posts and places, are not
only under all the common obligations of other men to profess and practice
religion, but they are under special, they are under peculiar and additional
obligations from their elevated characters also; and when they contemn and
despise it, and set bad examples before the people, their guilt is doubly
aggravated above that of other men. Once more,

5. Civil rulers should use their endeavors to propogate religion, and to
spread the knowledge of it through the world; -- all men indeed are required to
do this; all are to pray that the kingdom of CHRIST may come, and his will be
done on earth, as it is done in heaven. And if we are to pray for this, then are
we to endeavor to promote the REDEEMER's kingdom in this world. Regard for the
honor of GOD, and the immortal souls of our fellow men require this at our
hands. Nor is there any so mean and low, so inconsiderable in life, but they
may do something to help forward this good work; provided they suitably exert
themselves: A small spark kindles a great fire. The kingdom of heaven is
likened to a grain of mustard seed, which, when cast into the earth, is the
smallest of all seeds; but when grown up, it becomes a great and a mighty
tree. So from the smallest efforts of ours, in the cause of CHRIST; great and
mighty fruits may follow: these through the divine blessing, may become the
beginnings of a general reformation in the place and nation where we belong;
and at length spread itself even to the uttermost ends of the earth. The gospel
itself had small beginnings: JESUS its blessed author, was in the eyes of men
but of mean and low degree; -- twelve poor, despised, illiterate fishermen;
made but a mean appearance against all the great and learned rabbis, and
established religions of the world: but through a Divine Power accompanying
them, great and mighty effects were soon seen; in a few years christianity
spread itself every where; idols and idolatry fell before it. Men in the lowest
stations of life, then should not be discouraged from exerting themselves in
the cause of CHRIST; GOD may make them instruments of great good to the church
and world. But those in high and elevated places are under peculiar advantages
to do this; and in proportion to their advantages, so are their obligations
greater than other men's. They are armed with power and authority; and GOD
expects more from them than others. And would kings and princes, great and
mighty men, unitedly exert themselves in the Redeemer's cause, it is easy to
foresee, that a great and mighty alteration would soon be brought about.
Religion would spread far and wide in the world: Every knee would bow to
CHRIST, and the knowledge of the gospel would cover the earth, as the waters do
the seas. --

In all these ways, civil rulers are to be nursing fathers to the church; they
are to protect and defend it from the insults and malice of all its enemies,
and to restrain those that say of Jerusalem, Let us raze it, let us raze it,
even to the foundations thereof. They are to suppress all immorality and vice,
and every thing that is contrary to the pure precepts of religion, and to
encourage piety and virtue. They are to be terrors to evil doers, and a praise
to them that do well. They are to support and maintain religion, and to provide
for the public exercises of it. They are also to profess religion themselves;
to bow the knee to the LORD JESUS, and to set suitable examples of obedience to
his holy laws. And they are likewise to use their authority and influence, to
promote the REDEEMER's kingdom in the world; and to endeavor, that the
knowledge of our glorious SAVIOR may be extended from the rising to the
setting sun. -- In all these ways are civil rulers to approve themselves
nursing fathers unto the church of CHRIST.

I now go on to show,

II. The reasons of the doctrine, or why civil rulers are to be nursing fathers
to the church. And,

1. Their duty unto GOD obliges unto this. -- They are his ministers, they are
his servants; by him it is that kings reign, and princes decree justice. It Is
GOD that gave them power and authority, and advanced them to their high and
elevated stations in life: As his ministers therefore, they should strive to
promote his honor, interest and kingdom in the world; in faithfulness to him,
and as his servants, they are bound to do it. He gave them their power and
authority to enable them to serve the cause of virtue and goodness, more and
better than otherwise they could do. If they neglect it, they are unfaithful to
their trust, and violate their allegiance unto GOD the KING of Kings, and
Sovereign Prince of all the princes of the earth. Again,

2. The practice of religion and virtue tends, above all things, to promote the
public welfare and happiness of mankind, and to secure the ends of civil
government; therefore rulers should be nursing fathers to it. -- Civil
government was originally instituted to protect and defend men's lives and
liberties, to guard and secure their properties, and promote their temporal
interests and advantages. In a state of nature, where there is no common judge
to determine controversies, and no one armed with power and authority to
suppress the insolences of troublesome and contentious men; all our valuable
interests would be in-secure, and the stronger, like beasts of prey, would be
apt to devour and destroy the weaker. To prevent this, and to lay a firm
foundation of security and happiness unto all, men entered into civil
combinations and societies, and set up government in the world. Now the
practice of religion and virtue, tends, above all other things, to promote
those very ends, for which men entered into society. The gospel forbids all
those vices that are contrary to, and tend to defeat the end of civil
government; and it requires the observance of those virtues that are friendly
to it. Uncleanness, intemperance, fraud, cruelty, malice, idleness and
injustice, of every kind, are directly contrary to the ends of civil
government, and tend to bring confusion and ruin on the state. But our holy
religion, strictly forbids all these things, and, indeed, every other sort of
immorality and vice, that civil government was designed to rectify, and reform.
And, on the other hand, the gospel requires chastity, temperance, frugality,
diligence, justice, benevolence, and all those virtues that are necessary, to
the public welfare and happiness of a people. Barely considered as a set, a
body of laws, and without any regard to its being a divine revelation; the
bible is the best system of moral and political virtue, that ever was published
in the world; and wherever the religion of it is duly implanted in the heart,
it lays the greatest obligations to all civil offices, and moral duties; for it
reaches to the heart and consciences of men, and obliges them, not bearly for
fear of punishment, but for conscience sake, to practice those very virtues
that are absolutely necessary to the well-being and safety of the state.
Christianity, if cordially embraced, and acted up to, would make all men really
virtuous and good: It would have the best effects, both upon rulers, and upon
subjects -- it would teach magistrates to be just, and to rule in the fear of
GOD, and so would strengthen their authority, and procure veneration and
respect from all; Whereas (as one expresses it) impiety and vice do strangely
lessen the greatness of majesty, and secretly, yet unavoidably bring weakness
upon authority itself. -- Religion would also have a good influence upon
subjects, it would make them obedient unto government, and conformable to the
laws, and that not from wrath, and out of fear of the magistrates power (which,
as one observes, is but a loose principle of obedience, and will cease,
whenever a man can rebel with safety and impunity) but out of Conscience, which
is a firm, constant and lasting principle, and will hold a man fast, when all
other principles cease and lose their power. He that really entertains the
principles of christianity in his heart, will not, on any trifling pretenses,
be tempted from his allegiance to his lawful prince; knowing, that they who
resist authority, resist the ordinances of GOD; and that they who resist, shall
receive to themselves damnation.

Moreover, religion tends to make men quiet and peaceable, one toward another;
it endeavors to implant in us all these qualities and dispositions of mind,
which tend to peace and unity, and to fill men with a spirit of universal love
and good will. It likewise aims at securing men's interest, by requiring
justice and equity in all our dealings and intercourse, one with another; and
the universal observance of that golden rule, whatever ye would that men should
do unto you, de ye even so unto them. It also requires truth and fidelity, in
all our words, promises and contracts. And if the laws of religion were duly
observed, it would root out all those vices and passions, such as hatred,
malice, envy, revenge, covetousness, etc. which render men unsociable one to
another, and troublesome to the state; and it would diffuse a spirit of love,
beneficence, kindness, and christian charity every where. -- These are the
proper, these are the genuine fruits and effects of religion, and what the
gospel tends to bring us to. Now, it is obvious, that if this be the design of
religion, viz. to sweeten men's tempers, to correct their passions, and to
mortify all those lusts which are the causes of enmity, of division, and of
contention, in the world; then it tends, in its own nature, to the peace and
happiness of civil society; and if men would live as religion requires, the
world would be in a quite different state from what it now is; every one would
sit quietly under his own vine, and eat of the fruit of his own figtree. And,
indeed, the true reason why the societies of this world are so full of tumult
and disorder, is because there is no more religion in them. And were the little
remains of it once banished, human society would soon disband of itself, and
run into confusion; the earth would grow wild as a forest, and men, as beasts
of prey, would devour and destroy each other. Thus is religion apparently for
the good and welfare of the state: Civil government cannot subsist without it.
Hence it will ever be the duty of rulers, to encourage and promote religion, so
long as civil society and government subsists in the world.

I add once more,

3. That the great and unspeakable rewards which, in the life to come, will be
bestowed upon such as promote and advance the Redeemer's kingdom in the world,
should animate and encourage civil rulers to attempt it. -- The happiness of
all good men will, I know, be great, unspeakably great in heaven; great, above
what eye has ever seen, ear heard of, or what has ever entered into the heart
of man to conceive. Yet there will be a difference among the saints, the glory
of one shall be as the sun, another as the moon, and another as the stars. St.
Paul tells us, that As one star differs from another in glory; so it shall be
in the resurrection of the dead. Now these different degrees of glory will be
proportioned out to good men* according to their active diligence in the
service of GOD, and according as they have been more or less instrumental, in
promoting the cause of virtue and religion in the world. This may fairly be
collected from the well-known parable of the talents, and also from that
declaration of the prophet Daniel, that they who turn many to righteousness,
shall shine, no^ barely as the brightness of the firmament, but with a
distingushed luster, as the stars for ever and ever. Now, civil rulers are
capacitated above most other men, to do much for GOD, and much to promote
religion in the world; their high and elevated stations in life, give them many
opportunities, and great advantages to do this. They are armed with power and
authority to suppress vice, and to encourage virtue: They can support and
maintain religion, and give it countenance in the world: Their examples have an
extensive influence, and are commonly imitated by many. In a word, if civil
rulers are but properly disposed, there are no men that can do more than they,
to promote the REDEEMER's kingdom upon earth. While, on the other hand, if
rulers oppose religion, or are only cold and indifferent toward it, and
careless of its interests; there are none that do so much hurt: -- And, surely,
this is a mighty argument, to encourage rulers to be nursing fathers to the
church, that all their endeavors shall turn to a good account, to their own
souls, and one day procure for them a more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. Let me add further here, that the good effect of their pious labors may
last a great many years after they are gone, and laid in the silent dust. St.
Paul's excellent writings have been the means of converting many, in every age
of the church, and will be, till time shall be no more: It Is probable, at
least, that every new conversion, occasioned by his writings, adds a new gem
unto his crown, and increases his already unspeakable weight of glory. -- In
like manner, those civil rulers, who, by their wise and good regulations, have
been the means of advancing the REDEEMER's kingdom in the world, will, I doubt
not, find their own happiness hereafter greatly increased, by every new
accession thereunto, which they have been the means of. -- And, surely, the
great and unspeakable felicities of heaven, should animate and encourage all
men, men of influence and authority especially, both in church and state, most
vigorously to exert themselves in the cause of CHRIST, and to endeavor to
promote it in the world; since they know that their labor, in the LORD, shall
not be in vain: Far from this; and abundant, a glorious, an everlasting
recompense awaits them, at the resurrection of the just. --

Much might be said, by way of improvement, and many useful inferences be
deduced from the subject, would the time allow: But I must omit every thing, of
this kind, least I be over tedious; and conclude, with an address,

1. To his honor the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and the rest of the members
of the general assembly.

May it please your HONORS.

Since I stand in this place by his HONOR'S special command, it will not, I trust,
be thought too assuming, on this occasion, for me to observe, that as rulers of
this people, you are bound, by a law superior to any human constitutions, to be
attentive, not only to their civil, but especially to their religious
interests, and faithfully to endeavor to promote the same, according to the
utmost of your power. Your honors' known characters, I am sensible, renders it,
in a great measure needless for me to enlarge upon this subject. However, as
the interests of religion are the most important of all interests, not only our
temporal, but eternal welfare depending upon them; you will indulge me a few
words. Much, under GOD, depends upon your conduct; and we may naturally expect,
that religion, in the colony, will either revive or languish, as you bear a
friendly or an unfriendly aspect toward it. The history of the church, in
general, in all ages, justifies the truth of this observation. I well know,
that GOD is able to defend his church, and cause the interest of it to
flourish, in opposition to all the powers of earth and darkness, as he did in
the first ages of christianity; but this is not ordinarily to be expected.
GOD's usual method is to work by means, and one of the most effectual means is
to raise up good magistrates, to protect and take care of his church. I am far
from desiring civil rulers to enforce religion, by acts of uniformity, by
penal, and coercive laws; nor do I think the cause of truth was ever served by
such methods. The rights of conscience are sacred, they are unalienable rights.
Every man ought to be left at liberty, to think and act for himself; nor do I
believe any man should be restrained on religious accounts, unless his
principles or practices are such as give just disturbance to the state. As
every man must answer for himself at the great and last day; so every one ought
to be left at liberty to judge for himself here. Nor* may the civil magistrate
deny him this, and be blameless. However, there is a great deal rulers may do,
to promote religion, without descending to the dirty work of persecution. They
may protect it from the malice and insults of its enemies; they may suppress
all immorality and vice, and encourage virtue and goodness: they may also, and
they ought to establish religion, and provide suitable funds for the support
and maintenance of it. This is a duty not only to GOD, but even to the state;
it is the best, yea, it is the only security of civil government. I readily
own, that every establishment of a religious kind, should be upon the most
generous, catholic principles, and that no man, no set of men should be
excluded from the benefits of it, for mere speculative, and immaterial points,
for different modes and ceremonies: it must be something very material and
weighty that excludes any. And the great unhappiness in this case has been, not
that religious establishments have been set up in the world, but that they have
generally been founded upon too narrow, contracted and ungenerous principles.
And magistrates have too often gone into violent measures, in support of them.
However, I take it to be plain, that the civil interests of mankind, the safety
of the state requires, that there be some religious establishments, and that
the public be obliged in some just proportion, to support them; nor have
dissenters cause to complain of any little expenses on this account, any more
than of any other civil expenses whatever: to be sure, there is nothing of
persecution in it; nor can the consciences of any be in the least injured
thereby, provided they are not compelled to be of the religion of the state,
and are allowed to worship GOD, according to the dictates of their own minds.
This they have a right to expect; but they have no more right to ask an (...)
from contributing to the support of the (...) of the state, than from any other
measure the magistrate takes for the public good, which they happen to dislike.
The support of religion and the ministers of it, in a political view, is as
much a civil tax, as the support of any other necessary officers of the state.
Where no public provision is made for these purposes, but every man is left at
liberty to do what is right in his own eyes; we can scarcely expect (such is
the depraved condition of human nature) so much as the form of religion to
continue long among such a people. And where religion is banished from a
people, and the public exercises of it are not kept up, civil government stands
on a very slippery foundation. Though it is too apparent that the principles of
religion have not that general influence upon mankind that they ought to have,
and which might naturally be expected, considering their infinite importance;
yet disregarded as they be, I am persuaded that they have really a greater
influence to deter men from vice, and to confine them within any bounds of
order, than every other motive taken together; and that if this fence about the
state, were once taken away, if this security of civil government were removed,
all would immediately run into confussion, the reins could not be held, and no
man could depend on the quiet enjoyment of life, liberty or property.

Suffer me here to query with your Honors, Whether our own laws in this
colony, made for the support of religion, don't need some very material
amendments and alterations? And if they be already sufficient; whether the
construction put upon them, in many of our executive courts has not a direct
and natural tendency to undermine and sap the foundations of our ecclesiastical
constitution? To me, I confess; it appears, that as a tax laid on the polls and
rateable estate of the inhabitants of the colony, is the only fund the law has
provided for the support of the ministry; the releasing such numbers, as have
on one account, and on another, been excused from contributing to the support
of the religion of the government is such a diminution of this fund, as has a
very threatening aspect on our ecclesiastical establishment, and naturally
tends, not only to enervate and destroy the same, but even to root out the very
being of a learned ministry from among us; and so is big with ruin, both to
church and state. And the danger, in my apprehension, is increased from hence,
that most of these dissenters are not by law obliged to set up, and support any
religion among themselves. And from principle they profess utterly to abandon
and disclaim all covenants, all obligations of this kind. Considering human
nature as it is, and the difficult situation of the country at this day, is
there no reason to fear, that many will forsake our worship, and our churches,
only from narrow and contracted principles of mind? And GOD alone knows where
these things will end --

But I go on to add, that civil rulers may, and ought to profess religion
themselves, and set good examples of obedience to it. They should also
endeavor to promote the interests of religion, and to spread it far and wide
in the world. These things the civil magistrate may do, without persecution,
and we justly expect them from your honors. Our eyes are unto you for all due
protection and defense, for all due encouragement and support: you are to set
yourselves against vice, and to encourage virtue: you are to be terrors to
evildoers, and a praise to them that do well. And not only is it your duty to
profess religion yourselves, and to set good examples of obedience to it; but
to use your power and influence to promote the REDEEMER's kingdom in the world,
and if possible to extend it, even to the ends of the earth. A wide door is now
opened for this purpose among the heathen natives* of the land, and we shall be
inexcusable, altogether inexcusable in the eyes both of GOD and man, if we
neglect it. One great reason, I doubt not, why the heathen have been permitted
to be such sore scourges to these christian colonies, is, because they have
done no more to send the gospel among them. Many difficulties, I well know,
great and almost insurmountable difficulties have ever heretofore attended this
work; but by the success of the British arms in America, and the late peace so
happily established with the heathen natives, the greater part of them are
removed out of the way. We have not those pleas to make, in excuse for our own
neglect, that we once had, when the French were possessed of the greater part
of the inland country, and were continually spiriting up the Indians against
us. And I confess for my part, I have but little hopes or expectations of a
settled peace with them, till we thoroughly attempt to send the gospel among
them. Nor do I expect ever to see a more favorable crisis for this purppose
than the present; considering the disposition many of these nations have lately
shown; their earnest desire to be instructed in the principles of our holy
religion, and to have their children educated after the English method; it
appears to me that the most favorable opportunity now presents itself, to make
some vigorous efforts of this kind, that we have ever had, or probably ever
shall have, if we neglect the present. Separate from all considerations of duty
to our MAKER, and viewing the matter only in a political light, it appears to
me, to be our real interest, to exert ourselves in this cause; because this, if
we conducted as we ought, would convince the Indians, that we were their real
friends, and sought their best good, and so would naturally attach them to us,
in the strongest manner; and this would be a cheaper method of defense against
their ravages and insults, than maintaining numerous armies and garrisons. The
French, who are allowed to be very able politicians, most certainly acquired
their influence over the Indians by this very means: Why may not we learn
wisdom, from their experience? It is but little, I know, that this colony in
its present impoverished state, can do to this purpose; however, if we were
well disposed, we might do something -- we could at least cast in our mite into
the treasury. This perhaps might be imitated by more oppulent and wealthy
provinces, and even by the nation; to the great advancement of the REDEEMER's
kingdom, I have often heard it remarked, that scarce ever a public prayer is
put up in any of our worshipping assemblies in the country, but that one
petition to Almighty GOD, is to this purpose, "That he would open a door for
sending the gospel among the heathen in the land." All our public
proclamations, for days of fasting or thanksgiving, contain exhortations to the
same effect. A stranger to the history of the country would naturally conclude
from thence, that many endeavors were every where constantly used to promote
this good work. And yet, when I come to review our history, I can scarce find
any thing worthy to be remembered, since the days of the Rev. Mr. Eliott of
Roxbury. The surprising success he met with among the Natick Indians, ought, I
think, to have been regarded, as a favorable omen, and to have encouraged
other attempts. But the spirit died with that good man. The only endeavor of
this kind, that I know of, in the colony, at this day, is at Lebanon: The Rev.
Mr. Wheelock, has set up an Indian school there, and with indefatigable
industry and zeal, has collected a number of children, to be educated after the
English manner, and instructed in the principles of the christian religion. He
has lately obtained some help, and a commission from the society in Scotland,
incorporating a number of gentlemen to act as corresponding members with them,
for the purpose of promoting christian knowledge among the Indians. But he has
never yet obtained any considerable public encouragement from the government.
-- Some weighty objections, I am sensible, lie against that school, by reason
of its remote situation from the Indian country, and the charge of transporting
the children to and from it. I am not enough acquainted with Indian affairs, to
determine what weight there may be in the objection. Some who profess to know
more of these matters than I can pretend to, consider the distance from the
Indian country, as being, upon the whole, rather an advantage than the
contrary, because the children are entirely removed from the society of their
savage brethren. But however that be, the scheme, in general is undoubtedly
good. This, or something like it, ought most certainly to be encouraged there,
or elsewhere. And all orders and degrees of men, would do well to consider,
whether public guilt don't lie upon the land, for our neglect in these matters?
--
of the British interest, and even of ours in this land.

And next to the immediate care of religion, and as a means to promote it, the
interests of learning ought to be precious in your eyes. However, enthusiasm
may, it is not to be expected, that genuine religion will flourish, where
learning is in a low and declining state. The Ottoman Port has been for many
ages, so sensible of this, that the principal means made use of by them to
discourage and root out christianity from their dominions, has been to
discountenance learning. The church of Rome also accounts ignorance the mother
of devotion; and the main support of her monstrous superstition and tyranny.
But we have not thus learned Christ: Truth seeks not darkness, but loves the
light. We trust, honored fathers, that you are friendly to learning, and will
give it all due encouragement and support. Our College, which has been, and
now is so much our glory, as an elder child, claims your first and your
principal attention and care. You are the FATHERS, you are the FOUNDERS of that
society; and you have nourished and maintained it at a great expense. We doubt
not your smiles, and the continuance of former favors to that useful seminary.
And though it is a time of great public distress, yet you will allow us to
trust, that if any thing further be necessary, to the well-being of that
school, you will cheerfully advance it, to the utmost of your power, and
account it money well expended, and even let out on the highest interest. --
And, next to the college, our inferior schools of learning, ought to be the
objects of your care. That these be suitably maintained, and our youth early
instructed in useful learning, is a matter of very great importance, both to
church and state; and yet many, if not most of them, throughout the colony, are
so managed, as but illy to answer the good ends of their original institution.
Regard to the rising generation, yea, to children yet unborn, demands your
attention to this, and some effectual remedy. -- But I may not go on multiplying
particulars; your honors better acquaintance with public affairs, and closer
attention to them, will naturally point out what is amiss, and needs a remedy;
and we doubt not your readiness to promote the best good of this people,
temporal and eternal. Your duty to GOD, your duty to the state, yea, your duty
to your own souls, require this. I am sensible, it is an arduous work you are
called to; and that many trials and difficulties attend your high station,
especially at this day. But for your encouragement, remember a great and
glorious reward is set before you. Distinguished honor, if you are faithful,
will be your portion in this life, and everlasting happiness in the next. And
you shall not only, like other men, shine as the brightness of the firmament,
but with a surpassing luster as the stars forever and ever. Suffer me,

2. To address myself to my fathers and brethren in the ministry, here present,

Rev'd Sirs,

History informs us, that there has often been times, since CHRIST has had a
church in the world, when his faithful ministers have been obliged to struggle
not only against all the prejudices of mankind, and all the opposition of the
powers of darkness, but against the power of civil rulers too. They have set
themselves against the church, persecuted it with unrelenting rage; and said of
Jerusalem, Let us raze it, let us raze it, even to the foundations thereof.
Many were the difficulties, and severe the trials the faithful ministers of
CHRIST underwent, at these times. Through the goodness of GOD, our happy lot
and portion is to be born under different circumstances, and we live in a land
of gospel liberty and light: Our rulers, instead of persecuting, are forward to
exert themselves, in the cause of CHRIST, and to afford us all due
encouragement and assistance. Let us, who wait at the altar, heartily join with
them, in promoting the same good work. Our special business is to be ministers
of religion; and our great concern should be to advance the REDEEMER's kingdom
in the world: We can take no method, more effectual or likely to do this, than
by encouraging the hearts, and strengthening the hands of our rulers. If we who
look for protection and support from them, are mutinous and contentious
ourselves, and stir up sedition, both in church and state; we cannot expect
favor, either from GOD, or from the king. It Is our duty not only to pray for
our rulers, but to do what we can, to make the reins of government lie easy on
the people's necks. Our blessed LORD and MASTER was not only quiet and
inoffensive toward all, but friendly to civil government, and he taught his
disciples to be so too. Let us take his word for our rule, and him for our
pattern and example, in this regard. The history of the church, in all ages
shows, that when Moses and Aaron walk hand in hand, things go well: But when
the ministers of the state, and of the church, differ and disagree, all things
run into confusion. Let us see to it, that we, on our part, give none occasion
of division. If our rulers see us diligent and laborious in our work, quiet and
peaceable toward government, and inoffensive toward all men, minding our own
business, and faithfully laboring to win souls to CHRIST; then may we expect
their friendly smiles, their protection, and cheerful support: While a contrary
conduct and demeanor will naturally draw down a contrary treatment. In all
things let us show ourselves examples, in faith, in purity, in holiness, in
love and in charity: Then may we hope for the smiles of heaven, the favor of
the prince, and that great, very great will be our success in our Master's
work, that religion will revive and flourish, and the church become fair as the
moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners. And that all
nations will fly to it and be saved. But, if after all, our labors should not
be attended with the desired success, yet we ourselves, shall be glorious in
the eyes of the LORD, and with GOD shall be our reward.

I close all, with a few words,

3. To this numerous assembly here present.

It is undoubtedly, my brethren, the last time we shall all meet again, 'til we
meet together at the grand, decisive day of reckoning, before the tribunal of
the LORD JESUS, the judge of all flesh. Suffer then, a word of exhortation: And
let me earnestly entreat you to join with your rulers and with your ministers,
in the great work of promoting religion in the world, and enlarging the
REDEEMER's church and kingdom. Though men in public place and character, are
under peculiar obligations unto this, yet it is a duty, in some measure in
common, incumbent on all. Every one, in his proper place and station, should
endeavor to be aiding therein. There is something that all may do. Let me urge
it upon you, that you be not wanting, on your parts. To that end, let every man
be persuaded to break off his own sins by repentance, and his iniquities by
turning unto the LORD. Heartily profess the religion of CHRIST; give up
yourselves to him by faith, and live lives of obedience to his holy laws. Your
present peace here, and your everlasting welfare hereafter, depend upon this.
-- And having made your peace with GOD, and so secured the eternal safety of
your own souls; let it be your next endeavor, to promote a general reformation
among your neighbors. Every man, in his own sphere, should exert himself: None
are so low as to stand excused. The meanest may do something to promote this
work. The widow's mite should be cast in. And GOD may bless the weakest means,
and cause them to produce great effects. -- Great matters sometimes spring from
small beginnings. A little spark kindles a great fire. Religion may spread
from one man, from one family and neighbor to another, till at length it run
through the town, through the colony, through the land and nation; and may at
last, cover the earth, as the waters do the seas. And oh! how happy will it be
for us in the day of reckoning, if we are found faithful, and appear to be the
instruments GOD has chosen, to set up and enlarge the REDEEMER's kingdom in
the world, more generally than ever yet it has been! Very glorious, in that
case, will be our recompense of reward.

Come, LORD JESUS, come quickly. Take to thyself thy great power, and rule and
reign, from the rising to the setting sun. Let every knee bow to thee, and
every tongue confess thy praises.

AMEN.

