AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING The PROMISES of the GOSPEL

AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING THE PROMISES OF THE GOSPEL. Whether any of them are made
to the EXERCISES and DOINGS of persons in an UNREGENERATE STATE.

CONTAINING REMARKS on two sermons published by D. MAYHEW of Boston, entitled,
Striving to enter in at the strait gate (...) and inculcated; and the
Connection of Salvation therewith, proved from the Holy Scripture.

ALSO, A brief enquiry into the USE OF MEANS; Showing their necessity in order
to Salvation; and what is the true ground of encouragement for sinners
diligently to attend on them.

By SAMUEL HOPKINS A. M, Minister of the Gospel in Great Barrington.

GREAT MEN are not always wise.

ELIHU; BOSTON, N. E. Printed by W. M'ALPINE and J. FLEEMING in Marlborough
street. M,DCC,LXV.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. The text on which the doctor grounds this discourse considered, his
inconsistence with himself, in his way of explaining it, shown. page 1 SECT.
II. The doctor's stating the question examined. page 14 SECT. III. What is
meant by desiring salvation; and how far, and in what sense the unregenerate
may be said to do so. page 20 SECT. IV. An examination of nine of the doctor's
fourteen arguments, to prove that there are premises of salvation to the doings
of the unregenerate. page 29 SECT. V. Three of the remaining five of the
doctor's arguments examined. page 39 SECT. VI. The doctor's ninth and twelfth
arguments examined page 61 SECT. VII. A short and plain state of the case. page
(...) SECT. VIII. Arguments to prove that the there are no promises of
regeneration (...) or salvation, in the scripture, to the exercises and doings
of the unregenerate. page ^1 SECT. IX. Two objections answered. page 97 SECT.
X. The end and desin of means; and the true ground of encouragement for men to
be in the diligent (...) of them, (...) to their salvation. page 117
THE PREFACE.
AS the sermons remarked upon in the following sheets, were published in Boston
in the year 1761, it may be a question, Why no reply has been made to them long
before this time; seeing the doctor has therein attempted to establish a
doctrine, so directly contrary to the sentiments and preaching of many divines
in New England? To this, the author of what follows has only to say, That the
sermons had been long published before he got sight of them: After this, he
waited, hoping and expecting, that some able hand would undertake an answer.
But when he despaired of this, he turned his thoughts this way, and has
employed his first leisure hours, in attending to the subject. The result of
which, imperfect as it is, is now offered to the public. And none, it is hoped,
will think it is ever too late to defend the truth.

BUT what need, may it be said, of entering into this controversy at all? If
the author had a desire to publish his thoughts upon this subject, he had an
undoubted right to do it: but what call was there to engage in a formal
controversy with Dr. Mayhew? If the truth is vindicated by solid arguments,
what has been said against it will fall of course. There was no occasion
therefore of making a formal attack upon the doctor's performance: this must
proceed from too great a forwardness to run into controversy, of which little
good comes, and often much hurt.

ANS. As this objection is against the common practice of christian writers,
from the early days, of christianity to this time, and the men most noted for
wisdom and piety, yea, Dr. Mayhew himself among the rest, the author thinks
himself sufficiently kept in countenance by their example.

Besides, does not this appear to be the most proper and effectual way, in many
cases at least, to detect error, and vindicate the truth? If errors are
broached, and contended for by plausible arguments, how can they be detected,
and the truth set in an advantageous light, but by particularly showing the
fallacy of the pretended argument? If error is openly plead for, it tends to
hurt the public, and lead many astray. And what likelier method can there be
taken to prevent the mischief, than by particularly showing, how ill grounded
and absurd the arguments are, with which it is supported, and pointing out the
book in which they are found? If poison is publicly sold, and spread among the
people, under pretense of its being a wholesome food, a true friend to mankind,
would not content himself with pointing out the real qualities of good food;
but would discover the poison of that which pretended to be such, and tell them
where it was, that they might be under advantage to see for themselves, and
avoid the danger.

Controversy, it must be acknowledged, is too often managed, in an unfair
manner, and with unchristian heat and bitterness; and many times is diverted
from fair reasoning on the point to be disputed, into personal quarrel and
invectives. This can by no means be justified; but it may, and often has been
managed, greatly to the advantage of truth. It were easy to show, that this has
been one special and principal means, of the maintenance and increase of light
and truth in the christian church. One great end of God, in suffering men of an
uncommon genius to run into error, and spend their lives in hard study and
labor, in order to maintain and propagate their tenets, and oppose the truth,
it seems has been, to awaken the attention of men hereby, especially of the
friends of truth; that, by a close and thorough examination of the matter, the
error may appear in all its weakness and inconsistency, and the opposite truth
be set in a more clear and convincing light, than it could be, had it never
been opposed. To be sure, that this has in fact been the event of controversy
and dispute, in many instances, none can doubt, who have been in any measure
attentive to the state of the christian church. And the dispute that arises on
such occasions, is the means of awakening the attention of multitudes; by which
they are the more prepared to receive conviction of the truth, when it shines
forth bright and victorious. When opponents are engaged in a doctrinal
controversy, not only the love of truth, their zeal for God and his cause, but
their own personal interest and honor, will be a powerful motive to study and
search oat the matter, and vindicate their cause in the best manner they can.
And bystanders, who are properly attentive, and disposed to embrace the truth
wherever it appears, will hereby be under special advantage to get instruction:
for it would be a wonder, if some new light is not struck up by this means,
even though the controversy should not be managed every way in the best manner.

What Dr. Mayhew says to this point, is worthy to be attended to here. Speaking
of those who greatly dislike controversy and disputes on matters of religion,
he says, A third sort, are those good men, who sincerely love and practice
religion themselves, but yet are such great lovers of peace, of such a timid
make, and so apprehensive of the bad effects of contention, that they think it
best never to enter into debates on religion, or any thing relative to it on
any occasion; and condemn those who do so, as at best imprudent and ill advised
persons. But surely there may be just and sufficient cause for disputing, if
religion itself is of any great importance. We are enjoined to contend
earnestly for the faith. Observation, etc. p. 5, 6.
It may be added, the more earnestly we contend, the better, if it be with
christian meekness and humility. If those good, peaceable gentlemen, who are so
greatly averse to, and disgusted with all controversy, were universally
hearkened to, most of the important doctrines of christianity, would soon be
given up, or lost in darkness and ignorance.

IF any should be inclined to think, that the point here controverted, is not
of importance enough, to require any great ado about it; and is a sufficient
reason against entering into a public debate upon it: they are desired to
consider, that the question in dispute really is, What is the condition, on
which men may obtain salvation? or, What must men do, in order to be interested
in God's favor, and have a title to eternal life? This is therefore the most
interesting question that can be thought of: and it is of the greatest
importance to all, that they make no mistake here, but have a right
understanding of the matter. For surely nothing in religion is of greater
importance, than that which teaches us how we may be saved. If salvation itself
is of infinite importance, then it is of equal importance that we don't mistake
the terms on which it is to be obtained. What we chiefly want a revelation from
God for, is, to teach us the terms of his favor, or the way of salvation. And
since a revelation is given chiefly for this end, shall we think it a matter of
so little importance, as that it is not worth while to enquire into it, or
contend for what we think to be the truth of the matter?

Dr. Mayhew thinks what he contends for, to be the sum of the glad tidings of
the gospel. P. 76.
Consequently, in his view, they do not preach nor understand the gospel, who
oppose him in this point. He therefore thinks it of great importance that it
should be received. P. 30.
It Is granted to be so, if it is the truth. If it is not, it is of the last
importance to him, and all others, that they should be sensible of it, and
embrace directly the contrary, as truth: which, doubtless appears as greatly
important, to those who are now established in it. They therefore may be
allowed to contend earnestly for it.

BUT however just and important this controversy may be, it is surely not well
timed, some will say. Dr. Mayhew is now engaged in a good and important cause,
in his controversy with the episcopal party in New England. An appearance
against him at this time, may give some advantage to his other opponents, and
tend to weaken his hands. At least, this attack, at this time, looks unfriendly
to the important and noble cause he has espoused.

ANS. That the cause the doctor is engaged in, is important and noble, the
author readily acknowledges; and is not a little pleased, that a gentleman of
his abilities and advantages has undertaken it. He certainly deserves the
thanks of his country, for what he has done in this matter. And doubtless has
the thanks of all the true friends to the interest of religion; not excepting
even those of the church of England, who have impartiality and candor enough,
to attend to the true state of the case. The author is willing the world should
know, that he wishes and prays, that an end may be put to the erecting of
episcopal missions in New England, in the manner it has been done for so long a
time; by which, he has not the least doubt, not the cause of christianity, but
directly the opposite, has been greatly promoted. He sincerely wishes, the
doctor may have the honor and happiness, of being an instrument of this; and
would therefore be sorry to do any thing, that should tend to prevent it.

But if the doctor should appear to be wrong in one instance, this is no
argument that he is so in all others. And an attempt to set him right, wherein
he is thought to have made a mistake, is an act of friendship to him. It is
also, perhaps, worthy of remark, that the tenet in which the doctor is opposed
in the following enquiry, is exactly agreeable to most, if not all of the
episcopal party in New England; so that he herein falls in with those he
opposes in the controversy mentioned. The author, therefore, in opposing the
doctor here, equally opposes those whom he appears against. How then does he
strengthen them, and weaken the doctor's hands? May it not be truly said, that
if the doctor should be convinced of his mistake in this instance, if it is
one, and espouse the contrary doctrine, he would be under better advantages in
this controversy, than now he is? It is well known, what a noise most of the
doctor's antagonists have made about his heterodoxy. If he had been quite
orthodox, according to the faith of our pious forefathers in New England, they
would not have had this handle, however sincerely they now use it.

The author thinks the doctor worthy of esteem and honor, for his many
excellent talents; his close application and diligence in his study, his easy,
happy, masterly way of expressing his sentiments, etc. but all this is, in his
view, rather a reason why the doctor should be corrected, if he errs in any
important point. For such an error in him, will of course be more hurtful and
fatal to mankind, than in another. If his own conviction of his mistake would
have been a sufficient remedy of this evil, application would have been made to
him only; but as the case stands, a public confutation seems necessary.

THE doctor, without doubt, thought his arguments conclusive, and that he was
doing service to God and his church, in vindicating, in the best manner he
could, what appeared to him important truth. And he may perhaps think, what is
here offered to him and the public, is weak and inconclusive. If so, the author
does not expect to be contemned or neglected; but that the doctor will be so
just to himself, and good to the public, as fairly, and with christian meekness
to vindicate his scheme, from the exceptions here taken, and show that they are
indeed without foundation. If he should be convinced that he has made a
mistake, it is concluded, from his known disposition to be frank and open, that
he will freely confess it. However that may be, the author, at present, rests
in the goodness of his cause, and cheerfully commits it to Him, who is able to
plead it most effectually, in His own way and time.

THE tenth section is more than was at first designed: but finding that what
was said on the subject, would naturally lead to the question there considered;
and it being an important one, and one about which there is perhaps more
enquiry and dispute now, than ever there has been before, though little or
nothing has been published upon it; it was thought best not wholly to pass it
in silence. The author is far from thinking the subject is exhausted, or that
it may not be set in a far more clear and convincing light. If any serious
readers, who have been in any degree of darkness and uncertainty with respect
to this question, shall by what is there said get any light: and if these hints
shall be a help and excitement to any, who are making this the subject of their
enquiry, to pursue the matter, so as to throw greater light upon it, the utmost
that is expected will be answered. If the author has made any dangerous mistake
on this head, and it shall be pointed out by some wise, judicious pen, he will
most gladly stand corrected before the world.

APRIL 8th, 1765.

SECTION I. THE text on which the doctor grounds his discourse considered. His
inconsistence with himself, in his way of explaining it, shown.
THE words the doctor has chosen as the ground of his discourse now under
consideration, are those of our Savior, Strive to enter in at the strait gate,
Luke xiii. 24.
This text has been differently understood. Some suppose that by the strait
gate is meant the entrance upon an holy life, or getting into the narrow way
which leads to eternal life; which is the same that is commonly called
conversion, or the new birth. And by striving to enter in at this gate, they
understand the exercises and endeavors of the unregenerate, which are
antecedent to their conversion. But, few or none who understand the text thus,
suppose there is any certain connection between the striving here exhorted to,
and saving conversion, or that there is any promise made to this striving.

Others suppose that by the strait gate our Savior means, in general, the
entrance into heaven or eternal life. See Dr. Dedd. and Poli Syn. On the text.
And then by striving to enter in at this gate, is meant, a keeping the
commandments of God, or the holy exercises of true saints, by which they walk
in the way to heaven; fight the fight of faith, and so lay hold on eternal
life. And in support of this last interpretation, and as an evidence that
striving in the text, does not mean the unholy exercises and endeavors of
those whose hearts are wholly under the dominion of sin; but the holy exercises
and strivings of the godly, it may be observed, that the word in the original,
translated strive when used in other places in the new testament, as it is
often, always denotes the exercises and labor of true christians in their way
to heaven. And no good reason perhaps can be given, why it should not be
understood in the same sense here. When St. Paul says to Timothy, "Fight the
good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life," he speaks to an eminently good
man; and therefore it must be understood as an exhortation resolutely to
persevere in a christian course. But the word in the original here translated
fight is the same used by the evangelist in the text under consideration.
Agonizo^ ton kalon agona: Agonize the good agony. 4 Tim. vi. 12.
The same words St. Paul uses concerning himself, to denote the christian
course he had gone through. "I have sought the good fight." And he makes use of
the same word, in his first epistle to the Corinthians, with reference to the
exercises of true christians, by which they go in the way to heaven. "And every
one that striveth for the mastery, is temperrate in all things: Now they do it
to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible." And he denotes his own
exercises as a servant of Christ by the same word. "Whereunto I also labor,
striving according to his workings which he works in me mightily."

It may be noted here, that the word in the original in all these places, was
most commonly used by the Greeks to denote the exercises and labor of those,
who were candidates for the prize set up in the Olympic games: for instance,
the vigorous exertion of those who ran a race, in order to obtain the prize set
up for him who should outrun. And as these games in which they ran for the
prize, etc. were a fit emblem of the exercises of the christian life, it is
frequently represented by them: and hence the word used for those exercises, is
applied to the christiah, to signify the exercises and labor by which he
strives for eternal life. And the christian course is called a race or agony,
in allusion to the same thing. Heb. xiii. 1. -- Let us run the race. In the
original the agony. The race itself is callef the agony, the running is
agonizing.
According to this, to strive to enter in at the strait gate of eternal life,
or to agonize in order hereunto, is to agonize the good agony, so as to lay
hold on eternal life; to run the christian race, the way of true holiness,
which is set before us: And is the same which Christ exhorts to, when he says,
"Enter ve in at the strait gate." Matthew. vii. 14.
But let it be observed that the question now in dispute does not turn upon the
interpretation of this text; for let it be understood in either of the senses
abovementioned, it makes nothing for the doctor's promises to the doings of
the unregenerate. Only let it be remembered, that if by the strait gate is
meant the gate of eternal life, as the doctor understands it, striving to enter
in, must intend, a walking in the narrow way of holiness; and then it stands
directly against him. This leads me to consider the doctor's interpretation.

By the strait gate, the doctor understands the gate of heaven, or "the gate of
eternal lite and happiness." P. 6, 7.
But contrary to most, if not all others, who suppose this to be the meaning of
the strait gate, and in direct contradiction to himself, as will be seen
presently, he understlands striving to enter in at this gate, to mean the
endeavors and doings of the unregenerate, who are wholly without all true
holiness. To these unholy exercises and doings of the unregenerate, he insists,
the promises of regenerating grace and salvation are made; and by these, he
supposes, however absurdly, they go in the way to heaven, and enter in through
the gates into that holy city.

The doctor indeed supposes, that the words may be considered as a precept
given "both to those who are, and who are not already in a regenerate state."
P. 6.
If so, then they are a command which enjoins both the unholy endeavors of the
wicked, and the godly exercises of the true christian. The doctor's argument
for this is in the following words. For be they. in that happy estate or not,
still they ought to use their utmost diligence to obtain the salvation revealed
in the gospel; or, which is the same thing, to enter in at the strait gate. It
is true that all ought to enter in at the strait gate (taking the gate in the
doctor's sense of it) and in order to this, they ought to be real christians
and to live an holy life. And in this view, the command to enter in at this
gate is enjoined upon all, whether regenerate or not; as all are under
indispensible obligations to strive in this manner, in the exercise of true
holiness. If the precept to strive to enter in at the strait gate, enjoins on
christians earnestly to seek eternal life in the way of true holiness, or in
keeping the commandments of God; then it enjoins the same on wicked men, and
points out the very same way for them to obtain eternal life in, as for true
saints, and not another and quite different one; as it must do, if it only
requires of them those doings which have nothing of the nature of true
holiness, and are therefore different in nature and kind from what the true
christian is directed to; they having no more likeness, relation and
connection, than godliness and ungodliness. If, on the other hand, when wicked
men are commanded to enter in at the strait gate of eternal life, no more is
intended than what they may do, and yet be unholy in heart and life; then no
more is intended by the same command to the regenerate; for doubtless the
command requires the same thing of one as of another: and if so, they may enter
into eternal life without any true holiness; for the command to enter in,
surely requires all that is necessary in order to enter in. But none, I trust,
will assert that the unholy and unclean can, while such, enter in through the
gates into the heavenly city.

The doctor repeatedly says, there is but one way of life and salvation; and
challenges any one, who shall say there are two, or more, to point them out,
and show the difference there is betwixt them; and yet that both are true and
right, the ways of God's revealing. P. 13, 14.
It seems the doctor himself is the man, who has found out two ways to life and
salvation, viz. the way of the unholy and unclean, and the way of true virtue
and holiness, in which they go who turn their feet unto God's testimonies. But
what is most remarkable is, that he insists upon it, that these two different
ways are pointed out and enjoined by one and the same command. And now we must
wait on him to show the difference, and tell what the command enjoins on one,
which it does not on the other.

BUT if We attend to the doctor's description of striving to enter in at the
strait gate; we shall find that it is not only inconsistent with its intending
only the endeavors of the unregenerate (which it must, if the words were to
his purpose) but is also not consistent with their being at all intended or
included in this striving; it being, according to him, only applicable to the
exercises and doings of real christians. When the doctor was giving this
description, he seems to have in a measure forgot the point he chiefly contends
for, and gives such an account of striving, etc. as is by no means compatible
to the unregenerate; and so really inconsistent with what he was about to
prove. The reader must judge of the justice of this remark, when he has
attended to what follows.

To strive to enter in at the stralt gate, is, according to the doctor, to go
in the narrow way which leads to life; and is opposed to the broad way
leading to destruction. For he says, If we are not in the narrow way, we are of
consequence traveling toward the wide gate of destruction. P. 35.
But this narrow way is undoubtedly the way of holiness, if any such way is
spoken of in holy scripture; the way of God's commands, in distinction from all
the crooked ways of sinners, the way of the upright, who keep the commandments
of God, and so enter in through the gates into life.

As all men are in scripture comprehended in two opposite characters, between
which there is no medium, viz. the good and the evil, the righteous and the
ungodly; the children of God, and the children of the devil, etc. so there are
but two different and opposite ways spoken of in which they are going, viz,
"the way of the righteous, and the way of the ungodly:" Psalm. i. 6.
The broad way which leads to destruction, and the narrow way which leads
to life; or to the gate through which the righteous enter into life. This
latter is often spoken of in scripture. It is called "the way everlasting"
Psalm. cxxxix 24
"The way of life." Prove. xx. 24.
"The way of wisdom." Prove. iv. 11.
The way of righteousness," or holiness. Prove. viii. 2.
"The way of good men." Prove. ii. 29.
"The path of the just." Prove. iv. 18.
"The way of God's saints." Prove. ii. 8.
The way of the undefiled, who walk in the law of the Lord. Psalm. cxix. 1.
The way of God's commandments. ^. 32.
The way of holiness, in which, not the unclean, but the redeemed only are
found. Isaiah, xxxv. 8, 9.
Now, can any one who attends to the scriptural account of this matter, think
that the narrow way which Christ speaks of as leading to life, is not the way
of true holiness; but the way in which the unregenerate, the unholy and ungodly
walk!

Again, he speaks of striving, etc. as "the way of truth, righteousness and
life." P. 7, 8.
This surely is not the way of the ungodly, but of the righteous, or those who
love and practice the truth.

Moreover, he says, Unless we strive, in general, in the manner we ought to do,
allowing for involuntary mistakes, we are not in the way that leads unto
life. P. 35.
The doctor himself will not deny, I trust, that all under the gospel ought to
be true christians, and live a holy iife, and in this manner to seek the
salvation of their souls; consequently if persons strive as they ought to do,
they strive in this manner. Therefore any striving short of this, falls short
of what is commanded; so is not connected with, or the way to, eternal life. In
this one sentence the doctor has shut all wicked or unregenerate men out of the
way which leads to life; and represented striving to enter in at the strait
gate to be what they never attain to.

He also speaks of striving, as that by which persons overcome the world, the
flesh and the devil, principalities and powers and spiritual wickednesses in
high places. P. 9.
But he who does this, is surely a true christian, a regenerate, holy person,
if such an one is any where spoken of in the bible. The true followers of
Christ, or real christians are very often characterized, and distinguished from
all others, by this, that they overcome. And St. John expressly says, that none
overcome the world, but they who are born of God. 1 John, v. 4, 5, compared
with v 1.
St. Paul speaks of it as the great work of the christian to stand hit ground
against principalities and powers, etc. and directs to put on the whole armor
of God as necessary in order to this: which, none who read the description he
gives of it, can think is ever complied with by the unregenerate. Ephesians. vi. 10,
etc.


Further, the doctor says, A dependence upon Christ, as mediator between God
and man, is implied in the very notion of striving to obtain salvation through
him. And that it comprehends a relying, not on any supposed merit in what we
do, but on the mercy of God in Christ, for acceptance with him. P. 20, 39, 40.
Now, this is the very thing by which God's people, or true saints are in
scripture distinguished from all others, as that in which true godliness
consists: and by it is evidently meant that FAITH, saving, precious, holy faith
of God's elect, which is peculiar to good men, and by which the just do live.
They who hope in the mercy of God, and trust in him are repeatedly spoken of as
the blessed people of God to whom all divine promises are made. See Psalm. xiii.
5, xxxiii. 18, cxlvii 11. xxxi 19, xxxiv, 22, cxxv, 1, etc.
St. Paul speaks of trusting in Christ as that which was peculiar io true
saints, and the same with saving faith. Ephesians. i: 12, 13.


The doctor also speaks of his strivers as "those who take Jesus Christ for
their guide, and heartily desire to know the truth as it is in him. P. 17.
He speaks of this as necessary in order to be secure from fatal error. This
therefore implies a receiving the love of the truth: for they who do not so,
are liable to be given up to strong delusion, according to St. Paul's account
of the matter. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10, 11.
But to receive the love of the truth, is to love the truth: And what is this
but to love God and holiness? Which is the same with exercising holiness. To
take Jesus Christ for our guide, is to submit to him and trust in him in his
character of a teacher or prophet; which supposes a heart friendly to Christ,
and is really an hearty embracing the gospel. For he who heartily submits to,
and trusts in, Christ, or cordially acknowledges him in any part of his true
character, is really reconciled to the whole of it: And this is the same thing
with being reconciled to God through Jesus Christ, or embracing the gospel. But
this surely is not the character of the unregenerate.

Another passage of the doctor's is in the following words. Our Savior, who
certainly knew every thing relating to this affair, enjoins us to strive; or,
if the word may be allowed, to agonize, that we may enter into life: plainly
importing that the business of religion is at once of such vast importance, and
attended with such difficulties, as to call for the most anxious concern, the
most fixed resolutions, and unwearied endeavors. And there are diverse
metaphors used in scripture, relative to this matter, which naturally suggest
the same thing to us: Particularly those of wrestling, running, and fighting;
which express efforts of strength and activity, joined with wariness and
circumspection. These are all applied to the exercises, duties and employments
of THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. P. 3^, 33.
What could he have said more to the purpose, if he had undertaken to prove
that sriving to enter in at the strait gate intends not the doings of the
unregenerate, but the exercises and work of the real christian? He has, at
least, strongly asserted this here, however inconsistent with his main design.
If the doctor had been as sensible of this, as perhaps he ought, he could have
proceeded no further; as he must have seen the impropriety of applying that
striving, etc. to the doings of the unregenerate, which, according to his own
account of the matter, denotes the character and exercises of those only who
are born of God.

He appears indeed not wholly unthoughtful of this matter: for upon a review of
his description of striving to enter in at the strait gate, he has these words,
If it should be asked, whether any unregenerate sinner can be supposed to
strive in the manner represented above? I answer, YES; at least in general.
There is very little, if any thing in this account of striving, etc. which
would necessarily suppose a person to be already born of the Spirit of God. P,
21.
And again he says, Possibly one or two expression used in that description,
are in strictness applicable to the regenerate only; though I am not at present
sensible of ANY SUCH P. 47, margin.
It seems to be a pity, as well as somewhat strange, that he was not sensible,
that not only one or two expressions, but a considerable number, are applicable
only to the endeavors of the regenerate; and that his whole description, taken
together, is properly applicable to none but such: For this would most probably
have undeceived him with respect to this whole affair. For, I trust, it will
appear in the sequel, that the doctor has through his whole performance exalted
the unregenerate and their doings too high; and in order to support what he
contends for, has represented them as having those exercises which indeed they
never have, but are peculiar to the regenerate: and that most of his arguments
take all their seeming strength and plausibleness from this.

But what if " very little," and but one or two expressions used in that
description, are in strictness applicable to the regenerate only? This is
certainly a little too much; and renders him so far inconsistent with himself;
which no man chooses to be, if he can help it. For he has declared that not to
strive in the manner he has described, is fatal, and connected with a being for
ever excluded the kingdom of heaven. By which he has at one stroke cut off all
connection of the doings of the unregenerate with salvation, and landed them in
despair. Which connection he nevertheless thinks he has proved to a
demonstration! His words are these. I was in the next place to show you the
fatal consequences of not striving to enter in at the strait gate: Or, in other
words, of not using your endeavors to obtain eternal life, in the manner
represented above. P. 22.
If the fatal consequences which he goes on to mention, will certainly follow
on their not striving IN THE MANNER REPRESENTED ABOVE; and if any thing comes
into the description of that striving, which no unregenerate persons attain to,
but is peculiar to the regenerate; then the unregenerate do not strive, or use
their endeavors to obtain eternal life, in that manner: and consequently do
nothing which will prevent these fatal consequences coming on them; and
therefore nothing which has any certain connection with eternal life, but
rather with everlasting destruction. So that if the doctor has, after all this,
proved that, any of the endeavors of the unregenerate are connected with
eternal life, he has done it contrary to his own express assertion, if but very
little that is peculiar to the regenerate comes into the manner of the
endeavors to obtain salvation which he has described. But if very much which
comes into his account of striving to enter in at the strait gate, necessarily
supposes a person to be born of the spirit of God, which, I trust, appears
beyond contradiction, this makes, his inconsistence with himself still more
glaring.

However, though the doctor's text, as he understands it, seems to be rather
against him; and his own description of striving, etc. is inconsistent with his
whole scheme: and is, the whole taken together, in direct contradiction to the
point he endeavors by fourteen arguments to prove: yet, if he has, after all
this, rightly stated, and undeniably proved it, we must yield it to him,
however inconsistent he is with himself.

I therefore now proceed to enquire into this matter.

SECTION II. THE Dotor's stating the question examined.
THE doctor states the question in dispute three different times, in different
words: But it may be queried, Whether he has stated it properly, or in any
degree right, in either of his attempts? He first puts it in the following
words, Whether there are in the word of God, any gracious promises,
invitations, or declarations, respecting unregenerate sinners, to whom the
gospel is preached, from whence it may be clearly inferred, that if they strive
IN THE MANNER THEY MAY AND OUGHT TO DO, to attain to holiness and eternal life,
God will certainly afford them all the influences of his spirit and grace,
which are necessary to that end: so that their endeavors shall not be in vain,
but succeeded by him, and rendered effectual to their salvation? "This," the
doctor says, it is humbly conceived, is a fair, just and plain state of the
important question proposed. P. 15.
Doubtless he thought so. But, what does he mean by unregenerate sinners
striving in the manner they may and ought to do? They ought to strive as true
saints do; in a holy manner. This the doctor himself acknowledges; for he says,
That all who hear the gospel, are required, not only to believe it, but to
repent of their sins, and to become the true disciples of Jesus Christ P. 66.
If they are required to repent, etc. then they may and ought to repent, and
become true disciples of Christ; and therefore may and ought to strive in the
exercise of true repentance, and as real christians. And if so, then the
question, as the doctor has put it, comes to this: Whether, if unregenerate
sinners become true penitents and real christians, and as such, in the exercise
of true faith and holiness, strive to obtain the salvation of their souls, they
are hereby entitled to a divine promise of success?

The question therefore, as the doctor has stated it, is not disputed by those
whom he means to oppose. For they all allow, that if unregenerate sinners,
strive as they may and ought to do, they shall certainly obtain salvation. But
at the same time they may and ought to strive in a right manner, i. e. as real
penitents and true christians: and the doctor is so happy as to agree with them
in this too. Where is the dispute then? We can have none with him on this
question; for we hold the affirmative as fully as he can. And now, Whether this
is a "fair, just and plain state of the important question proposed," let the
impartial judge. The doctor knew, or ought to have known, that they whom he
meant to oppose, hold that no unregenerate sinner strives for salvation as he
may and ought to do: and if he had believed the contrary, he ought not to take
it for granted, in stating the question to be disputed: for this, instead of
putting the question in a fair, just and plain light is realty begging the
question. But as he does not himself believe that unregenerate sinners ever
strive thus, but has affirmed they do not, this his state of the question, is
not only, not fair, or just, but some what surprising.

The question really is, whether unregenerate sinners while they do nothing but
what is consistent with a state of unregeneracy, i. e. reigning wickedness of
heart, do ever so strive for salvation, as tnat by their thus striving, they
are entitled to those gracious promises, whereby God is engaged to bestow
eternal life upon them?

BUT let us see if the doctor has succeeded better in his second attempt. This
is in the following words. Whether the gracious declarations and promises of
God in his word, are such as will in any measure admit of the supposition, that
unregenerate sinners, to whom the gospel is preached, may desire, strive, and
earnestly endeavor, in the use of proper means, to obtain the salvation
revealed therein, seeking to God for his Grace and assistance; and yet possibly
fall short of eternal life, and perish in their sins, by reason that God
withholds his spirit and grace from them? He thinks, "the question thus stated,
comes precisely to the same thing as in the former way." Perhaps it does. But
if so, then the matter is not mended; and the question is still far from being
rightly stated, as has been shown. All the difficulty in this state of the
question lies in the word DESIRE. If he uses this word in the sense in which it
is commonly used, we shall all agree with him and allow, that the gracious
declarations and promises of God in his word, are such as will not admit of the
supposition, that they who desire the salvation revealed in the gospel, can
possibly fall short of eternal life. This therefore is not the question in
dispute. The promises of the gospel are beyond question made to all who
heartily desire the things promised. But then we assert that no unregenerate
person does really and heartily desire these things. But of this more hereafter.

The dodtor goes on to say, It may be reduced to another form, and still
narrower compass thus, viz. Whether unregenerate sinners, under the
dispensation of the gospel, have any day of grace and salvation afforded them;
in such a sense, that they shall certainly obtain eternal life, provided they
heartily desire it, and strive to that end. Still we are all agreed, none, I
trust will deny this.

He says, He has expressed the true point in question, in these several ways,
not merely for the sake of having it understood; but partly, because he
supposed, that the bare stating it thus, would go a considerable ways toward a
proper resolution of it, with those who are tolerably acquainted with the
general tenor of the holy scripture; unless their minds are unhappily
prepossessed in favor of some unscriptural scheme of systematical divinity. If
he has indeed expressed the true point in question, it appears to be easily
resolved, from what has been observed: For no body seems to have any dispute
with him. But that he should imagine this to be the true point in question; and
that what he here fixes upon as the condition of the promises of the gospel, is
ever come up to by unregenerate sinners, must, I think, be owing to his not
being tolerably acquainted with the general tenor of holy scripture: unless
perhaps his mind is unhappily prepossessed in favor of some unscriptural scheme
of UNsystematical divinity. But this will be more particularly considered by
and by.

Thus it appears that the whole matter in dispute is in the doctor's way of
stating the question overlooked, or rather taken for granted; for if
unregenerate sinners ever actually do what he supposes they must do in order to
have an interest in the promises, without question promises of salvation as
made to their doings. But that unregenerate men ever do thus, lies on the
doctor to prove, which he has not so much as attempted any where; but as he has
taken it for granted in stating the question, he has done so through his whole
performance, and from beginning to end, entirely mis-stated the matter, and
really begged the whole question in dispute.

I will now take leave to give what appears to me to be a fair, just and plain
state of this important question before us.

QUEST. Are there any gracious promises of salvation to the exercises and
doings of unregenerate sinners, who do not strive for salvation as they ought
to do; who have no true and hearty desires of the salvation offered in the
gospel; but are so far from it, that they are under the reigning power of
enmity against God and the Savior, and do with their whole heart oppose the
way of salvation opened in the gospel; and continually reject the salvation it
self, and obstinately refuse to have any part therein, notwithstanding it is
freely offered to their choice and acceptance? The bare stating the question
thus, I suppose, will go a considerable ways toward a proper resolution of it,
even with all. The doctor himself, I presume, will fully and cheerfully espouse
the negative of this question, thus stated. But then he may perhaps complain,
that the true point in question is not expressed, or at least is not fairly
stated; because the exercises and doings of unregenerate sinners are not justly
represented; and that is taken for granted in this state of the case, which he
shall dispute, and really is the only thing in question. But would not such a
complaint be really against himself, while the same objection lies against his
own state of the question? I say, the doctor has raised the unregenerate man
too high, and represented him as doing mote than ever he does. On the other
hand he says, I sink him too low, and represent all his exercises and doings in
much too bad a light. Who does not see that I have as good a right to take for
granted what I assert of the doings of the unregenerate man, as he has, what he
has asserted? All must see, I think, by this time, that in order to understand
and settle the question before us, it must be first determined, what can be
justly predicated of the doings of unregenerate sinners: and that a just
resolution of this will put an end to the dispute. If it can be proved that the
doctor's unregenerate sinner is a creature only of his own fancy; a kind of
monster; an enemy to God, dressed up in the attire of a saint, a contradiction
almost in terms: then all he has said, and attempted to prove of such an one,
is really nothing to the purpose. Here then we must join issue, and leave it to
the world to judge, who, is on the right side of the question.

SECTION III. IN which it is considered, What is meant by DESIRING Salvation;
and how far, and in what sense, unregenerate persons may be said to do so.
THE doctor often speaks of sinners desiring salvation. With relation to this,
he uses the word DESIRE above thirty times in this argument. He calls it a
sincere desire, a real and a hearty desire. This is a word of great importance
with him. According to him, they who do not heartily and earnestly desire
salvation, do not strive for it so as to obtain, and so are not in the way to
it. P. 12.
And on the other hand, he often speaks of this desire of salvation, as that
which will not, cannot fail of success: as if it was the only necessary
condition on the sinner's part, to which all the promises in the gospel are
made. And most of his arguments derive all their force and strength from this
word. It Is proper therefore in the first place particularly to attend to this,
and enter into the true meaning of it; otherwise we may dispute altogether in
the dark.

Since the doctor makes so much of this word, and speaks so often of an hearty
desire of salvation, and builds so much upon it; it might have been expected
that he would have given such a plain definition of this phrase, and so
explained the matter, that none could be left at a loss about his meaning. But
this he has not done; we must therefore find out his meaning as well as we can,
by considering the various passages in which he uses these words, together with
what they are connected. It is plain at first view, that he means to speak of
the desires of unregenerate persons; but the question is, whether he means only
those desires of salvation, which are indeed compatible to an unregenerate man;
or something which is never found with such, however he may suppose it; but is
peculiar to the regenerate?

By desiring salvation, or eternal life, he evidently means the same with
choosing it, in the same sense in which the people of Israel were exhorted to
choose life. Deuteronomy. xxx 19. See p 53, 54.
The doctor speaking of that passage observes, that life was set before them
"for their choice" and then has the following words, And if so, the obtaining
it depended on their choice, or was connected therewith. And doubtless, it is
not less truly and properly set before sinners now, under the gospel
dispensation, than it was before the Israelits in the time of Moses. From
whence we may conclude, that if we really desire, and strive to enter into
life, we shall not fall short of it. P. 54.
And in another passage he represents this real desire of salvation as being
the same with accepting of it, and coming to Christ for it, or at least as
implying this. P. 55, 56.
Having observed that "the scriptures speak plainly and directly of sinners
neglecting the opportunity allowed them for obtaining life, as the real cause,
of their death or destruction," he proceeds to illustrate this by various
passages of scripture, such as, "how shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. O Jerusalem --
how often would I have gathered thy children -- and ye would not, etc." And
then says, These, with innumerable other passages of scripture, most clearly
and strongly express this sentiment; That the true and only reason why sinners
perish, is, -- that they neglect the great salvation offered to them; and will
not come to Jesus Christ for life. But neither of these things can be truly and
properly said of those persons, who are awakened to such a sense of their sins,
as really to desire the salvation revealed, and to strive in order thereto.
From these, and other passages of the same import, I think it plainly appears,
that by a real desire of salvation, he means a hearty choice of life, a true
acceptance of salvation, and coming to Christ for life, or a taking and
accepting of the good things freely offered in the gospel. He has therefore set
himself an easy task, while he undertakes to prove, that they who thus desire
salvation, and strive in the exercise of these desires, shall certainly obtain;
for all the promises of the gospel are constantly made to such, without all
question; and instead of fourteen arguments, which the doctor has produced to
prove this, one might easily assign as many score, perhaps as strong, and as
much to the purpose. But that the unregenerate ever did, or ever will, thus
desire, choose, and accept of this salvation, and come to Christ for it, is
denied by those whom the doctor means to oppose: And what is more, is in the
strongest and most express terms denied by our Savior himself. He says, "No
man can come unto me, except the father which has sent me, draw him. -- Every
man, therefore that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes unto me."
John vi. 44, 45.


The doctor says, "that neither of these things" i. e. a neglect of the great
salvation, a refusal to come to Christ for life, etc. "can be truly and
properly said of those persons, who are awakened to such a sense of their sins,
as really to desire the salvation revealed, and to strive in order thereto:
even though they are not (WHICH IS VERY SUPPOSABLE) already in a regenerate
state." P. 56.
This is very supposable we see; for the doctor has abundantly supposed it,
through the whole course of his argument, and built all upon this supposition, as
has been observed. But it is presumed he will not be able to prove, what has
been with him so very supposable, as Jesus Christ, who doubtless well
understood this matter, has not only supposed, but expressly asserted, directly
the contrary, in the words just quoted.

THE doctor allows that unregenerate persons are not true believers or real
christian; and are without all real holiness. P. 42, 43.
Consequently they do not love, choose or desire holiness: but this is the
object of their greatest and peculiar aversion. Therefore the salvation offered
in the gospel, which is in a peculiar sense an holy salvation and consists
summarily in true holiness, they are so far from desiring, that nothing else is
hated and rejected by them, with such constancy, and so much with their whole
heart, as this. And this is the only thing that keeps them from an interest in
this salvation; as who ever is willing to take it as it is offered, has it: and
it is certainly bestowed on every one who desires and chooses it, so asks for
it; which is the same with coming to Christ for life.

UNREGENERATE sinners may, while they continue such, in some sense desire
salvation. They may desire deliverance from natural evil, between which and
salvation there is no medium: and they may desire safety and happiness, under a
conviction of conscience, that it is to be had in no other way but by sharing
in the salvation which is by Jesus Christ. Such a desire as this every person
under the gospel has, in some degree, who has any belief of the truth of divine
revelation: And these desires are strong, and influence the conduct of men, in
proportion to their attention to these things, and their apprehention and sense
of the importance of them to themselves. But this is consistent with their
hating the true character of the only Savior, and the salvation which he
offers freely for their acceptance; and their continuing to reject it with
their whole hearts. It is but to delude sinners, to represent to them, that
their concern and desires of this kind, are the least evidence that their
hearts are a whit the nearer a true submission to Christ, or a real acceptance
of salvation as offered by him; or that there is the less opposition to the
gospel in their hearts. If the doctor, by his DESIRES of salvation, means such
desires as these, which most men under the gospel have in a greater or less
degree, and had explained himself, most of his arguments would appear in their
true weakness, to every one at first view. But these are not truly and
properly desires of the salvation offered in the gospel, according to the most
common and natural meaning of the word: because that salvation is not properly
the object of these desires, but something else; yea, salvation as it is
offered is not desired, but rejected. If any particular gift or privilege is
offered to a person, and nothing required as the condition of his having it,
but his hearty acceptance of it; he cannot be said to desire it according to
the sense in which the word is generally used, if the gift offered is in itself
undesirable to him, or if, all things considered, he is not willing to have it,
and refuses to take it; however exercised he may be about the matter, and
whatever pains he may take with relation to it.

The salvation revealed in the gospel, is offered freely to the acceptance of
all; the proclamation is, "Whosoever will, let him come and take it." And they
who dislike and reject this salvation, and the Savior himself by whom it is
offered, and are, on the whole, all things considered, unwilling to be saved by
him, cannot be properly said to desire this salvation; but it may truly be said
that they do not desire to be saved by Christ. The words of Isaiah are very
applicable to such; and of such he doubtless speaks, when he says, "When we
shall see him ( i. e. the Messiah) there is no beauty that we should desire
him. He is despised and rejected of men. Isaiah liii. 2, 3.
Despising and rejecting any object, is surely inconsistent with, and in direct
opposition to desiring it. Therefore there is not one instance in scripture of
any person's being spoken of as desiring salvation, who was not heartily
willing to accept of it as it is offered; but such are represented as not
desiring it. If therefore the doctor uses this word in a sense directly
contrary to that in which it is used in holy scripture, and in common speech;
and so in a very strange and improper sense, it might reasonably have been
expected that he would give notice of it, and so explain himself, as to prevent
mistake and delusion in this matter, in which mistakes are so easily and so
often made, especially by the inattentive and unwary. But as it is evident from
what has been taken notice of already, that he, at least some times, means
something else by his desires of salvation, I proceed to observe,

Men may most properly be said really and heartily to desire salvation, when
the salvation itself is the object of their desires, the good things in which
it consists being what they are pleased with, and choose for their own sake;
and this implies an hearty approbation of the character of the Savior, and the
way of salvation by him. They who have such a desire of salvation as this do
truly choose life, and may properly be said to accept of salvation; to receive
Jesus Christ and come to him for life, or believe on his name. The doctor seems
to mean such kind of desires as these, by the desires of salvation he speaks so
much of, as has been shown. It is quoted, as has been before observed, that to
such desires as these the promises of the gospel are made; therefore they who
thus desire salvation shall not fail of it. But such desires as these are holy
desires; and therefore are found no where but in a regenerate heart. The love
of holiness is it self an exercise of holiness: but an hearty desire of
holiness for its own sake, implies and is indeed itself, an exercise of love to
holiness. Now to desire salvation for its own sake, because it is what it is, is
to desire holiness for its own sake: for holiness comes into the very essence
of this salvation. And that approbation of the character of the Savior, which
is implied in true desires of salvation by him, also implies love to him, and
consequently is an exercise of love to holiness: for holiness is an essential,
and the most important part of the character of the Savior, without which he
could not be the Savior of sinners.

The salvation which the gospel reveals, the way in which it is bestowed, and
the Savior himself, are if I may so speak, so clothed with holiness, and such
a bright expression of it, which is the peculiar excellency and glory of the
gospel, that the unholy are set at the greatest distance from these things; and
men never will desire and choose them until they have a heart friendly to
holiness, which is the new heart given in regeneration. If the unregenerate
have an heart to desire and choose the salvation offered in the gospel, in the
sense now explained, it will be difficult to show what need they stand in of
regeneration in order to be saved, or to tell what regeneration consists in.
For if men have an heart to desire and choose holiness for holiness sake, and
so to delight in it, as they must, in order to desire and choose the salvation
offered in the gospel, and come to Christ, they have no need of a new heart in
order to be holy, and happy in God and the Savior: this same principle from
whence such desires flow being perfected, they will be perfectly united to the
Savior, and completely delivered from sin and misery, and in full possession
of salvation. The need men stand in therefore of being regenerated, or of
having a new heart given them, is a demonstration that the unregenerate have no
such desires.

And this is agreeable to the whole current of scripture representation, as
might be easily shown, was there need of it. The scripture ranks all mankind in
two classes. Those that love God and his ways, who know and choose the things
that are excellent; and those the language of whose hearts to God is, "depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways;" who are enemies to the
just God and Savior, and neglect and refuse the salvation offered. Of these,
some may be more concerned about themselves than others, and so have more
exercises, and take more pains to escape eternal misery; but still their hearts
are as opposite to reconciliation with God, and to the salvation offered as
ever; they have still an heart of stone, a stubborn rebellious heart, and are
dead in tespasses and sins, until they have a new heart given them, and they
are quickened by regeneration.

If the doctor will show from scripture, that there are some persons who are
neither dead in trespasses and sins, nor alive to God; who are neither enemies
to God and the Savior, nor his friends and reconciled to him: or if he will
tell what need they stand in of regeneration, who have these hearty desires of
salvation, which are inconsistent with a hard heart, a neglecting the great
salvation offered them, and a refusing to come to Christ for life, and will
plainly show what such a regeneration consists in, he will doubtless greatly
oblige the christian world. But till this is done, we must take leave to
conclude, that the desires of the unregenerate he speaks of, and the
regeneration of those who first have these desires, are a figment of his own.

SECTION IV. AN examination of nine of the Doctor's fourteen arguments.
WHAT the doctor, undertakes to support is, that the endeavors and striving of
the unregenerate hare a promise of succesfs; and so are certainly connected
with salvation. This he attempts to prove by fourteen arguments. It appears at
first view they are not wanting in number: the weight and strength of them is
now to be inquired into. At least nine of these fourteen have all their
strength in the words DESIRE of salvation, or words to the like purpose; in
which the unregenerate sinner is supposed to have such a desire of salvation
which implies a real choice of it as it is offered; and a hearty acceptance of
it, and coming to Christ for it. Now as this supposition is entirely groundless
and contrary to the truth, as has been shown in the last section, all those
arguments, which are built wholly upon it, are demolished and fall of course.
But that this may clearly appear, we will briefly consider each of them.

ARG. 1st Mankind being considered in scripture as in a state of sin and death,
it is declared that Jesus Christ came into the world to save them: to save
sinners; to seck and to save that which was lost. P. 47.
The doctor, proceeds, to illustrate this by several passages of scripture, and
then adds, Now, from such declarations of holy scripture, we may fairly infer
that all those to whom the gospel is preached, have therein an offer of
salvation made to them. And if it really makes an offer, or points out a method
of salvation to all; can it be supposed, that any sinner WHO IS WILLING AND
DESIROUS, and strives, to obtain the salvation thus revealed, should yet be
rejected of God and finally perish? Certainly it cannot. P, 48, 49.
The whole of this is granted. But what does it prove? that salvation is
offered to the acceptance of all: and therefore whoever is so "desirous" to
obtain the salvation thus revealed as to "be willing," to have it, and heartily
accept of it, shall not be rejected. Nothing can be more certain (...) But what
is this to an unregenerate sinner who will not come to Christ for life, and
continues to make light of, and reject, the salvation offered to him?

ARG. 2d. God has declared in the most solemn manner that he has no pleasure
in the death of sinners. Ezekiel xxxiii 11.
Yea, it is declared, that God will have all men to be saved. Now if what these
declarations most obviously and strongly import, be true: surely all who REALLY
DESIRE and strive to obtain eternal life, will certainly obtain it. For if God
himself has no pleasure in their death, but the contrary; and if they
themselves desire life and endeavor to obtain it, what should hinder their
salvation? Can the devil be supposed to hinder it on these suppositions? He
cannot, unless, he is stronger, not only than man, but than God himself. P 49.
Very strongly expressed: And very true; But what is all this to the case in
hand? to the unregenerate who are so far from desiring life, that they choose
and love death rather than life; Prove. viii. 36.
and are the children of disobedience, in whom the devil powerfully works:
Ephesians. ii.
yea, the children of the devil, whose lusts they will do, John viii 44. 1 John
iii. 10.
being voluntarily in his kingdom and under his power?

ARG. 3d. According to the representation of scripture, God affords to sinners
a space for repentance, a day of grace and salvation: or a season for making
their peace with him; during which time, he is said to be near, so that he may
be found by them that seek him. Yea, God is represented as longsuffering
toward them, being unwilling that they should perish. Having mentioned a
unmber of texts to this purpose, he says. Now, is it consistent with these
repeated declarations, to suppose that sinners during the time of their
visitation, may REALLY DESIRE and strive to enter in at the strait gate; and
yet fall short of salvation? P. 50.
All true yet, if really desiring and striving imply a hearty acceptance of
offered mercy: But nothing to the purpose. The unregenerate sinner, whose heart
is as hard as a stone, who refuses to repent, and embrace the gospel, is left
out of these question, and may perish notwithstanding all these declarations.
The following words, upon this argument are perhaps worthy a transcription. If
God is longsuffering, not willing that any of those sinners, to whom the gospel
is preached, should perish, but that all should come to repentance; certainly
he puts them all into a capacity for attaining salvation. If he means, they may
be saved if they will; or that nothing can prevent their salvation but the want
of their good will in the case, as it is presumed he does, his argument is
acknowledged to be just: But he goes en to say, To suppose that any are left in
such a state, that they cannot avoid perishing, though they desire it: or in such
a state as renders repentance impossible for them; manifestly supposes, that
God wills them to perish, that he would not have them come to repentance; nor
really allows them a space for it in any proper sense: and so is directly
contrary to the doctrine of scripture. All may be saved who truly desire it,
and repentance is impossible to none who are willing to repent. But if the
unregenerate, do always refuse to repent, there being no difficulty in the way
of their repentance and salvation, but the obstinacy of their own will, what is
all this to the doctors purpose? In this passage the doctor fully shows that by
desiring salvation, he intends the sinners good will in the case; and supposes
that the unregenerate may be so well disposed toward repentance and salvation
as that if they perish, it must be owing, not to any deficiency in their hearts
but to some fatal difficulty which God has laid in their way which it is
impossible their good will should remove. He adds, -- But let the unbiassed
judge. And so say I. -- let them judge, whether the doctor had any reason to
make such a representation as this: or whether it is any thing to the purpose.

ARG. 4th. It is further to be remarked, that during this space given for
repentance, or that day of salvation, which the scriptures so plainly assert:
sinners are earnestly admonished, exhorted and commanded, to seek God, to be
reconciled to him, and to work out their salvation. P. 51.
And having produced a number of passages to this purpose, he draws the
consequence in the following words. These exhortations and commands, are
directed more especially to sinners; to the wicked; to simple ones, scorners
and fools; to such as were not yet reconciled, to God. And can any unprejudiced
man think it consistent with them, to suppose, that sinners may be awakened to
such a sense of their misery in being in a state of alienation from God, as to
desire to be reconciled to him, and really strive to obtain a part in the
salvation thus revealed; and yet fail of it! Judge for yourselves -- We will --
And therefore conclude, that these exhortations and commands being given to the
wicked, scorners, and fools, etc. who are the same with the unregenerate, is no
argument that they require nothing but what such may comply with, and yet
remain wicked, scorners, and fools; but they are required to leave off
scorning; to forsake the foolish, etc. That they who do this, and so truly
desire to be reconciled to God i.e. are in any degree reconciled to God at
heart, shall not fail of salvation. But simple ones, scorners, and fools, or
the unregenerate, never do this, while they remain such. And now what is become
of the doctors arguments? -- Let the reader judge for himself.

ARG. 5th. Conformably hereto, life and death, blessing and cursing, are said
to be set before sinners, in the word of God, and they are admonished to choose
life. Deuteronomy. xxx. 19.
-- But with what truth or propriety could life and death be said to be set
before sinners, if though they desired life, and heartily endeavored to obtain
it, they might yet fail thereof? P. 53.
Life is undoubtedly set before sinners for their choice. If therefore they
comply with the offer and exhortation, and choose life, they will certainly
have it. But what is this to the sinner, who does, not choose, but obstinately
refuses the life offered to him? this is true of every unregenerate person, as
has been shown.

ARG. 6th. The scripture speaks of some sinners as wholly left, and forsaken of
God, in this world; given up to their own hearts lufts, to incurable blindness,
to strong delusion, etc. that they might be damned. Now if there is any such
thing as such like passges of scripture seem to assert; and as they are usually
understood; it will even from hence follow, that the persons thus given up of
God, were, antecedently hereto, in a salvable state; that they had in some
measure the restraints and strivings of God's spirit; that they were really put
into a capacity for obtaining salvation, HAD THEY DESIREDIT; and that their not
doing so, was the reason of their being thus forsaken. P. 54.


It is sufficient to observe upon all this, that there is no advance made by
this argument, it being the same with the foregoing, only in a little different
words. All that the doctor attempts to prove here is, that if the sinner under
the gospel is not saved, but is given up to ruin, it is because he does not
desire and choose salvation when offered to him, but neglects and refuses it.
But how does this help the unregenerate, who always do this?

ARG. 7th. The scriptures speak plainly and directly of sinners neglecting the
opportunity allowed them for obtaining life, as the real cause of their death
or destruction. Hence he inferrs in allusion to the scriptures he here quotes,
That the true and only reason why sinners perish, is, that they do not regard
the hand of God, stretched out to save them; that they grieve him by their
obduracy in sin; that they neglect the great salvation offered to them; and
will not come to Jesus Christ for life. But neither of these things can be
truly and properly said of those persons, who are awakened to such a sense of
their sins, as really to desire the salvation revealed; and to strive in order
thereto; even though they are not (which is very supposeable) already in a
regenerate state. And therefore all such persons, unless they cease to desire
and strive thus, shall be saved. ['Tis well he has thought of his perseverance
to the end of life once, which he had hitherto in every argument entirely
forgot or rather implicitly denied as necessary in order to be interested in
the promises. But he goes on] Not to be sure, without being born of God: but
they shall be renewed in the spirit of their minds; and consequently enter into
life. P. 55, 56, 57.
What has been said upon this passage in the last section, is sufficient to
convince any attentive impartial person, I trust, that what the doctor here
takes to be "very supposeable," is plainly contary to scripture and all reason:
and therefore the argument being built upon a most evidently false hypothesis,
as are all the other, is much too weak to bear its own weight.

I SHALL at present pass over the next five arguments, leaving them to be more
particularly considered by and by; and now attend to the two last as they seem
to be exactly of the same stamp with those already mentioned; and therefore
most properly put with them.

ARG. 13th. It is very generally allowed, that all those in general, who hear
the gospel; are invited and required, not only to believe it, but to repent of
their sins, and to become the true disciples of Jesus Christ. It is moreover
universally acknowledged, that the gospel promises eternal life to all who do
thus, or to all real christians: And it is represented as a wonderful
manifestation of the goodness of God to men, that he should, in this way,
promise salvation to them. Now, if these conceptions and representations are
just, as they unquestionably are; it may from hence be clearly inferred, that
there is grace accompanying the dipensation of the gospel, sufficient to render
it effectual to the salvation of those, who hear it, PROVIDED THEY ARE REALLY
DESIROUS OF, and endeavor after it. All very true. But what if they are not
really desirous of it; but oppose and reject it? And if this is true of all the
unregenerate, the argument comes to nothing.

ARG. 14th. It is very generally allowed, that those who, having had the gospel
preached unto them, do not actually comply with the method of salvation
revealed therein, and so finally obtain eternal life, will have an aggravated
condemnation at the last day. This is agreeable to the representations of
scripture in many places. But what reason? What justice, would there be in
this, if these sinful and unhappy men were never really put into a capacity for
obtaining this salvation? or never had it made possible to them, though they
desired and endeavored to become partakers of it?

I answer, No reason, or justice at all. But what is this to his purpose? All
sinners under the gospel are "really put into a capacity for obtaining
salvation:" and that whether they desire and accept of this salvation or not;
it being freely offered to their choice and acceptance. In this sense it is
made possible to all; and their constantly neglecting and refusing to desire
and endeavor to become partakers of it, does not alter the case with respect
to this, If therefore they miss of this salvation, because they do not desire
it, but neglect and refuse it, which is true of all unregenerate men; then this
is very consistent with their falling under "an aggravated condemnation,"
because they "do not actually comply with the method of salvation revealed."

NINE of the doctors fourteen arguments have now been considered. And as they
are all built upon one hypothesis, which has no truth in it, the falsehood of
that being detected, they appear to be perfectly weak and inconclusive.

Indeed, these nine arguments are really but one. As they are all built on one
hypothesis, so the predicate in each is much one and the same, as the attentive
reader may easily see by looking over them. The number therefore adds nothing
to the weight. They may be easily reduced to one; and that, to nothing. Or if
he had pleased he might have added an hundred, yea as many as there are
promises in the bible, as weighty and as much to the purpose as any of these.

"But let the the unbyassed judged."

SECTION V. IN which three of the remaining five of the Doctor's arguments are
examined.
THE doctor's eighth, tenth, and eleventh arguments are so nearly one; or at
least run so much into one and the same thing, that they may be considered
together. These are stated in the following words, Sinners have a promise of
the spirit of wisdom, or of spiritual wisdom, with which eternal life is
connecled, if they hearken to God's reproof, and diligently seek it. Turn you
at my reproof: behold I will pour out mv spirit unto you: I will make known my
words unto to you. Prove. i. 23.
Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that
hears me, watching daily at my gates, and waiting at the posts of my doors.
Chap. viii. 33, 34. See P. 57.
And Our Savior pronounces a blessing on those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness; adding, that they shall be filled. P. 59.
And To this promise of our Lord, another may be subjoined, which is also found
in his sermon on the mount. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
find, etc. P. 61.


The doctor attempts to prove that the condition to which these promises of
spiritual, saving blessings are made, intends the exercises and doings of the
unregenerate. His arguments for this are now carefully to be enquired into.

He having observed, that it will perhaps be said, that none but a regenerate
man, can be supposed to turn at God's, or wisdom's reproof, or to wait at the
posts of her doors, in the sense here intended, goes on to say, But this were
an arbitrary assertion: one for which there is not the least color or
foundation. For the persons here addressed, are spoken to under the character
of simple ones, scorners, and fools; who certainly need wisdom the most of any.
And the promise is apparently made for the encouragement of such, to turn at
her reproof, and to watch daily at her gates; that they might find her, and
thereby find life. This was therefore to be done by them, antecedently to their
obtaining spiritual wisdom; not in the actual exercise of it. P. 57, 58.


The persons here addressed are indeed "simple ones, scorners and fools, who
certainly need wisdom the most of any." But does it hence follow, that they are
not called upon and required to obey and be wise; but to do something while
they remain scorners and fools, or antecedent to their obtaining wisdom? I
think not: But directly the contrary: viz. that they are required to embrace
wisdom, or be wise; to cease from scorning, and become obedient: to forsake the
foolish, and live. I trust the doctor will not deny that turning at wisdom's
reproof implies thus much. And if so, it cannot mean any thing to be done by
them while they continue fools and scorners, or consistent with their
continuing such. It appears to me an odd way of arguing, to say, that seeing
they are addressed in the character of simple ones, scorners, and fools,
therefore they are called upon to act according to this character; that is,
like simple ones, scorners, and fools. But thus argues the doctor.

And this is not the only instance of the doctor's arguing at this rate. In
order to prove that the asking, seeking, and knocking our Savior speaks of,
intends the desires, prayers and endeavors of the unregenerate, he says, "The
words were spoken by him to the promiscuous multitude of his professed
followers; and there is no reason to suppose that all these were in a
regenerate state." P. 62.
This is as if a doctor of divinity should gravely undertake to prove that the
moral law, contained in the ten commands requires nothing but what unholy,
wicked men do, while such; because it was published to a promiscuous multitude,
many, if not most, of whom were such. The doctor allows, that all those in
general who hear the gospel, are invited and required to repent of their sins,
and to become the true disciples of Jesus Christ. P. 66.
He represents those who will not allow this, to be "men of a disordered mind,
hardly fit to be reasoned with." If the doctor will not rank himself among
these, he must allow that our Savior, when he preached the gospel on the
mount, did invite and require all his hearers to repent and become his true
disciples, and as such, with a penitent, humble, christian temper of mind, to
ask, seek and knock; however far he knew most of them then to be from such a
temper. But this is to give up the argument under consideration, as fit to be
used only by "men of a disordered mind, hardly fit to be reasoned with." But to
return,

The doctor goes on to argue, that if the promise of wisdom in the texts
quoted, is not "made to the turning, waiting and watching of an unregenerate
man," then it amounts to no more than this; that upon their first becoming
wise, they shall then have wisdom given them. But such a promise, he thinks,
not "agreeable to the wisdom of God." P. 62.


This, with his words just now quoted relating to these scriptures, leads to
the following remarks.

1. It does not appear that there is any promise of wisdom in these texts, of
which they have no degree, who hearken and turn at wisdom's reproof. The thing
required here is wisdom. They are exhorted to act directly contrary to what
scorners and fools do, which surely is to act wisely. "Hear instruction, and be
wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at
my gates, etc." Hearing instruction is here spoken of as the same with being
wise, or as that in which wisdom consists; and not as something which a fool
must do, as such, or while he continues a fool, and antecedent to his
exercising any wisdom. Therefore such are pronounced blessed who hearken to
wisdom, watching daily at her gates, etc. which is itself an exercise of
wisdom, We have the same exhortation in a little different words, in the
context. Prove. viii 5.
"O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding
heart." None can suppose that what is required here, is something to be done by
the simple and fools, "antecedently to their obtaining wisdom;" but they are
called upon to be wise.

The same is evident with respect to the other passage referred to by the
doctor, "How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And the scorners
delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof."
Here it is supposed that they must cease from loving simplicity, and no longer
delight in scorning, and hate knowledge, in order to turn at wisdom's reproof;
or rather, that this is implied in the turning required. Therefore turning is
an exercise of wisdom and obedience, in opposition to folly and stubborness.
How the doctor could imagine that, here, and in the words before considered,
wisdom is promised, upon doing something in which no wisdom is implied, I am at
a loss.

It is indeed here promised, that upon their turning, wisdom will make known
her words unto them. But this only intends that they shall be taken into the
school of wisdom, in consequence of their being so wise as to embrace her; and
shall be trained up by her, as the children of wisdom, to greater degrees of
knowledge and understanding. For "the Lord lays up sound wisdom for the
righteous." Prove. ii. 7.
"To him that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundance." Give
instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he
will increase in learning." Chap. ix. 9.


This leads to another remark,

2. It is contrary to reason and common sense; Yea, a plain contradiction, to
suppose that any person does hearken to the reproofs and instruction of wisdom,
and obey her dictates, while a fool, and antecedent to his having and
exercising any wisdom. To hearken to wisdom, and turn at her reproof, is surely
itself wise, or an instance and exercise of wisdom. If the dictates of wisdom
itself are wise; then it is not folly, but wisdom, to hearken to them. If this
is not wisdom, it will be difficult to show what is wisdom, or that there is
any such thing in the universe.

The doctor concludes this argument by saying, I may venture to appeal to any
wise man, whether such a promise would be agreeable to the wisdom of God. P. 58.
I will venture my character for wisdom, with the public, and with the doctor
himself, so far as to say, that whatever promise is made to hearkening to
wisdom, and turning at her repoof, is a promise made to a wise act or the
exercise of wisdom; and that such a promise may be agreeable to the wisdom of
God. And I hope the doctor will, for time to come, be so wise, and so much of a
divine and philosopher, as not to assert, or even think the contrary.

I COME now to consider the doctors arguments to prove that hungering and
thirsting after righteousness, intends the exercises of the unregenerate. He
says, there is not the least ground to doubt but that convinced, awakened
sinners, may and do often, thus hunger and thirst after righteousness. P. 60.


I answer, Hungering and thirsting supposes and implies, yea consists in a
relish of, and appetite to, the things hungered and thirsted after. So far
therefore as sinners are without any real, true appetite to holiness or
righteousness, and have no relish and love for it, But an aversion to it; just
so far there is ground to doubt, whether they hunger and thirst after it: Yea,
there is ground of assurance that they do not. But the unregenerate have no
such appetite; for their unregeneracy consists in the want of it, and the
perfect prevalence and dominion of and inclination and appetite directly
contrary hereto. Therefore, whatever else they may hunger and thirst after,
they do not hunger and thirst after righteousness.

Besides, if these words of our Savior are considered in their connection, it
will appear unreasonable to apply them to the unregencrate. Hungering and
thirsting after righteousness, is spoken of as an abiding, constant exercise,
and points out a character, as much as any of the rest of these beatitudes;
such as the poor in spirit, the merciful, the pure in heart, etc. The doctor I
conclude, will not suppose that the other exercises or characters mentioned
here, intend the transient acts of the unregenerate; but the abiding exercises
and character of true christians, which are peculiar and essential to them as
such. And there is no reason why this one expression should be singled out, as
belonging to the unregencrate only; and not to those, whose temper and
exercises Christ is characterizing through this whole passage.

But against this the doctor argues in the following words, If any should say
that the regenerate only, or such as have already attained unto righteousness,
can be supposed to hunger and thirst after righteousness; this were altogether
as contrary to reason and good sense, as to say, that a man must eat a good
meal, in order to be hungry in a literal sense; and that he must drink an
hearty draught, in order to be a-thirst.

The mis-representation and absurdity contained in these words must appear, I
think, to all who I will calmly attend to the matter. Regeneration; does not
consist in any exercise of the mind, or any enjoyment: but by being regenerated
a foundation is laid in the mind for holy exercises, for hungering and
thirsting after rightcouness, and eating and drinkirg in a spiritual sense, In
regeneration is given what may be called an appetite to holiness or a right
taste and disposition. And the exercises of this new taste or appetite, in
which the mind hungers and thirsts, eats and drinks, and enjoys spiritual
objects, follow regeneration, and are the effect of it. The regenerate
therefore have not "attained unto righteousness," or active holiness, neither
have they eat and drank so as to be satisfied, until the appetite given in
regeneration is exercised in hungering and thirsting after holiness: which
appetite, thus exercised, is always gratified in the enjoyment of the object
toward which is exercised. And thus the promise of Christ is always fulfilled:
For men never are filled or satisfied, but in the exercise of holiness; that
is, in loving and delighting in divine things, or in hungering and thirsting
after righteousness. But in this way, they never fail of being satisfied or
filled. The doctor therefore wholly mis-represents the matter. If he had put
the case properly, and according to truth, it would stand thus. "If any should
say, that the regenerate only can be supposed to hunger and thirst after
righteousness; this were altogether as contrary to reason and good sense, as to
say, that a man must" have a stomach prepared, or an appetite to relish food
and drink, in order to his hungering after, or desiring, them. But that this is
perfectly agreeable to reason and good sense, I trust, will not be disputed by
any one, who has the least degree of either. And it may be therefore added,
that to suppose that the unregenerate do ever hunger and thirst after
righteousness, as the hungry man desires food, or the thirsty, drink, is
altogether as contrary to all reason and good sense, as to say, that a man
wholly destitute of any appetite to food and drink, or with a perfect antipathy
against them, is hungery and thirsty in a literal sense, and earnestly longs
for them.

The doctor goes on to say, This benediction and promise, more especially
respect unregenerate, heavy laden sinners: as do also such gracious invitations
and promises as these -- Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters --
Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good. -- Isaiah lv, 1, 2
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst.
John iv. 14
I am the bread of life, he that cometheth unto me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me, shall never thirst. Chap. vi. 35.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink -- This he spoke of the
spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. Chap. vii. 37-39.
-- Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Rev. xxii. 17.


Concerning these passages of scripture it may be observed, 1. That if the
invitations and promises contained in them are made to unregenerate sinners,
and wholly respect their exercises and doings while such; then the
unregenerate, while such, come to the waters of life, and do actually drink of
this water: yea, they come to Christ and believe on him. For the invitation is
to this, and to this only the promise is made. Of this any one may be certain,
by carefully reading the quoted passages over. It seems the doctor supposes the
unregenerate do all this, by his thus quoting these words, as otherwise they
are not to his purpose. When he shall prove this, we will acknowledge he has
gained his point: but till then, we must be confident that none come to Christ,
unless they are drawn by the regenerating influences of God's spirit; and that
they who believe on him are born of God: and that men's unwillingness, or
opposition of heart to coming to Christ, to coming and taking the water of
life, is the only ground of the necessity of their being born again, in order
to see the kingdom of God. If therefore these passages are parallel to that
under consideration, which I am ready to allow, then hungering and thirsting
after righteousness is the same with coming to Christ, and believing on him;
therefore is peculiar to the regenerate. This leads me to observe,

2dly, That the hungering and thirsting mentioned in these passages, does not
intend, at least in all of them, a hungering and thirsting after righteousness:
but something else. When Christ says, "He that comes unto me shall never
hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst;" he does not mean a
hungering and thirsting after righteousness. He makes no promise here to this
hungering and thirsting, which he does to hungering and thirsting after
righteousness; but the promise is made to coming to him, and believing on him;
and he expressly distinguishes the hungering and thirsting he here speaks of
from believeing, etc. and represents it as inconsistent with it. He that
believes on him shall not hunger and thirst: the one is not, cannot be, where
the other is. Moreover, our Savior here asserts that they who come to him,
etc. shall never have any more of that hunger and thirst he here speaks of. But
will any christian believe, that no real saint ever hungers and thirsts after
righteousness? Have they not a relish and thirst for the waters of life?
Surely, they have strong desires after, and their souls thirst for, God, even
the living God: And as new born babes they desire the sincere milk of the word,
that they may grow thereby. By hungering and thirsting then, Christ here means,
a being in a miserable, destitute state; or unsatisfied desires, uneasiness and
want, without any thing to afford relief; which is sometimes, if not often,
meant by hungering and thirsting in scripture. He here promises that they who
come to him and drink the water of life, shall never hunger and thirst again in
this sense: shall no more be in that destitute, miserable state, in which they
were before; which may well be represented by a person famishing with hunger
and thirst, without any thing to relieve and satisfy him.

Let us now hear the doctor's argument from these words. How unreasonable? how
unscriptural, says he, were it to suppose, that by those who hunger and thirst
after righteousness, our Lord intends only the regenerate: or such as have
already eaten and drank of that spiritual bread and water, which he gives?
Especially, when he declares above, that such persons shall neither hunger nor
thirst again!

As all the strength of the argument in these words lies in the supposition,
that when our Lord says, he that comes to him, etc. shall neither hunger nor
thirst again, he means hungering and thirsting after righteousness, what has
been just observed, serves to show how groundless and absurd it is. If the
doctor's argument is good, it proves that by those who hunger and thirst after
righteousness, our Lord intends only the unregenerate; and that the regenerate
never do thus hunger and thirst; so have no true desires after God and
holiness. Yea, it proves, according to the doctor's sense of the words, that
the regenerate do not desire salvation. By hungering and thirsting after
righteousness, is meant, "Strong and ardent desires to attain the
righteousness, and so the salvation revealed in the gospel," as the doctor
explains it. Therefore, according to him, the regenerate never hunger nor
thirst after righteousness, nor earnestly desire salvation; this being peculiar
to the unregenerate. According to this, neither David, nor Paul, nor any of the
worthies we have on sacred record, were regenerate; for they hungered and
thirsted after righteousness; they had strong and ardent desires after
righteousness and salvation.

If these things are duly considered, it will, I believe, appear, that this
argument of the doctor's, takes all its seeming strength only from a gingle of
words, by jumbling several texts together, which have not the same meaning; and
which, if they were taken in the doctor's sense of them, would be inconsistent
with each other; with the rest of the bible; with common sense, and even with
the doctor himself.

And now the reader is to judge, whether in this view of the case, the doctor
had any real ground for the following words. "Can any man read this, and yet
suppose, that hungering and thirsting after righteousness, in the sense of our
Savior, is always subsequent, never prior, to coming to him, or to
regeneration? If he can, however good his heart may be, no one has much reason
to envy him his head."

Why does the doctor express himself so guardedly? "ALWAYS subsequent, NEVER
prior to regeneration. If his argument above is good, and the scriptures
referred to any thing to the purpose; it follows, as has been shown, that
hungering and thirsting after righteousness, or a desire of salvation is never
subsequent, but always prior to regeneration: And if this is not true, the
argument comes to nothing. If any man may think hungering and thirsting is ever
consequent, and not always prior to regeneration; he may, as consistently with
all the doctor has said, think this is always subsequent, never prior to
regeneration. But if the doctor had truly and fully expressed the genuine
consequence of his premises, he would have quite spoiled his argument; and it
would have appeared, at first view, that he had proved too much for himself, or
any body else.

It appears by the last sentence quoted, that I have sufficiently endangered my
head to the doctor -- However good the doctor's may be in the main, most
readers, I imagine, will take leave to think it was not perfectly right in this
instance, at least. And I will persume to say in my turn: Can any man read
this, and yet think the doctor's argument strong and consistent? If he can, no
one, I am sure, has any reason to envy him his head.

THE doctors argument, to prove that when our Savior promises good things, to
them that ask for them, he means the asking of the unregenerate, shall be next
considered. He having observed, that, "the good things promised, are such as
are comprehended in the gift of the Spirit," goes on to say, The promise of
which, in consequence of asking, seeking and knocking, is so far from supposing
that the persons who do so, are already regenerate, or that the Spirit is given
them prior to their asking; that it rather, implies the direct contrary: viz.
that they had not the spirit in the sense here intended. For if they are
supposed, at the time of their asking, to have the Spirit of God dwelling in
them, to abide with them for ever, as all the sons of God by regeneration have,
what becomes of the promise? What are they to have in consequence of asking? Is
it only the continuance of the Spirit, or larger measures of it? But these are,
I think, never called, giving the spirit, in the language of scripture: which
means the original bestowment of it [or him] on such as were destitute of it;
in consequence of which, they are said to be born of the Spirit, or of God. As
a man is but once born of God, or of the spirit, so the Spirit is, properly
speaking, "never given more than once: For being once given, he is to be in,
and abide with believers for ever." P. 64.


If the following things are attended to, it will be easily seen how little
weight there is in this argument.

1. The regeneration is produced by the Spirit of God: yet in affecting this
change, he is not given, properly speaking, to abide in them for ever, as a
promised, abiding principle of holiness: but the holy spirit is thus given,
after regeneration, in consequence of faith in Jesus Christ, to which the gift
of the Spirit is often and always promised. The spirit of God in regenerating
men, operates not as a promised gift or agent; but regeneration is effected as
an unpromised favor. There are no promises to any particular persons, of the
gift of the Spirit, in this sense, to produce this change in them, in which
they are wholly passive: nor are there any promises in the bible to
regeneration itself, or to the regenerate, antecedent to any exercise of
holiness, but only to those exercises, which are the fruit and consequence of
regeneration. This remark is sufficient to show the doctor's mistake, in
supposing that the spirit of God is given in regeneration, as the spirit of
promise, to abide with them for ever; on which mistake the whole force of his
argument rests. But this will be more fully confirmed by what follows.

2. Though the spirit of God is in a sense given in regeneration, as it is an
effect produced by the spirit; yet he is not herein given as he is to the
believer, as a promised, abiding principle of holiness. In this latter sense,
in which sense alone he is promised, he is given to those who believe, or those
who ask him, which are really one and the same thing, as will be more fully
considered by and by. Christ promises the spirit to those who come to him, or
believe on him. "Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink. He that believes on me as the scripture has said, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water. This spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive." John vii. 37, 38, 39.
Now I trust the doctor will not deny that men must be regenerated, or born of
God, antecedent to their believing on Christ, or in order to this: If he
should, the apostle John will confute him; for he says, "Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God." 1. John v. 1.
If they who believe on Christ are already born of God; then when Christ
promises the Spirit to them who believe on him, he means something by the gift
of the Spirit which is not given in regeneration, and something more, even that
he should be in them for ever as an abiding principle of spiritual life or
holiness. Exactly parallel to this, are the words spoken by the same person,
long before, "Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto
you." Prove. i. 23.
To turn at wisdom's reproof, is the same with coming to Christ, or believing
on him; and in consequence of this, the spirit is promised to be poured out
upon them, as our Savior promises the Spirit to those who come to him, by the
same metaphor, water. We may not hence infer that persons are to turn to Christ
without the Spirit, or antecedent to regeneration; but that being regenerated
by the unpromised influence of the divine Spirit, they turn at wisdom's
reproof, come to Christ, and believe on him, and so ask him for all good
things; to which the Spirit is promsed, to be in them for ever. We hence see
how greatly mistaken the doctor was in supposing in the passage above quoted,
that when the scripture speaks of giving the Spirit, it always means, "the
original bestowment of him, in consequence of which men are said to be born of
the Spirit of God." For our Savior speaks of giving the Spirit to them who
believe on him; but believing on him is in consequence of the original
bestowment of the Spirit in regeneration: for such, St. John says, are already
born of God. Therefore, after men have received the Spirit, so far as is
necessary in order to their being born of God, they must believe on Christ, or
come to him, and ask him, in order to receive the Spirit in the sense in which
he is promised by Christ.

Exactly agreeable to this are the words of St. Paul. "That we might receive
the promise of the Spirit through faith Gal. iii. 14.
" "In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise." Rph. i. 13.
Here he speaks of the gift of the Spirit as promised to men, in which he
doubtless has reference to the promise of Christ now under consideration, among
others. And this, he says, they received through faith, and after they bad
believed: therefore after they were regenerate. Faith then is the condition of
this promise, and not any doings of the unregenerate. Again he says, "And
because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts." Gal. iv. 6.
He here speaks of the gift or bestowment of the Spirit in consequence of their
being the sons of God: and he had just told how they became the sons or
children of God: viz. that they were "all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus" Chap. iii. 26.
And it is worthy of remark here, that the promise which Christ makes of the
spirit to his disciples, to abide with them forever, to which the doctor
alludes, is made to those who were already regenerate; and he expressly says,
the world, that is, the unregenerate, cannot receive the Spirit in the sense in
which he is here promised. See John xiv. 16, 17.
He therefore does not mean what the doctor calls "the original bestowment" of
the Spirit. If the doctor had well attended to all this, the paragraph of his,
now under consideration, would most probably never have seen the light.

3. Though the spirit operates in a sense and degree in regeneration; yet as he
does not regenerate men as being given as an abiding principle of life, but
this change is produced as an unpromised favor, which neither unites them to
Christ, nor gives them an interest to any promise in the bible, there appears
great propriety in promising the Spirit as an abiding principle of eternal
life, which comprehends all good things, to those exercises or acts by which
the regenerate actively unite themselves to Christ, and come to him, trust in
him, and ask in his name for this great benefit. And our being directed to
believe on Christ in order to this, and ask for the Spirit in this sense, with
a promise that he shall be given, is no argument, that in order to thus
believing and asking, we must not first be born of God, therefore the doctor's
argument is, wholly without foundation. The doctor himself allows that persons
must have the influences of the Spirit of God in order to strive, or ask for
the Spirit so as to be entitled to the promise. See P. 21, 40, 73.
Therefore they have the Spirit in some sense when they ask, and in order to
their asking: and therefore, according to him, the promise of the Spirit to
them who ask does not imply that persons must not have the Spirit in order to
ask. If therefore there is any reason in what he says, which indeed there is
not, it is as much against himself, as any body else.

4. It is acknowledged that the Spirit is given but once as he is promised by
our Savior. He is given to believers never to be taken away: but this gift of
the Spirit men never receive in regeneration, as has been shown; but in
consequence of that faith, that coming to Christ, and asking him, for which
regeneration lays the only foundation. And as this gift is promised to
believing and asking; so it can be received in no other way. And never is given
but in consequence of asking.

5. As this gift is first received in a way of believing and asking, so it is
continued, and the Spirit abides in believers by the exercise of faith, or
their continuing to ask for the Spirit in a persevering way. Therefore men are
not only to ask for the Spirit in order to their first receiving this gift; but
are to continue to ask, in order to the Spirit's abiding in them, and
perfecting the work he has begun. This direction and promise of our Savior is
therefore applicable to true christians at all times.

The doctor does not expressly deny this; but the whole of what he says is
inconsistent with it. If believers having the Spirit dwelling in them, with a
promise that he shall abide with them for ever, renders it absurd for them any
more to ask for this favor, which comprises all good things: then certainly
they must ask no more, where once they are born of God, and have received the
Spirit. And if, true christians are never to ask for the Spirit, because he is
in them, and they have the promise that he shall abide with them for ever; then
they are never more to ask for any good thing, as all these are comprised in
the gift of the Spirit. Does the doctor mean to represent prayer as
inconsistent and absurd in the true christian, who is born of the Spirit of
God? It certainly is so, if there is any reason or propriety in what he says.

If, as the Doctor justly observes, all spiritual blessings and good things are
comprehended in the gift of the Spirit: and therefore asking for the spirit is
the same with asking for spiritual blessings, or good things in general. And if
when the Spirit is once given, as he is to all the regenerate, there is no
reason or propriety in asking for the Spirit; upon which position the doctor's
argument is wholly grounded: then they who are regenerate have no spiritual
good thing to ask for; consequently prayer is no part of their duty: This
belongs only to the unregenerate. How contrary to this is the scripture account
of the matter! This teaches true christians to pray without ceasing: to pray
always with all prayer. And this, although they already have the Spirit, and
pray by the Spirit. There we find such words as these. "Likewise the Spirit
also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought: but the Spirit itself makes intercession for us with groanings that
cannot be uttered." Romans viii. 26.
"Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit." Ephesians. vi. 18.
"Praying in the Holy Ghost." Juds. 20.


6. On the whole, it appears, that turning at wisdom's reproof, coming to
Christ, or believing on him, a willingness to take of the water of life, and
asking good things of God, are all one and the same thing, or at least imply
each other; and therefore the promise of the Spirit, which is the sum of all
good, is made to this. But in order to men's coming up to this condition of the
promise, they must, according to scripture, first be born of the Spirit of God.
In order really and heartily to ask for good things there must be a real and
hearty willingness to have them, or a desire of them considered as what they
are; and indeed, asking is nothing but a proper exercise and expression of such
willingness and desire. But this is the same with coming to Christ, receiving
him, or believing on him: In order to which men must be regenerated, as has
been before shown. They who with their whole hearts reject all the good things
the gospel offers, surely do not in any true sense ask for them. But this is
true of all unregenerate men.

SECTION VI. THE Doctor's ninth and twelfth arguments examined.
WE now come to the ninth argument which the doctor has produced in favor of
his hypothesis. This is in the following words. In Ezekiel [chap. 36.] God
declares his purpose to do many things for the people of Israel: and, among the
rest, to give them a new heart, and a new Spirit. But he adds afterward. I
will be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. Which
unquestionably relates in part to the new heart and new spirit, spoken of
before. Upon which we may briefly remark, That eternal life, or salvation, is
connected in scripture with the having a new heart: That such an heart is the
gift of God: That he gives such an heart, not prior to, but in consequence of,
being enquired of, or sought to, for it. And consequently, that the enquiring
of God, here intended, is the act, not of the regenerate, but the unregenerate;
who are awakened to desire, and seck after it.

If this passage of scripture is duly attended to, it will appear, I doubt
not, that it affords no foundation for what the doctor attempts to argue from
it.

There are two things promised by God in this chapter, which he would do in
behalf of the people of Israel, now under his correction for their sins; both
of which depended, not on them, but on God's sovereign determination to do it,
not for their sakes, but for his own holy name's sake. This is repeatedly
declared in this very passage. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 22, 23.
God is through this whole passage represented, not as waiting for them to do
something, in order to his bestowing good things promised to them on this
condition; but declares what shall be, in which he himself is the first mover,
and which he will accomplish in and for them, independent of them.

1. One thing promised is, that he would bring them from the state of captivity
and affliction in which they now were in Babylon, and re-settle them in the
land of Canaan, in a state of prosperity, and there greatly increase and
multiply them.

2. The other thing which God here promises is, that in order to prepare them
for this deliverance, and prosperity, that it might be for their good, and the
glory of his name, he would take away the hard, obstinate, impenitent,
prayerless heart which they now appeared to have, and give them a new,
penitent, obedient, praying heart. They had now no heart to repent and humble
themselves and seek the Lord; but were stiff-necked, hard-hearted and most
rebellious. See Chap ii. iii.
Instead of humbling themselves under God's corrections, they were disposed to
justify themselves; and complained that they were injured: and that God's ways
toward them were not just and equal. Chap xviii. 33.
God here promises that he will take away this hard rebellious heart, and give
them "an heart of flesh;" a penitent heart; a heart to humble themselves, to
loath and abhor themselves for their iniquities and abominations: Ezekiel xviii.
31.
a heart to know their dependence on him, and seek him for that deliverance he
had promised to grant. When God says, "I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them." the meaning is, that they should be
brought to seek him in a sense of their dependence upon him for that
deliverance and enlargement which he had promised, which is mentioned in the
words immediately preceding and following these. And this seeking God is so far
from being the condition of their obtaining a humble, penitent, obedient heart,
that such an heart is necessary in order to this, and is implied in it. A heart
to seek God was a new heart, an heart entirely different from, and opposite to,
the temper and disposition they then had; and therefore is the very thing
promised, when God says, "I will give them an heart of flesh."

This restoration of the people of Israel and return to their own land, after
they had been long captivated and oppressed by their enemies, is many times
spoken of; and the temper and exercises of mind which they should be brought to
in order to this, is often mentioned in scripture, and represented by the
following expressions. "If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity
of their fathers, with their trespass which they have trespassed against me,
and that also they have walked contrary unto me. If then their uncircumcised
hearts be humbled, and they then accept the punishment of their iniquity: then
will I remember my covenant with Jacob, etc." Levit. xxvi 40, 41.
"But if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if
thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. -- If thou turn to the
Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice," etc. Deuteronomy iv. 29, 30
"And it shall come to pass when all these things are come upon thee, -- and
thou shall call them to mind among the nations whether the Lord thy God has
driven thee, and shall return unto the Lord thy God, and shall obey his voice
according to all that I command thee this day, with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul: that then the Lord thy God, will turn thy captivity, etc. Chap.
xxx. 1, 2, 3
"And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, -- to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, etc. And thou shall return and obey the voice of the
Lord, etc." ver. 6, 8.
"Yet if they shall bethink themselves, in the land whether they shall be
carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee, in the land of
them that carried them captives, saying we have sinned; -- and so return unto
thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, -- and pray unto thee,
toward their land: -- then hear thou their prayer and their supplication, etc.
1 King viii. 47, 48, 49.
"For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to
this land. -- And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me
with their whole heart." Jer. xxiv. 6, 7.
"Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for
me with all your heart. And I will be found of you, says the Lord, and I will
turn away your captivity, etc." Jer. xxix. 12, 13, 14.
Behold, I will bring them from the north country, etc. They shall come with
weeping, and with supplications will I lead them." Cap xxxi. 8, 9.
"And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations, whether they
shall be carried captives: -- and they shall loath themselves for the evils
which they have committed in all their abominations. And they shall know that I
am the Lord." Ezekiel. vi. 9, 10.
"And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new Spirit within you; and I
will take the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of
flesh: that they may walk in my statutes, etc." Chap. xi. 19, 20.
" A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. Then shall ye
remember your own ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall has
yourselves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations.
Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto you: be
ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel. Thus says the
Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it
for them, I will increase them with men like a flock, etc." Chap. xxxvi. 26,
27, 31, 32, 37


From these passages, thus put together and compared, and duly considered with
the context, I think the following things will be evident beyond dispute.

1. That to have their uncircumcised heart humbled, and circumcised to love the
Lord, a heart to know the Lord, and a new heart, is the same thing: and that
this implies, or is the only foundation of, repentance and turning to the Lord,
obeying his voice, doing his commandments, and walking in his statutes with
their whole heart: Which also implies, and is really the same with confessing
their iniquity, loathing themselves for their iniquities and abominations;
seeking the Lord, and searching for him with all the heart and with all the
soul; praying and making supplications to him, and enquiring of him to do these
things for them, i. e. to deliver and save them. The temper and exercises of
heart denoted in these several passages and by these different expressions,
are, as to substance, one and the same: at least any one of these things here
mentioned does imply all the rest; so that where that is found, there the other
are as connected with, and implied in it. These scriptures cannot be
reconciled, or even understood, on any other supposition. The heart with which
they were to make supplication to God, enquire of him and seek him for what
they wanted, was not an uncircumcised, stupid, ignorant, hard, impenitent,
rebellious, proud heart; but an heart of flesh, a penitent, humble, obedient
heart; a heart to confess and forsake their sins, and loath themselves for them.

All these predictions and promises were examplified and fulfilled in Daniel,
Ezra and Nehemiah, and all the pious Jews who were returned from the Babylonish
captivity. They had a new heart; a heart directly opposite to the prevailing
temper and disposition of their fathers, who went into captivity. They enquired
of God, sought him with their whole heart, for the salvation they needed; and
returned with weeping and supplications, with repentance and confession of
their sins, and the sins of their fathers. See Dan. ix. 1,-9 Ezra. vii. 10,
viii. 21,-23. ix 5,-15. Neh. I and ix.
And it may be of use here to observe, that Nehemiah represents the condition
of their finding mercy, not to be a seeking God with a hard, impenitent heart,
but a penitent, obedient one, which is the same with a desire to fear God's
name. "Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou command thy servant
Moses, saying, if ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the nations:
But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them, etc." O Lord, I
beseech thee, let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of -- thy servants, who
desire to fear thy name." Chap i. 8, 9, 11.


And as this temporal salvation was promised to seeking God with their whole
hearts, and enquiring of him to do it for them; so that eternal salvation, of
which this was an emblem, is promised to this same condition. "The humble shall
see this and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek God." Psalm. lxix. 32.
"Let all those that seek thee, rejoice, and be glad in thee: and let such as
love thy salvation say continually, let God be magnified." Psalm. lxx. 4.
"Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.
Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with their whole
heart." Psalm. cxix. 1, 2.
" Seek, and ye shall find." Matthew. vii. 7.
"Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved." Rom x. 13.
But who are they who seek God with their whole hearts? -- Not the proud,
impenitent, disobedient and heard hearted; but the humble; they who love the
salvation of God, they who are undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the
Lord; who have clean hands and a pure heart. See Psalm. xiv 3, 4, 5, 6.
The Psalmist, says "the wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not
seek after God." Psalm. x. 4.
And St. Paul tells us in a quotation from the psalmist, that there is no man
in his natural, unrenewed state, that seeks after God. Rom iii 11.
And who call upon the name of the Lord? Not the blind, rebellious and
unbelieving as all the unregenerate are: for how shall they call on him, in
whom they have not believed?" Rom x. 14.


2. It is also evident, that this condition of their deliverance and salvation,
the whole of it taken together, is itself promised by God, as what he would
work in them. God himself promises not only to deliver them out of captivity;
but to circumcise their hearts, to give them an heart of flesh, by which they
should become a humble penitent people, and turn to him, and seek him with all
their heart, as a proper preparative for the outward deliverance he had
promised. When God says, in the text under consideration, "I will yet for this
be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them," it is to be
considered as a promise that he will bring them to this, by giving them a
humble, praying heart, which they were far from then; which therefore must be a
new heart. God promises that he will bring them to seek him with their whole
hearts, which is expressed thus in words before cited, "they shall come with
weeping, and with supplications will I lead them." But they could not be
brought to this, while their hearts were uncircumcised, and hearts of stone;
but in order to this, God must circumcise their hearts to love him, and give
them an heart of flesh; and it was impossible to accomplsh it any other. way.
So far is this seeking God from being antecedent to a new heart, and required,
as what must take place in order to it.

What do they mean who flatter sinners that they may sincerely and heartily, or
with their whole hearts seek a new heart, as the condition of obtaining it, and
that to which a new heart is promised? Are not all the exercises of an
impenitent, rebellious heart, impenitent, rebellious exercises? and does not
the old heart perfectly hate and oppose a new heart? Does not the flesh lust
against the spirit? and are not these contrary the one to the other? What
sinceriry and heartiness then is there in asking for a new heart with a heart
so perfectly opposite to the thing asked for? The doctor says, "It were highly
absurd to suppose, that a man must have a new heart, in order to his enquiring
of, or seeking God, in such a manner, as to obtain such an heart of him." P. 59.
It may be replied, Not more absurd, than to suppose, that a person under the
dominion of an hard, impenitent, rebellious heart, does, with such an heart,
even with all his heart, desire a humble, broken heart, and truly and
sincerely seek for it. For this is as absurd as to suppose that sin and
obstinacy itself is reconciled to holiness, and subjection to God's law. There
is no such thing supposed in the bible; nor will common sense admit of it,
however commonly it has been supposed; and though the doctor has done it, not
only in the argument under consideration, but through all his performance.

On the whole, does it not appear beyond contradiction, from this view of the
case, that enquiring of God, in the text under consideration, is the same with
what is called by Jeremiah, when speaking of the same thing, seeking God, and
searching for him with their WHOLE HEARTS; and that this is seeking God with a
new heart. If so, the doctor has wholly perverted this passage. -- I have been
the more particular on this text, because it is so strangely mis-understood,
not only by the doctor, but by many others.

THE doctor takes his twelfth argument from the following words of the apostle
Peter. "According as his divine power has given unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called
us to glory and virtue: whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises, that by these you might be made partakers of the divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust." 2 Peter i. 3,
4.


By the "things pertaining to life and godliness," the doctor understands, the
external privileges of the gospel, among which he reckons "the great and
precious promises." The end of which, he says, is, our being made "partakers of
the divine nature," which is the same with a new heart. And "escaping the
corruptions that are in the world through lusts." he takes to be the same with
striving to enter in at the strait gate. And he finally observes," that this
divine nature or new heart, is given in a way of promise, or in the fulfillment
of the promises." Hence he infers that there are promises of a new heart to the
unregenerate, who strive to enter in at the strait gate.

If by "all things partaining to life and godliness" are meant the gifts,
qualifications and peculiar advantages bestowed by the divine power, even that
mighty power, which is exercised toward them who believe, Ephesians. i. 19.
bestowed, I say, on true christians, to whom the apostle is speaking, who have
obtained precious faith, through or in the righteousness of God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. ver. 1.
If by, "exceeding great and precious promises" are meant the promises of all
good things, made to God's people, but more especially of the heavenly
inheritance. And by "partaking of the divine nature is meant this perfect
purity and holiness for which all true christians are candidates; for which
they are longing, and to which they shall all be finally brought. And by
"escaping the corruption that is in the world through lust, is meant crucifying
the flesh with the affections and lusts, purifying ourselves from all
filthiness of flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor.
vii. 1.
and purifying ourselves as Christ is pure," 1 John iii. 3.
being encouraged and animated hereto by the great and precious promises made
to the people and servants of God, thus to "press toward the mark, for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" Phil. iii, 14.
"not being slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience
inherit the promises," Heb. vi. 12:
I say, if these several phrases are thus understood, the true sense of the
whole passage will be found in the following paraphrase.

I Peter an apostle of Jesus Christ write this epistle to all true believers.
My beloved brethren, as you have entered upon the christian life, so I
earnestly wish you may make great progress, and that all divine gifts and
graces may be multiplied and abound, in and by an increase in the knowledge of
God and the Savior. This it is most proper for me to wish for you, and I am
especially encouraged to do it, since by the exceeding greatness of God's
power, which has been exercised toward every one that believes, you have been
raised from the dead and quickened by the partaking of spiritual life and true
holiness, in the knowledge of him who has hereby effectually called and
furnished you to press on to the perfect holiness and glory of his eternal
kingdom.

And has also given you exceeding great and precious promises, that by these
you might be encouraged and animated to perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord, cleansing yourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, in the
denial of all ungodliness and every worldly lust.

Very parallel to these words are those of St. Paul. "Having therefore these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God." 2 Cor. viii. 1.
And several other passages, which might be mentioned.

The most natural and easy sense of these words, and the most agreeable to
parallel passages of scriptue, being given, there appears to be no foundation
in them for the argument the doctor attempts to find in them: It is therefore
needless particularly to show how groundless and forced is the meaning which he
puts upon them.

THE doctor's arguments have been now, I trust, fairly and fully considered.
And it must be left to those who interest themselves in this question to judge,
whether he has in any measure proved, that there are any promises in the bible
of regenerating grace or salvation, to the doings of the unregenerate. The
doctor is very sanguine in the matter, and concludes that he has produced, not
only satisfactory and conclusive evidence of it; but a full blaze of it, so as
to take away even the possibility of doubt, from any person of a tolerable
comprehension of mind, who seriously attends to it; -- unless he is under the
influence of some very unhappy, though he does not say, criminal prejudice. P.
70, 71.
On which side the evidence lies, where the prejudice is, and how far criminal,
let the unprejudiced judge. That all may be under the better advantage to do
this, the following sections are added.

SECTION VII. A short and plain state of the case.
WHILE we have been attending to the doctor's state of the question, and his
arguments to support the tenet he espouses, some things have been said which,
it is hoped, will help to set this matter in a true light. However, it may not
be improper here to collect the whole of this kind, so as to give a plain short
view of the case.

Man is not only by sin plunged into a state of infinite guilt; from which he
cannot be delivered, consistent with the law and moral government he is under,
unless he is interested in, or united to, the Mediator: but he has also by his
apostasy lost the moral image of God, or all true holiness; and consequently is
wholly corrupt, and under the dominion of appetites and inclinations directly
contrary to God and his law. Dr. Mayhew allows that men are destitute of all
true holiness until they are born again, or have a new heart given them in
regeneration. [P. 42.] Yet, [P. 73] he represents the exercises and doings of
the unregenerate, as having something of the nature of obedience to God in
them; and therefore GOOD; and consequently not wholly unpleasing to God. I
should be glad to know of the doctor what that obedience is, which falls wholly
short of true holiness. If it is obeaience to God's law, it is true holiness,
if there is any such thing in nature; if it is not obedience to God's law, How,
and in what sense is it any obedience at al.? He will be pleased also to tell
us, what that is in the exercises and doings of the unregenerate, which is of
the nature of GOOD, and yet has nothing of the nature of true holiness. The
world has yet found out but two sorts of good, viz natural and moral, holiness
and happiness. But as the doctor means neither of these by the GOOD that is
found with unregenerate men; he would oblige the world, if he would tell what
this new discovered GOOD is.

The doctor's representing the doings of wicked men as good, and sense degree
pleasing to God, brings to my mind the words of Malathy. [chap. Ii. 17.] "Ye
have wearied the Lord with your words: yet you say. Wherein have we wearied
him? When ye say, Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord,
and he delights in them." Our Savior says, "A corrupt tree cannot bring
forth good fruit." Very agreeable to this, a noted author well observes," It is
the good tree ONLY, that brings forth good fruit; and it is ONLY a good men,
out of the good treasure of his heart, that brings forth good things. An HOLY
PRINCIPLE within, is considered in scripture as prior to good works, the latter
being the exertions and operations of the former." Dr. Mayhew's sermons on
various subjects. p. 191..


This is the carnal mind which the scripture says, "is enmity against God; For
it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be." Romans viii.
This corruption or viciousness of heart being so great and universal, the
sinner will not repent, or have any right exercises toward God and his law,
until his heart is in some degree renewed and set right. In this state the
gospel finds man; in which pardon and salvation, through a mediator are freely
offered to his acceptance; and all are invited to come to Christ, believe on
him and trust in him, for all! they want; being assured, that on this condition,
Christ, with all his benefits, shall be theirs.

But as the way in which this salvation is given, is in a peculiar manner
adapted to do honor to the law which the sinner has broken, and vindicate the
divine character, to which he is a perfect enemy: and as the Savior himself,
in all he has done in the character of a Mediator, has above all others
condemned sin, and manifested his love of righteousness and hatred of iniquity:
and as the salvation itself which he gives, consists summarily in deliverance
from sin, and the exercise and enjoyment of true holiness, the sinner is in a
peculiar manner an enemy to the gospel; to the Mediator, viewed in his true
character; to the way in which he saves sinners; and to the salvation itself.
And he always continues so while an enemy to holiness, and an impenitent: or
until his heart is changed, and he comes to a new temper and disposition. This
change of the corrupt heart is in scripture spoken of as the work of the Spirit
of God, in which sinners are said to be born of the Spirit, to have the stony
heart taken away and an heart of flesh, or a new heart given; to be quickened,
or made alive from the dead; created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. It
is also called the washing; of regeneration and the renewing of the the Holy
Ghost.

As men do in their natural state with their whole hearts reject the good
things offered in the gospel: and their doing so, is wholly owing to an
inexcutable wickedness of heart, God is not obliged, in reason or justice, to
remove this voluntary wicked inexcusable opposition and bring them to a willing
compliance with his proposals: Neither has he obliged himself to do this for
any, by promises to any thing which they shall do, as the condition of it.
Therefore whenever, and in whatever instance, God takes away the heart of
stone, and gives a new heart, he acts as being unobliged, or sovereignly, and
bestows an unpromised favor; and so "has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and
whom he will be hardens" i. e. leaves under the dominion of a hard, stony
heart. But when God gives a new heart in regeneration, a foundation is laid in
the mind for a discerning of the truths, of the gospel in their real beauty and
excellency, (to which the unregenerate heart, or the mind under the dominion of
lust is wholly blind) and for those right exercises, in which faith or
christian holiness consists. And all the promises of the gospel are made to
these exercises of the mind, in which the mind discerns divine truth in some
measure as it is, and heartily embraces the gospel, etc. And the first exercise
of this kind, intitles the person to all divine promises; to pardon of sin, and
eternal life, and to all those divine influences, by which he shall persevere
in faith and holiness, until he shall be perfectly delivered from all sin, and
awake complete in God's likeness.

There must therefore be a distinction kept up between regeneration, which is
the work of God in giving a new heart, and in which men are perfectly passive;
and active conversion in which men, being regenerated, turn from sin to God, in
the exercise of repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;
and in consequence of which they are pardoned and received to favor, and a
title to eternal life; and have the gift of the Spirit to dwell with them for
ever, as an abiding principle of life and holiness. All this, with every
benefit which men receive by Christ, is promised to those who believe, or
heartily embrace gospel, and not to regeneration: for to this, considered as
antecedent to all action, and only as tho foundation of right exercise, no
promise is made. Neither are those influences by which men are regenerated in
this sense, meant by giving, or receiving the Spirit, as the Spirit of promise,
by which believers, and they only, are sealed to the day of redemption: but men
receive the Spirit, in this sense, as a spirit of adaption, by which all God's
children are led, by faith, or a hearty receiving Christ with all his benefits.
See John i. 12, Gal. iii. 14, 26, Ephesians. i. 13.
They who will not make and understand this distinction, must think and talk in
some measure unintelligibly on this point.

This change therefore, called regeneration, by which a new heart is given; as
the foundation of all true discerning of the things of God's moral kingdom, and
of all right exercises of heart; this change, I say, "wrought by the Spirit of
God immediately and instantaneously, and altogether imperceptibly to the person
who is the subject of it; it being impossible that he should know what God has
done for him, but by a conciousness of his own views and exercises, which are
the fruit and consequence of the divine operation. These views and exercises of
the regenerate, in which they turn from sin to God, or embrace the gospel, are
often in scripture spoken of as included in that change which is called a being
born again, etc. as all the change which is perceptible, and in which man is
active consists in this. And this is sometimes called by divines active
conversion, to distinguish it from regeneration, or that change in which men
are passive.

Men being washed by regeneration, and renewed by the Holy Ghost; the hard
rebellious heart being subdued in a degree, and a new and opposite biass, which
is by our Savior called an honest and good heart, being given, the light and
truth of God's word, enters into the mind, and it discerns the things of the
Spirit of God in their reality, beauty, wisdom, glory: and in this view and
sense of divine truths, the heart approves of the divine character, comes to
Christ for life, or believes on him, and sincerely and heartily asks for the
Spirit, or that living water which Christ gives, and which comprehends all good
things. And to this hugering and thirsting after righteousness, coming to
Christ, believing on him and trasting in him; to this asking, knocking,
seeking, divine promises are made, even to the first and lowest degree of this
kind of exercise. To such the Spirit is given as a fountain; "a well of living
water, springing up into everlasting life." John iv. 14.
And by this actively cleaving to Jesus Christ, in a view of his true character
as Mediator and Savior, and uniting themselves to him, a proper foundation is
laid for their being looked upon and treated, as being in him, and in a sense
one with him; so that on his account, out of respect to his merit and
worthiness, they are pardoned and received to favor; they become the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus, and heirs of eternal life. And as they have
thus received Christ Jesus the Lord, so they walk in him; the life they live is
by faith on the Son of God; and consists in cleaving to Christ in all proper
ways; in coming to him, living upon him, asking and receiving all good things
from him, as a free gift to the infinitely unworthy.

THE unregenerate Sinner may be in a sort convinced in his judgment and
conscience that he has by his sin exposed himself to eternal destruction; that
he can be delivered from this evil, and obtain salvation only by Jesus Christ,
by coming to him and believing on him; and that in order to this he must have a
new heart given him by God, etc. And he may have such a sense of his danger and
misery, and of the awful consequence of sin, as to fill his mind with great
uneasiness and distress. This may, while it continues, deaden him-to all carnal
gratifications, and make him afraid to indulge himself to any overt acts of
known sin; and lead him to make deliverance from future misery his great
concern, and earnestly to seek this in the use of all means; being all
attention to the great concerns of his soul, and a future world. But all this
does not alter the reigning temper and disposition of the heart. There may be
yet no more true hatred of sin than before, and a reigning enmity against the
divine character, and law, and against the gospel; and the heart may therefore
be as far from repentance, and acceptance of offered salvation by Jesus Christ
as ever, and really reject and abhor the good things offered in the gospel: and
so be far from truly desiring and asking for them, And this is certainly the
case with every unregenerate person, whatever concern and exercises he may have
about the salvation of his soul; and whatever he may pretend and think of
himself. If he thinks better of himself, as thousands do, it is all delusion:
And they who go about to strengthen and confirm men in such delusion, are
strengthening the cause of the prince of darkness, instead of promoting the
interest of Christ, and the salvation of sinners.

I shall therefore think myself doing God service, and that which tends to
promote the good of mankind, while I attempt to prove, that there are no
promises of regenerating grace or salvation, made to these exercises and doings
of the unregenerate in the holy scripture. This is the design of the following
section.

SECTION VIII. ARGUMENTS to prove that there are no promises of regenerating
grace or salvation, in the scripture, to the exercises and doings of
unregenerate men.
THAT the doctor's arguments to support the affirmative of the question before
us, are by no means satisfactory and conclusive, I have endeavored to show. I
shall now attempt to prove the negative, by suggesting as briefly as I can,
some. of the most obvious arguments which have occurred to my mind.

I. ARG. THAT there are no promises of regenerating grace made to the exercises
and doings of the unregenerate, may be argued from many particular passages in
holy scripture.

In scripture men are required to repent and believe, and turn to God on. pain
of eternal damnation, and are declared to be in a state of condemnation until
they do so. "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." Luke xiii. 3.
"He that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in
the name of the only begotten Son of God." John iii. 18.
"He that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abides on him." v. 36.
"He that believes not shall be damned." Mark xvi. 16.
If he that believes not shall be damned, is now under condemnation, and has
the wrath of God abiding on him, surely he has not at the same time, even while
he does not believe, a promise of God's favor and eternal life: for to be
condemned, and under God's wrath, and to be interested in the promises of God's
favor and eternal life at the same time, is a contradiction, and absolutely
impossible. But if the promises of the gospel are made to the doings of
unregenerate sinners, then I they have a title to God's favor, and eternal
salvation, antecedent to faith, or while they are unbelievers; and therefore
while they are condemned, and under the doom of eternal damnation. They are
therefore at the same time, interested in all the divine promises, under God's
favor and smiles, and accepted of him to a title to life; and yet under all the
curses written in God's book, in a state of condemnation, and under the wrath
of God. We cannot avoid this glaring absurdity and contradiction, without
concluding that there are no promises of saving mercy made to sinners, upon any
condition short of faith in Jesus Christ; and therefore may be sure there are
no such promises. Dr. Mayhew himself asserts, that all unregenerate men art
under a sentence of condemnation and death [p. 26] As sinful creatures, says
he, we are already exposed to perdition from the avageing justice of God; yea,
we are actually under a sentence of condemnation and death, till such time as
we are delivered there from, by having an interest in the redemption wrought
out by Christ. For, it is to them only that are in Christ Jesus, and so in him
as to walk, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, that there is no
condemnation. How he will reconcile this with unregenerate persons, who are
not, even according to him, in Christ, and do not walk after the spirit, but
after the flesh, being interested in promises of God's eternal favor, while
such, and on the account of what they have done, I am not able to Imagine. He
may perhaps attempt it now, though he once very justly thought it impossible.
This appears from the following words of his. There are no promises of future
glory and happiness made in the scriptures, to impenitent, persevering
transgressors. They are all made to those who confess and forsake their sins.
The gospel is so far from giving any title to future glory, to the impenitent
workers of iniquity, that it expressly condemns them, and cuts them off from
it. [He having cited several passages of scripture to prove this, goes on in
the following words, which are worthy of special note.] It is not SURELY
POSSIBLE, that the same gospel, which speaks thus to, and of, the wicked and
disobedient, condemning them to future woe and punishment, should, at THE SAME
TIME, entitle them, by its promies, to life everlasting. Serms. on several
sujects, p. 221.

It seems the doctors now believes that there are promises of future glory and
happiness made in scripture to impenitent, hard hearted sinners, who do not
consess and forsake their sins; and that it is very possible that the same
gospel which condemns unbelievers to future woe and punishment does at the same
time entitle them, by its promises, to life everlasting; and has wrote a book
to prove it. But as there is a real impossibility, and direct contradiction in
the case, no wonder his attempt has proved very unsuccessful.




AGAIN the first 13 verses in the viii, chap, of the Epistle to the Romans seem
not consistent with the notion that there are promises of salvation to the
unregenerate. It is there said that "to be carnally minded is death." Romans
viii. 6.
And that they who "live after the flesh, shall die." v. 13.
And they are represented as in a state of condemnation. v. 1.
And here all are represented as carnally minded, and being in the flesh, and
walking after the flesh, who have not the Spirit of Christ, and do not walk
after the Spirit. v. 4, 9.
But unregenerate persons have not the Spirit of Christ, and do not walk in the
Spirit: therefore they are those who are in the flesh, and walk after the flesh.

All unregenerate pesons then are, according to this, in a state of
condemnation and death, and are in the way to eternal destruction. But this
cannot be true if any, while in an unregenerate state, have a title to life, or
are interested in the promises of salvation. For he who has a title to life, or
is doing that to which the promises of salvation are made, is not in the way to
death; but in that which leads to life; neither is there any condemnation to
him. They who assert that there are promises of God's favor and eternal life,
to the exercises and doings of unregenerate men, point out a way for them to
walk in, while they are in the flesh, and walk after the flesh, which, they
say, is the way to life; and by walking in which, they shall not die, but live:
But St. Paul says, it is the way to death, and by walking in it, they shall
die: none being free from condemnation, and in the way to life, but they who
have the Spirit of God dwelling in them; do live after the the Spirit, do
through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body; are in the spirit, and led by
the Spirit; and so are the sons of God. Therefore these men do not agree with,
but directly contradict, St. Paul, or rather the Holy Ghost speaking by him.

St. Paul here divides men into two classes and no more: one are the sons of
God, who have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, who walk after the Spirit
and are led by the Spirit, and through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body. These are free from condemnation and death, and in the sure way to life.
In the opposite class are comprehended all others: who being in the flesh, and
walking after the flesh, are in a state of condemnation, and in the way which
leads to eternal destruction. This is exactly agreeable to our Savior's
representation, when he speaks of but two ways in which men are going, viz the
broad way which leads to destruction, and the narrow way which leads to
life. The former is the way of the ungodly, the unholy, the unregenerate, who
walk after the flesh, are under the dominion of a carnal mind which is enmity
against God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. The
latter is the way of good men, the way of righteousness, the way of holiness,
in which the redeemed, and none but such, do walk, etc. See a more full
repesentation of this, P. 7, 8.


MOREOVER, it is observable, that when the apostles went forth to preach the
gospel, they never directed men, who applied to them to know what they should
do to be saved, to any endeavors and doings short of true repentance, and
faith in Jesus Christ, as what would save them: but expressly told them that
they must repent and believe on Christ in order to this. Acts ii. 37, 38. Chap.
xvi. 30, 31.
And St. Paul speaks of his preaching as consisting summarily in inculcating
"repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." Chap. xx. 21.


Now, we cannot account for this, on supposition the endeavors and doings of
men, which are short of repentance and faith, are the condition of salvation,
having the promise of it made to them. For were this the case, they must have
directed them to these endeavors and doings, as what they must do in order to
be saved, and by doing which they should certainly obtain the salvation they
enquired after. And this must have been the drift and sum of their preaching,
and not repentance and faith: such as indeed has been the preaching of many
since that time. We may therefore be sure the apostles did not believe there
were any promises made to doings short of repentance and faith in Christ, but
that these were the lowest condition of salvation. This leads me to the

II. ARG. TO suppose that there are promises of salvation made to the doings of
unregenerate persons, is to make these doings the condition of salvation; and
not faith or repentance; or indeed any thing else which the scripture
represents as such.

That to which the promises of life and salvation are made, so that he who has
it, or attains to it, has a sure title to salvation, is certainly the condition
of salvation; but the exercises and doings of the unregenerate, are this
condition, if promises of salvation are made to them. Yea, according to this,
the doings of the unregenerate are the condition, and only condition of
justification. For they who have a title to God's favor and eternal life, are
no longer in a state of condemnation, as has been shown; to have a title to
God's special, eternal love and favor, and be heir of eternal life, certainly
implies every thing that is contained in justification. If then men are not
forgiven till they repent of their sins; are justified by faith; and therefore
not until they believe, and heartily embrace the gospel: In short, if one
tittle of the new Testament is true, there are no promises of salvation made to
the doings of the unregenerate. WHATSOEVER is necessary according to the terms
laid down in the gospel, in order to our having a title to eternal life in the
kingdom of heaven, is necessary in order to our being justified in this world.
But in order to our having such a title it is necessary, that we repent of our
sins, and obey the gospel: this is therefore necessary in order to
justification. Dr. Mayhew's sermon. on justification by faith, p. 219.


III. ARG. THAT there are no promises of salvation made to the exercises and
doings of the unregenerate, will be evident if it be considered, that such do
with their whole hearts oppose the way of salvation by Christ, and reject the
salvation offered by him. That this is true of all the unregenerate has been
shown; Sec. III.
so that there is no need of dwelling long upon it here. It has been observed
that in this men's unregeneracy consists so that to suppose them to be in any
degree friendly to the gospel at heart, is to suppose them to be regenerate: or
at least that they stand in no need of regeneration, in order to salvation. To
suppose the unregenerate are not at heart enemies to the way of salvation by
Christ, and that any of the exercises of their hearts about this salvation, are
not consistent with enmity against, and opposition to it, is to take away all
distinction between the regenerate and the unregenerate: To be sure, it takes
away that by which alone they are distinguished in scripture. If any are at a
loss about this, let them read their bibles over, with a special view to this
point: and then let them tell, what is meant by the unregenerate; what
unregeneracy consists in; and what regeneration is, on supposition the
unregenerate do not with their whole hearts reject Jesus Christ and oppose the
way of salvation by him, as being enemies to God and the Savior. If they are
not willing to be at this pains, let them turn to the viii. chap, to the
Romans, the passage just now under consideration. There it is said "the carnal
mind is enmity against God; -- is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be." That by the carnal mind is meant the unregenerate heart, in
distinction from those who are spiritually minded, have the Spirit of Christ,
and walk after the spirit; who love God, and are his children, has been just
now proved. And I know not how any one can doubt of this, who will carefully
read that chapter. But if the carnal, unregenerate heart, is full of enmity
against God and his law, it is equally an enemy to Jesus Christ and the gospel:
For the divine character and the holy law of God, are more fully vindicated and
honored, and are set in a clearer view, by Jesus Christ in the gospel, than
otherwise they could be; and are so interwoven through the whole gospel scheme,
that it cannot be understood and approved of, any further than God's law, and
his character therein expressed, are seen and loved: and therefore every degree
of enmity against God and his law, is, to the same degree, and in a peculiar
manner, enmity against Christ and the gospel.

Now that exercises of enmity against Christ, and opposition to the gospel, and
the salvation therein revealed and offered; or those which are consistent with
this, are made the condition of a title to and interest in this salvation; so
as that all the promises of the gospel are made to such exercises and acts, I
presume none will believe. This seems to be so self-evident, that it is
needless to go about to prove it. Nothing therefore seems necessary to decide
the point we are upon, but to keep in view the true state of the case, and
attend to the real character of the unregenerate, and the nature and quality of
all their actions.

It is therefore observable, that men, in arguing that there are promises to
the doings of the unregenerate, do always overlook the true character of such,
and of their exercises; yea suppose them to be in a degree friendly to Christ,
and the salvation by him. In order to prove that there are promises to the
unregenerate, they dress them up in the character which belongs, only to the
regenerate; so that by stripping them of this disguise, the boasted arguments
vanish into nothing but weakness and absurdity; and the truth arises into view,
and becomes clear beyond dispute. How far this is true of Dr. Mayhew's
performance, which has been under consideration, they who have read the
foregoing section must judge.


IV. ARG. If salvation is offered to all who heartily desire it, really choose
and accept of it, and so truly ask for it: it is offered on terms low enough:
as low as any can reasonably desire; yea, on the lowest conceivable or even
possible terms. But no unregenerate person comes up to these terms. Therefore
salvation is not offered or promised to any doings of the unregenerate.

If a free gift is offered and promised to any one that desires it, and is
willing to take it, it cannot be offered on lower or easier terms. If any
should say, 'Yes, it may be offered or promised to a person, whether he will
have it or no: so that he shall have it, even contrary to his will and choice.'
I answer, this is not to offer it on lower and easier terms. It is not to offer
it on any terms; neither is it properly any offer or promise at all: it is only
a declaration of what shall be; which is, all things considered, contrary to
the will and inclination of the person. But indeed there can be no such
declaration properly and truly made. A person while unwilling to accept of, and
have any gift and enjoyment 9 and while he rejects it with his whole heart, is
not capable of receiving it, or of cordially entertaining the offer of it; and
therefore is not a subject capable of such an offer, with a promise that it
shall be his, even while he undervalues, despises, and refuses to receive it.
If it is offered with a promise that it shall be his, as soon as he is heartily
willing to accept of it, and upon this condition only; it is offered on the
lowest terms that ever any offer was, or can be made. Now, it is granted that
the gospel offers salvation to all who will accept of it, or are truly willing
to have it. But as no unregenerate person is thus willing to accept of
salvation, no such one ever did, or ever will come up to these lowest possible
terms, on which salvation is offered and promised. This last proposition has
been proved in the third section, end under the last argument.
It would be highly absurd and ridiculous to offer that to any one, which is
the object of his peculiar aversion and hatred, under the notion of its being
his by something he is to do as the condition of it, while he continues thus
averse to it: And therefore no such offer was ever seriously and really made.
We may therefore be certain God has never done this: but that the lowest terms
on which salvation is offered and promised, imply a real choice of this
salvation, or a hearty acceptance of it. Dr. Mayhew has supposed and allowed
this, through the whole course of his arguments, and in all he says upon this
subject, as the attentive reader has observed. The only thing he can dispute,
is, that the unregenerate do not come up to these terms. When he will prove
they do, he will gain his point. For this therefore the public must wait on him.


IF it should here be said, that though unregenerate sinners are not willing to
accept of salvation which is freely offered; and that this is both their sin
and calamity: yet God may offer them regenerating grace; and promise to bring
them to a willingness to accept of salvation, by giving them a new heart, upon
terms which they, while unregenerate, may come up to; and so regeneration, and
consequently the whole of salvation, may be connected with this condition,
which really is something short of a hearty acceptance of salvation: for this
is one thing promised to be given, and is implied in regeneration.

I answer. If we suppose the grace of regeneration or a new heart, which
implies a heart to accept of and trust in Christ for salvation, to be offered
and promised to the unregenerate, on some condition which they are to come up
to and perform, while unregenerate; yet still this is an offer of that to which
their hearts are as much averse, as to salvation itself: they are as far from
accepting of such an offer, as they are from accepting of salvation, and reject
and despise it as much. The grace of regeneration, or a new heart, is as
contrary to the unregenerate heart, as salvation or holiness itself: the
unregenerate do oppose and reject this with their whole hearts; for it is
supposed their hearts are now in direct opposition to the new heart offered;
otherwise they would stand in no need of a new heart. If therefore God offers
and promises to give them a new heart, on any condition, which consists in
their exercise and doings, he makes this offer and promise to exercises and
doings which imply, or are consistent with, a real opposition to, and rejection
of, the thing offered and promised. The unregenerate heart hates and opposes a
new heart, just as much as it does the divine character and law, or Jesus
Christ and the gospel; and therefore is no more willing to receive the former
than the latter, but rejects it with perfect abhorence. Therefore there is
nothing which the unregenerate may be supposed to do, in order to obtain a new
heart, which is not itself an act of opposition, or consistent with the most
perfect opposition to that which he is supposed to be seeking. For instance: If
we should suppose that God offers and promises to give the unregenerate, a new
heart, on condition they will ask him for such a favor: this must mean an
asking without any true desire of the thing asked for; yea an asking which is
consistent with an opposing and rejecting the favor offered; and therefore
really no asking at all for a new heart, but for something else. For so far as
the new heart is opposite to the heart of the unregenerate, just so far does
the unregenerate heart oppose and hate the new heart, and reject the offer of
it; and that constantly, and in all its exercises which have any relation to,
and respect the new heart, which is the thing offered.

Thus it appears that there is the same difficulty and absurdity in supposing,
that a new heart is offered and promised to the doings of the unregenerate, by
which they would become willing to accept of Christ and salvation; as there is
in supposing, that eternal life is offered on some condition lower than a real
willingness to accept of it.

In a word, if we will not go beyond reason and plain common sense in this
matter, we shall conclude, that whatever offer of any favor or free gift God
makes to men, he offers it to their free acceptance, and promises that on this
condition it shall be their's: and consequently that they can have no title to
it, on any condition short of a hearty acceptance of it: And that an offer made
to a lower or easier condition, cannot be reasonably desired, or even supposed.
Therefore God in the gospel makes no offers and promises of salvation, or of
any thing connected with it, to the exercises and doings of the unregenerate.

V. ARG. FOR God to offer and promise salvation to those who with their whole
hearts hate and reject Jesus Christ in his character of Mediator, would be
altogether unbecoming: and really inconsistent with the gospel, and overthrow
it. The gospel opens a way of salvation for sinners through a Mediator; in
which they are pardoned, and received to favor, and a title to everlasting
life, purely out of respect to his merits and worthiness; so on his account and
in his name. And in this way alone can God pardon the sinner, receive him to
favor, and bestow eternal life on him, consistent with his honor and in a way
becoming his character, as supreme lawgiver and judge. But to pardon the sinner
and receive him to favor, and promisie eternal life to him, while he remains an
enemy to this Mediator, and opposes and rejects him in this charcter, would be
to act directly contrary to this plan; and really to dishonor the mediator, and
set him aside.

Therefore in the gospel sinners are represented as being saved ( i. e. brought
into a state of pardon and acceptance with God, and to a title to eternal life)
by the blood of Christ; or by his merit and worthiness being imputed to them,
or reckoned to their account. Accordingly it is by virtue of their union to
him, or being in him, that they are delivered from condemnation, justified,
etc. In this way God may be just, may act a wise and honorable part, so as in
no degree to injure his own character as moral governor; even while he
justifies, pardons and promises salvation to, him who, though infinitely
unworthy and ill-deserving in himself, believes in Jesus the Mediator: i. e.
who, in a view of his true character, heartily approves and accepts of him, so
as actively to unite himself to him, and be in him. See Romans iii. 26. v. i, 2.
viii (...)
He being thus in Christ, a proper foundation is laid for his being interested
in the Mediator's merits and worthiness; so that he is received to favor and a
title to eternal life purely out of respect to Him. Therefore all the promises
of God to sinners are said to be IN HIM, unto the glory of God. 2 Cor. i. 20.
They would not all be in Him, if sinners were interested in them while they
continued to hate and reject him, so were out of him: consequently would not be
to the glory of God; as this would be directly contray to the plan of pardoning
and receiving sinners to a title to life in and by a Mediator. Dr. Mayhew
spends some time to answer an objection against their being any promises to the
doings of the unregenerate viz that this supposes God to make promises to these
actions, which are not truly holy. [P. 72, etc] If truly holy actions might be
done by men, and yet they continue out of Christ, and in opposition to him, as
the unregenerate do; it must be confessed, there would be no more reason why
divine promises should be made to them, than to actions which are not holy: for
all sinners, considered as out of Christ, or not united to him, so as to be
interested in his merits, are on a level in this respect, whether holy or
unholy; they are infinitely unworthy and ill deserving, and cannot be received
to favor with God, and a little to life, until they are united to the
Mediator, so as to be interested in this merit and worthiness. If the doctor
therefore represents this objection in its full strength and import, it must be
owned it is as feeble as he supposes it to be. But if the objectors mean, that
the unregenerate do nothing in that holy manner, which is necessary in order to
their hearts being united to Christ the Mediator, so as to be a proper ground
of their being accepted to him, the doctor has not in the least degree answered
the objection. There may be a sufficient reason why no promises should be made
to the exercises of sinners, which have no degree of holiness in them; viz
because such exercises do not unite to Christ, or imply any union of heart to
him, but the contrary. It has been observed, that the gospel, or Christ and the
way of salvation by him, are so holy, that the unholy heart cannot be pleased
with, but must hate and oppose them. Therefore that exercise of heart by which
sinners embrace the gospels or unite themselves to Jesus Christ, by an
acceptance of him, must be an holy exercise. In this view, it is unreasonable
and absurd to suppose, that there are any promises of salvation, made to the
unholy doings of sinners; and therefore the objection stands good. But there
may be good reason why salvation should be promised to the holy exercises of
the regenerate; because, however imperfect they are, they are really an
acceptance of Christ, and unite them to him; so that they lay a proper
foundation for their being accepted in him, and receiving a title to the
heavenly inheritance for his sake: For, as the doctor well expresses it. "It is
for Christ's sake, that these promises are made to them." [P. 74.] But it has
been shown, that such promises cannot be made for Christ's sake, so these who
hate end reject Jesus Christ: But if promises are made to such, heaven and
Christ himself are promised to them, for their own sakes, or rather, for the
sake of their own unholy, wicked exercises and doings.

The doctor indeed endeavors to palliate this matter a little [P. 73] What he
says it to this effect, the temper and actions of his strivers, are really
different from those who are proceeding headlong in their criminal courses and
to say the least, are not so displeasing to God. And their doings may properly
be called obedience to God; and therefore have something of the nature of GOOD;
and so cannot be wholly unpleasing to God. It must therefore render them more
suitable objects of his favor and mercy than these are, who do not strive; but
commit iniquity with greediness." The doctor seems to be conscious that there
must be some GOOD qualification in the sinner in order to render him a suitable
object of God's favor and mercy; otherwise he would not take so much pains to
find something of this kind in those whom be supposs the objects of this favor.
But what does he mean by their being suitable, or more suitable objects of
God's favor and mercy, antecedent to their union to Christ, and interest in his
worthiness; and considered as in themselves? Does he mean, there is a proper
moral suitableness or fitness; some moral excellency which reconmends to God's
favor, as a reason why they should have mercy rather than others? If this is
the case, then they need not the merit of Christ to recommend them to God's
favor; for they have upon this supposition, merit enough of their own to answer
this end. The doctor repeatedly disclaims the notion of merit; but if this is
what he means, he holds to the doctrine of merit to all intents. If any sinner
has any moral good or worth, which recommends him to the divine favor, on the
account of its acceptableness in God's sight, and on this account is a reason
why God shows favor to him rather than to another; he has as real merit, as
it is possible any creature should have, though it may not be to so great a
degree. But if by being a suitsble, or fit object of God's favor he means any
other kind of fitness, he would oblige us by showing what it is.




I HAVE now produced some of the principal arguments which occurred to me, to
prove that there are no promises of salvation made to the doings, of the
unregenerate. I am far from concluding that these are the strongest and best,
that might be thought of; or that they are set in the most striking and
convincing light possible. Whether they are conclusive or not, let the
attentive impartial reader judge.

SECTION IX. CONTAINING an answer to two objections.
OBJ. I.
IT is said that the doctrine contended for in the preceding section, is
greatly to to the dishonor of God's goodness and even inconsistent with it.

Dr. Mayhew insists upon it, that such a notion is inconsistent with the
appearance of any goodness of God to sinners, in the offers made to them in the
gospel: yea, that it is not consistent with justice. P. 67, 68.
And agreeable to this, he looks on what he has done, in proving that there are
promises to the doings of the unregenetate, as "a clear and full vindication,
both of the justice and goodness of God." P. 80.


ANS. This objection seems to have its foundation in a supposition for which
there is no ground, and is indeed directly contrary to the truth of the case;
viz. that if salvation is not offered and promised to the exercises and
endeavors of unregenerate men, then it is offered to them on terms
impracticable, though they are never so well disposed, and have a good will in
the case; and so are not, at all to blame for not coming up to the terms
proposed; there being some difficulty in the case which is insurmountable,
however good and great their inclination and desire may be to do it. As the
objectors seem to view the case, it may be represented by the following
comparison. A certain lord, as he was visiting one of his plantations, saw a
large building on fire: and when he came to it, he. found a number of his
servants confined in it. He knowing their situation, calls to them, tells them
the dreadful case they are in, and earnestly calls upon them to arise and come
to the door with a promise that upon their so doing, he will unlock it, and
deliver them. At the same time, both he and they know, that they are fastened
down with chains which they have been trying with all Itheir might to deliver
themselves from; but find it impossible. They cry to him for help, and do their
utmost, but all in vain: he stands by, and sees them perish in the devouring
flames! Dr. Mayhew, represents the state much in this light in many passages in
his sermons, as well as in the following words. "Is there any real kindness,
mercy or goodness, in offering salvation to guilty creatures, and inviting them
to accept it, on such terms as are to them impracticable, though they desire it
and strive to this end? -- Impracticable, I mean, with all the helps and
advantages that God affords, or will afford to them, though they seek them in
the best manner their circumstances will admit of? I must confess, I cannot see
any goodness herein." P. 67.


I am as ready to confess, as the doctor that were the case as is here
supposed, there would be no goodness, or propriety in the offers of the gospel.
But in truth it is, as it were, infinitely otherwise. There is no difficulty in
the sinner's complying with the offers of the gospel, but what lies in his want
of an inclination and true desire to accept the salvation offered; and a strong
and obstinate inclination to the contrary. The case really is, as if the above
mentioned lord should find his servants in the house consuming by fire,
confined by nothing but their own inclination and lust, all engaged in gaming
and drinking. He opens the door and calls upon them to escape for their lives,
and promises them that if they are willing to come to him, and engage in his
service, they shall be safe and happy. But they have such a dislike to his
person and service, and are to attached to their gaming, etc. that they
absolutely refuse to comply with the proposal. They had rather run the venture
of perishing in the flames: and continue there under the repeated admonitions
and calls of their kind lord, until inevitable destruction comes upon them.

If it should be said, 'That though this similitude may fitly represent the case
of sinners, who pay no regard to the gospel, but run with greediness in a
course of sin; yet the case of convinced sinners, who are concerned about
themselves, and earnestly seeking deliverance, is different.' It may be
observed, that there is no material difference, so as any way to affect the
case under consideration. The sinner, however exercised and concerned he is
about himself, and whatever pains he takes to better his case, and obtain
deliverance; if still he does not actually accept of salvation; does refuse so
to do from the fixed opposition of his heart, to the salvation offered: which
opposition of heart is of the same nature and kind, with that of the secure
sinner, and is really as voluntary, and every way as inexcusable; and indeed is
more apparent, and exercises itself in a stronger manner, than that of the
secure sinner; as the former actually resists more light, and conviction of
conscience than the latter.

Suppose two criminals, under confinement and sentence of death, for some
treasonable practices against their prince. The prince offers to pardon and
restore them to his favor, if they will heartily repent, ask his pardon, and
submit to his government and laws, as excellent and good. One of them pays no
regard to the proposal; but, unconcerned about what he has done, and what is
coming upon him, follows his cups, and does not so much as seriously attend to
the sad case he is in. The other thinks of the death that is before him with
horror, and can neither eat nor sleep in peace: but, on the whole, cannot find
in his heart to comply with the offer. The more he thinks of it, the more his
heart rises against his prince. He cannot be willing to ask his pardon, nor
does he desire to live under his government and laws. He tries every way he can
think of to escape death, short of complying with these terms. He sends
petitions every day and hour to his prince: hoping to gain his favor upon some
other conditions. But the longer he tries, the more he is convinced that he
must perish, unless he heartily complies with the proposals made him, and the
more clearly he sees and feels the opposition of his heart thereto. Now which
of these traitors is, on the whole, the greatest criminal in the sight of the
prince? Does the latter do any thing that tends to recommend him to the prince?
And if after all he dies, in consequence of his refusing to accept of the
offered pardon and deliverance, is it any imputation on the goodness of the
prince? or does it appear to be the less goodness in him, because the traitor
refused to take the advantage of it? Let common sense decide the question. And
by this, the question before us will be decided.

The terms on which God offers pardon and salvation to, sinners, are not "to
them impracticable though they desire it." They are no more impracticable, and in
no other sense, than are the terms on which pardon and safety are offered by
the prince to the traitor, in the instance mentioned. If sinners perish under
the gospel, it is through their own obstinate, continued, voluntary refusal to
accept of, or truly desire and ask for offered salvation. And shall this
refusal of offered mercy; this direct and continued abuse of God's goodness,
render it no goodness, and so change the nature of it, as to turn it into
cruelty? This is impossible!

If God puts men under advantages to be holy and happy; gives them all proper
means and sets before them all proper motives: and they fail of holiness and
happiness by a neglect and abuse of these advantages, means and motives. God's
goodness is still most perfect, and it is not owing to any deficiency in this,
that they are not holy and happy. If this needs any testimony besides that of
the holy scripture and common sense, Dr. Mayhew's may he produced. God may,
says he, properly be said tot be good and merciful to all those, for whose
welfare be provides according their respective natures and capacities, hwoever
inferior. If these are upon the whole happy, or if those of an higher order
might be so, did they not abuse the divine goodness, God is certainly good to
them. Sermons on the nature, etc. of the divine goodness, p. 29 And again, p.
67, in order to show how the punishment of the finally impenitent, is
consistent with God's goodness, he says, God certainly exercises great goodness
and mercy toward such sinners in this world; not only in supplying their
temporal wants, but in affording them such means of knowledge and eternal
happiness as nothing but their own wilful blindness and perverseness can render
ineffectual to that end. All are invited and persuaded, in the most gracious
and pathetic terms, to accept of eternal life, through him that gave himself a
ransom for all.
Wisdom itself represents the matter in this light. "Because I have called, and
ye refused. -- Ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, etc. -- For that they hated
knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
counsel; they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, etc."

THE doctor seems to think he has done much to set the wonderful goodness and
mercy of God in a clear and stricking light, by proving that there are promises
to the unregenerate. He therefore makes the following, which he calls an
important inference. We see from hence the wonderful goodness and mercy of God;
in as much as he has given us the strongest assurance of pardon and eternal
life, on such terms as, by his offered grace we may all comply with, if we
desire to do it. P. 77.
With the doctor's good leave I will say, that the goodness and mercy of God
appears equally wonderful, on supposition there are no promises made to the
doings of the uneregenerate. For even on this supposition, "he has given us the
strongest assurances of pardon and eternal life, on such terms as we may comply
with if we really desire it. I have therefore as good a right to this inference
from my doctrine, as the doctor has from his. Yea I presume to say, a much
better. In this sentence the doctor supposes that the terms on which pardon and
salvation are offered are so difficult, that a real desire to comply with them,
does not get over the difficulty: but there is yet need of God's "offered
grace," to assist and help over that which is otherways insuperable, by the
best desire, and the utmost good will in the matter. Whereas, according to the
doctrine he opposes, a real desire to comply, is the compliance itself; and is
the condition on which pardon and salvation are offered; there being no
difficulty in coming up to the terms, but what there is in having a real desire
and hearty good will, or a being truly willing to accept of pardon and
salvation. He who comes to this, has no need of any "offered grace" to help him
to comply with the terms of salvation, as the doctor supposes; but has already
complied, and has pardon and salvation insured to him. If the doctor's scheme
then, shows the "wonderful goodness and mercy of God," that which he opposes
does so, much more abundantly.

But what does the doctor mean by his "offered grace," to help those to comply
with the terms of salvation, who "really desire to do it?" If there is a real
desire to comply, the heart is really gained, and there is a real compliance of
heart or will, and what more there is required as the condition of pardon and
salvation, in which the heart or will has no concern; and so is not the
compliance of the heart, but of something else; in order to which compliance we
stand in need of God's "offered grace," even when the heart has really
complied; I say, what this is; and how God's "offered grace" helps to it, the
doctor has not told, and I am not able to conceive. Until the doctor shall
explain this matter, I shall conclude, that there is no "offered grace" to
enable men to comply with the terms of salvation, whose hearts do already
really comply, and yet cannot comply, until by this "offered grace" they come
up to a compliance in which the heart is not concerned, it being something more
than, and different from a hearty compliance. I believe, that no compliance
with the terms of salvation is required but an hearty compliance; and if men
are by God's grace assisted to such a compliance, they have all the assistance
they (...) the case, in order to obtain pardon; and therefore that God does not
offer any other assstance, in order to a compliance.

But let us attend a minute longer to this extraordinary passage of the
doctor's. He says, The wonderful goodness and mercy of God appears, "in as much
as he has given us the strongest assurances of pardon and eternal life, on such
terms as, by his offered grace, we may all comply with, IF WE REALLY DESIRE TO
DO IT." But what if we don't really desire to do it? Will this in the least
fully the goodness of God in making the offer on such low terms? The doctor
supposes, in his very putting the case, it will not. What then if none of
mankind will really desire to comply; or in other words, really and heartily
comply with the terms on which pardon and salvation are offered, until they
are regenerated, and have a new heart given them? -- Is not the goodness of God
to be vindicated, and does it not appear to be wonderful, in offering pardon
and eternal life to every one who is heartily willing and desirous to have
them, however far mankind may be from a heart to comply with this condition?

Dr. Mayhew himself, is as clear and full in this, as any one can be: as
appears not only from passages already quoted, P. 102 marg.
but the following words of his, in the sermons under consideration. He [God]
has provided and revealed a way of Salvation, for sinful, guilty and lost
creatures, through the mediation, the sufferings and death of his own dear son;
and says, Whosoever will, let him come, etc, God exercises patience and
forbearance toward his sinful creatures; thereby giving them time and
opportunity for repentance, and working out their salvation. Now, if you should
neglect this method of deliverance, from condemnation, and think everlasting
life not worth your striving after; you will not only remain under the guilt of
your other sins, but will be justly chargeable also with despising thy goodness
of God: even the riches of his goodness, forbearance and long-suffering. P. 27.


If the language of the gospel to sinners is, Whosoever WILL, let him come,
etc. "And all are invited and persuaded, in the most gracious and pathetic
terms to accept of eternal life," and sinners refusal to comply with these
offers, and slighting them, is a "despising the goodness of God, even the
riches of his goodness" exercised and manifested herein; then unregencrate
sinners have these offers, and God is herein good to them: and their refusal to
comply, is a despising the riches of his goodness. Is it not sftrange, that the
doctor should express himself so clearly and fully on this head, from time to
time, and so perfectly agreeable to the doctrine he opposes, and yet so confuse
and bewilder himself, and his readers, as in the passage just now considered,
and in many others? Or, are we the only persons confused and be wildered? "Let
the unbiassed judge."

OBJ. II. It is objected, that if there are no promises of success to the
endeavors and doings of the unregenerate, in seeking the salvation of their
souls; THE reader is desired to observe, and bear in mind, that when the
unregenerate sinner is spoken of as seeking salvation, using means and
endeavors in order thereto, or even hoping for it expressions of their kind
are to be understood in a sense consistent with his really at heart opposing,
hating and rejecting the salvation which the gospel offers. This is not
properly the object of his desires and hopes; and therefore not what be seeks
after, and endeavors to obtain. He does not heartily ask for, or desire, the
pardon which the gospel offers; nor that deliverance from sin, and that
holiness and happiness, in which the salvation revealed in the gospel consists:
so cannot be truly said to endeavor after or hope for this. But the object of
his desires, hopes and endeavor, is something else; even that deliverance from
misery or natural evil, and that happiness or natural good, which are naturally
and even necessarily the objects, of men's desires from an aversion to misery,
and love of happiness, which is essential to a moral agent; and is consistent
with the greatest love to sin, and most perfect opposition of heart to that
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. -- These expresions are used
in compliance with the common way of speaking in this matter, and not because
it is the language of scripture.
then there is little or no encouragement to sinners to take pains in this
matter; in attending on the means of grace: but it tends greatly to discourage,
and lead them to neglect all means and endeavors for their own salvation, if
not to indulge themselves in all manner of licentiousness and known sin.

Dr. Mayhew indeed allows, that upon supposition there is no certain connection
between the endeavors and strivings of the unregenerate, and salvation; yet
they are obliged in all reason to strive, and do their best. He observes that
men will think it worth while to take the utmost pains in the concerns of a
worldly nature, when there is an uncertainty with respect to the success of
their endeavors: but that, the reason and motive to strive for salvation are
unspeakably greater, though there be an equal uncertainty of obtaining. P. 36.
However, he insists upon it, that if unregenerate persons are told that there
is no connection between any of their endeavorurs, and obtaining eternal life,
this has a direct and manifest tendency to dishearten them and damp their
endeavors: and must needs prove a great discouragement to them. P. 76, 81, 82.


ANS. WHETHER there is any just ground for this objection, the reader must
judge, when he has attended to the following particulars.

I. IT does not appear from fact and experience, that what is supposed and
asserted in the objection, is true; but the contrary. There can be no instances
produced of persons who have been engaged in a diligent attendance on the means
of grace and salvation; and have been discouraged and left off from this
consideration, that there was no certain connection between what they did, and
their salvation. Persons who appear to be in any good degree in earnest in this
matter, are not wont to be discouraged in the least by this doctrine. They who
profess to neglect the concerns of their souls because there is no promise to
the pains they should take, would not be persuaded to be in earnest, by all the
promises that can be imagined; and this appears not to be the true reason of
their sitting still, or going on in a way of allowed sin.

And if it be inquired, Who are generally the most in earnest in the use of
means? It will doubtless be found, that they are those who believe there are no
promises made to the doings of the unregenerate: while they who embrace the
contrary notion, are generally in a great degree careless and negligent; either
wholly putting off the concerns of their eternal interest for the present, or
contenting themselves with that which is very consistent with great
slothfulness in religion, the prevalence of a worldly spirit, and a greedy
pursuit of the things of time and sense. To be sure, it does not appear that a
belief that the endeavors of the unregenerate are connected with salvation has
any such influence on persons to excite and encourage them earnestly to attend
on the means of grace and salvation, as that they who believe this to be true,
evidently distinguish themselves from others in their endeavors. And where
this doctrine is preached up most strenuously and constantly, it does not
appear to have any sensible effect, to rouse and engage sinners to zeal and
earnestness it this matter. Such congregations don't appear to be more engaged
and painful in the things of religion than others, where the contrary doctrine
is preached. But if there is any visible difference in this respect, it is
directly the reverse of this. And wherever there have been the most remarkable
visible instances of sinners being awakened to a suitable concern about their
souls, and a great and constant engagedness in attending on means, it has been
under the preaching, which is in the whole tenor of it inconsistent with the
notion, of there being promises made to the doings of unregenerate sinners: and
all their concern and earnest endeavors have taken place, and continue, under
a firm belief of the contrary doctrine.

Now, if it appears from fact and experience, that the doctrine which asserts
that there are no promises to the doings of the unregenerate, is not matter of
discouragement to any in constantly and earnestly attending on means; and that
the opposite doctrine does not influence, to stir men up and put them forward
in taking pains in this matter; but rather has a contrary influence: have we
not reason to conclude, that the objection is groundless, however well
supported by good reason, the objector may think it to be?

It appears from fact, that sinners under the gospel more commonly neglect the
proper means of grace and salvation, live in securiy and sloth, and so finally
miscary, from presumption, than from despair; or for want of greater
encouragement and hope. And when they do despair, so as in any degree to
discourage them, and prevent their engaged, resolute, painful endeavors, this
is never grounded on their supposing that there are no promises to their
doings; but upon some delusion. What secure sinners under the gospel who are
neglecting the means of salvation, want, in order to their being engaged in
this matter, is to have their fears excited, and not their hope. Their hope is
generally high enough, and too high in all reason; and is therefore
presumption. They stand in need of having their fears excited, by a sight of
the dangerous and awful state they are in. And when they have any degree of a
just sense of this, they will still have all the hope that is consistent with a
just fear and concern about themselves; even on supposition there are no
promises made to their endeavors. They therefore who make this objection, seem
not only to have overlooked matter of fact, but not to attend to human nature,
in its natural operations in a state of unregeneracy: and therefore attempt to
argue, not only against all experience: but in in direct opposition to reason
and the nature of things.

But I proceed to observe,

2dly. THE doctrine that the doings of the unregenerate are connected with
salvation, as it is preached up by those who hold it, is so far from containing
in it more encouragement to them than the opposite doctrine, that it tends
greatly to discourage sinners, who are in any good measure acquainted with
themselves, and even to throw them into despair.

According to this doctrine, a sinner must distinguish himself from others by
his doings, as the proper and only ground of his obtaining mercy. And in order
to this, his exercises and endeavonrs must be in some sense obedience to God,
so in some degree good and acceptable, or at least not wholly unpleasing to
God: so that by this he shall become a more suitable object of mercy, and
recommended himself to God's favor. And in order to this, the sinner must
really, heartily and earnestly desire salvation, even the salvation which the
gospel offers; and must strive for it with the utmost earnestness, without
intermission; must begin in season; Dr. Mayhew tells his bearers that they may
neglect striving for salvation till it shall be too late ever to obtain, even
though life should be continued P. 79. Do not, I beseech you delay for human
(...) is precutious; and although your own should be prolonged yet if you go on
to provoke God by your sins, he may perhaps give you over to a reprobate mind;
so that you will only live to fill up the measure of your sins. Today then if
you will hear his voice! According to this, no one sinner, who has lived any
time in the world, can be sure it is not too late for him; yea all such have
reason to fear it is so. And that especially if they find their hearts to be
yet hard; which every unregenerate sinner does, if he has any true
acquaintaince with it.
and persevere in it to the end of life. ACCORDING to Dr. Mayhew, no striving
is successful, or connected with salvation, but that in which men persevere in
to the end of life. [P. 20.] He says, The striving here enjoined, must be
supposed to intend striving with perseverace; not for a month a year, or any
definite given time; but as long as it shall please God to conclude us in the
world.

Upon this it may be observed, That if any are regenerated before they die, or
in this life, God does not grant them this favor, and give them a new heart, in
fulfillment of any promise to their doing; or strivings, or because there is any
connection between their strivings, and this gift of a new heart. For if no
striving entitles to any promise, but that which continues to the end of life,
even to the last breath, then if a new heart and an interest in Christ is given
before the end of life, it is given not as a promised mercy; and therefore not
out of respect to any endeavors of the sinner, or because they have any
connection with it. Therefore they who are regenerated, and became true
christians in this life, do not obtain it by their striving, as having any
connection with it; but they become so by the unpromised sovereign mercy of
God. If therefore all who are saved are regenerated, or obtain a new heart, and
become real, true Christians in this life, then they are all brought into a
state of salvation, have a sure title to life, and are interested in all the
promises of the gospel, not by virtue of their unregenerate strivings, but
before they obtain any title to God's favor by these; because it is before they
have persevered therein to the end of life.

The doctor's promises to the doings of the unregenerate, and their certain
connection with salvation, do at length then turn out to be promises that are
never fulfilled or rather no promises at all; and a connection which is of no
avail; but is consistent with their being eternally lost. For notwithstanding
those promises and this connection, they must go out of the world unregenerate,
or in their sins; because they are not (...) to the promises, and the
connection does not take place, while they are in this life; as the condition
is not fulfilled till the last breath. And (...) they go out of the world
unregenerate, they must be damned, unless they are regenerated, and became true
christian in the other world, or after death

Therefore if any hope to obtain a new heart, and become real christians in
this life, they can according to the doctor's plan have no encouragement to
strive under the notion of doing that with which such a savor is connected, but
must seek it as an unpromised, sovereign mercy. And they only can be encouraged
by the doctor's promises, who are willing to wait for a new heart till After
they are dead; that is, till it is eternally too late to obtain it, according
to the divine constitution.

The doctor having observed that all persons though unregenerate, who desre
salvation and strive in order thereto, shall be saved, unless they cease thus
to desire and strive, adds the following words [P. 56, 57] Not to be sure,
without being born of God; but they shall be renewed in the (...) of their
minds, and consequently enter into life. If they are born of God in this life,
or while "It shall please God to continue them in this world," they receive
this favor before they have fulfiled the condition of it, and therefore not as
what they have a title to by promise, for they have not yet fulfilled the
condition, which is perseverence in striving to the end of life. If they shall
be born of God, and renewed in the spirit of their minds after they are gone
out of this world, and so out of the body, this is a new doctrine which has
hitherto been thoug of contrary to scripiture. In one word,

The doctor supposes that all who have a new heart given them, receive it as a
favor, promised to their seeking and striving. But in order to their being
entitle to this promise, they must seek and strive as long as they are in the
world. Therefore, according to him, none are regenerated, and made new
creatures in this world; but this work is in all cases put off till after men
are dead: So there never was a regenerate person or real christian in this life.


And he who does not do all this, is so far from being in the way to salvation,
that he will certainly be lost: and therefore can have no reasonable hope of
mercy.

Now, it is easy to show, that such a representation of the case, tends to
discourage the sinner who has any degree of just views of himself, and to land
him in despair. The sinner who is brought to any true sight of himself, and
belief and sense of eternal things, finds he has an exceeding hard heart, a
stony heart; as this is never removed till men are regenerated. He finds that
he is in no measure affected with the things, of God and religion, as it is
reasonable he should be: and takes pains and strives in no degree answerable to
the importance of the matter. He will therefore naturally look upon himself,
not to be an earnest striver for salvation; but rather a stupid, hardened
creature, who though he finds himself more concerned about his soul than some
others appear to be; and constantly attends on the means of grace, yet cannot
view himself as having begun to strive in earnest; and will therefore naturally
be afraid, it is too late for him. And in this case, calling upon him earnestly
and perseveringly to strive for salvation as the only condition on which he may
hope to be saved, will tend to drive him to despair; for the more concerned he
is, the more deficiencies he sees in his endeavors, and the less they appear
to him; so that he will naturally conclude, he never shall be One of those
strivers. He also finds that he has no real true desires of the salvation which
is offered in the gospel; but is wholly without all good desires and
inclinations, or any thing which should be acceptable or pleasing to God; and
that there is no foundation in him for this, until his heart is changed. He
will therefore despair of ever attaining to this in an unregenerate state: and
consequently, if he is made to believe that none can obtain a new heart but
those who have these good desires etc. he will of course despair of ever
obtaining it. In a word, he sees that he never has, and never shall do any good
thing, by which he should distinguish himself from others, but naturally looks
upon himself one of the greatest sinners; as his own sins are more in his view,
and more attended to by him than those of others. He therefore despairs of thus
distinguishing himself from others; of doing or obtaining any thing which
should recommend him to God's favor, by becoming better or less sinful than
others. So the doctrine that teaches him, he must thus distinguish himself or
perish, will be so far from comforting and encouraging him, that it tends only
to discourage him: it will be like singing songs to a heavy heart; and if
believed, will certainly deprive him of all hope. The only doctrine that can
give support and hope to such a sinner, and encourage him to attend on means
is, that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and therefore waits not to
have sinners distinguish, and recommend themselves to him as more suitable
objects of his mercy than others, before he will grant them mercy: but in
showing mercy acts as being infinitely above all obligations to any, and as
having no regard to worthiness, or less unworthiness, as what recommends one to
his favor, rather then another. This being the case, the greatest sinner; he
who looks on himself the farthest from righteousness of any, and himself to be
the most guilty and unworthy, may hope in the use of means: and this is his
only support.

If a person is but in a small degree concerned about his own salvation, and is
in no measure convinced how sinful and depraved his heart is; and how entirely
destitute of all good; he may be flattered and encouraged, under the notion of
doing something by which he shall distinguish himself, so as to become a more
suitable object of mercy than others, and which shall entitle him to God's
favor. But to what is he encouaged? -- Why, to think more highly of himself and
his doings than there is any reason for; and to go on in a dull lazy way; while
he flatters himself he is sufficiently in earnest, and is doing something very
great and good. This is to flatter him to his own ruin; to keep him easy and
secure in a great degree, or to quash any beginning of genuine conviction (...)
concern, and promote that pride and self confidence which is inconsistent with
the sinners attending on means with any good degree of solicitude and
earnestness; and must be slain, in order to his coming to good.

IF these things are so; I think, it will follow.

3dly. THAT though there are no promises made to the endeavors and doings of
the unregenerate; yet sinners have all proper encouragement to a diligent use
of means. Yea all that the nature of the case will admit of.

If the doctrine, that there are promises to the doings of the unregenerate,
does not in fact, or according to the reason of things, tend to encourage and
excite sinners to a proper and diligent use of means; but really has directly
the contrary tendency: then the opposite doctrine affords all proper and
possible encouragement thereto, and is the only plan on which sinners may be
addressed, considering their state and disposition, so as to excite them
earnestlly to use means with all proper degrees of encouragement and hope: and
so as shall tend to answer the proper end of means.

But what is said in the next section may serve further to clear up and confirm
this.

SECTION X. 0F the end and design of means; and the true ground of
encouragement for men to be in the diligent use of them, in order to their
salvation.
IT may still remain a doubt with some, whether there is really any ground of
encouragement for men, especially the unregenerate, to use means to obtain
salvation: Or, If there be any, what it is. And as this is an important point,
and a careful attention to it may serve to throw some further light upon this
subject, and yet more fully obviate the objection last considered, the reader
is invited to an attentive and candid perusal of what may be said in answer to
the following questions.

QUEST. I. WHAT are the means of grace and salvation; and what it meant by
using these means?

QUEST. II. WHY are means to be used, and what end does this answer? And what
motive and encouragement is there to this?

QUEST. III. WHAT obligations are men under to use means?

QUEST. I. What are the means of grace and salvation; and what is meant by
using these means?

ANS. THE means of grace and salvation may be considered as including every
thing which is adapted and tends to communicate light and truth, respecting the
things of a moral nature, to the mind of man; or to lead his mind to attend to
truth, and to excite those ideas which are necessary or proper, in order to
right exercises.

The grand medium of grace and salvation, and strictly speaking, the sole
medium, is TRUTH. It is in the view of this that the mind exercises itself
properly, and has true enjoyment. This is the food and life of the mind: Was
there no truth, there could be no virtue, or real happiness. As sin and misery
consist summarily in the darkness of the mind, and its alienation from, and
opposition to light and truth; so all true holiness, and proper mental
enjoyment, consists in those exercises which are implied and involved in a
proper view and sense of truth; the truth, I mean, which relates to God's moral
government and kingdom.

But then, all those things, those institutions and exercises, which tend to
instruct mankind in the knowledge of truth; to excite the attention; to convey
truth to the mind, and hold it up in its view: all these, I say, are in a more
remote sense the means of grace and salvation. Such are all those things, those
circumstances and events in the natural and moral world, which are adapted to
instruct mankind. Such, in a special manner is divine revelation; and all those
institutions and appointments therein, to be attended on by men. Such are
reading the bible, public and private instructions, religious conversation,
serious meditation on divine things, etc. and particularly PRAYER, which is the
most solemn way of meditating on divine truth, as it is done as in the presence
of of God, and in a solemn address to him, and has a special and peculiar
tendency to awaken, instruct and affect the mind.

USING these means intends two things, viz.

I. Taking methods with men to set truth before them and instruct them, and
awaken their attention. Thus God is using means with men in his providence,
which is every way calculated to give instruction to a sinful world. But more
especially by giving the revelation which is contained in the bible; and
ordering it to be published and preached to the world. And according to divine
institution, men are using means with others for their salvation, by public and
private instructions, etc.

2. Persons themselves attending on these means. This is supposed in the use of
means, just mentioned: for if there were none to attend on means, there would
be no such thing as using means with any, for their instruction. For the end of
instruction cannot be answered, where there is no attention to the instruction
given: so no pains taken to get instruction. He who cannot have the attention
of those, with whom he attemps to use means, fails of answering the proper end
of means entirely: and what he does is as much in vain, as to any benefit to
the persons with whom he is concerned, as if they were stocks or stones. So
that God's using means with men for their instruction and salvation, and
directing men to use means with others, supposes the propriety and importance
of attending on these means. There would have been no wisdom or propriety in
making a revelation, if there were none to attend to it, and use all proper
means to understand it, and get the instruction there given. To what purpose
would it be to preach a sermon, or write a book in order to instruct men, if
none were to hear or read? And what reason and propriety would there be in it?
The propriety and reasonableness of taking any pains or method to instruct men,
or using any means with them to this end, supposes it proper and reasonable,
that they should give all that attention, and take all those pains, which are
necessary in order to be under the best advance to get the instruction given.
Now this is the sum of what is meant by being in the use of means. THEY who
insist upon it that there is no reason why, men should be in the use of any
means for their instruction and salvation, and yet are using means with others
for their instruction by conversation preaching or writing, seem to be guilty
of an inconsistence. For if it is unreasonable to use any means for instruction
it is unreasonable to attend to what they write or speak in order to this;
consequently it is unreasonable for them to write or speak. If the instruction
they give is worthy to be attended to; then the bible is worthy to be attended
to, and it is reasonable and proper to take all possible pains to understand it
And this implies the constant and diligent use of all means of grace and
salvation.
To use or attend the means of grace, is to make use of all the means of
instruction in the things that relate to God's moral kingdom; to go into that
conduct and practice, and do all those things, which tend to lead us into the
knowledge of the truths, of divine revelation, and to keep up the attention of
the mind to them: and carefully to avoid whatsoever has a contrary tendency.

QUEST. II. WHY are means to be used, and what end does this answer? Or of what
advantage is it to use means? What motive and encouragement is there to this?

It has has been observed that the end of using or attending on the means of
grace is instructusing or there to lead the mind to the knowledge of that truth
which it was before ignorant of, or to renew the attention to truth already
known, and fix the mind upon it. The question now is, What end this instruction
answers; Of what advantage is it to have the truth set before the mind; and to
have the attention of the mind fixed upon it?

ANS. THE benefit, advantage and importance of this to men, is just as great as
that of an external, divine revalation. For divine revelation is of service to
men no further than it is attended to and understood. The world is as well
without it, as with it, if no instruction is given; but this instruction comes
only by attending to the things revealed, in the use of means. If therefore the
revelation which God has made in the bible, is adapted to be of any benefit to
mankind, with respect to their eternal salvation; it is of equal benefit to
mankind to attend to this revelation, in the diligent use of all proper means;
that hereby they may get and retain the instruction given therein: for without
this it will certainly be in vain to them. A revelation not understood, is of
no more advantage than no-revelation at all. Therefore means are to be used in
order to obtain the knowledge of the truths contained in the bible, and to fix
and impress them on the mind.

In order to the salvation of men, it is absolutely necessary that they should
have the ideas and knowledge of those things which relate to this salvation,
and in which it consists. He who has no idea in his mind of any thing, is not
capable of any exercise of heart, or of any mental enjoyment. No man is capable
of any exercise about that of which he has no idea or knowledge. It is
impossible that a man should repent, and believe the gospel, so long as he has
no knowledge of those truths, in the view of which, repentance and faith are
exercised. Therefore if repentance and faith in Christ are necessary in order
to salvation, a knowledge of those things contained in divine revelation,
without which there can be no such exercise, is equally necessary. But this
knowledge can be obtained only in the use of means.

There are but two possible ways in which the knowledge of the truths, which
are necessary to be known in order to salvation, can be obtained, viz. by
immediate revelation, or inspiration; or by an external mediate one, or by
means The latter is the way which God has taken to set these truths before the
mind. Therefore the knowledge of them is not to be obtained in any way but in
the use of means. If the thief on the cross, and Soul the persecutor should be
thought by any to be converted and saved without attending on means; they are
desired to consider, that the former was surrounded with means of instruction;
and it is apparent that he was all attention. And what was this (...) to attend
on means? And the same is true of the latter. His immediate instructor was
Jesus Christ; and no sinner was ever (...) attentive than be And neither of
them could have been converted and saved, had they not attained It may here be
observed, that a (...) influence may he vastly different and the attention of
our may be to a much greater degree than of another, etc some may gain that
instruction in a short time, which others do not obtain in a much longer, who
yet are in the use of means. God may order things so that a person may get that
instruction in a few hours, or minutes which it takes another years to obtain.
Yet the instruction which the former obtains, is no more without attention and
the use of means, than that of the latter: and therefore is no arguments
against the necessary of the use of means, in oder to get instruction.


In proportion therefore as men feel the importance and worth of salvation,
will they be engaged in the diligent attendance on the means of grace, as
necessary in order thereto, and so the only way in which they may hope to
obtain it.

It is to be observed that I am now speaking of that knowledge which the mind
is capable of, independent of any degree of right taste or disposition of the
heart, or which the mind may have without discerning and relishing the beauty
of divine things: And is what is commonly meant by speculative or doctrinal
knowledge. This knowledge is to be obtained only in the use of means, and is
necessary in order to repentance, or any right exercise or heart: though no
degree of it does imply, or is certainly connected with, any truly virtuous or
holy exercise.

The unregenerate are certainly capable of great degrees of this knowledge,
which may much impress and affect their minds. See Jam. xi. 19.
They may have a clear view and affecting sense (which is indeed, strictly
speaking, something more than mere speculation) of the truths of Christianity,
and particularly of their own state as sinners. They are capable of every thing
of this kind, but what depends upon, consists in, or results from a sight and
discerning of the true beauty or moral excellency of divine things. This is
indeed a kind of knowledge which is peculiar to the regenerate; the foundation
of which is laid in their having a, new heart. The former is necessary in order
to the latter, as it is supposed and implied in it: For there can be no
discerning of the beauty of those objects, of which the mind has no speculative
idea.

IF it should be asked, What good all this instruction and knowledge will do
the unregenerate, who are under the dominion of a hard and impenitent heart,
and will continue so until a new heart is given in regeneration? If this
knowledge will be of no service to them, and really do them no good, and they
are yet as far from salvation as ever; then there is no encouragement for them
to attend on the means of grace, in order to obtain it, and keep up a view and
sense of the truths of christianity in their minds.

I answer, it is certain the unregenerate do not exercise any true virtue in
their attendance on the means of grace, however engaged and diligent they are,
and whatever pains they, take in this matter. And there is no connection
between the instruction or knowledge they obtain hereby, and holiness. Yea, the
impenitent sinner, who continues obstinately to reject and oppose the salvation
offered in the gospel, does in some respects, yea, on the whole, become, not
less, but more vicious and guilty in God's sight, the more instruction and
knowledge he gets in attendance on the means of grace. The more clearly he sees
his own wretched case as a sinner, and the dreadful consequence of dying in his
sins; and the clearer conviction he has of his need of a Savior, and of the
truths of the gospel in general; the greater is the crime of his impenitence,
and continuing to reject the salvation offered in the gospel. The awakened,
convinced sinner, who has taken a great deal of pains in the use of means, and
has hereby got a great degree of instruction and knowledge, and yet continues
impenitent, is in this respect much more guilty and vile, and a greater
criminal in God's sight, than if he had never attained to this conviction and
knowledge: For now he is guilty of the abuse of, and opposition to, all this
light and knowledge, which he could not be, while he had it not. Yea, his
impenitence, and and all his sins are so aggravated by the light and conviction
he obtains, that whatever particular ways of known sin he has forsaken, and how
many soever external duties he attends upon; yet, on the whole, he is
undoubtedly a greater sinner, than he was when he lived in security and the
neglect of the means of grace. So that the impenitent, unregenerate sinner does
not grow better, but rather grows worse, by all the instruction and knowledge
he gets in the use of means. And awakened, convinced sinners, with whom most
means are used, and who are most attentive to the concerns of their souls, and
most in earnest in the use of means, are commonly, if not always, really more
guilty and odious in God's sight than they who are secure and at ease in their
sins.

Their greater sinfulness does not indeed consist in their concern about
themselves, in a sense of the sad, dangerous state they are in, and in their
earnestly desiring deliverance and safety; or in the pains they take in order
hereto; but in their continuing to hate God and his law, and to oppose and
reject the Savior, even under all their concern, exercises and endeavors, and
with all the light and conviction they have.

Our Savior represents the light which men have, as that which does in a
peculiar manner, and above every thing else, aggravate the sin and condemnation
of those who rebel against it. He says, " This is the condemnation, that light
is come into the world, and men have loved darkness rather than light." John
iii. 19.
And he says of these to whom he preached; who continued to hate and reject
both him and the father, "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had sin." John xv, 23, 24.
i. e. their sin would have been little or nothing, compared with what it is
now. And he speaks of the inhabitants of those cities where most of his mighty
works were done, to whom he most frequently preached, and who attended most on
his ministry, and yet continued impenitent, as much more guilty, and liable to
a more awful condemnation, than if they had never enjoyed these advantages, nor
had this light and instruction. Matthew. xi. 20-24.


None will deny, I trust, that a living under the gospel, and enjoying the
means of grace, is the occasion of aggravating the sin and condemnation of
those who persevere in their opposition to Jesus Christ. The gospel proves to
them a "savor of death unto death." Consequently the more light and conviction
men have, the more their attention is awakened to the things of the gospel, and
the more means they attend upon, and are used with them, while they continue
obstinately to oppose light and truth, and reject the offers of the gospel; the
more guilty and vile, and the greater criminals are they in God's sight.

If these things are so, then the sin^^^^ who continue impenitent under the
greatest convictions of conscience, and the most concern about their souls and
salvation, and are consequently taking the most pains, and using unwearied
endeavors, are usually the greatest sinners, really more vicious, more guilty
and vile than they were, when in a state of security, and lived in a great
measure in the neglect of the means of grace. And if they live and die
impenitent, their condemnation will be more intolerable, than if they had never
had that conviction and knowledge which by their attention to the gospel they
have obtained. So that the good the sinner gets, by a constant attendance on
the means of grace, while he continues impenitent, is not a becoming in any
degree virtuous or holy hereby; or on the whole, less vicious and criminal in
God's sight.

However, there is yet a reason why the sinner should diligently attend all
means of instruction and knowledge, and sufficient encouragement hereto. For,

I. WITHOUT this instruction and knowledge, which is to be obtained by those
only who are using the proper means of it, the sinner cannot be saved, as has
been shown. This knowledge being absolutely necessary in order to salvation, he
who is without it, has a fatal bar in the way of his salvation: And so far as
this is obtained; this bar or impediment is removed out of the way; and so he
is in a more likely way to be saved than those who are in security and
ignorance. For surely he who has obtained one thing which is necessary in order
to salvation, is in a more likely way to be saved than he who has not obtained
it, nor is in the way of it, all other circumstances being equal, however
uncertain it may be that either shall be saved. In order to salvation several
things are necessary. He cannot be saved who does not believe; and he cannot
believe who has not heard, and attended to the report of the gospel; so has no
right speculative notions about the objects of faith; and he cannot hear and
understand, who has not the advantage of divine revelation See Rom x. 14, 17.
Now he who enjoys divine revelation, and attends to it with the utmost concern
and diligence; so is in the way to get right speculative notions of the objects
of faiths and obtain all that is implied in hearing, is more likely to be
saved, than he who either does not live under the gospel, or if he does, never
attends to it, and uses no proper means to understand it. I say, the former is
more likely to be saved, than the latter, because he has more of those things
which are necessary in order to this, than the latter. If hearing, which is the
same with a diligent attendance on the means of grace, is necessary in order to
faith and salvation; then they who are concerned about the salvation of their
souls, will be proportionably concerned and engaged to hear, and get
instruction, as the only way in which they may hope to be saved.

It may be also farther observed,

2dly, As that instruction and knowledge which is to be had only by hearing, in
a diligent and earnest attendance on the means of grace, is necessary in order
to the exercise of repentance and faith, and so in order to salvation; so the
way in which this knowledge is to be obtained, is the only way in which sinners
may hope for a new heart, or to obtain regenerating grace.

As he who has no doctrinal acquaintance with the truths contained in God's
word, is not in a capacity to exercise any christian grace or virtue, whatever
foundation there might be for this in the renovation of his mind by
regeneration, no one has reason to expect that his heart will be thus renewed
by the spirit of God, while he is in this case. God can doubtless as easily
change the heart of the most ignorant, deluded, Mohammedan, or heathen, yea the
most blind, stupid Hottentot in the world, as that of the most awakened,
enlightened sinner under the gospel. But if he should do so by the regenerating
influences of his Spirit, there could be no right and proper exercises of
christian virtue and holiness; because such an one is without any right
speculative knowledge of those truths, in the view of which alone christian
holiness is exercised. And giving a new heart, or a right taste and temper of
mind, would not remove this darkness. This only prepares the mind to discern
and relish the beauty and sweetness of divine things, when set before it in the
use of means; but does not give any new speculative ideas or knowledge.
Therefore we have no reason to think God ever does so.

And as the case is in a great degree the same with those under the gospel, who
have never attended, to it in earnest, they have no reason to expect to become
new creatures by God's regenerating influences, so long as they are in this
situation. But in order to this, they must first be made to attend to the
gospel with that concern and earnestness which is necessary in order to their
learning the character of the just God and Savior, and understand their own
state and circumstances as sinners, in a manner in which no careless neglecters
of the means of grace ever do: for until they come to this, grace or the new
creature could have no opportunity to exert itself properly, or according to
its nature; but must lie dormant and inactive, so answer no good end: therefore
not to be expected before, or in any other way. For God does not give life
before there is any provision for the support of it, or any materials by which
it may subsist, and exert itself according to its own proper nature. Truth may
be said to be the food on which the new creature lives, and is absolutely
necessary to the least motion of life, or exercise of holiness in the heart.
Therefore the mind that has no speculative view and conviction of those truths,
in the sight and sense of which especially christian holiness is exercised; but
embraces the contrary errors (...) is in total ignorance of them, is not
furnished or provided for the exercise and support of the divine life: And none
have any reason to expect it will be implanted, or a new heart given, while the
man is in such a state.

When God created man, he did not first form him while the earth was in its
chaotic state, when it was without form, and void and darkness was upon the
face of the deep: he did not create him with all his bodily senses and
appetites, before there were any objects toward wnich they might exercise
themselves in a manner proper to man's nature, and so as to support and promote
animal life, and afford proper enjoyment and happiness. He did not form an eye
before there was any light, or objects to be beheld: He did not produce animal
life, dependant on food for its constant support and exercise, and an appetite
for that food, before any materials were made, to become proper food, suited to
the appetite, and to support and nourish life. He did not form man before he
had provided any place for his subsisting and exercising himself in a manner
proper and suited to his nature. No: He first ceated an external world, a
proper dwelling place for man, furnished with materials suited to the senses;
appetites and life of such a creature; that there might be a foundation and
opportunity for proper exercises and enjoyments, as soon as he should be
created. And we hesitate not to say, that this was agreeable to wisdom; and
that the contrary would not be so.

So in the new creation, God will not form the new creature where there is no
proper provision, where there are no materials for the life and support of the
new man, so no opportunity to act, and to act in a manner proper and suitable
to his nature. But proper materials for this new life must first be provided.
The mind must be properly stored with speculative ideas of divine things, and
the judgment convinced of the truth; in order to which the man must be all
attention to these things in a sense of their high importance to him, as his
whole, his eternal interest turns upon them. When things are thus prepared a
new heart may be given with propriety and wisdom, as the new creature will now
nave opportunity to act in a way answerable to its nature, and so to the glory
of God.

Christ would not raise Lazarus to lite so long as the stone lay on the cave.
It was proper the stone which would hinder his coming forth, were he alive,
should be first taken a way. In this case to neglect to take away the sftone
would have been an effectual bar in the way of his resurrection; and the most
likely method that could be taken to have him raised from the dead was to take
it away. Ignorance of, and inattention to the truths of divine revealation, may
be compared to this stone. The only likely way for the sinner to become the
subject of a spiritual resurrection, is to have this taken away, by becoming
all attention to the things contained in God's word. And the more instruction
the sinner has, the more fully and clearly he is convinced of those truths
which do most nearly concern him; and the more constantly and earnestly he
attends to divine truth by hearing, reading, meditation, prayer, etc. and the
more his mind is impressed and affected with it, as the minds of the
unregenerate may be; the more hope there is in his case; the more likely it is
that he shall become a new creature, and believe to the saving of his soul.

This view of the matter serves to show what is the advantage of knowledge to
the unregenerate sinner, even the knowledge which no openly vicious, or
careless sinner ever obtains; and the reasnableness and importance of using
means with such by constant public and private instruction, etc. and of their
earnestly attending on all proper means of instruction; and consequently the
motive and encouragement there is to this. Moreover,

3dly, FACT and experince serve to strengthen the foregoing observations and
reasoning, and show the advantage there is in attending on the means of grace,
and hold forth the proper encouragement thereto. For it appears from experience
that this is the most, the only likely way to obtain regenerating grace and
salvation. None, I suppose, will dispute whether more have been converted and
saved of those who have attended on the means of grace, than of those who have
not, in proportion to their numbers. All will grant that many were saved who
attended on the preaching of John the Baptist, Christ, and his apostles; many
more, according to the number of those who attended, than of those who did not
enjoy or attend these means. Our Savior indeed says that publican's and
harlots went into the kingdom of God before, or rather than the chief priests
and elders of the Jews. But this is so far from being an objection against what
has been just observed, that it serves to confirm it. For publicans and harlots
attended much more on Christ's preaching, and much better understood the things
relating to the kingdom of God than they. The former attended so constantly,
and were so much in his company, that it was made an objection against him, and
he was obliged often to vindicate his conduct with respect to them.

It therefore appears from fact and experience that they are in the most likely
way to be saved, who attend on the means of grace And when the matter is
attended to, the reason of this may easily be seen, as has been shown above. We
therefore now see what advantage there is in attendance on means, and what is
the proper motive aid encouragement thereto. When any one attends to his
eternal interest, and feels the infinite importance of it to him, and at the
same time sees the undone, wretched state he is in as a sinner, he will with
all his might pursue that method which appears most likely to obtain
deliverance from the evil he fears, and promote this interest. Let the only way
be pointed out to him in which he may have hope, and he will want no farther
motive and encouragement to attend to it with resolution and earnestness. This
will prove, in all such cases, a sufficient motive and encouragement, and will
never fail effectually to influence the person who is sensible his all lies at
stake, and enters into the infinite importance of the matter to him. If
therefore any sit still in the neglect of the means of grace, it is not owing
to any deficiency in the encouragement to attend upon them; but to stupidity
with regard to their own case, and their eternal interest. And if this
encouragement is not effectual, no imaginable, or even possible, encouragement
would be so.

IF any should say, that promises to the sinner's endeavors and persevering
attendance on means, would raise the encouragement much higher: for then there
would be no discouragement, but an absfolute certainty of succeeding in ihis
way; the following particulars may perhaps serve to discover their mistake.

I. If there were such promises made, the sfinner would be so far from being
absolutely certain of salvation in a way of attendance on means, that the
probability, in his view, and his encouragement would not be at all increased
hereby. And that for two reasons.

1. The sinner could never come to any certainty that he had fulfiled the
condition to which the promise is made, or that he is in a likely way to fulfill
it. 1. Because he could never be certain that he had come up to that precise
degree of earnest striving and diligent attendance on means, to which the
promise is made. Indeed he may be certain, as long as he lives, that he has not
yet fulfilled the condition; because he has not attained to (...). so long as
he has one breath more so draw, however great the degree of his endeavors now
are. The sinner therefore can be very (...) regements from such a promise of
being delivered from the miserable (...) of unregenerates, and becoming a true
christian, in this life as has been before observed. And this is the same with
no encouragement at all.
If there are any promises made to the doings of the unregenerate, they are
made not to any certain kind of exercises and endeavors, so that the lowest
degree of this kind of seeking intitles to the promise, but to a certain degree
of this kind, which is not, neither can be precisely pointed out, and
distinguished from some lower degree, to which the promise is not made, so that
the sinner can ever be certain that he has attained to that degree. And however
near he comes to it, if he, after all, finally falls short in the least degree,
he is as far from salvation, in this way, as if he had done nothing. This
therefore would tend to perplex, rather than encourage the sinner. Yea, the
sinner who has the clearest view of the viciousness of his own heart, and the
greatest sense of the reallity and importance of eternal things, will be
farthest from imagining that he has attained to that degree of earnestness of
endeavor to which the promise is made: and will be most ready to conclude
against himself, as being a stupid, indolent, sottish wretch, and despair of
ever obtaining salvation in this way. But,

2dly. If the sinner could be certain that he has attained to that degree of
earnestness of endeavor which will entitle him to the promise, if he
perseveres in it: yet he can have no certainty of persevering, so no certainty
of salvation. As his perseverance depends wholly on himself, his own will and
resolution, and so he has nothing to rely upon but himself for it, it is the
most uncertain thing in the world that he shall persevere. He can have
confidence in nothing, in this case, but his own deceitful heart which is
indeed only the confidence and presumption of a fool: for "he that trusts in
his own heart is a tool." Prove. xxviii. 26.
If he is sufficiently in earnest and painful in his endeavors for some time;
yet if after all that, he is in any degree remiss and negligent one day, or but
one hour, all is lost, and he has got all to begin again; for he has failed of
perseverance. And how does he know that it is not now eternally too late! So
that his salvation, on this footing, is the most uncertain, precarious thing in
the world: or rather may most reasonably be despaired of. He who knows his own
heart, so far as he who is under proper, geneuine convictions does, can take no
encouragement from this quarter. This is suited only to flatter and bolster up
the unreasonably self confident and foolhardy. Therefore,

2. Such promises, were there any, would only tend to encourage men in a self
confidence, which is as opposite to the whole tenor of divine revelation, and
the peculiar genius and glory of the gospel, as darkness is to light; so that
the more the sinner has of it, the farther he is from Christ, and the more
blind to the way of salvation by him. The preaching up such promises therefore,
will tend to fix persons in their self confidence and delusion, who have no
good degree of genuine conviction of their sinful, miserable state, and to
fasten them down in ease and security; so to pervert the benefit of the means
of grace and frustrate the great end and design of them, which is to give light
and instruction to the sinner. But to those who are in any measure convinced of
their true state; so know how little depandence there is on themselves, how
vile and fottish their hearts are, this doctrine will give no encouragement:
but will have directly the contrary influence on them, if they can be made to
believe it, as has been before shown.

QUEST. III. WHAT obligations are men under to use means?

ANS. THEY seem to be under the same obligations to this, as they are to repent
and believe the gospel. If God commands all men every where to repent, then he
requires of them all that is implied in, or is necessary in order to,
repentance. He therefore requires of them to understand those truths which are
necessary to be known in order to repentance: consequently requires all that
attention to the things contained in divine revelation, which is necessary in
order to understand those truths, a right speculative knowledge of which is
implied in repentance. But this implies a diligent use of the means of grace,
as has been shown. A neglect of any of those things, which are implied in, or
necessary in order to repentance, is a neglect of, and opposition to, the
command to repent; so a counteracting and violating our obligations to repent.
But he is guilty of this, who neglects the means of grace. It has been shown
that there is a certain degree of speculative knowledge necessary in order to
exercise repentance, which they never have who live in the neglect of all means
of grace. Therefore the command to repent, is a command to attend all those
means necessary in order to attain that knowledge. If men are under any
obligation to attend to the command to repent and be converted, or to obey this
command, they are under obligation to all that, which is implied in this, or
necessary on their parts in order to it: therefore are under obligation to hear
and attend to the truths contained in God's word, with the utmost concern and
diligence.

The preaching the gospel therefore, which is the same with a testifying to all
men repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; is a call
unto all to hearken and attend, as this is implied in repentance and faith. But
to hearken and attend, implies the whole that is intended by the use of means.
Therefore if any preacher of the gospel doubts whether he has any warrant to
call upon and exhort sinners to attend the means of grace; he appears not well
to understand what he is about: for he is really doing this, while he is
calling upon and exhorting them to repent and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
For how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? THEY are indeed
already attending on means, while he is preaching the gospel to them. This is
supposed; for if they give no attention to what he says, why does he speaks?
Every word he says, is in effect a call attend And his manifesting his
intention to preach in any future time, is a call upon them to attend. For if
their attending is not reasonable and important, there is no reason in
his.preaching; so his intention to do it is foolish and absurd: consequently
his doing it now is so In this view then he tho undertakes to preach the
gospel; and yet holds that sinners are not to he called up a to attend means,
is guilty of a glaring absurdity.


And it may be here observed, that this is the scriptural way of calling upon
men to attend means, viz. to call on them to repent and believe the gospel. And
they who so far attend to this call as to feel the infinite importance to
themselves that they should comply with it, will of course, and of their own
accord go into a diligent use of means. Many public teachers therefore seem to
make a great mistake here. Instead of calling upon all to repent and believe
the gospel, as the only condition of God's favor and eternal life, the most
they do, with relation to unregenerate sinners, is to exhort and urge them to
these doings which are short of repentance. They teach them to use means in
such a manner, as rather tends to defeat the proper end of means, and so as
that they become a means of blinding their eyes, rather then of intruction; it
tends to lead them to rest in means, and make a Savior of them; to quiet and
heal them short of repentance, and a saving application to Jesus Christ.

OBJ. Whatever obligations sinners are under to attend the means of grace: yet
if they attend, they still sin in all they do, while they continne impenitent,
yea they are constantly growing worse and more guilty, the more pains they
take, and as light and conviction increase. What obligations do they then
fulfill? And is not this sufficient matter of discouragement?

Ans. I. They do not properly fulfill their obligations, if they stop short of
true repentance, or real holiness; for nothing short of this is true obedience
to God's law. Nevertheless, a neglect of the means is an instance of the
violation of the obligation they are under, which they are not guilty of who do
attend with concern and engagedness, however guilty and vile they may be in
other respects; which guilt and vileness may be greatly aggravated by their
attendance on means. If a man forbear to kill his neighbor, certainly he does
not violate the obligations he is under not to kill, as he does who takes away
his neighbor's life, however far he may be from any true love to his
neighbor, or obedience to any of God's commands; and though he may, on the
whole, be more guilty than the murderer.

If a father calls after, and commands his two sons, who are running from him,
with a design to quit his family and government, as what they perfectly hate,
immediately to return back, and submit themselves to his authority: If they
ought to obey their father's command, then they are under obligation to stop
and attend to what he has to say; for this is implied in what he requires, and
ncessary in order to it. Therefore if one turn about and attend to what his
father has to say to him, while the other stops his ears, and runs on till he
is out of hearing, the former does not violate the obligation to stop and
hearken, which the latter does, though if he continues to hate his father, and
refuses to return and submit to his government, he cannot be said to obey his
father's command; and may, by the light and conviction laid before him by his
father, in consequence of his flopping and attending, be more guilty in
refusing to submit to him than the other who has been out of hearing.

And if any by-stander, who sees them running; often, should tell them to stop
and hear what their father says, he would herein act a friendly part both to
them and their father, and perfectly coincide with his command to them to
return and submit themselves to him. Indeed, if he should inculcate this upon
them so as to leave their father's command to return, etc. out of view,
dwelling on this as if it was the only thing that they had to do: Or as what
would on the whole recommend them to their father, and interest them in his
favor; or render them less displeasing to him, though, after all, they persisted
in their refusal to return and submit to him. I say, if he should treat the
matter so, it would be so far from vindicating the father's authority, and
coinciding with his command, that he might justly look upon it at taking part
with his rebellious sons, setting up against him, and flattering them to their
own ruin.

Ans. II. However sinful and abominable in God's fight the impenitent are in
all they do, even in attendance on the means of grace, their sinfulness does
not consist merely in this; it does not consist in their concern about their
eternal interest: in their dread of misery, and desire to escape it, and obtain
happiness, nor in their using means in order to this, in reading, hearing
praying, etc. but in their impenitency, in the opposition of their hearts to
holiness, and the only way of salvation; and in those things which are the
attendants and consequence of this, or in the want of their opposites, with
which all their exercises are attended, and therefore very criminal. But this
can be no reason why they should neglect the proper means of salvation. If "the
plowing of the wicked is sin," shall they therefore not-plow? Shall they not
desire food for themselves and their families, and take the most likely method
to obtain it? -- Their sin does not consist merely in their plowing, so that it
would be a less sin not to plow, than to do it; but in the wrong views and
exercises of mind with which they plow, and in the want of right ones.

And if by attending, praying, reading, hearing, etc. the impenitent sinner
grows more criminal and vile, as his light and conviction increases this is not
properly owing to use of means; but to to the rooted viciousness of the heart.
The attendance on means is indeed the occasion of it, as by this, greater light
and conviction takes place in the mind: and the wickedness of the heart takes
occasion by this light to exert itself with a higher hand, and more obstinately.

Ans. III. The sinner's growing no better, but really worse, more guilty and
vile, the more light he has and the greater advantages he enjoys, while he
continues impenitent, is really no matter of discouragement from attending
means in order to get light and instruction, etc. For in the gospel there is no
more encouragement given to a less sinner than to a greater; that he shall find
mercy rather than the other, while both continue impenitent, and opposers of
the way of salvation therein revealed. No one sinner has any reason to hope
that he shall be saved rather than an other, because he has not been, or is not
now, so great a sinner as others, while he is impenitent, and at heart an enemy
to the gospel. Never did a sinner find acceptance with God, on account of the
comparitive smallness of his sins, or his reformations, which were short of an
hearty compliance with the gospel. We indeed read of one who took his
encouragement that God would accept and favor him, from his imagining himself
not so criminal and vile as others. But what was the conseqnence? He was
rejected: While one who took his encouragement to hope for God's mercy quite
from another quarter, and which was consistent with his viewing himself as the
chief of sinners, found favor. See Luke xviii. 9-14.
The gospel offers salvation to the greatest sinners: they are as welcome as
any other; they are as acceptable to God, and he is as ready to bestow
salvation upon them, as if their sins were not so many and great, if they will
heartily embrace offered mercy, submit to, and trust in a Mediator. In this
respect there is as much encouragement to the most guilty and vile, as to any
whatsoever.

And as to obtaining a new heart by regenerating grace, they who are the chief
of sinners, have as much encouragement to hope for this, in the use of means,
as they whose sins are less aggravated, and not so many or great. It does not
appear from scripture, that God chooses out the least sinners to be the objects
of this mercy; or that he withholds it from any merely because they are so
guilty and hateful in his sight: or that he waits till men who have been great
sinners are so reformed as to become, all things considered, less vile and
guilty. And there is not any thing in the bible that should lead us to think,
that God bestows his regenerating grace on the least sinners more commonly than
on those who are greater: But we find much there to teach us, that if he ever
does this, it is not be cause they are less sinners than others; but for some
other reason.

If sinners were to take their only encouragement to hope for salvation in the
use of means, from their being less sinners than others, or not so bad as they
once were, this would tend to take all encouragement from those who are under
genuine convictions, and have any true view of their own sinfulness, and leave
them in absolute despair. For all such, as they have a more clear and full
sight of their own sins than they can have of others, ara naturally led to view
themselves as the greatest sinners. And as by attendance on means, they get
more and more acquainted with their own hearts, their own sinfulness increases
in their view, they are so far from looking on themselves as less sinners than
they were, that they naturally view themselves in a contrary light

The only proper way (...) sinner, who is under any great degree of genuine
conviction of sin, and concern about his eternal interest, to attend on means
with hope, is not to preach up promises to his doings, and lead him to expect
hereby to become less sinful; but to teach him the true end and design of
means. He will then know that the great wickedness of his heart, exercised in
all he does, and his appearing to himself to grow worse rather than better,
which is commonly the chief ground of discouragement to such, is really no
reason why he should neglect means; but rather an encouragement constantly to
attend. For this sight and conviction of his own sinfulness, which is necessary
in order to salvation, is kept up in his mind and increased, only by attending
on means. In this view his own experience serves to show the advantage of using
means, and is matter of encouragement and hope.

FINIS
ERRATA
Page 18, line 15, for as read are. P. 67 I. 1, r. examplified. P. 107, I. 3 in
the margin, for their, r. this.

The following BOOKS etc. etc. may be had at John Perkins's Shop, in
UnionStreet, near the Conduit, Boston.

BUrkett on the NewTestament, with and without Cutts, Flavel's Works, Nelson's
Life of Christ and the Apostles, Bailey's Dictionary, Fenning's Royal ditto,
Boyer's French and English ditto, Huxham on Fevers, Thompson's Art of
Discecting, Drake's Anatomy, Morgan's Principles, -- Practice of Physic,
Heister's Anatomy, Daventur's Midwifery, Minute Philosopher, Watts's
Philosophy, -- Essays, -- Astronamy, -- Ruin and Recovery, -- On Prayer, --
Improvement of the Mind, -- Psalms with Appendix, -- Hymns, -- Lyrick Poems, --
World to come, Large Quarto Bibles with Church Service, Apocraphy and
Concordance, Octavo ditto, Small Pocket Bibles, with Tate and Brady's Psalms,
Ditto in two Volumns, Common Prayer Books, neatly bound in Turkey Cicero's
Orations, Horace Delph. Virgil Ditto, Davidson's Virgil, Terence, Eutropie's,
Gradus, Lexicons, Greek Testaments, Ditto -- Grammars, Latin -- Ditto, Ditto --
Testaments, Ward's Grammar, Accidences, Smallot's Don Quixot, Young's Works,
Perigrine Pickle, Family Instructor, Fortunate Country Maid, Adventures of a
Guinea, Gordon's Grammar, Martin's Land Surveying, Ned Ward's Dialogues,
Pomfret's Poems, English Hermit, Pilgrim's Progress, Aliene's Alarm to the
Unconverted, Russell's seven Sermons, -- Ditto on Prayer, Whole Duty of Man,
Universal Gazetteer, Salmon's Ditto, Bland's Discipline, Aliard and Eliosa,
Young Clerk's Assistant, Virgin Unmarsk'd, Adventures of a Valet, Gentleman's
Libra, Langley's golden Rule, Young Man's Companion Complete Letter-writer,
Hills Arithmatick, Fisher's Ditto, Cocker's Ditto, Fenning's Algebra, William's
singing Book, Knap's Ditto, Arnold's Ditto, Walter's, the old Standard, Consort
Pitch Pipes, British Grammar, Dyches Spelling-Book, Dillworth's Ditto,
Unfortunate young Noble Man, Patty Saunders, Paradise Lost, History of England,
by Question and Answer, Love's Surveying, King's Heathen Gods, Young's Night
Thoughts, Prior's Poems, Hervey's Meditations, Ditto -- Dialogues, Cole on
God's Sovereignty Beveridge's Thoughts, Free Masons Pocket Companion, Mair's
Book-keepings, Complete Tradesman, Ward's Mathematick, Religious Courtship,
Martin's Philosophy, Peter the Great, Lock on Understanding, Even's Sermons,
Craige's Poems, Wilson's Examples, Tate and Brady's Psalms, neatly bound in
Turkey Leather, West India Pilot, Nine Leaves Charts, Mariner's Compass, --
Kallender,

