THE LIFE and CHARACTER OF THE LATE REVEREND Mr. JONATHAN EDWARDS, PRESIDENT of
the COLLEGE at NEW JERSEY. Together with a Number of his SERMONS ON Various
important SUBJECTS.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S KNEELAND, opposite to the Probate-Office in
Queen Street. M,DCC,LXV.

THE LIFE OF THE LATE REVEREND, LEARNED AND PIOUS Mr. JONATHAN EDWARDS, Some
Time MINISTER of the Gospel at Northampton, in New England, and then MISSIONARY
to the INDIANS at Stockbridge, and after that PRESIDENT of NEW JERSEY COLLEGE.
Who departed this Life at Princeton, March 22. 1758. in the 55th. Year of his
Age.

"The sweet Remembrance of the Just
"Shall flourish when he sleeps in Dust.
PSALM. 112.6 BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite the
Probate-Office, in Queen Street. M,DCC,LXV.

The PREFACE.
PRESIDENT EDWARDS, in the esteem of all the judicious, who were well
acquainted with him, either personally, or by his writings, was one of the
greatest -- best -- and most useful of men, that have lived in this age.

He discovered himself to be one of the greatest of divines, by his
conversation, preaching and writings: One of remarkable strength of mind,
clearness of thought, and depth of penetration, who well understood, and was
able, above most others, to vindicate the great doctrines of christianity.

And no one perhaps has been in our day, more universally esteemed and
acknowledged to be a bright christian, an eminently good man. His love to God
and man; his zeal for God and his cause; his uprightness, humility,
self-denial, and weanedness from the world; his close walk with God; his
conscientious, constant and universal obedience, in all exact and holy ways of
living: In one word, the goodness, the holiness of h^s heart, has been as
evident and conspicuous, as the uncommon greatness and strength of his
understanding.

And that this distinguished light has not shone in vain, there are a cloud of
witnesses. God who gave him his great talents, led him into a way of improving
them, both by preaching and writing, which has doubtless proved the means of
converting many from the error of their ways; and of greatly promoting the
interest of Christ's church, both in America and Europe. And there is reason to
hope, that though he is now dead, he will yet speak for a great while yet to
come, to the great comfort and advantage of the church of Christ; that his
publications will produce a yet greater harvest, as an addition to his joy and
crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord.

But the design of the following memoirs, is not merely to publish these
things, and tell the world how eminently great, wise, holy and useful President
Edwards was; but rather to inform in what way, and by what means he attained to
such an uncommon stock of knowledge and holiness; and how, in the improvement
of this, he did so much good to mankind; that others may hereby be directed and
excited to go and do likewise.

The reader is therefore not to expect a mere encomium on the dead, but a
faithful and plain narration of matters of fact, together with his own internal
exercises, expressed in his own words; and is desired not to look on the
following composure so much an act of friendship to the dead, as of kindness to
the living; it being only an attempt to render a life that has been greatly
useful, yet more so. And as this is designed for the reader's good, he is
desired to remember, that if he gets no benefit hereby; is not made wiser nor
better, gains no skill or disposition to live an holy and useful life, all is
in vain as to him.

IN this world, so full of darkness and delusion, it is of great importance
that all should be able to distinguish between true religion and that which is
false. In this, perhaps none has taken more pains, or labored more
successfully, than he whose life is set before the reader. And it is presumed
that his religious resolutions, exercises and conduct here exhibited, will
serve well to exemplify and illustrate all that he has wrote on this subject.
Here pure and undefiled religion, in distinction from all counterfeits, appears
in life and practice, exhibiting a picture which will tend to instruct,
strengthen and comfort all those, who in their religious sentiments and
exercises, are built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, of which
Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone; while their hearts and practice in some
measure answer to it, as in water; face answers to face. And here, they who
have hitherto unhappily been in darkness and delusion, in this infinitely
important affair, may have matter of instruction and conviction.

This is a point about which, above many other, the protestant world is in the
dark, and needs instruction, as Mr. Edwards was more and more convinced, the
longer he lived; and which he was wont frequently to observe in conversation.
If therefore these his remains are adapted to answer this end* and may be
considered as a word behind all to whom they shall come, "saying, THIS IS THE
WAY, walk ye in it", and shall in this view, be blessed to many, it will be a
relief under one of the greatest calamities that attend the christian world,
and promote that important end, so worthy the a^tention and pursuit of all; and
in which he from whom this mantle falls, was zealously engaged, and which he
pursued to the end of his life.

In this view especially, is the following life offered to the public, with an
earnest desire that every reader may faithfully improve it to this purpose;
while he heartily overlooks any improprieties and defects which he may observe
to be chargeable on the compiler; who is he knows, in a great degree unequal to
what is here attempted.

August 20. 1764.
The CONTENTS.
PART I. CONTAINING the History of his Life, from his Birth, to his Settlement
in the Work of the Ministry.
His Parentage. Page 1 -- 3. -- Education. p. 3. Studies Divinity, -- takes
License and preaches at New York. p. 4. Is chosen Tutor of Yale-College. p. 5.
Is settled in the Work of the Ministry at Northampton. p. 5.
PART II. Containing Extracts from his private Writings etc.
SECT. I. His Resolutions. p. 6. etc. SECT. II. Extracts from his private
Diary. p. 10. SECT. III. A brief Reflection on the foregoing Extracts. p. 21.
SECT. IV. An Account of his Conversion, Experiences, and religious Exercises,
given by himself. p. 24.
PART III. Containing a History of his Life, from his entering on the Work of
the Ministry, to his Death.
SECT. I. His general Manner of Life. p. 39 -- 53. Serious and devout. p. 40.
Temperance in eating and drinking, and early rising. p. 40. His Diversions p.
40. His Studiousness, and Manner of pursuing his Studies. p. 40. His Government
of his Tongue. p. 41. His Conduct in his Family. p. 42. His Treatment of Mrs.
EDWARDS, and Family Religion. p. 42. Government and Instruction of his
Children. p. 43. Strict Observation of the Sabbath. p. 43. Inviolable Regard to
Truth and Justice. p. 44. His Friends, and his Treatment of them. p. 45. His
Benevolence and Charity. p. 45. His Accomplishments and Eminency as a Preacher.
p. 47, 48. His Prayers. p. 49. Free from worldly Cares. p. 49. His Manner of
Instructing his People more privately. p. 50. His Principles. p. 52. SECT. II.
His Dismission from Northampton, with the Occasion and Circumstances of it. p.
53, etc. His unhappy Difficulty with his People. p. 54, 55. His Principles that
occasioned his Dismission. p. 55, 56, 57. The Uneasiness and Uproar of his
People. p. 57. Their Treatment of Mr. EDWARDS in some Instances. p. 58 -- 64.
He preaches on the Subject. p. 58, 59. Difficulty of agreeing on a Council. p.
60. A Council is agreed upon and he is dismissed. p. 61. After his Dismission
they refuse to let him preach occasionally in the Pulpit. p. 62. The Greatness
of Mr. EDWARDS's Trial, and his Steadiness and Patience under it. p. 62, 63,
64. The Charity of his Friends in Scotland, on this Occasion. p. 64, 65. The
Friendship of some of his People at Northampton, and a Council called on their
Motion. p. 65, 66. Major HAWLEY's Letter relative to his own and the People's
Treatment of Mr. EDWARDS. p. 66, 72. SECT. III. His Mission to the Indians at
Stockbridge. p. 72 -- 74. SECT. IV. His being made President of New Jersey
College, his Sickness and Death. p. 75 -- 82.
PART IV. Containing an Account of his Manuscripts and the Books published by
him.
SECT. I. His Manuscripts. p. 82, etc. SECT. II. His Publications. p. 84.
APPENDIX, No. I.
A brief Account of Mrs. BURR. p. 88.
APPENDIX, No. II.
A short Sketch of Mrs. EDWARDS's Life and Character. p. 92.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 3. from the bottom, for my, read any. p. 14. l. 33. f. their, r.
this. p. 17. l. 4. f. I, r. To. p. ^8. l. 17. f. Thursday. r. Tuesday. p. 22.
l. 22. f. teach, r. feed. p. 24. l. 28. f things, r. thoughts. p. 25. l. 11. f.
(...) p. 27. l. 20. f. o, r. of. p. 33. l. 27, 28. r. some sp^^ seasons. p. 40.
l. 3. r. indication p. 46 l. 15. after (...) r. a considerable sum: which ought
not to have bee^ (...) in the margin. p. 52. l. 24. r. Brain^rd. p. 57 (...)
after them, add would. p. 61. l. 22. after church^^ (...) that. p. 63. l. 23.
r. seem. p. 65. l. 11. f. that, (...) l. 26, r. a great. l. 33. r.
eclesiastical council. (...) 25. blot out to. p. 76. l. 5. r. peculiarly. l.
(...) p. 77. l. 11. r. decrees. p. 80. l. 32. r. stanch (...) 5. r. penning. p.
86. in the margin, f. 46. (...) l. 3. r. Esther. p. 94. l. 33. r. sex.

Many less mistakes and inaccuracies, w^^ ^^fect the sense, will need the
candor of the ^ea^^
THE LIFE Of the Reverend Mr. JONATHAN EDWARDS.
PART I. Containing the History of his Life, from his BIRTH, to his SETTLEMENT
in the Work of the MINISTRY.
MR. JONATHAN EDWARDS was born October 5. 1703. at Windsor, a Town in
Connecticut. His Father was the Rev. Mr. TIMOTHY EDWARDS, Minister of the
Gospel on the east Side of Connecticut River in Windsor. He began to reside and
preach at Windsor in November 1694 but was not ordained till July, School. He
died Jan. 27. 1758. in the 89th Year of his Age, not two Months before this his
SON. He was in the Work of the Ministry above 59 Years: And from his first
beginning to reside and preach there, to his Death, are above 63 Years; and was
able to attend on the Work of the Ministry and preach constantly till within a
few Years before his Death. He was very universally esteemed and beloved as an
upright, pious, exemplary Man, and faithful Minister of the Gospel; and was
greatly useful. He was born at Hartford in Connecticut, May 14. 1669, received
the Honors of the College at Cambridge in New England, by having the Degrees
of Bachelor and Master of Arts given him the same Day, July 4. 1694, one in
the Forenoon, and the other in the Afternoon.

On the 6th Day of November 1694, he was married to Mrs. ESTHER STODDARD, in
the 23d Year of her Age, the Daughter of the late famous Mr. SOLOMON STODDARD
of Northampton; whose great Parts and Zeal for experimental Religion are well
known in all the Churches in America; and will probably be transmitted to
Posterity yet unborn, by his valuable Writings. They lived together in the
married State above 63 Years. Mrs. EDWARDS was born June 2. 1672, and is now
living in her 89th Year, remarkable for the little decay of her mental Powers
at so great an Age.

THEY had eleven Children: All which lived to adult Years, viz ten Daughters,
seven of whom are now living, and this their only Son and fifth Child. As the
following more large and particular Account, of (...) EDWARDS's Ancestors may
gratify some Readers, it is inserted here in the Margin.

Mr. EDWARDS's Grandfather was Mr. RICHARD EDWARDS. His first Wife was Mrs.
ELISABETH TUTTLE, Daughter of Mr. WILLIAM TUTTLE of New Haven in Connecticut,
and Mrs. ELIS. TUTTLE his Wife, who came out of Northamtonshire in England. His
second Wife was Mrs. TALCOT, Sister to Governor TALCOT: By his first Wife he
had seven Children, the oldest of which was the Rev. Mr. TIMOTHY EDWARDS of
Windsor, his Father, before mentioned. By his second Wife Mrs. Talcot, he had
six Children

The Father of Mr. RICHARD EDWARDS was Mr. WILLIAM EDWARDS, who came from
England young and unmarried. His Wife, Mrs. AGNES EDWARDS, who also came out of
England, had two Brothers in England, one of them Mayor of Exeter, and the
other of Barnstable. Mr. WM. EDWARDS's Father was the Rev. Mr. RICH. EDWARDS,
Minister of the Gospel in London. He lived in Queen ELISABETH's Day, and his
Wife Mrs ANNE EDWARDS assisted in making a Ruff for the Queen. After the Death
of Mr. EDWARDS she married to one Mr. JAMES COLE. She with her second Husband,
and her Son WM. EDWARDS came into America, and all died at Hartford in
Connecticut.

Mr. EDWARDS's Grandfather, (Mr. SOLOMON STODDARD, and his Predecessor at
Northampton) married Mrs. MATHER, the Relict of the Rev Mr. MATHER his
Predecessor, and the first Minister at Northampton. Her maiden Name was ESTHER
WARHAM, Daughter and youngest Child of the Rev. Mr. JOHN WARHAM, Minister at
Windsor in Connecticut, who came out of England, before which he was Minister
in Exeter in England: He had four Children, all Daughters; and Mrs. WARHAM
survived him, and had two Daughters by Mr. NEWBURY, her second Husband.

Mrs. ESTHER WARHAM had three Children by Mr MATHER, viz. Eunice, Warham and
Eliakim. And she had twelve Children by Mr. STO^DARD, six Sons and six
Daughters: Three of the Sons died in Infancy. The three that lived to adult
Years were Anthony, John and Israel. Israel died in Prison in France. Anthony
was the Rev. Mr. ANTHONY STODDARD, late Minister of the Gospel at Woodbury in
Connecticut. who lived to a great Age, and was in the Work of the Ministry 60
Years: He died Sept 6 1760, in the 82d Year of his Age. John was the honorable
JOHN STODDARD, Esquire who lived at Northampton, and who often, especially in his
younger Years, served the Town as their Representative at the Great and General
Court in Boston; and was long Head of the Country of Hampshire as their chief
Colonel, and chief Judge of the Court of Common Pleas: And he long served His
Majesty, and the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, as one of his Majesty's
Council. He was remarkable as a Politician, and for his Spirit of Government; a
wise Counselor, an upright and skilful Judge, a steady and great Friend to the
Interest of Religion. He was a great Friend and Admirer of Mr Edwards, and
greatly strengthened his Hands in the Work of the Ministry while he lived. A
more particular Account of the Life and Character of this truly great Man may
be seen in the Sermon which Mr. Edwards preached and published on the Occasion
of his Death.

Mr STODDARD's Father was ANTHONY STODDARD, Esquire of Boston, a zealous
congregational Man. He had five Wives, the first of which, Mr. STODDARD's
Mother, was Mrs. MARY DOWNING, Sister to Sir GEORGE DOWNING, whose other Sister
married Governor BRADSTREET. Mr. SOLOMON STODDARD was their oldest Child.




Mr. EDWARDS entered Yale College in the Year 1716, and received the Degree of
Bachelor of Arts in September 1720, a little before he was 17 Years old. He
had the Character of a sober Youth, and a good Scholar while he was a Member of
the College. In his second Year at College, and thirteenth of his Age, he read
Lock on the human Understanding, with great delight and profit. His uncommon
Genius, by which he was, as it were by Nature, formed for closeness of Thought
and deep Penetration, now began to exercise and discover it self. Taking that
Book into his Hand, upon some Occasion, not long before his Death, he said to
some of his select Friends, who were then with him. That he was beyond
Expression extertain'd and pleased with it, when he read it in his Youth at
College; that he was as much engaged, and had more Satisfaction and Pleasure in
studying it, than the most greedy Miser in gathering up handfuls of Silver and
Gold from some new discovered Treasure.

THOUGH he made good Proficiency in all the Arts and Sciences, and had an
uncommon Taste for natural Philosophy, which he cultivated to the end of his
Life, with that justness and accuracy of Thought which was almost peculiar to
him; yet moral Philosophy or Divinity w^^ his favorite Study. In this he early
made great Progress.

HE lived at College near two Years after he took his first Degree, designing
and preparing for the Work of the Ministry. After which, having passed the
pre-requisite Trials, he was licenced to preach the Gospel as a Candidate. And
being pitched upon, and applied to by a Number of Ministers in New England, who
were entrusted to act in Behalf of the English Presbyterians at New York, as a
fit Person to be sent to them, he complied with their Request, and went to
New York the beginning of August, 1722; and preached there to very good
Acceptance about eight Months But by Reason of the Smallness of that Society,
and some special Difficulties that attended it, he did not think they were in a
Capacity to settle a Minister, with a rational Prospect of answering the good
Ends proposed. He therefore left them, the next Spring, and retired to his
Father's House; where he spent the Summer in close Study. He was indeed
earnestly solicited by the People he had been among at New York to return to
them again; but for the Reason just mentioned, he could not think himself in
the way of his Duty to gratify them.

IN September, 1723, he received his Degree of Master of Arts; about which time
he had Invitations from s^^cial Congregations to come among them in order to
his Settlement in the Work of the Ministry; but being chosen Tutor of
Yale-College the next Spring in the Year 1724, being in the twenty first Year
of his Age, he retired to the College, and attended the Business of Tutor there
above two Years.

WHILE he was in this Place, he was applied to by the People at Northampton,
with an Invitation to come and settle in the Work of the Ministry there, with
his Grandfather STODDARD, who by Reason of his great Age, stoo^ in need of
Assistance. He therefore resigned his Tutorship, in September, 1726, and
accepted of their Invitation* and was ordained in the Work of the Ministry at
Northam^ton, Colleague with his Grandfather STODDARD, February 15. 1727, in
the twenty fourth Year of his Age, where he continued in the Work of the
Ministry till June 22. 1750, twenty three Years and four Months.

BETWEEN the Time of his going to New York and his Settlement at Northampton,
he formed a Number of Resolutions, and committed them to Writing: the
particular Time, and special Occasion of his making many of them, he has noted
in his Diary which he then kept; as well as many other Observations and Rules,
which related to his own Exercises and Conduct. And as these Resolutions,
together with the Things noted in his Diary, may justly be considered, as the
Foundation and Plan of his whole Life, it may be proper here to give the Reader
a Taste and Idea of them: which will therefore be done in the following
Extracts.

PART II. Containing EXTRACTS from his PRIVATE WRITINGS etc.
SECTION I. His RESOLUTIONS.
"BEING sensible that I am unable to do any thing without God's Help, I do
humbly entreat him by his Grace to enable me to keep these Resolutions, so far
as they are agreeable to his Will, for Christ's Sake.

Remember to read over these Resolutions once a Week.

1. Resolved, That I will do whatsoever I think to be most to God's Glory, and
my own Good, Profit and Pleasure, in the whole of my Duration, without any
Consideration of the Time, whether now, or never so many Myriads of Ages hence.
Resolved to do whatever I think to be my Duty, and most for the Good and
Advantage of Mankind in general. Resolved to do this, whatever Difficulties I
meet with, how many and how great soever.

2. Resolved, to be continually endeavoring to find out some new Invention and
Contrivance to promote the forementioned Things.

4. Resolved, never to do any manner of Thing, whether in Soul or Body, less or
more, but what tends to the glory of God; nor be, nor suffer it, if I can avoid
it.

5. Resolved, never to loose one Moment of Time; but improve it the most
profitable Way I possibly can.

6. Resolved, to live with all my might, while I do live.

7. Resolved, never to do any Thing, which I should be afraid to do, if it were
the last Hour of my Life.

9. Resolved, to think much on all Occasions of my own dying, and of the common
Circumstances which attend Death.

11. Resolved, when I think of my Theorem in Divinity to be solved, immediately
to do what I can toward solving it, if Circumstances don't hinder.

13. Resolved, to be endeavoring to find out fit Objects of Charity and
Liberality.

14. Resolved, never to do any Thing out of Revenge.

15. Resolved, never to suffer the least Motions of Anger to irrational Beings.

17. Resolved, that I will live so as I shall wish I had done when I come to
die.

18. Resolved, to live so at all Times, as I think is best in my devout Frames,
and when I have clearest Notions of Things of the Gospel, and another World.

20. Resolved, to maintain the strictest Temperance in eating and drinking.

21. Resolved, never to do any Thing, which if I should see in another, I
should count a just Occasion to despise him for, or to think any Way the more
meanly of him.

24. Resolved, whenever I do any conspicuously evil Action, to trace it back,
till I come to the original Cause; and then both carefully endeavor to do so
no more, and to fight and pray with all my Might against the Original of it.

28. Resolved, to study the Scriptures so steadily, constantly and frequently,
as that I may find, and plainly perceive my self to grow in the Knowledge of
the same.

30. Resolved, to strive to my utmost every Week to be brought higher in
Religion, and to a higher Exercise of Grace, than I was the Week before.

32. Resolved, to be strictly and firmly faithful to my Trust, that that in
Prove. xx. 6. A faithful Man who can find? may not be partly fulfilled in me.

33. Resolved, always to do what I can toward making, maintaining and
establishing Peace, when it can be without over-balancing Detriment in other
Respects.

34. Resolved, in Narrations never to speak any Thing but the pure and simple
Verity.

36. Resolved, never to speak Evil of any, except I have some particular good
Call for it.

37. Resolved, to enquire every Night, as I am going to Bed, wherein I have
been negligent, what Sin I have committed, and wherein I have denied my self:
Also at the end of every Week, Month and Year.

38. Resolved, never to speak any Thing that is Ridiculous, or Matter of
Laughter on the Lord's Day.

39. Resolved, never to do any Thing that I so much question the Lawfulness of,
as that I intend, at the same Time, to consider and examine afterward, whether
it be lawful or no: except I as much question the lawfulness of the omission.

41. Resolved, to ask my self at the end of every Day, Week, Month and Year,
wherein I could possibly in any Respect have done better.

42. Resolved, frequently to renew the Dedication of my self to God, which was
made at my Baptism; which I solemnly renewed, when I was received into the
Communion of the Church; and which I have solemnly re-made this twelfth Day of
January 1722.3.

43. Resolved, never hence-forward, till I die, to act as if I were any way my
own, but entirely and altogether God's, agreeable to what is to be found in
Saturday January 12.

46. Resolved, never to allow the least Measure of any fretting Uneasiness at
my Father or Mother. Resolved to suffer no Effects of it, so much as in the
least alteration of Speech, or motion of my Eye: And to be especially careful
of it, with respect to any of our Family.

47. Resolved, to endeavor to my utmost to deny whatever is not most agreeable
to a good, and universally sweet and benevolent, quiet, peaceable, contented,
easy, compassionate, generous, humble, meek, modest, submissive, obliging,
diligent and industrious, charitable, even, patient, moderate, forgiving,
sincere Temper; and to do at all Times what such a Temper would lead me to.
Examine strictly every Week, whether I have done so.

48. Resolved, constantly, with the utmost Niceness and Diligence, and the
strictest Scrutiny, to be looking into the State of my Soul, that I may know
whether I have truly an Interest in Christ or no; that when I come to die, I
may not have any Negligence respecting this to repent of.

50. Resolved, I will act so as I think I shall judge would have been best, and
most prudent, when I come into the future World.

52. I frequently hear Persons in old Age say how they would live, if they were
to live their Lives over again: Resolved, that I will live just so as I can
think I shall wish I had done, supposing I live to old Age.

54. Whenever I hear any thing spoken in Conversation of any Person, if I think
it would be praiseworthy in me, Resolved to endeavor to imitate it.

55. Resolved, to endeavor to my utmost to act as I can think I should do, if
I had already seen the Happiness of Heaven, and Hell Torments.

56. Resolved, never to give over, nor in the least to slacken my Fight with my
Corruptions, however unsuccessful I may be.

57. Resolved, when I fear Misfortunes and Adversities, to examine whether I
have done my Duty, and resolve to do it; and let it be just as Providence
orders it, I will as far as I can, be concerned about nothing but my Duty and
my Sin.

62. Resolved, never to do any thing but Duty; and then according to Ephesians. vi.
6, 7, 8. do it willingly and cheerfully as unto the Lord, and not to Man;
knowing that whatever good Thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the
Lord.

65. Resolved, very much to exercise my self in this all my Life long, viz.
with the greatest openness I am capable of, to declare my Ways to God, and lay
open my Soul to Him: all my Sins, Temptations, Difficulties, Sorrows, Fears,
Hopes, Desires, and every Thing, and every Circumstance; according to Dr.
Manton's 27th Sermon on the 119 Psalm.

67. Resolved, after Afflictions, to inquire, what I am the better for them,
what Good I have got by them, and what I might have got by them. The
Resolutions are seventy in Number. But part of them are here transcribed, as a
Specimen of the whole. The Number here affixed to them, is that by which they
are numbered in the original Manuscript; and retained here for the Sake of the
References made to some of them in the Diary, as the Reader will presently see.


SECTION II. Extracts from his PRIVATE DIARY.
"SAturday, December 22. 1722. This Day revived by God's Spirit. Affected with
the Sense of the excellency of Holiness. Felt more exercise of Love to Christ
than usual. Have also felt sensible Repentance of Sin, because it was committed
against so merciful and good a God. This Night made the 37th Resolution.

Sabbath Day-Night, Dec. 23. Made the 38th Resolution.

Monday, Dec. 24. Higher Thoughts than usual of the Excellency of Jesus Christ
and his Kingdom.

Wednesday, January 2 1722, 3. Dull. I find by Experience, that let me make
Resolutions, and do what I will, with never so many Inventions, it is all
nothing, and to no Purpose at all, without the Motions of the Spirit of God:
for if the Spirit of God should be as much withdrawn from me always, as for the
Week past, notwithstanding all I do, I should not grow; but should languish,
and miserably fade away -- There is no Dependence upon my self. It is to no
Purpose to resolve, except we depend on the Grace of God; for if it were not
for his mere Grace, one might be a very good Man one Day, and a very wicked one
the next.

Sabbath Day, Jan. 6. at Night. Much concerned about the improvement of
precious Time. Intend to live in continual Mortification, without ceasing, as
long as in this World.

Tuesday, Jan. 8. in the Morning. Higher Thoughts than usual, of the Excellency
of Christ, and felt an unusual Repentance of Sin therefrom.

Wednesday, Jan. 9. at Night. Decayed. I am sometimes apt to think, I have a
great deal more of Holiness than I have. I find now and then, that abominable
Corruption which is directly contrary to what I read of eminent Christians. --
How deceitful is my Heart! I take up a strong Resolution, but how soon does it
weaken!

Thursday, Jan. 10. about Noon. Reviving. It Is a great Dishonor to Christ, in
whom I hope I have an Interest, to be uneasy at my worldly State and Condition.
When I see the Prosperity of others, and that all Things go easy with them; the
World is smooth to them, and they are happy in many Respects, and very
prosperous, or are advanced to much Honor etc. to grudge and envy them, or be
the least uneasy at it; to wish or long for the same Prosperity, and that it
would ever be so with me. Wherefore concluded always to rejoice in every one's
Prosperity, and to expect for my self no Happiness of that Nature as long as I
live; but depend upon Afflictions, and betake my self entirely to another
Happiness.

I think I find my self much more sprightly and healthy, both in Body and Mind,
for my Self-denial in eating, drinking, and sleeping.

I think it would be advantageous every Morning to consider my Business and
Temptations; and what Sins I shall be exposed to that Day* and to make a
Resolution how to improve the Day, and to avoid those Sins. And so at the
beginning of every Week, Month and Year.

I never knew before what was meant by not setting our Hearts upon these
Things. It Is, not to care about them, to depend upon them, to afflict our
selves much with Fears of losing them, nor please our selves with Expectation
of obtaining them, or hope of the Continuance of them At Night made the 41st
Resolution.

Saturday, Jan. 12. in the Morning. I have this Day solemnly renewed my
baptismal Covenant and Self-Dedication, which I renewed when I was received
into the Communion of the Church. I have been before God; and have given my
self, all that I am and have to GOD, so that I am not in any Respect my own: I
can challenge no Right in my self, I can challenge no Right in this
Understanding, this Will, these Affections that are in me; neither have I any
right to this Body, or any of its Members: No Right to this Tongue, these
Hands, nor Feet: no Right to these Senses, these Eyes, these Ears, this Smell
or Taste. I have given my self clear away, and have not retained any Thing as
my own. I have been to GOD this Morning, and told Him that I gave my self
wholly to him. I have given every Power to him; so that for the future I will
challenge no Right in my self, in any Respect. I have expressly promised Him,
and do now promise Almighty God, that by his Grace I will not. I have this
Morning told Him, that I did take Him for my whole Portion and Felicity,
looking on nothing else as any Part of my Happiness, nor acting as if it were;
and his Law for the constant Rule of my Obedience: and would fight with all my
Might against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, to the End of my Life. And
did believe in Jesus Christ, and receive him as a Prince and a Savior; and
would adhere to the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, how hazardous and
difficult soever the Profession and Practice of it may be. That I did receive
the blessed Spirit as my Teacher, Sanctifier and only Comforter; and cherish
all his Motions to enlighten, purify, confirm, comfort and assist me. This I
have done. And I pray God, for the sake of Christ, to look upon it as a
Self-Dedication; and to receive me now as entirely his own, and deal with me in
all Respects as such; whether he afflicts me or prospers me, or whatever he
pleases to do with me, who am his. Now, henceforth I am not to act in any
Respect as my own. -- I shall act as my own, if I ever make use of any of my
Powers to any thing that is not to the glory of God, and don't make the
glorifying Him my whole and entire Business; if I murmur in the least at
Afflictions; if I grieve at the Prosperity of others; if I am any way
uncharitable; if I am angry because of Injuries; if I revenge: If I do any
thing, purely to please my self, or if I avoid any thing for the sake of my
Ease: If I omit any thing because it is great Self-denial: If I trust to my
self: If I take any of the Praise of any Good that I do, or rather GOD does by
me; or if I am any way proud.

This Day made the 42d and 43d Resolutions.

Monday, Jan. 14 -- The Dedication I made of my self to my God, on Saturday
last, has been exceeding useful to me. I thought I had a more spiritual insight
into the Scripture, reading the 8th Chapter to the Romans, than ever in my Life
before.

Great Instances of Mortification are deep Wounds given to the Body of Sin,
hard Bows that make him stagger and reel: we thereby get great Ground and
footing against him. -- While we live without great Instances of Mortification
and Self-denial, the old Man keeps whereabouts he was; for he is sturdy and
obstinate, and will not stir for small Blows. After the greatest
Mortifications, I always find the greatest Comfort.

Supposing there was never but one complete Christian, in all Respects of a
right Stamp, having Christianity shining in its true Luster, at a time in the
World; Resolved to act just as I would do, if I strove with all my Might to be
that One, that should be in my Time.

Tuesday, Jan. 15. It seemed Yesterday, the Day before and Saturday, that I
should always retain the same Resolutions to the same Height, but alas, how
soon do I decay! O, how weak, how infirm, how unable to do any thing am I! What
a poor, inconsistent, what a miserable Wretch, without the assistance of God's
Spirit! While I stand, I am ready to think I stand in my own Strength, and upon
my own Legs; and I am ready to triumph over my Enemies, as if it were I my self
that caused them to flee: when alas! I am but a poor Infant, upheld by Jesus
Christ; who holds me up, and gives me Liberty to smile to see my Enemies flee,
when he drives them before me; and so I laugh, as though I my self did it, when
it is only Jesus Christ leads me along, and fights Himself against my Enemies.
And now the Lord has a little left me, and how weak do I find my self! O, let
it teach me to depend less on my self, to be more humble, and to give more of
the praise of my Ability to Jesus Christ. The Heart of Man is deceitful above
all Things, and desperately wicked, who can know it?

Saturday, Febr. 16 I do certainly know that I love Holiness, such as the
Gospel requires.

At Night. I have been negligent for the Month past in these three Things; I
have not been watchful enough over my Appetite in eating and drinking; in
rising too late a Mornings; and in not applying my self with Application enough
to the Duty of secret Prayer.

Sabbath Day, Feb. 17. near Sunset. Renewedly promised, that I will accept of
God, for my whole Portion; and that I will be contented, whatever else I am
denied. I will not murmur, nor be grieved, whatever Prosperity, upon any
Account, I see others enjoy, and I am denied.

Saturday, March 2. -- O, how much pleasanter is Humility than Pride! O, that
God would fill me with exceeding great Humility, and that he would evermore
keep me from all Pride! The Pleasures of Humility are really the most refined,
inward and exquisite Delights in the World. How hateful is a proud Man! How
hateful is a Worm that lifts up it self with Pride! What a foolish, silly,
miserable, blind, deceived, poor W^rm am I, when Pride works!

Wednesday, March 6. near Sun set. Felt the Doctrines of Election, Free Grace,
and of our not being able to do any thing without the Grace of God; and that
Holiness is entirely, throughout, the Work of God's Spirit, with more Pleasure
than before.

Monday Morning, April 1. I think it best not to allow my self to laugh at the
Faults, Follies and Infirmities of others.

Saturday Night, April 7. This Week I found my self ^^r gone, that it seemed to
me, that I should never rec^^e more. Let God of his Mercy return unto me, and
no more leave me thus to sink and decay! I know, O Lord, that without thy Help,
I shall fall innumerable times, notwithstanding all my Resolutions, how often
so ever repeated.

Saturday Night, April 14. I could pray more heartily this Night, for the
Forgiveness of my Enemies, than ever before.

Wednesday, May 1. Forenoon. Last Night I came Home, after my melancholy
parting from New York.

I have always, in every different State of Life, I have hitherto been in,
thought the Troubles and Difficulties of that State, to be greater than those
of any other, that I proposed to be in; and when I have altered with assurance
of mending my self, I have still thought the same; yea, that the Difficulties
of that State, are greater than those of that I left last. Lord, grant that
from hence I may learn to withdraw my Thoughts, Affections, Desires and
Expectations, entirely from the World, and may fix them upon the heavenly
State; where there is fullness of Joy; where reigns heavenly, sweet, calm and
delightful Love without Alloy; where there are continually the dearest
Expressions of their Love: where there is the Enjoyment of the Persons loved,
without ever parting: where those Persons, who appear so lovely in this World,
will really be inexpressibly more lovely, and full of Love to us. How sweetly
will the mutual Lovers join together to sing the Praises of God and the Lamb!
How full will it fill us with Joy to think, this Enjoyment, these sweet
Exercises, will never cease or come to an End, but will last to all Eternity.

Remember, after Journeys, Removes, Overturnings and Alterations in the State
of my Life, to reflect and consider, Whether therein I have managed the best
Way possible, respecting my Soul? And before such Alterations, if foreseen, to
resolve how to act.

Thursday, May 2. -- I think it a very good Way to examine Dreams every Morning
when I awake, what are the Nature, Circumstances, Principles and Ends of my
imaginary Actions and Passions in them, to discern what are my chief
Inclinations etc.

Saturday Night, May 4. Although I have in some Measure subdued a Disposition
to chide and fret, yet I find a certain Inclination, which is not agreeable to
Christian sweetness of Temper and Conversation: either by too much
Dogmaticalness, too much of the Egotism; a Disposition to be telling of my own
Dislike and Scorn; and freedom from those that are innocent, yea common
Infirmities of Men; and many other such like Things. O that God would help me
to discern all the Flaws and Defects of my Temper and Conversation, and help me
in the difficult Work of amending them: And that he would fill me so full of
Christianity, that the Foundation of all these disagreeable Irregularities may
be destroyed, and the contrary Sweetnesses and Beauties may of themselves
naturally follow.

Sabbath Day, May 5. in the Morning. This Day made the 47th Resolution.

Sabbath Day, May 12. I think I find in my Heart to be glad from the hopes I
have that my Eternity is to be spent in spiritual and holy Joys, arising from
the manifestation of God's Love, and the exercise of Holiness and a burning
Love to Him.

Saturday-Night, May 18. I now plainly perceive what great Obligations I am
under to love and honor my Parents. I have great Reason to believe, that their
Counsel and Education have been my making; notwithstanding, in the Time of it,
it seemed to do me so little good. I have good Reason to hope that their
Prayers for me, have been in many Things very powerful and prevalent; that God
has in many Things, taken me under his Care and Guidance, Provision and
Direction, in answer to their Prayers for me. I was never made so sensible of
it as now.

Wednesday, May 2^. in the Morning. Memorandum. To take spe^ial Care of these
following Things; Evil Speaking, Fretting, Eating, Drinking and Sleeping,
speaking simple Verity, joining in Prayer, slightiness in secret Prayer,
Listlesness and Negligence, and Thoughts that cherish Sin.

Saturday, May 25. in the Morning. As I was this Morning reading the 17th
Resolution, it was suggested to me, that if I was now to die, I should wish
that I had prayed more that God would make me know my State, whether it be good
or bad; and that I had taken more Pains to see and narrowly search into this
Matter. Wherefore, Mem. For the future most nicely and diligently to look into
our old Divines Opinions concerning Conversion. Made the 48th Resolution.

Friday, June 1. Afternoon. I have abundant Cause, O my merciful Father, to
love thee ardently, and greatly to bless and praise thee, that thou have heard
me in my earnest Request, and have so answered my Prayer for Mercy to keep from
decay and sinking. O, graciously, of thy mere Goodness, still continue to pity
my Misery, by reason of my Sinfulness. O my dear Redeemer, I commit my self,
together with my Prayer and Thanksgiving into thine Hand.

Monday, July 1. Again confirmed by Experience of the happy Effects of strict
Temperance, with respect both to Body and Mind. Resolved for the future to
observe rather more of Meekness, Moderation and Temper in Disputes.

Thursday, July 18. near Sunset. Resolved to endeavor to make sure of that
Sign the Apostle James gives of a perfect Man, Jam. iii. 2. If any Man offend
not in Word, the same is a perfect Man, and able also to bridle the whole Body.

Monday, July 22. I see there is danger of my being drawn into Transgression by
the Power of such Temptations as a fear of seeming uncivil, and of offending
Friends. Watch against it.

Tuesday, July 23. When I find those Groanings which cannot be uttered, the
Apostle speaks of; and those Soulbreakings, for the longing it has, the
Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. cxix. 20. to humor and promote them to the utmost of
my Power, and be not weary of earnestly endeavoring to vent my Desires.

To count it all Joy when I have Occasion of great Self-denial, because then I
have a glorious Opportunity of giving deadly Wounds to the Body of Sin, and
greatly confirming and establishing the new Nature: I seek to mortify Sin, and
increase in Holiness: these are the best Opportunities, according to January 14.

To improve Afflictions of all Kinds as blessed Opportunities of forcibly
bearing on in my Christian Course, notwithstanding that which is so very apt to
discourage me, and to damp the vigor of my Mind, and to make me lifeless: Also
as Opportunities of trusting and confiding in God, and getting a Habit of that,
according to the 57th Resolution. And as an Opportunity of rending m^ Heart off
from the World, and setting it upon Heaven alone. To improve them as
Opportunities to repent of, and bewail my Sin, and abhor my self. And as a
blessed Opportunity to exercise Patience; to trust in God, and divert my Mind
from the Affliction, by fixing my self in religious Exercises. Also, let me
comfort my self, that it is the very Nature of Afflictions to make the Heart
better; and if I am made better by them, what need I be concerned, however
grievous they seem for the present?

Friday Afternoon, July 26. To be particularly careful to keep up inviolable a
Trust and Reliance, ease and entire Rest in God in all Conditions, according to
57th Resolution; for this I have found to be wonderfully advantageous to me.

Monday, July 29. When I am concerned how I shall perform any thing to public
Acceptance, to be very careful that I have it very clear to me, that I do what
is Duty and Prudence in the Matter.

Wednesday, July 31. -- Never in the least to seek to hear sarcastical
Relations of others Faults. Never to give Credit to any thing said against
others, except there is very plain Reason for it; nor to behave in any Respect
the otherwise for it.

Wednesday, August 7. To esteem as some Advantag^ that the Duties of Religion
are difficult, and that many Difficulties are some times to be gone through in
the Way of Duty. Religion is the sweeter, and what is gained by Labor, is
abundantly more precious: as a Woman loves her Child the better for having
brought it forth with Travail. And even to Christ Jesus himself, his
mediatorial Glory, his Victory and Triumph, his Kingdom which he has obtained;
how much more glorious is it, how much more excellent and precious, for his
having wrought it out by such Agonies!

Friday, August 9. -- One Thing that may be a good help toward thinking
profitably in Time of Vacation is, when I light on a profitable Thought, that I
can fix my Mind on, to follow it as far as possibly I can to Advantage.

Sabbath Day, after meeting, August 11. Resolved always to do that which I
shall wish I had done, when I see others do it. As for Instance, sometimes I
argue with my self, that such an Act of good Nature, Kindness, Forbearance, or
Forgiveness, etc. is not my Duty, because it will have such and such
Consequences: yet, when I see others do it, then it appears amiable to me, and
I wish I had done it; and I see that none of those feared Inconveniences
follow.

Thursday, August 13. I find it would be very much to Advantage, to be
thoroughly acquainted with the Scriptures. When I am reading doctrinal Books or
Books of Controversy, I can proceed with abundantly more Confidence; can see
upon what Footing and Foundation I stand.

Thursday, August 29 -- The Objection my Corruptions make against doing
whatever my Hand finds to do with my Might is, that it is a constant
Mortification. Let this Objection by no means ever prevail.

Monday, September 2. -- There is much Foll^, when I am quite sure I am in the
right, and others are positive in contradicting me, to enter into a vehement or
long Debate upon it.

Monday, September 23. I observe that old Men seldom have any Advantage of new
Discoveries; because they are beside a Way of thinking, they have been so long
used to. Resolved, if ever I live to Years, that I will be impartial to hear
the Reasons of all pretended Discoveries, and receive them if rational, how
long so ever I have been used to another Way of thinking.

Thursday, October 18. To follow the Example of Mr. B -- who, though he meets
with great Difficulties, yet undertakes them with a smiling Countenance, as
though he thought them but little; and speaks of them as if they were very small.

Thursday, November 26. It Is a most evil and pernicious Practice in Meditations
on Afflictions, to sit ruminating on the Aggravations of the Affliction, and
reckoning up the evil, dark Circumstances thereof, and dwelling long on the
dark Side; it doubles and trebles the Affliction. And so when speaking of them
to others, to make them as bad as we can, and use our Eloquence to set forth
our own Troubles, and are all the while making new Trouble, and feeding and
pampering the old; whereas the contrary Practice would starve our Afflictions.
If we dwelt on the light Side of Things in our Thoughts, and extenuated them
all that possibly we could, when speaking of them, we should think little of
them our selves; and the Affliction would really, in a great Measure, vanish
away.

Thursday Night, December 12. If at any Time I am forced to tell others of that
wherein I think they are something to blame; for the avoiding the important
Evil, that would otherwise ensue, not to tell it to them, so that there shall
be a Probability of their taking it as the effect of little, fretting, angry
Emotions of Mind.

December 31. at Night. Concluded never to suffer nor express any angry
Emotions of Mind more or less, except the Honor of God calls for it, in Zeal
for him, or to preserve my self from being trampled on.

Wednesday, January 1. 1723, 4.

NOT to spend too much time in thinking even of important and necessary worldly
Business. To allow every Thing it is Proportion of Thought, according to it is
Urgency and Importance

Friday, January 10. [After having wrote considerable in a short Hand, which he
used when he would have what he wrote effectually concealed from every Body but
himself, he notes the following Words in round Hand] Remember to act according
to Prove. xii. 23. A prudent Man concealeth Knowledge.

Monday, Feb. 3. Let every Thing have the Value now, that it will have on a
sick Bed: and frequently in my Pursuits of whatever Kind, let this come into my
Mind; "How much shall I value this on my Death Bed?

Wednesday, Feb. 5. Have not in Time past in my Prayers, enough insisted upon
the glorifying God in the World, and the Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ,
the Prosperity of the Church, and the good of Men. Determined that this
Objection is without Weight, viz. That it is not likely that God will make great
Alterations in the whole World, and Overturnings in Kingdoms and Nations, only
for the Prayers of one obscure Person, seeing such Things used to be done in
answer to the united, earnest Prayers of the whole Church: And if my Prayers
should have some Influence, it would be but imperceptible and small.

Thursday, Febr. 6. More convinced than ever of the Usefulness of a free
religious Conversation. I find by conversing on natural Philosophy, I gain
Knowledge abundance faster, and see the Reasons of Things much clearer, than in
private Study. Wherefore earnestly to seek at all times for religious
Conversation; for those that I can with Profit and Delight and Freedom so
converse with.

Sabbath Day, Febr. 23 -- If I act according to my Resolution, I shall desire
Riches no otherwise than as they are helpful to Religion. But this I determine,
as what is really evident from many Parts of Scripture, that to fallen Man they
have a greater Tendency to hurt Religion.

Saturday, May 23. How it comes about I know not; but I have remarked it
hitherto, that at those Times when I have read the Scripture most, I have
evermore been most lively, and in the best Frames.

Saturday-Night, June 6. This Week has been a remarkable Week with me with
Respect to Despondencies, Fears, Perplexities, Multitudes of Cares and
Distraction of Mind; being the Week I came hither to New Haven, in order to
entrance upon the Office of Tutor of the College. I have now abundant Reason to
be convinced of the Troublesomeness and Vexation of the World, and that it
never will be another Kind of World.

Tuesday, July 7. When I am giving the Relation of a Thing, to abstain from
altering either in the Matter or Manner of speaking, so much, as that if every
one afterward should alter as much, it would at last come to be properly false.

Tuesday, Sept. 2. By a Sparingness in Diet, and eating, as much as may be,
what is light and easy of Digestion, I shall doubtless be able to think
clearer, and shall gain Time. 1st. By lengthening out my Life. 2dly. shall need
less Time for Digestion after Meals. 3dly. shall be able to study closer
without wrong to my Health. 4thly. shall need less Time to Sleep. 5thly. shall
seldomer be troubled with the Headache.

Sabbath Day, November. 22. Considering that Bystanders always espy some Faults
which we don't see our selves, or at least are not so fully sensible of: there
are many secret Workings of Corruption which escape our Sight, and others only
are sensible of: Resolved therefore, that I will, if I can by any convenient
Means, learn what Faults others find in me, or what Things they see in me, that
appear any Way blameworthy, unlovely or unbecoming.

SECTION III. REFLECTION on the foregoing EXTRACTS.
THE foregoing Extracts were wrote by Mr. EDWARDS in the 20th and 21st Years of
his Age, as appears by the Dates. This being kept in Mind, the judicious Reader
will make proper Allowance for some Things, which may appear a little Juvenile,
or like a young Christian, as to the Matter, or Manner of Expression; which
would not have been found, had it not have been done in early Life. Which,
indeed are no Blemishes, the whole being taken together: as by this, it appears
more natural, and the Strength of his Resolution, and fervor of Mind; and his
Skill and Discerning in divine Things, so seldom found even in old Age, are the
more striking. And in this View, we shall be led to admire his conscientious
Strictness, his Zeal and Painfulness, his Experience and Judgment in true
Religion, at so early an Age. For here are not only the most convincing
Evidences of Sincerity and thorough Religion, of his engaging in a Life devoted
to GOD in good earnest, so as to make Religion his only Business; but through his
great Attention to this Matter, he appears to have the Judgment and Experience
of gray Hairs.

THIS is the Beginning of a Life so eminently holy and useful as Mr. EDWARDS's
was. He who became one of the greatest Divines in this Age; has had the
Applause and Admiration of America, Britain, Holland, and Germany, for his
Piety, and great Judgment and Skill in Divinity; and has been honored above
most others in the Christian World, in this Century; in his being made the
Instrument of doing so much good: HE began his Life thus: He entered on a
public Life with such Views, such Exercises, such Resolutions.

THIS may serve as a Direction and Excitement to those who are Young, to devote
themselves to GOD in good earnest, and enter on the Business of strict and
thorough Religion without delay: especially those who are looking toward the
Work of the Ministry, as they would take the most direct, the only Way to
answer the good Ends which they profess to seek.

IT is to be lamented, that there is so much Reason to think, there are so few
Instances of such early Piety in our Day. If the protestant World abounded with
young Persons of this Stamp; with young Men, who were preparing for the Work of
the Ministry, with such a Temper, such Exercises, and such Resolutions, what a
delightful Prospect would this afford, of the near approach of happier Days,
than the Church of GOD has ever yet seen! What pleasing Hopes that the great,
the merciful Head of the Church, was about to send forth Laborers, faithful,
successful Laborers into his Harvest; and bless his People with "Pastors which
shall teach them with Knowledge and Understanding!"

BUT if our Youth neglect all proper Improvement of the Mind; are shy of
Seriousness and strict Piety; choose to live Strangers to it, and keep at a
Distance from all Appearance of it; are wanton, and given to carnal Pleasures;
what a gloomy Prospect does this afford! If they who enter into the Work of the
Ministry; from a gay, careless, and what may justly be called a vicious Life,
betake themselves to a little superficial study of Divinity, and soon begin to
preach; while all the external Seriousness and Zeal they put on, is only from
worldly Motives; they being without any inward, experimental Acquaintance with
spiritual, divine Things, and even so much as any Taste for true Divinity; no
wonder if the Churches "suck dry Breasts"; and there are many ignorant Watchmen

BUT, as the best Comment on the foregoing Resolutions and Diary; and that the
Reader may have a more particular, full and instructive View of Mr. EDWARDS's
Entrance on a religious Life, and Progress in it, as consisting in the Views
and Exercises of his Mind; a brief Account thereof is here inserted, which was
found among his Papers, in his own Handwriting: and which, it seems, was wrote
near twenty Years after, for his own private Advantage.

SECTION IV. An Account of his CONVERSION, EXPERIENCES, and RELIGIOUS
EXERCICES, given by himself.
I Had a variety of Concerns and Exercises about my Soul from my Childhood; but
had two more remarkable Seasons of Awakening, before I met with that Change, by
which I was brought to those new Dispositions, and that new Sense of Things,
that I have since had. The first Time was when I was a Boy, some Years before I
went to College, at a Time of remarkable Awakening in my Father's Congregation.
I was then very much affected for many Months, and concerned about the Things
of Religion, and my Soul's Salvation; and was abundant in Duties. I used to
pray five times a Day in secret, and to spend much Time in religious Talk with
other Boys; and used to meet with them to pray together. I experienced I know
not what Kind of Delight in Religion. My Mind was much engaged in it, and had
much self-righteous Pleasure; and it was my Delight to abound in religious
Duties. I, with some of my School-mates joined together, and built a Booth in a
Swamp, in a very secret and retired Place, for a place of Prayer. And besides,
I had particular secret Places of my own in the Woods, where I used to retire
by my self; and used to be from time to time much affected. My Affections
seemed to be lively and easily moved, and I seemed to be in my Element, when
engaged in religious Duties. And I am ready to think, many are deceived with
such Affections, and such a kind of Delight, as I then had in Religion, and
mistake it for Grace.

"BUT in process of Time, my Convictions and Affections wore off; and I
entirely lost all those Affections and Delights, and left off secret Prayer, at
least as to any constant Performance of it; and returned like a Dog to his
Vomit, and went on in Ways of Sin.

"INDEED, I was at some Times very uneasy, especially toward the latter Part
of the Time of my being at College. 'Till it pleased GOD, in my last Year at
College, at a Time when I was in the midst of many uneasy Thoughts about the
State of my Soul, to seize me with a Pleurisy; in which he brought me nigh to
the Grave, and shook me over the Pit of Hell.

"BUT yet, it was not long after my Recovery, before I fell again into my old
Ways of Sin. But God would not suffer me to go on with any Quietness; but I had
great and violent inward Struggles: 'till after many Conflicts with wicked
Inclinations, and repeated Resolutions, and Bonds that I laid my self under by
a kind of Vows to God, I was brought wholly to break off all former wicked
Ways, and all Ways of known outward Sin; and to apply my self to seek my
Salvation, and practice the Duties of Religion: But without that kind of
Affection and Delight, that I had formerly experienced. My Concern now wrought
more by inward Struggles and Conflicts, and Self-reflections. I made seeking my
Salvation the main Business of my Life. But yet it seems to me, I sought after
a miserable manner: Which has made me some times since to question, whether
ever it issued in that which was saving; being ready to doubt, whether such
miserable seeking was ever succeeded. But yet I was brought to seek Salvation,
in a manner that I never was before. I felt a Spirit to part with all Things in
the World, for an Interest in Christ. My Concern continued and prevailed, with
many exercising Things and inward Struggles; but yet it never seemed to be
proper to express my Concern that I had, by the Name of Terror.

"FROM my Childhood up, my Mind had been wont to be full of Objections against
the Doctrine of GOD's Sovereignty, in choosing whom he would to eternal Life,
and rejecting whom he pleased; leaving them eternally to perish, and be
everlastingly tormented in Hell. It used to appear like a horrible Doctrine to
me. But I remember the Time very well, when I seemed to be convinced, and fully
satisfied, as to this Sovereignty of God, and his Justice in thus eternally
disposing of Men, according to his sovereign Pleasure. But never could give an
Acccount, how, or by what Means* I was thus convinced; not in the least
imagining, (...) the Time of it, nor a long Time after, that there was any
extraordinary Influence of God's Spirit in it: but only that now I saw further,
and my Reason apprehended the Justice and Reasonableness of it. However, my
Mind rested in it; and it put an end to all those Cavils and Objections, that
had 'till then abode with me, all the preceding part of my Life. And there has
been a wonderful Alteration in my Mind, with respect to the Doctrine of God's
Sovereignty, from that Day to this; so that I scarce ever have found so much as
the rising of an Objection against God's Sovereignty, in the most absolute
Sense, in showing Mercy on whom he will show Mercy, and hardening and eternally
damning whom he will. God's absolute Sovereignty, and Justice, with respect to
Salvation and Damnation, is what my Mind seems to rest assured of, as much as
of any Thing that I see with my Eyes; at least it is so at Times. But I have
often times since that first Conviction, had quite another Kind of Sense of
God's Sovereignty, than I had then. I have often since, not only had a
Conviction, but a delightful Conviction. The Doctrine of God's Sovereignty has
very often appeared, an exceeding pleasant, bright and sweet Doctrine to me:
and absolute Sovereignty is what I love to ascribe to God. But my first
Conviction was not with this.

"THE first that I remember that ever I found any thing of that Sort of inward,
sweet Delight in GOD and divine Things, that I have lived much in since, was on
reading those Words, 1 Timothy i. 17. "Now unto the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise GOD, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen." As I
read the Words, there came into my Soul, and was as it were diffused through it,
a Sense of the Glory of the Divine Being; a new Sense, quite different from any
Thing I ever experienced before. Never any Words of Scripture seemed to me as
these Words did. I thought with my self, how excellent a Being that was; and
how happy I should be, if I might enjoy that GOD, and be wrapped up to GOD in
Heaven, and be as it were swallowed up in Him. I kept saying, and as it were
singing over these Words of Scripture to my self; and went to Prayer, to pray
to GOD that I might enjoy him; and prayed in a manner quite different from what
I used to do; with a new sort of Affection. But it never came into my Thought,
that there was any thing spiritual, or of a saving Nature in this.

"FROM about that Time, I began to have a new Kind of Apprehensions and Ideas
of Christ, and the Work of Redemption, and the glorious Way of Salvation by
him. I had an inward, sweet Sense of these Things, that at times came into my
Heart; and my Soul was led away in pleasant Views and Contemplations of them.
And my Mind was greatly engaged, to spend my Time in reading and meditating on
Christ; and the Beauty and Excellency of his Person, and the lovely Way of
Salvation, by free Grace in him. I found no Books so delightful to me, as those
that treated of these Subjects. Those Words Cant. ii. 1. used to be abundantly
with me: I am the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of the Valleys. The Words seemed to
me, sweetly to represent, the Loveliness and Beauty of Jesus Christ. And the
whole Book of Canticles used to be pleasant to me; and I used to be much in
reading it, about that time. And found, from Time to Time, an inward Sweetness,
that used, as it were, to carry me away in my Contemplations; in what I know
not how to express otherwise, than by a calm, sweet Abstraction of Soul from
all the Concerns ^o this World; and a kind of Vision, or fixed Ideas and
Imaginations, of being alone in the Mountains, or some solitary Wilderness, far
from all Mankind, sweetly conversing with Christ, and wrapped and swallowed up in
GOD. The Sense I had of divine Things, would often of a sudden as it were,
kindle up a sweet burning in my Heart; an ardor of my Soul, that I know not how
to express.

"NOT long after I first began to experience these Things, I gave an Account to
my Father, of some Things that had passed in my Mind. I was pretty much
affected by the Discourse we had together. And when the Discourse was ended, I
walked abroad alone, in a solitary Place in my Father's Pasture, for
Contemplation. And as I was walking there, and looked up on the Sky and Clouds;
there came into my Mind, a sweet Sense of the glorious Majesty and Grace of
GOD, that I know not how to express. I seemed to see them both in a sweet
Conjunction: Majesty and Meekness joined together: it was a sweet and gentle,
and holy Majesty; and also a majestic Meekness; an awful Sweetness; a high,
and great, and holy Gentleness.

"AFTER this my Sense of divine Things gradually increased, and became more and
more lively, and had more of that inward Sweetness. The Appearance of every
thing was altered: there seemed to be, as it were, a calm, sweet Cast, or
Appearance of divine Glory, in almost every Thing. God's Excellency, his
Wisdom, his Purity and Love, seemed to appear in every Thing; in the Sun, Moon
and Stars; in the Clouds, and blue Sky; in the Grass, Flowers, Trees; in the
Water, and all Nature; which used greatly to fix my Mind. I often used to sit
and view the Moon, for a long time; and so in the Day time, spent much time in
viewing the Clouds and Sky, to behold the sweet Glory of GOD in these Things:
in the mean Time, singing forth with a low Voice, my Contemplations of the
Creator and Redeemer. And scarce any Thing, among all the Works of Nature, was
so sweet to me as Thunder and Lightning. Formerly, nothing had been so terrible
to me. I used to be a Person uncommonly terrified with Thunder: and it used to
strike me with Terror, when I saw a Thunder-storm rising. But now, on the
contrary, it rejoiced me. I felt GOD at the first Appearance of a
Thunder-storm. And used to take the Opportunity at such Times, to fix my self
to view the Clouds, and see the Lightnings play, and hear the majestic and
awful Voice of God's Thunder: which often times was exceeding entertaining,
leading me to sweet Contemplations of my great and glorious GOD. And while I
viewed, used to spend my time, as it always seemed natural to me, to sing or
chant forth my Meditations; to speak my Thoughts in Soliloquies, and speak with
a singing Voice.

"I felt then a great Satisfaction as to my good Estate. But that did not
content me. I had vehement Longings of Soul after GOD and CHRIST, and after
more Holiness; wherewith my Heart seemed to be full, and ready to break: which
often brought to my Mind, the Words of the Psalmist, Psalm. cxix. 28. My Soul
breaks for the Longing it has. I often felt a mourning and lamenting in my
Heart, that I had not turned to GOD sooner, that I might have had more time to
grow in Grace. My Mind was greatly fixed on divine Things; I was almost
perpetually in the Contemplation of them. Spent most of my Time in thinking of
divine Things, Year after Year. And used to spend abundance of my Time, in
walking alone in the Woods, and solitary Places, for Meditation, Soliloquy and
Prayer, and Converse with GOD. And it was always my Manner, at such times, to
sing forth my Contemplations. And was almost constantly in ejaculatory Prayer,
wherever I was. Prayer seemed to be natural to me; as the Breath, by which the
inward Burnings of my Heart had vent.

"THE Delights which I now felt in Things of Religion, were of an exceeding
different Kind, from those forementioned, that I had when I was a Boy. They
were totally of another Kind; and what I then had no more Notion or Idea of,
than one born blind has of pleasant and beautiful Colors. They were of a more
inward, pure, Soul-animating and refreshing Nature. Those former Delights,
never reached the Heart; and did not arise from any Sight of the divine
Excellency of the Things of GOD; or any Taste of the Soul-satisfying, and
Life-giving Good, there is in them.

"MY sense of divine Things seemed gradually to increase, 'till I went to
preach at New York; which was about a Year and a half after they began. While I
was there, I felt them, very sensibly, in a much higher Degree, than I had done
before. My Longings after GOD and Holiness, were much increased. Pure and
humble, holy and heavenly Christianity, appeared exceeding amiable to me. I
felt in me a burning Desire to be in every Thing a complete Christian; and
conformed to the blessed Image of Christ: and that I might live in all Things,
according to the pure, sweet and blessed Rules of the Gospel. I had an eager
thirsting after Progress in these Things. My Longings after it, put me upon
pursuing and pressing after them. It was my continual Strife Day and Night, and
constant Inquiry, How I should be more holy, and live more holily, and more
becoming a Child of God, and Disciple of Christ. I sought an increase of Grace
and Holiness, and that I might live an holy Life, with vastly more Earnestness,
than ever I sought Grace, before I had it. I used to be continually examining
my self, and studying and contriving for likely Ways and Means, how I should
live holily, with far greater diligence and earnestness, than ever I pursued
any thing in my Life: But with too great a Dependence on my own Strength; which
afterward proved a great Damage to me. My Experience had not then taught me,
as it has done since, my extreme Feebleness and Impotence, every manner of Way;
and the innumerable and bottomless Depths of secret Corruption and Deceit, that
there was in my Heart. However, I went on with my eager pursuit after more
Holiness; and sweet conformity to Christ.

"THE Heaven I desired was a Heaven of Holiness; to be with GOD, and to spend
my Eternity in divine Love, and holy Communion with Christ. My Mind was very
much taken up with Contemplations on Heaven, and the Enjoyments of those there;
and living there in perfect Holiness, Humility and Love. And it used at that
Time to appear a great Part of the Happiness of Heaven, that there the Saints
could express their Love to Christ. It appeared to me a great Clog and
Hindrance and Burden to me, that what I felt within, I could not express to
GOD, and give vent to, as I desired. The inward ardor of my Soul, seemed to be
hindered and pent up, and could not freely flame out as it would. I used often
to think, how in Heaven, this sweet Principle should freely and fully vent and
express it self. Heaven appeared to me exceeding delightful as a World of Love.
It appeared to me, that all Happiness consisted in living in pure, humble,
heavenly, divine Love.

"I remember the Thoughts I used then to have of Holiness. I remember I then
said sometimes to my self, I do certainly know that I love Holiness, such as
the Gospel prescribes. It appeared to me, there was nothing in it but what was
ravishingly lovely. It appeared to me, to be the highest Beauty and
Amiableness, above all other Beauties: that it was a divine Beauty; far purer
than any thing here upon Earth; and that every thing else, was like Mire, Filth
and Defilement, in Comparison of it.

"HOLINESS, as I then wrote down some of my Contemplations on it, appeared to
me to be of a sweet, pleasant, charming, serene, calm Nature. It seemed to me,
it brought an inexpressile Purity, Brightness, Peacefulness and Ravishment to
the Soul: and that it made the Soul like a Field or Garden of GOD, with all
manner of pleasant Flowers; that is all pleasant, delightful and undisturbed;
enjoying a sweet Calm, and the gently vivifying Beams of the Sun. The Soul of a
true Christian, as I then wrote my Meditations, appeared like such a little
white Flower, as we see in the Spring of the Year; low and humble on the
Ground, opening it is Bosom, to receive the pleasant Beams of the Sun's Glory;
rejoicing as it were, in a calm Rapture; diffusing around a sweet Fragrancy;
standing peacefully and lovingly, in the midst of other Flowers round about;
all in like Manner opening their Bosoms, to drink in the Light of the Sun.

"THERE was no Part of Creature-Holiness, that I then, and at other Times, had
so great a Sense of the Loveliness of, as Humility, Brokenness of Heart and
Poverty of Spirit: and there was nothing that I had such a Spirit to long for.
My Heart as it were panted after this, to lie low before GOD, and in the Dust;
that I might be nothing, and that GOD might be all; that I might become as a
little Child.

"WHILE I was there at New York, I sometimes was much affected with Reflections
on my past Life, considering how late it was, before I began to be truly
religious; and how wickedly I had lived till then: and once so as to weep
abundantly, and for a considerable time together.

"ON January 12. 1722, 3. I made a solemn Dedication of my self to GOD, and
wrote it down; giving up my self, and all that I had to GOD; to be for the
future in no Respect my own; to act as one that had no right to himself, in any
Respect. And solemnly vowed to take GOD for my whole Portion and Felicity;
looking on nothing else as any Part of my Happiness, nor acting as if it were:
and his Law for the constant Rule of my Obedience: engaging to fight with all
my Might, against the World, the Flesh and the Devil, to the End of my Life.
But have Reason to be infinitely humbled, when I consider, how much I have
failed of answering my Obligation.

"I had then abundance of sweet religious Conversation in the Family where I
lived, with Mr. John Smith, and his pious Mother. My Heart was knit in
Affection to those, in whom were Appearances of true Piety; and I could bear
the Thoughts of no other Companions, but such as were holy, and the Disciples
of the blessed JESUS.

"I had great Longings for the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the World. My
secret Prayer used to be in great Part taken up in praying for it. If I heard
the least hint of any thing that happened in any Part of the World, that
appeared to me, in some Respect or other, to have a favorable Aspect on the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, my Soul eagerly caught at it; and it would much
animate and refresh me. I used to be earnest to read public News-Letters,
mainly for that End; to see if I could not find some News favorable to the
Interest of Religion in the World.

"I very frequently used to retire into a solitary Place, on the Banks of
Hudson's River, at some Distance from the City, for Contemplation on Divine
Things, and secret Converse with GOD; and had many sweet Hours there. Sometimes
Mr. Smith and I walked there together, to converse of the Things of GOD; and
our Conversation used much to turn on the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in
the World, and the glorious Things that GOD would accomplish for his Church in
the latter Days.

"I had then, and at other Times, the greatest Delight in the holy Scriptures,
of any Book whatsoever. Oftentimes in reading it, every Word seemed to touch my
Heart. I felt an Harmony between something in my Heart, and those sweet and
powerful Words. I seemed often to see so much Light, exhibited by every
Sentence, and such a refreshing ravishing Food communicated, that I could not
get along in reading. Used oftentimes to dwell long on one Sentence, to see
the Wonders contained in it; and yet almost every Sentence seemed to be full of
Wonders.

"I came away from New York in the Month of April, 1723, and had a most bitter
parting with Madam Smith and her Son. My Heart seemed to sink within me, at
leaving the Family and City, where I had enjoyed so many sweet and pleasant
Days. I went from New York to Weathersfield by Water. As I sailed away, I kept
Sight of the City as long as I could; and when I was out of Sight of it, it
would affect me much to look that Way, with a kind of Melancholy mixed with
Sweetness. However, that Night after this sorrowful parting, I was greatly
comforted in GOD at Westchester, where we went ashore to lodge: and had a
pleasant Time of it all the Voyage to Saybrook. It was sweet to me to think of
meeting dear Christians in Heaven, where we should never part more. At Saybrook
we went ashore to lodge on Saturday, and there kept Sabbath; where I had a
sweet and refreshing Season, walking alone in the Fields.

"AFTER I came home to Windsor, remained much in a like Frame of my Mind, as I
had been in at New York; but only some times felt my Heart ready to sink, with
the Thoughts of my Friends at New York. And my Refuge and Support was in
Contemplations on the heavenly State; as I find in my Diary of May 1. 1723. It
was my Comfort to think of that State, where there is fullness of Joy; where
reigns heavenly, sweet, calm and delightful Love, without Alloy; where there
are continually the dearest Expressions of this Love; where is the Enjoyment of
the Persons loved, without ever parting; where these Persons that appear so
lovely in this World, will really be inexpressibly more lovely, and full of
love to us. And how sweetly will the mutual Lovers join together to sing the
Praises of GOD and the LAMB! How full will it fill us with Joy, to think, that
this Enjoyment, these sweet Exercises will never cease or come to an End; but
will last to all Eternity!

"CONTINUED much in the same Frame in the general, that I had been in at
New York, till I went to New Haven, to live there as Tutor of the College;
having one special Season of uncommon Swe^tness: particularly once at Bolton,
in a Journey from Boston, walking out alone in the Fields. After I went to
New Haven, I sunk in Religion; my Mind being diverted from my eager and violent
Pursuits after Holiness, by some Affairs that greatly perplexed and distracted
my Mind.

"IN September, 1725, was taken ill at New Haven; and endeavoring to go home
to Windsor, was so ill at the North Village, that I could go no further: where
I lay sick for about a Quarter of a Year. And in this Sickness, GOD was pleased
to visit me again with the sweet Influences of his Spirit. My Mind was greatly
engaged there on divine, pleasant Contemplations, and Longings of Soul. I
observed that those who watched with me, would often be looking out for the
Morning, and seemed to wish for it. Which brought to my Mind those Words of the
Psalmist, which my Soul with Sweetness made it is own Language. My Soul waits
for the Lord, more than they that watch for the Morning, I say, more than they
that watch for the Morning. And when the Light of the Morning came, and the
Beams of the Sun came in at the Windows, it refreshed my Soul from one Morning
to another. It seemed to me to be some Image of the sweet Light of GOD's Glory.

"I remember, about that Time, I used greatly to long for the Conversion of
some that I was concerned with. It seemed to me, I could gladly honor them, and
with Delight be a Servant to them, and lie at their Feet, if they were but
truly holy.

BUT some Time after this, I was again greatly diverted in my Mind, with some
temporal Concerns, that exceedingly took up my Thoughts, greatly to the
wounding of my Soul: and went on through various Exercises, that it would be
tedious to relate, that gave me much more Experience of my own Heart, than ever
I had before.

"SINCE I came to this Town, Northampton.
I have often had sweet Complacency in GOD, in Views of his glorious
Perfections, and the Excellency of Jesus Christ. GOD has appeared to me, a
glorious and lovely Being, chiefly on the account of his Holiness. The Holiness
of GOD has always appeared to me the most lovely of all his Attributes. The
Doctrines of God's absolute Sovereignty, and free Grace, in showing Mercy to
whom he would show Mercy; and Man's absolute Dependence on the Operations of
God's Holy Spirit, have very often appeared to me as sweet and glorious
Doctrines. These Doctrines have been much my Delight. GOD's Sovereignty has
ever appeared to me, as great Part of his Glory. It has often been sweet to me
to go to GOD, and adore Him as a sovereign GOD, and ask sovereign Mercy of Him.

"I have loved the Doctrines of the Gospel: They have been to my Soul like
green Pastures. The Gospel has seemed to me to be the richest Treasure; the
Treasure that I have most desired, and longed that it might dwell richly in me.
The Way of Salvation by Christ, has appeared in a general Way, glorious and
excellent, and most pleasant and beautiful. It has often seemed to me, that it
would in a great Measure spoil Heaven, to receive it in any other Way. That
Text has often been affecting and delightful to me, Isai. xxxii. 2. A Man shall
be an hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest etc.

"IT has often appeared sweet to me, to be united to CHRIST; to have Him for my
Head, and to be a Member of his Body: and also to have CHRIST for my Teacher
and Prophet. I very often think with Sweetness and Longings and Pantings of
Soul, of being a little Child, taking hold of CHRIST, to be led by Him through
the Wilderness of this World. That Text, Matthew. xviii. at the Beginning, has
often been sweet to me, Except ye be converted, and become as little Children
etc. I love to think of coming to CHRIST, to receive Salvation of him, poor in
Spirit, and quite empty of Self; humbly exalting Him alone; cut entirely off
from my own Root, and to grow into, and out of CHRIST: to have GOD in CHRIST to
be all in all; and to live by Faith on the Son of GOD, a Life of humble,
unfeigned Confidence in Him. That Scripture has often been sweet to me, Psalm.
cxv. 1. Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, for thy
Mercy, and for thy Truth's sake. And those Words of Christ, Luke x. 21. In that
Hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, that thou have hid these Things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight.
That Sovereignty of GOD that Christ rejoiced in, seemed to me to be worthy to
be rejoiced in; and that rejoicing of CHRIST, seemed to me to show the
Excellency of CHRIST, and the Spirit that he was of.

"SOMETIMES only mentioning a single Word, causes my Heart to burn within me:
or only seeing the Name of CHRIST, or the Name of some Attribute of GOD. And
GOD has appeared glorious to me, on account of the TRINITY. It has made me have
exalting Thoughts of GOD, that he subsists in three Persons; FATHER, SON, and
HOLY GHOST.

THE sweetest Joys and Delights I have experienced, have not been those that
have arisen from a Hope of my own good Estate; but in a direct View of the
glorious Things of the Gospel. When I enjoy this Sweetness, it seems to carry
me above the Thoughts of my own safe Estate. It seems at such Times a Loss that
I cannot bear, to take off my Eye from the glorious, pleasant Object I behold
without me, to turn my Eye in upon my self, and my own good Estate.

"My Heart has been much on the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the World.
The Histories of the past Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, have been sweet to
me. When I have read Histories of past Ages, the pleasantest Thing in all my
reading has been, to read of the Kingdom of Christ being promoted. And when I
have expected in my reading, to come to any such thing, I have lotted upon it
all the Way as I read. And my Mind has been much entertained and delighted,
with the Scripture Promises and Prophecies, of the future glorious Advancement
of Christ's Kingdom on Earth.

"I have sometimes had a Sense of the excellent Fullness of Christ, and his
Meetness and Suitableness as a Savior; whereby he has appeared to me, far
above all, the chief of ten Thousands. And his Blood and Atonement has appeared
sweet, and his Righteousness sweet; which is always accompanied with an Ardency
of Spirit, and inward Strugglings and Breathings and Groanings, that cannot be
uttered, to be emptied of my self, and swallowed up in CHRIST.

"ONCE, as I rid out into the Woods for my Health, Anno 1737; and having lit
from my Horse in a retired Place, as my Manner commonly has been, to walk for
divine Contemplation and Prayer; I had a View, that for me was extraordinary,
of the Glory of the SON OF GOD; as Mediator between GOD and Man; and his
wonderful, great, full, pure and sweet Grace and Love, and meek and gentle
Condescension. This Grace, that appeared to me so calm and sweet, appeared
great above the Heavens. The Person of CHRIST appeared ineffably excellent,
with an Excellency great enough to swallow up all Thought and Conception. Which
continued, as near as I can judge, about an Hour; which kept me, the bigger
Part of the Time, in a Flood of Tears, and weeping aloud. I felt withal, an
Ardency of Soul to be, what I know not otherwise how to express, than to be
emptied and annihilated; to lie in the Dust, and to be full of Christ alone; to
love him with a holy and pure Love; to trust in him; to live upon him; to serve
and follow him, and to be totally wrapped up in the Fullness of Christ; and to be
perfectly sanctified and made pure, with a divine and heavenly Purity. I have
several other Times, had Views very much of the same Nature, and that have had
the same Effects.

"I have many Times had a Sense of the Glory of the third Person in the
Trinity, in his Office of Sanctifier; in his holy Operations communicating
divine Light and Life to the Soul. GOD in the Communications of his Holy
Spirit, has appeared as an infinite Fountain of Divine Glory and Sweetness;
being full and sufficient to fill and satisfy the Soul: pouring forth it self
in sweet Communications, like the Sun in its Glory, sweetly and pleasantly
diffusing Light and Life.

"I have sometimes had an affecting Sense of the Excellency of the Word of GOD,
as a Word of Life; as the Light of Life; a sweet, excellent, Life giving Word:
accompanied with a thirsting after that Word, that it might dwell richly in my
Heart.

"I have often since I lived in this Town, had very affecting Views of my own
Sinfulness and Vileness; very frequently so as to hold me in a kind of loud
Weeping, sometimes for a considerable time together: so that I have often been
forced to shut my self up. I have had a vastly greater Sense of my own
Wickedness, and the Badness of my Heart, since my Conversion, than ever I had
before. It has often appeared to me, that if GOD should mark Iniquity against
me, I should appear the very worst of all Mankind; of all that have been since
the beginning of the World to this time: and that I should have by far the
lowest Place in Hell. When others that have come to talk with me about their
Soul Concerns, have expressed the Sense they have had of their own Wickedness,
by saying that it seemed to them, that they were as bad as the Devil himself; I
thought their Expressions seemed exceeding faint and feeble, to represent my
Wickedness. I thought I should wonder, that they should content themselves with
such Expressions as these, if I had any Reason to imagine, that their Sin bore
any Proportion to mine. It seemed to me, I should wonder at my self, if I
should express my Wickedness in such feeble Terms as they did.

"MY Wickedness, as I am in my self, has long appeared to me perfectly
ineffable, and infinitely swallowing up all Thought and Imagination; like an
infinite Deluge, or infinite Mountains over my Head. I know not how to express
better, what my Sins appear to me to be, than by heaping Infinite upon
Infinite, and multiplying Infinite by Infinite. I go about very often, for this
many Years, with these Expressions in my Mind, and in My Mouth, "Infinite upon
Infinite. Infinite upon Infinite!" When I look into my Heart, and take a view
of my Wickedness, it looks like an Abyss infinitely deeper than Hell. And it
appears to me, that were it not for free Grace, exalted and raised up to the
infinite Height of all the fullness and glory of the great JEHOVAH, and the Arm
of his Power and Grace stretched forth, in all the Majesty of his Power, and in
all the Glory of his Sovereignty; I should appear sunk down in my Sins
infinitely below Hell it self, far beyond Sight of every Thing, but the
piercing Eye of God's Grace, that can pierce even down to such a Depth, and to
the bottom of such an Abyss.

"AND yet, I ben't in the least inclined to think, that I have a greater
Conviction of Sin than ordinary. It seems to me, my Conviction of Sin is
exceeding small, and faint. It appears to me enough to amaze me, that I have no
more Sense of my Sin. I know certainly, that I have very little Sense of my
sinfulness. That my Sins appear to me so great, don't seem to me to be, because
I have so much more Conviction of Sin than other Christians, but because I am
so much worse, and have so much more Wickedness to be convinced of. When I have
had these Turns of weeping and crying for my Sins, I thought I knew in the Time
of it, that my Repentance was nothing to my Sin.

"I have greatly longed of late, for a broken Heart, and to lie low before GOD.
And when I ask for Humility of GOD, I cannot bear the Thoughts of being no more
humble, than other Christians. It seems to me, that though their Degrees of
Humility may be suitable for them; yet it would be a vile Self-exaltation in
me, not to be the lowest in Humility of all Mankind. Others speak of their
longing to be humbled to the Dust. Though that may be a proper Expression for
them, I always think for my self, that I ought to be humbled down below Hell.
It Is an Expression that it has long been natural for me to use in Prayer to
God. I ought to lie infinitely low before GOD.

"IT is affecting to me to think, how ignorant I was, when I was a young
Christian, of the bottomless, infinite Depths of Wickedness, Pride, Hppocrisy
and Deceit left in my Heart.

I Have vastly a greater Sense, of my universal, exceeding Dependence on God's
Grace and Strength, and mere good Pleasure, of late, than I used formerly to
have; and have experienced more of an Abhorrence of my own Righteousness. The
Thought of any Comfort or Joy, arising in me, on any Consideration, or
Reflection on my own Amiableness, or any of my Performances or Experiences, or
any Goodness of Heart or Life, is nauseous and detestable to me. And yet I am
greatly afflicted with a proud and self-righteous Spirit; much more sensibly,
than I used to be formerly. I see that Serpent rising and putting forth it is
Head, continually, every where, all around me.

"THOUGH it seems to me, that in some Respects I was a far better Christian, for
two or three Years after my first Conversion, than I am now; and lived in a
more constant Delight and Pleasure: yet of late Years, I have had a more full
and constant Sense of the absolute Sovereignty of GOD, and a delight in that
Sovereignty; and have had more of a Sense of the Glory of CHRIST, as a
Mediator, as revealed in the Gospel. On one Saturday Night in particular, had a
particular Discovery of the Excellency of the Gospel of CHRIST, above all other
Doctrines; so that I could not but say to my self; "This is my chosen Light, my
chosen Doctrine:" and of Christ, "This is my chosen Prophet." It appeared to me
to be sweet beyond all Expression, to follow Christ, and to be taught and
enlightened and instructed by him; to learn of him, and live to him.

"ANOTHER Saturday Night, January ^^ 38, 9. had such a Sense, how sweet and
blessed a Thing it was, to walk in the Way of Duty, to do that which was right
and meet to be done, and agreeable to the holy Mind of GOD; that it caused me
to break forth into a kind of a loud weeping, which held me some Time; so that
I was forced to shut my self up, and fasten the Doors. I could not but as it
were cry out, "How happy are they which do that which is right in the Sight of
GOD! They are blessed indeed, they are the happy ones!" I had at the same time,
a very affecting Sense, how meet and suitable it was that GOD should govern the
World, and order all Things according to his own Pleasure; and I rejoiced in
it, that GOD reigned, and that his Will was done."

PART III. Containing a History of his Life from his ENTERING on the Work of
the Ministry, unto his DEATH.
SECTION I. His GENERAL MANNER of LIFE.
MR. EDWARDS made a Secret of his private Devotion, and therefore it cannot be
particularly known: though there is much Evidence, that he was punctual, constant
and frequent in secret Prayer, and often kept Days of Fasting and Prayer in
secret; and set a part Time for serious, devout Meditations on spiritual and
eternal things, as part of his religious Exercise in secret. It appears by his
Diary that in his Youth he determined to attend secret Prayer more than twice a
Day, when Circumstances would allow. He was, so far as it can be known, much on
his Knees in secret, and in devout reading God's Word, and Meditation upon it.
And his constant, solemn converse with GOD in these Exercises of secret
Religion made his Face, as it were, to shine before others. His Appearance, his
Countenance, Words and whole Demeanor, (though without any thing of affected
Grimace and sour Austerity) was attended with a Seriousness, Gravity and
Solemnity, which was the natural genuine Indications and Expression of a deep,
abiding Sense of divine Things on his Mind, and of his living constantly in the
fear of God.

AGREEABLE to his Resolutions, he was very careful and abstemious in eating and
drinking; as doubtless it was necessary so great a Student, and a Person of so
delicate and tender a bodily make (...) he was, should be, in order to be
comfortable and useful. When he had, by careful Observation, found what kind,
and what quantity of Diet, best suited his Constitution, and rendered him most
fit to pursue his Work, he was very strict and exact in complying with it; and
in this respect lived by Rule; and herein constantly practiced great
Self-denial: Which he also did in his constant early rising, in order to redeem
Time for his Study. He used himself to rise by four or between four and five in
the Morning.

THOUGH he was of a tender and delicate Constitution, yet few Students are
capable of close Application more Hours in (...) Day than he. He commonly spent
thirteen Hours every Day in his Study. His most usual Diversion in the Summer
was riding on Horseback and walking. He would commonly, unless diverted by
Company, ride two or three Miles after Dinner to some lonely Grove, where he
would dismount and walk a while. At which times he generally carried his Pen
and Ink with him, to note any Thought that should be suggested, which he chose
to retain and pursue, as what promised some Light on any important Subject. In
the Winter he was wont almost daily to take an Ax and chop Wood moderately for
the space of half an Hour or more.

HE had an uncommon thirst for Knowledge, in the pursuit of which, he spared no
Cost nor Pains. He read all the Books, especially Books of Divinity, that he
could come at, from which he could hope to get any help in his pursuit of
Knowledge. And in this, he confined not himself to Authors of any particular
Sect or Denomination; yea took much pains to come at the Books of the most
noted Writers, who advance a Scheme of Divinity most contrary to his own
Principles. But he studied the BIBLE more than all other Books, and more than
most other Divines do. His uncommon acquaintance with the Bible appears in his
Sermons, and in most of his Publications: and his great pains in studying it
are manifest in his Manuscript Notes upon it; of which a more particular
Account may be given hereafter. He took his religious Principles from the
Bible, and not from any human System or Body of Divinity. Though his Principles
were Calvinistic, yet he called no Man, Father. He thought and judged for
himself, and was truly very much of an Original. This is evident by what he
published in his Lifetime, and is yet more so by his MSS. Many Volumes of
which he has left; and the Reader may expect a more particular Account of them
in the Sequel. For reading was not the only Method he took to improve his Mind;
but he did this much by Writing; without which, it is probable no Student can
make Improvements to the best Advantage. Agreeable to Resolution 11th, he
applied himself with all his Might to find out the Truth: He searched for
Understanding and Knowledge, as for Silver, and dug for it, as for hid
Treasures. Every thought on any Subject, which appeared to him worth pursuing
and preserving, he pursued, as far as he then could, with his Pen in his Hand.
Thus he was all his Days, like the busy Be, collecting from every opening
Flower, and storing up a Stock of Knowledge, which was indeed sweet to him, as
the Honey and the Honeycomb. And as he advanced in Years and in Knowledge, his
Pen was more and more employed, and his Manuscripts grew much faster on his
Hands.

HE was thought by some, who had but a slight Acquaintance with him to be stiff
and unsociable; but this was owing to want of better Acquaintance. He was not a
Man of many Words indeed, and was somewhat reserved among Strangers, and those
on whose Candor and Friendship he did not know he could rely. And this was
probably owing to two Things. First, the strict Guard he set over his Tongue
from his Youth, which appears by his Resolutions, taking great Care never to
use it in any way that might prove mischievous to any; never to sin with his
Tongue; or to improve it in idle, trivial and impertinent Talk, which generally
makes up a great Part of the Conversation of those who are full of Words in all
Companies. He was sensible that in the multitude of Words there wants not
Sin; and therefore refrained his Lips, and habituated himself to think before
he spoke, and to propose some good End even in all his Words; which led him to
be above many others, ag^eable to St. James's Advice, slow to speak. Secondly,
this was in Part the effect of his bodily Constitution. He possessed but a
comparative small Stock of animal Life: his animal Spirits were low, and he had
not Strength of Lungs to spare, that would be necessary in order to make him
what would be called, an affable, facecious Gentleman, in all Companies. They
who have a great flow of animal Spirits, and so can speak with more Ease and
less Expense, may doubtless lawfully practice free Conversation in all
Companies for a lower End, (e. g. to please and render themselves acceptable)
than he, who has not such a Stock to expend upon. It becomes him to reserve
what he has, for higher and more important Service. Besides, the want of animal
Spirits lays a Man under a natural inability to that freedom of Conversation,
at all times, and in whatever Company he is; which those of more Life naturally
go into; and the greatest Degree of a sociable Disposition, Humility and
Benevolence, will not remove this Obstacle.

HE was not forward to enter into any Dispute among Strangers, and in Companies
where were Persons of different Sentiments; as he was sensible that such
Disputes are generally unprofitable, and often sinful and of bad Consequence;
and he though it he could dispute to the best Advantage with his Pen in his Hand:
Yet he was always free to give his Sentiments on any Subject proposed to him;
and remove any Difficulties or Objections offered by way of Enquiry, as lying
in the Way of what he looked upon to be the Truth. But how groundless the
imputation of stiff and unsociable was, his known and tried Friends best knew.
They always found him easy of access, kind and condescending; and though not
talkative, yet affable and free. Among such whose Candor and Friendship he had
experienced, he threw off the Reserve, and was most open and free; quite
patient of Contradiction, while the utmost Opposition was made to his
Sentiments, that could be by any plausible Arguments or Objections. And indeed,
he was on all Occasions, quite sociable and free with all, who had any special
Business with him.

IN his Conduct in his Family he practiced that conscientious exactness which
was perspicuous in all his Ways. He maintained a great esteem and regard for
his amiable and excellent Consort. Much of the tender and kind was expressed in
his Conversation with her and conduct toward her. He was will not frequently to
admit her into his Study, and converse freely with her on Matters of Religion.
And he used commonly to pray with her in his Study, at least once a Day, unless
something extraordinary prevented. The time in which this used to be commonly
attended, was just before going to Bed, after Prayers in the Family. As he rose
very early himself, he was wont to have his Family up in season in the Morning;
after which, before the Family entered on the Business of the Day, he attended
on Family Prayers. When a Chapter in the Bible was read, commonly by
Candlelight in the Winter; upon which he asked his Children Questions
according to their Age and Capacity; and took Occasion to explain some Passages
in it, or enforce any Duty recomended etc. as he thought most proper.

HE was careful and thorough in the Government of his Children; and, as a
Consequence of this, they reverenced, esteemed and loved him. He took special
care to begin his Government of them in Season. When they first discovered any
considerable degree of Will and Stubbornness, he would attend to them till he
had thoroughly subdued them and brought them to submit. And such prudent through
Discipline, exercised with the greatest Calmness, and commonly without striking
a Blow, being repeated once or twice, was generally sufficient for that Child;
and effectually established his parental Authority, and produced a cheerful
Obedience ever after.

HE kept a watchful Eye over his Children, that he might admonish them of the
first wrong Step, and direct them in the right Way. He took Opportunities to
treat with them in his Study, singly and particularly about their own Soul's
Concerns; and to give them Warning, Exhortation and Direction, as he saw
Occasion. He took much Pains to instruct them in the Principles of Religion; in
which he made use of the Assembly's Shorter Catechism: not merely by taking
care that they learned it by Heart; but by leading them into an understanding
of the Doctrines therein taught, by asking them Questions on each Answer, and
explaining it to them. His usual time to attend this was on the Evening before
the Sabbath. And as he believed that the Sabbath or holy Time bgan at Sunset
the Evening before the Day, he ordered his Family to finish all their secular
Business by that time or before; when they were all called together, and a
Psalm was sung and Prayer attended, as an Introduction to the sanctifying the
Sabbath. This care and exactness effectually prevented that intruding on holy
Time, by attending on secular Business, too common in Families where the
Evening before the Sabbath is pretended to be observed.

HE was a great Enemy to young People's unseasonable Company-keeping and
Frolicking, as he looked upon it a great Means of corrupting and ruining Youth.
And he thought the Excuse many Parents make for tolerating their Children in
it, (viz. that it is the Custom, and others Children practice it, which renders
it difficult, and even impossible to restrain theirs) was insufficient and
frivolous: and manifested a great Degree of Stupidity, on supposition the
practice was hurtful and pernicious to their Souls. And when some of his
Children grew up he found no difficulty in restraining them from this
pernicious Practice; but they cheerfully complied with the will of their
Parents herein. He allowed not his Children to be from home after nine o'Clock
at Night, when they went abroad to see their Friends and Companions. Neither
were they allowed to sit up much after that Time, in his own House, when any
came to make them a visit. If any Gentleman desired Acquaintance with his
Daughters; after handsomely introducing himself, by properly consulting the
Parents, he was allowed all proper Opportunity for it; a Room and Fire, if
needed: but must not intrude on the proper Hours of Rest and Sleep, or the
Religion and Order of the Family.

HE had a strict and inviolable regard to Justice in all his dealings with his
Neighbors, and was very careful to provide for Things honest in the sight of
all Men; so that scarcely a Man had any Dealings with him, that was not
conscious of his uprightness. He appeared to have a sacred regard to truth in
his Words, both in Promises and Narrations, agreeable to his Resolutions. This
doubtless was one Reason why he was not so full of Words as many are. No Man
feared to rely on his Veracity.

HE was cautious in choosing his intimate Friends, and therefore had not many
that might properly be called such. But to them he showed himself friendly in a
peculiar manner. He was indeed a faithful Friend, and able above most others to
keep a Secret. To them he discovered himself more than to others, led them into
his Views and Ends in his Conduct in particular Instances: by which they had
abundant Evidence that he well understood human Nature; and that his general
Reservedness, and many particular Instances of his Conduct, which a Stranger
might impute to ignorance of Men, were really owing to his uncommon Knowledge
of Mankind.

HIS Conversation with his Friends was always savory and profitable: In this he
was remarkable, and almost singular. -- He was not wont to spend his time with
them, in Scandal, Evil-speaking and Backbiting, or in foolish Jesting, idle
chat, and telling Stories: But his Mouth was that of the Just, which brings
forth Wisdom, and his Lips dispersed Knowledge. His Tongue was as the Pen of a
ready Writer, while he conversed about important, heavenly, divine Things,
which his Heart was so full of, in such a natural and free manner, as to be
most entertaining and instructive: so that none of his Friends could enjoy his
Company without Instruction and Profit, unless it was by their own fault.

HIS great Benevolence to Mankind discovered it self, among other ways, by the
uncommon regard he showed to Liberality, and Charity to the Poor and
Distressed. He was much in recommend^ng this, both in his public Discourses
and private Conversation. He often declared it to be his Opinion, that
professed Christians, in these Days are greatly deficient in this Duty; and
much more so, than in most other Parts of external Christianity. He often
observed how much this is spoken of, recommended and encouraged in the holy
Scripture, especially in the New Testament. And it was his Opinion, that every
particular Church ought by frequent and liberal Contributions, to maintain a
public Stock, that might be ready for the poor and necessitous Members of that
Church: and that the principal Business of Deacons is to take care of the Poor
in the faithful and judicious Distribution and Improvement of the Church's
temporals, lodged in their Hands. And he did not content himself with only
recommending Charity to others, but practiced it much himself: Though, according
to his Master's Advice, he took great Care to conceal his Deeds of Charity; by
which Means doubtless most of his Alms-deeds will be unknown till the
Resurrection, which if known, would prove him to be as great an Instance of
Charity as any that can be produced in this Age. This is not mere Conjecture,
but is evident many ways. He was forward to give on all public Occasions of
Charity, though when it could properly be done, he always concealed the Sum
given. And some Instances of his giving more privately have accidentally come
to the Knowlede of others, in which his Liberality appeared in a very
extraordinary Degree. One of the Instances was this. Upon hearing that a poor
obscure Man, whom he never saw, or any of his kindred, was by an extraordinary
bodily Disorder, brought to great Straits; he, unasked, gave A considerable Sum.
to a Friend to be delivered to the distressed Person; having first required a
Promise of him, that he would let neither the Person, who was the Object of his
Charity, nor any one else know by whom it was given. This may serve both as an
Instance of his extraordinary Charity, and of his great Care to conceal it. As
both the giver, and the Object of his Charity are dead, and all the Ends of the
proposed secrecy are answered; it is thought not inconsistent with the above
mentioned Promise, to make known the Fact, a^ it is here related.


Mr. EDWARDS had the most universal Character of a good Preacher of almost any
Minister in this Age. There were but few that heard him, who did not call him a
good Preacher, however they might dislike his religious Principles, and be much
offended at the same Truths when delivered by others: And most admired him
above all that ever they heard. His Eminency as a Preacher seems to be owing to
the following Things.

First, The great Pains he took in composing his Sermons, especially in the
first Part of his Life. As by his early rising, and constant attention to his
Study, he had more time than most others; so he spent more time in making his
Sermons. He wrote most of his Sermons all out, for near twenty Years after he
first began to preach; though he did not wholly confine himself to his Notes in
his delivering them.

Secondly, His great acquaintance with Divinity, his study and knowledge of the
Bible. His extensive and universal Knowledge, and great clearness of Thought,
enabled him to handle every Subject with great Judgment and Propriety, and to
bring out of his Treasury things new and old. Every Subject he handled was
instructive, plain, entertaining and profitable; which was much owing to his
being Master of the Subject, and his great skill to treat it in a most natural,
easy, and profitable Manner. None of his Composures were dry Speculations, or
unmeaning Harangues, or Words without Ideas. When he dwelt on those Truths
which are much controverted and opposed by many, which was often the Case, he
would set them in such a natural and easy Light, and every Sentiment from Step
to Step, would drop from his Lips, attended with such clear and striking
Evidence, both from Scripture and Reason, as even to force the assent of every
attentive Hearer.

Thirdly, His excellency as a Preacher was very much the Effect of his great
Acquaintance with his own Heart, his inward Sense and high Relish of divine
Truths, and the high Exercise of true, experimental Religion. This gave him a
great insight into human Nature: He knew what was in Man, both the Saint and
the Sinner. This helped him to Skill, to lay Truth before the Mind, so as not
only to convince the Judgment, but touch the Heart and Conscience; and enabled
him to speak out of the abundance of his Heart, what he knew, and testify what
he had seen and felt. This gave him a taste and discerning, without which he
could not have been able to fill his Sermons, as he did, with such striking,
affecting Sentiments, all suited to solemnize, move, and rectify the Heart of
the Hearer. His Sermons were well connected, not usually long, and commonly a
large Part taken up in the Improvement; which was closely connected with the
Subject, and consisted in Sentiments naturally flowing from it.

BUT no Description of his Sermons will give the Reader the Idea of them which
they have who sat under his Preaching, or have even read some of his Discourses
which are in print. There is a great Number now in Manuscript, which are
probably as worthy the view of the Public, and at least tend as much to
instruct and quicken Christians, as most that have been published in this
Century.

HIS Appearance in the Desk was with a good Grace, and his delivery easy,
natural and very solemn. He had not a strong, loud Voice; but appeared with
such gravity and solemnity, and spoke wi^h such distinctness, clearness and
precision; his Words were so full of Ideas, set in such a plain and striking
Light, that few Speakers have been so able to demand the Attention of an
Audience as he. His Words often discovered a great degree of inward fervor,
without much Noise or external Emotion, and fell with great weight on the M^nds
of his Hearers. He made but little Motion of his Head or Hands in the Desk, but
spoke so as to discover the Motion of his own Heart, which tended in the most
natural and effectual manner to move and affect others.

AS he wrote his Sermons out at large for many Years, and always wrote a
considerable part of most of his public Discourses; so he carried his Notes
into the Desk with him, and read the most that he had wrote; yet he was not so
confined to his Notes, when he had wrote at large, but that, if some Thoughts
were suggested while he was speaking, which did not occur when writing, and
appeared to him pertinent and striking, he would deliver them; and that with as
great propriety and fluency, and oftener with greater pathos, and attended with
a more sensible good effect on his Hearers, than all he had wrote.

THOUGH, as has been observed, he was wont to read so considerable a part of what
he delivered; yet he was for from thinking this the best way of preaching in
general; and looked upon his using his Notes so much as he did, a Deficiency
and Infirmity. And in the latter part of his Life was inclined to think it had
been better, if he had never accustomed himself to use his Notes at all. It
appeared to him that preaching wholly without Notes, agreeable to the Custom in
most Protestant Countries, and what seems evidently to have been the manner of
the Apostles and primitive Ministers of the Gospel, was by far the most natural
way; and had the greatest tendency on the whole, to answer the End of
Preaching: and supposed that none who had Talents equal to the Work of the
Ministry, was incapable of speaking Memoriter, if he took suitable Pains for
this Attainment from his Youth. He would have the young Preacher write all his
Sermons, or at least most of them, out at large; and instead of reading them to
his Hearers, take pains to commit them to Memory. Which, though it would require
a great deal of Labor at first, yet would soon become easier by use, and help
him to speak more correctly and freely, and be of great Service to him all his
Days.

HIS Prayers were indeed extempore. He was the farthest from any appearance of
a Form, as to his Words and manner of Expression, of almost any Man. He was
quite singular and inimitable in this, by any who have not a Spirit of real and
undissembled Devotion. Yet he always expressed himself with Decency and
Propriety. He appeared to have much of the Grace and Spirit of Prayer; to pray
with the Spirit and with the Understanding: and he performed this part of Duty
much to the acceptance and edification of those who joined with him. He was not
wont, in ordinary Cases to be long in his Prayers: an error which he observed
wa^ often hurtful to public and social Prayer, as it tends rather to damp than
promote true Devotion.

HE kept himself quite free from worldly Cares. He gave himself wholly to the
Work of the Ministry, and entangled not himself with the Affairs of this Life.
He left the particular Oversight and Direction of the temporal Concerns of his
Family, almost entirely to Mrs. Edwards; who was better able than most of her
Sex to take the whole Care of them on her Hands. He was less acquainted with
most of his temporal Affairs than many of his Neighbors; and seldom knew when
and by whom his Forage for Winter was gathered in, or how many milk Kine he
had; whence his Table was furnished etc.

HE did not make it his Custom to visit his People in their own Houses, unless
he was sent for by the Sick; or he heard that they were under some special
Affliction. In stead of visiting from House to House, he used to preach
frequently at private Meetings in particular Neighbourhoods; and often call the
young People and Children to his own House: when he used to pray with them and
treat with them in a manner suited to their Years and Circumstances. And he
catechized the Children in public every Sabbath in the Summer. And he used
sometimes to propose Questions to particular young Persons in writing, for them
to answer after a proper time given to them to prepare. In putting out these
Questions he endeavored to suit them to the Age, Genius and Abilities of those
to whom they were given. His Questions were generally such as required but a
short Answer; and yet could not be answered without a particular Knowledge of
some historical Part of the Scripture; and therefore led, and even obliged
Persons to study the Bible.

HE did not neglect visiting his People from House to House, because he did not
look upon it, in ordinary Cases, to be one Part of the Work of the Gospel
Minister. But he supposed that Ministers should, with respect to this, consult
their own Talents and Circumstances, and visit more or less, according to the
degree in which they could hope hereby to promote the great Ends of the Gospel
Ministry. He observed, that some Ministers had a talent at entertaining and
profiting by occasional Visits among their People. They have Words at Will, and
a knack at introducing profitable, religious Discourse in a free, natural, and,
as it were undesigned way. He supposed such had a call to spend a great deal of
their time in visiting their People. But he looked on his Talents to be quite
otherwise. He was not able to enter into a free Conversation with every Person
he met with, and in an easy manner turn it to what Topic he pleased, without
the help of others, and, as it may be, against their Inclination. He therefore
found that his visits of this kind must be in a great degree unprofitable. And
as he was settled in a great Town, it would take up a great part of his Time to
visit from House to House; which he thought he could spend in his Study to much
more valuable Purposes, and so as much better to promote the great Ends of his
Ministry. For it appeared to him, that he could do the greatest good to Souls,
and most promote the interest of Christ by preaching and writing, and
conversing with Persons under religious Impressions in his Study; where he
encouraged all such to repair; where, they might be sure, in ordinary Cases, to
find him: and to be allowed easy access to him, and where they were treated
with all desirable tenderness, kindness and familiarity. In times therefore of
the out-pouring of God's Spirit, and the revival of Religion among his People,
his Study was thronged with Persons to lay open their spiritual Concerns to
him, and seek his Advice and Direction: whom he received and conversed with,
with great freedom and pleasure, and had the best Opportunity to deal in the
most particular manner with each one.

HE was a skilful Guide to Souls under spiritual Difficulties. And was
therefore sought unto not only by his own People, but by many who lived scores
of Miles off. He became such an able Guide, partly by his own experimental
acquaintance with divine things, and unwearied study of God's Word; and partly
by his having so much concern with Souls under spiritual Troubles. For he had
not been settled in the Work of the Ministry many Years before the Spirit of
GOD was wonderfully poured out on his People, by which a great Concern about
their Souls became almost universal; and a great Number were hopefully the
Subjects of saving Conversion. This was principally in the Year 1734. A
particular Account of which has been wrote by him, entitled, A faithful
Narrative of the surprising Work of GOD in the Conversion of many hundred Souls
in Northampton. Which has been printed in England, Germany and America; to
which the Reader must be referred.

AND there was another remarkable Time of the outpouring of GOD's Spirit in the
Years 1740, and 1741. in which Northampton partook largely; though not exclusive
of most other Parts of the Land. Mr. EDWARDS in this time had to deal not only
with his own People, but with Multitudes of others. The hearing that the same
things were at Northampton some Years before, and the fame Mr. EDWARDS had for
Knowledge, Piety, and a great Acquaintance with experimental Religion,
naturally led both Ministers and People, in almost all Parts of New England, to
look to him for Direction and Assistance, in this extra-ordinary time. Being in
this time earnestly solicited by the Ministers and People of many Places to
come and preach among them, he went to many; though he was not able to gratify
all who desired him. And his preaching was attended with great Success.

AND as many of the Ministers and People in New England had been unacquainted
with such things as then appeared, they were greatly exposed to run wild, as it
were, and actually did, by the subtle Temptations of the Devil, taking
Advantage of the Ignorance and Wickedness of Men's Hearts, go into great
Extremes both as Opposers and Friends to the Work of GOD. Mr. EDWARDS was
greatly helpful by his Direction and Assistance against the two opposite
Extremes, both in Conversation, Preaching and Writing. His Publications on this
Occasion were especially of great and extensive Service. Of which it may be
proper to give some Account here.

The first is a Sermon preached at New Haven, Sept. 10. 1741. On the
distinguishing Marks of the Spirit of GOD etc.

In the Year 1742, he published a Book of five Parts, entitled, Some Thought^
concerning the present Revival of Religion in New England, and the Way in which
it ought to be acknowledged and promoted etc.

In the Year 1746, he published a Treatise on Religious Affections. All which
might be justly considered by the Church of Christ as a Voice behind them
saying, "This is the Way, walk therein." Especially the last mention^^ Book,
which has been esteemed by many the best that has been wrote on that Subject;
setting the distinction between true and false Religion in the most clear and
striking Light.

To the same Purpose, is The Life of the Rev. Mr. DAVID BRANIERD, with
Reflections and Observations thereon; published by Mr. EDWARDS in the Year 1749.

Mr. EDWARDS was what by some is called a rigid Calvinist. Those Doctrines of
Calvinism, which have been most objected against, and given the greatest
Offense, appeared to him as scriptural, reasonable and important as any; and he
thought that to give them up, was in effect to give up all. And therefore he
looked upon those who called themselves Calvinists, that were for palliating
the Matter, by, as it were, triming off the Knots of Calvinism, that they might
conform it more to the taste of those who are most disposed to object against
it, were really giving up and betraying the Cause they pretended to espouse:
and were paving the way not only to Arminianism, but to Deism. For if these
Doctrines, in the whole length and breadth of them were relinquished, he did
not see, where a Man could set his Foot down with consistency and safety, short
of Deism, or even Atheism it self; or rather universal Sc^pticism.

HE judged that nothing was wanting, but to have these Doctrines properly
stated and judiciously and well defended, in order to their appearing most
agreeable to Reason and common Sense, as well as the Doctrines of Revelation;
and that this therefore was the only effectual Method to convince, or silence
and shame the opposers of them. All will be able to satisfy themselves of the
truth of this, by reading his Treatise on Justification, and his two last Books
on the Freedom of the Will, and Original Sin.

IN this view of Things, he thought it of Importance that Ministers should be
very critical in examining Candidates for the Ministry, with Respect to their
Principles, as well as their religious Disposition and Morals. And on this
Account he met with considerable Difficu^ty and Opposition in some Instances.
His Opinion was, that an erroneous or unfaithful Minister was likely to do
(...) hurt than good to the Church of Christ; and therefore he could not have
any Hand in intro^^cing a Man into the Ministry, unless he appeared sound in
the Faith, and manifested to a Judgment of Charity, a Disposition to be
faithful.

SECTION II. His DISMISSION from Northampton, with the Occasion and
Circumstances of it.
MR. EDWARDS was very happy in the esteem and love of his People for many
Years, and there was the greatest Prospect of his living and dying so. He was
the last Minister almost in New England that would have been pitched upon to be
opposed and renounced by his People. But by what has come to pass with respect
to this, we have an instructive Lesson on the instability of all human Affairs,
and the unreasonableness of trusting in Man.

IN the Year 1744. Mr. EDWARDS was informed that some of the young Persons in
Town, who were Members of the Church, had Books in keeping, which they improved
to promote lascivious and obscene Discourse among the young Poople. And upon
inquiring, a Number of Persons were found to testify, that they had heard one
and another from time to time talk obscenely; as what they were led to by
reading a Book or Books, which they had among them. Upon which Mr. EDWARDS
thought the Brethren of the Church ought to look into the Matter. And in order
to introduce it, he preached a Sermon from Heb. xii. 15, 16. Looking
diligently, lest any Man fail of the Grace of GOD, lest any Root of bitterness
springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: lest there be any
Fornicator, or profane Person as Esau etc. After Sermon, he desired the
Brethren of the Church to stay, and told them what Information he had got; and
proposed whether they thought proper to take any Measures to examine into the
Matter. They with one consent, and much Zeal, manifested it to be their
Opinion, that it ought to be enquired into. And proceeded to chose a Number of
Men, to assist their Pastor in examining into the Affair. Upon which Mr.
EDWARDS appointed the time for their meeting at his House: and then read a
Catalogue of the Names of young Persons, whom he desired to come to his House
at the same time. Some were the accused, and some Witnesses; but it was not
then declared of which Number any particular Person was.

WHEN the Names were published, it appeared, that there were but few of the
considerable Families in Town, to which none of the Persons named did belong,
or were nearly related. Whether this was the Occasion of the alteration or not,
before the Day appointed came, a great Number of Heads of Families altered
their Minds (yea many condemned what they had done, before they got home to
their own Houses) and declared, they did not think proper to proceed as they
had done; that their Children should not be called to an Account in such a way
for such things etc. etc. And the Town was suddenly all on a Blaze. This
strengthened the Hands of the accused, and some refused to appear, and others
that did appear, behaved unmannerly, and with a great Degree of Insolence, and
contempt of the Authority of the Church. And little or nothing could be done
further in the Affair.

THIS was the Occasion of weakening Mr. EDWARDS's Hands in the Work of the
Ministry, especially among the young People; with whom by this Means he greatly
lost his Influence! This seemed in a great Measure to put an end to Mr.
EDWARDS's Usefulness at Northampton, and doubtless laid a Foundation, and will
help to account for the surprising Events which will by and by be related. To
be sure he had no great visible Success after this; but the Influences of God's
Spirit were greatly withheld, and security and carnality much increased among
them. That great and singular degree of visible religion and good order which
had been found among them, soon began gradually to decay: and the youth have
since been more wanton and dissolute.

Mr. STODDARD, Mr. EDWARDS's grandfather and predecessor in the work of the
ministry, was of the opinion, that unconverted persons had a right in the sight
of God, or considered as such, to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; that
therefore it was their duty to come to that ordinance, though they knew they had
no true goodness, or gospel holiness. He maintained, that visible christianity
does not consist in a profession or appearance of that wherein true holiness or
real christianity consists. That therefore the profession which persons make in
order to be received as visible Members of Christ's Church, ought not to be
such as to express or imply a real compliance with, or consent to the terms of
the covenant of grace, o^ a ^earty embracing the gospel. So that they who
really reject Jesus Christ, and dislike the gospel way of salvation in their
hearts, and know that this is true of themselves may make the profession
without lying and hypocrisy. Accordingly he endeavored to form a short
profession for persons to make in order to be admitted into the church and come
to the sacrament, answerable to this principle. And it took place and was
practiced upon in Northampton; and persons were admitted into the church, and
to the sacrament, not under the notion of their being true saints, or that they
had any real goodness.

Mr. STODDARD's appearing to maintain this principle made a great noise in the
country; and he was opposed as introducing something contrary to the principles
and practice of almost all the churches in New England. And the matter was
publicly controverted between him and Dr. INCREASE MATHER of Boston. However,
through Mr. STODDARD's great influence and ascendance over the People at
Northampton, it was introduced there, though not without Opposition. And his
principles by degrees spread very much among Ministers and People in that
county, and in other parts of New England; though no church except Northampton
publicly and professedly acted upon this principle, by altering the profession
that those made, who were admitted to the Sacrament, to suit it to such a
notion: but required of all who joined to the church a profession of that
wherein true christianity, or real godliness consists. And of late years his
opinion that persons who have no real goodness, but are in a christles^ state,
and know themselves to be so, may make a christian profession and come to the
Sacrament, without lying and hypocrisy; and that they have a right, and it is
their duty so to do, has greatly spread in the country.

Mr. EDWARDS had some hesitation about this matter when he first settled at
Northampton, and afterward; but did not receive such a degree of conviction,
that the admitting persons into the church, who made no pretense to real
godliness was wrong, as to prevent his practicing upon it with a good
conscience, for some years. But at length his doubts about the matter greatly
increased, which put him upon examining it more thoroughly than he had ever
before done, by searching the Scripture, and reading and examining such books,
as were written to defend the admission of persons to sacraments, without a
profession of saving faith. And the result was a full conviction that it was
wrong, and that he could not practice upon it with a good Conscience. He was
fully convinced that to be a visible Christian was to put on the visibility or
appearance of a real christian; that the profession o^ christianity was a
profession of that, wherein real christianity consists; was therefore a
profession of true respect of Christ, and a hearty embracing the gospel etc.
That therefore no person who rejected Christ in his heart, could make such a
profession consistent with truth. And therefore, as the Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper was instituted for none but visible professing christians, none but
those who are real christians have a real right in the sight of God to come to
that ordinance: and that none ought to be admitted thereto, who do not make a
profession of real christianity, and so cannot be received in a judgment of
charity as true friends to Jesus Christ, or real saints. THEY who have a desire
more fully to understand this controversy, and know if it is justly represented
here may do it by reading what Mr. Edwards wrote on this occasion, in order to
explain and vindicate his principles; together with the Rev. Mr. Williams's
answer, and Mr. Edwards's reply to him. And if they please, they may consult
what Dr. Mather, and Mr. Stoddard before wrote on this subject.


WHEN Mr. EDWARDS's sentiments were known, in the spring of the year 1744, it
gave great offense, and the town was put into a great ferment: and before he
was heard in his own defense, or it was known by many what his principles were,
the general cry was to have him dismissed, as what alone would satisfy them.
This was evident from the whole tenor of their conduct, as they neglected and
opposed the most proper means of calmly considering, and so understanding the
matter in dispute, and persisted in a refusal to attend to what Mr. EDWARDS had
to say in defense of his principles. And from beginning to end opposed the
measures which had the best tendency to compromise and heal the difficulty; and
with much zeal pursued those, which were calculated to make a separation
certain and speedy.

Mr. EDWARDS thought of preaching on the subject, that they might know what
were his sentiments, and what were the grounds of them, (of both which he was
sensible the most of them were quite ignorant) before they took any step for a
separation between him and his people. But that he might do nothing to increase
the tumult, but on the contrary take all those steps, which he could with a
good conscience, that tended to peace, he first proposed the thing to the
church's standing committee; supposing that if he entered on the subject
publicly with their consent, it would prevent the ill consequences which
otherwise he feared would follow. But the most of them by no means consent to
it, but strenuously opposed it. Upon which he gave it over for the present, as
what in such circumstances would rather raise a tumult, and blow the fire up to
a greater height, than answer the good ends proposed.

Mr. EDWARDS being sensible that his principles were not understood, and much
misrepresented through the country; and finding that his people were in too much
of a heat calmly to attend to the matter in controversy then; and were in a
disposition even to refuse to hear him preach upon it, proposed to print what
he had to say on the point; as this seemed to be the only way left him to have
a fair hearing. Accordingly his people consented to put off the calling a
council, till what he should write was published. But they manifested great
uneasiness in waiting, before it came out of the press. And when it was
published, it was read but by very few of them. Mr. EDWARDS being sensible of
this, renewed his proposal to preach upon it, and at a meeting of the brethren
of the church asked their consent in the following terms: I desire that the
brethren would manifest their consent, that I should declare the reasons of my
opinion relating to full communion in the church, in lectures appointed for
that end: Not as an act of authority, or as putting the power of declaring the
whole counsel of God out of my hands; but for peace sake, and to prevent
occasion of strife.

But it passed in the negative.

Mr. EDWARDS then proposed that it should be left to a few of the neighboring
ministers, whether it was not, all things considered, reasonable that he should
be heard in this matter from the pulpit, before the affair should be brought to
an issue. But this also passed in the negative.

HOWEVER, he having had the advice of the ministers and messengers of the
neighboring churches, who met at Northampton to advise them under their
difficulties, proceeded to appoint a lecture, in order to preach on the
subject, proposing to do so weekly 'till he had finished what he had to say. On
Monday there was a precinct or society meeting, in which a vote was passed to
choose a committee to go to Mr. EDWARDS, and desire him not to preach lectures
on the subject in controversy, according to his declaration and appointment.
And accordingly, proceeded to choose a committee of three men for this purpose,
who waited on him, and did their errand. However, Mr. EDWARDS thought proper to
proceed according to his proposal, and accordingly preached a number of Sermons
till he had finished what he had to say on the subject. These lectures were
very thinly attended by his own people: but great numbers of strangers from the
neighboring towns attended them, so many as to make above half the
congregation. This was in February and March 1750.

THE calling a decisive council to determine the matter of difference between
pastor and people, or rather to dismiss the pastor from his church and people,
(for the delay of which a great deal of impatience had been publicly
manifested) was now more particularly attended to by Mr. EDWARDS and the church.

Mr. EDWARDS had before this insisted upon it from time to time, that they were
by no means ripe for such a proceedure; (as they had not yet given him a fair
hearing in defense of his cause: which if they would do, perhaps the need of
such a council would be supersceeded. And besides, he thought there was
abundant public evidence, that they were not yet in a temper suited to attend
on, and be active in such a transaction, as the dissol^ing the relation between
them and their pastor; which would, as things then stood, probably be the
event. He observed, That it was exceeding unbecoming churches of the Lamb of
God to manage their religious affairs of greatest importance in a ferment and
tumult, which ought to be managed with great solemnity, deep humiliation and
submission to the awful frowns of heaven, humble dependence on God, and with
fervent prayer and supplication to him. That therefore for them to go about
such an affair, in such a manner as they did, would be most unbecoming the
Gospel, greatly to the dishonor of God and religion, and a way in which a
people cannot expect a blessing. That such a great affair as this should be
gone about with ca^m consideration; but that such a temper as the people were
then in, was wholly inconsistent with this.

BUT having used all means which he could think of within his Power to bring
them to a more calm and charitable temper, and to hear and weigh what he had to
say in his own defense, with attention and candor; and finding that nothing
prevailed; but rather the tumult and uproar was increased; he consented that a
decisive council should be called without any further delay.

BUT a difficulty attended the choice of a council, which was for some time
insuperable. It was agreed that the council should be mutually chosen, one half
by the pastor, and the other half by the church: but the people insisted upon
it that he should be confined to the county in his choice. Mr. EDWARDS thought
this an unreasonable restraint on him, as it was known that the ministers and
churches in that county were almost universally against him in the controversy
that divided him and his people, and made the two parties. He indeed did not
suppose that the business of the proposed council would be to determine whether
his opinion which was the occasion of the difficulty between him and his people
was right or no; or that what they were to judge of, depended upon this. But
their business would be -- to see and determine whether any possible way could
be devised for an accommodation between pastor and people, and to use their
wisdom and endeavor in order to this. And if they found this impracticable,
they must determine, whether things were now ripe for a separation; whether
what ought in justice to be previous to a separation had already actually been
done, so that there was nothing further in justice to be demanded by either of
the parties concerned, before a separation should take place. And if he was
dismissed by them, it would be their business to set forth to the world in what
manner and for what cause he was dismissed: how far he was innocent, and
whether he might yet be employed in the work of the ministry etc. All which
were matters of great importance to him, and required upright and impartial
judges. And considering the great influence a difference in religious opinions
has to prejudice men one against another; and the close connection of the
point, in which most of the ministers and churches in the county differed from
him, with the matter to be judged of, he did not think they could be reasonably
looked upon so impartial judges, as that the matter ought to be wholly left to
them. Besides, he thought the case being so new and extraordinary, required the
ablest judges in the land. For these, and some other reasons, which he offered,
he insisted upon liberty to go out of the county for those members of the
proposed council, in which he was to have a choice. In this, as was just now
said, the people strenuously and obstinately opposed him. They at length agreed
to leave the matter to a council consisting of the ministers and messengers of
the five neighboring churches: who, after they had met twice upon it, and had
the case largely debated before them, were equally divided, and therefore left
the matter undetermined.

HOWEVER, they were all agreed, that Mr. EDWARDS ought to have liberty to go
out of the county for some of the council. And at the next church meeting,
which was on the 26th of March, Mr. EDWARDS offered to join with them in
calling a council, if they would consent that he should choose two of the
churches out of the county, in case the council consisted of but ten churches.
The church however refused to comply with this at one meeting after another
repeatedly; and proceeded to warn a church meeting and choose a moderator, in
order to act without their pastor.

BUT, to pass by many particulars, at lenth at a meeting of the church, warned
by their pastor, May 3d. they voted their consent to his proposal of going out
of the county for two of the churches, should be applied to. And then they
proceeded to make choice of the ten ministers and churches, of which the
council should consist. Accordingly, the churches were sent to, and the council
convened on the 19th of June. Who, after they had made some fruitless attempts
for a composition between the pastor and church, passed a resolve, by the
majority of one voice One of the churches which Mr. Edward^ chose did not see
fit to join the council. However, the minister of that church being at
Northampton at the sitting of the Council, was desired by Mr. Edwards and the
Church to sit in Council and act, which he did. But there being no messenger
from the Church, the council was not full, and there was a disparity; by which
means doubtless, there was Our vote more for an immediate dismission, than
against it.
only, to the following purpose: "That it is expedient that the pastoral
relation between Mr. EDWARDS and his church be immediately dissolved, if the
people still persist in desiring it." And it being publicly put to the people,
whether they still insisted on Mr. EDWARDS's dismission from the pastoral
office over them? A great majority (above two hundred against twenty) zealously
voted for his dismission. And he was accordingly dismissed June 22, 1750.

THE dissenting part of the council, entered their pro^est against this
proceeding, judging that it was too much in a hurry, as they were by no means
ripe for a separation, considering the past conduct, and present temper of the
people. And some of that part of the council that were active, expressed
themselves surprised at the uncommon zeal and engagedness of spirit, publicly
manifested by the people in their voting for a dismission; which evidenced to
them, and all observing spectators, that they were far from a temper of mind
becoming such a solemn and awful transaction, considered in all its
circumstances.

BEING thus dismissed, he preached his farewell Sermon on the first of July,
from 2 Cor. i. 14. The doctrine he observed from the words was this, Ministers
and the people that have been under their care, must meet one another before
Christ's tribunal, at the day of Judgment. It was a remarkably solemn and
affecting discourse, and was published at the desire of some of the hearers.

AFTER Mr. EDWARDS was dismissed from Northampton, he preached there some times
occasionally when they had no other preacher to supply the pulpit; till at
length a great uneasiness was manifested by many of the people, at his
preaching there at all. Upon which, the committee for supplying the pulpit,
called the town together, to know their minds with respect to that matter: when
they voted that it was not agreeable to their minds, that he should preach
among them. Accordingly, when Mr. EDWARDS was in town, and they had no other
minister to preach to them, they carried on public worship among themselves,
and without any preaching, rather than to invite Mr. EDWARDS!

EVERY one must be sensible that this was a great trial to Mr. EDWARDS. He had
been near twenty four years among that people; and his labors had been, to all
appearance, from time to time greatly blessed among them: and a great number
looked on him as their spiritual father, who had been the happy instrument of
turning them from darkness to light, and plucking them as brands out of the
burning. And they had from time to time professed that they looked upon it as
one of their greatest privileges to have such a minister, and manifested their
great love and esteem of him, to such a degree; that, (as St. Paul says of the
Galatians) if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes,
and given them to him. And they had a great interest in his heart: He had borne
them on his heart and carried them in his bosom for many years; exercising a
tender concern and love for them: for their good he was always writing,
contriving, laboring; for them he had poured out ten thousand fervent prayers;
in their good he had rejoiced as one that finds great spoil; and they were
dear to him above any other people under heaven.

NOW to have this people turn against him, and thrust him out from among them,
in a great tumult and heat, with haste, and a great degree of violence; like
the Jews of old stoping their ears and running upon him with furious zeal, not
allowing him to defend himself by giving him a fair hearing; and even refusing
so much as to hear him preach; many of them surmising and publicly speaking
many ill things as to his ends and designs! To have the tables turned so
suddenly and the voice so general and loud against him. This surely must come
very near to him, and try his spirit. The words of the psalmist seems
applicable to this case, It was not an enemy that reproached me, then I could
have borne it; neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself
against me, then I would have hid my self from him. But it was THOU -- my guide
and mine acquaintance. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the
house of God in company.

LET us therefore now behold the man!

THE calm and sedateness of his mind; his meekness and humility in great and
violent opposition, and injurious treatment; his resolution and steady conduct
through all this dark and terrible storm, were truly wonderful, and cannot be set
in so beautiful and affecting a light by any description, as they appeared in
to his friends, who were eyewitnesses.

Mr. EDWARDS had a numerous and chargeable family, and little or no income,
exclusive of his salary: and considering how far he was advanced in years; the
general disposition of people who want a minister to prefer a young man who has
never been settled, to one who has been dismissed from his people; and what
misrepresentations were made of his principles through the country, it looked to
him not at all probable that he should ever have opportunity to be settled
again in the work of the ministry, if he was dismissed from Northampton: And he
was not inclined or able to take any other course, or go into any other
business to get a living. So that beggary as well as disgrace stared him full
in the face, if he persisted in his principles. To be sure, he viewed himself
as taking the most direct way to these, according to the natural course of
things, by discovering and adhering to his principles, in the situation he then
was. For he forsaw all this, before it came upon him; and therefor had the
opportunity and the temptation to escape it, by concealing his principles. When
he was fixed in his princples, and before they were publicly known, he told
some of his friends, that if he discovered and persisted in them, it would most
likely issue in his dismission and disgrace; and the ruin of himself and
family, as to their temporal interests. He therefore first sat down and counted
the cost, and deliberately took up the cross, when it was set before him in its
full weight and magnitude; and in direct opposition to all worldly views and
motives. And therefore his conduct in these circumstances, was a remarkable
exercise and discovery of his conscientiousness; and his readiness to deny
himself, and forsake all that he had, to follow Christ.

A man must have a considerable degree of the spirit of a martyr, not to flinch
in such a case as this; but go on with the stedfastness and resolution with
which he did. He, as it were, put his life in his hand, and ventured on where
truth and duty appeared to lead him, unmoved at the threatening dangers on every
side.

HOWEVER, God did not forsake him. As he gave him those inward supports by
which he was able in patience to possess his soul, and calmly and courageously
row on in the storm, as it were, in the face of boistrous winds, beating hard
upon him, and in the midst of gaping waves threatening to swallow him up: so he
soon appeared for him, in his providence, even beyond all his expectations. His
correspondents and other friends in Scotland, hearing of his dismission, and
fearing it might be the means of bringing him into worldly straits, generously
contributed a handsome sum, and sent it over to him.

AND God did not leave him without tender, valuable friends at Northampton. For
a small number of his people who opposed his dismission from the beginning, and
some who acted on neither side, who joined with him after his dismission, and
adhered to him, under the influence of that great esteem and love of Mr.
EDWARDS were willing and thought themselves able to maintain him: and insisted
upon it that it was his duty to stay among them, as a distinct and separate
congregation from the body of the town, who had rejected him.

Mr. EDWARDS could not see it to be his duty to stay among them, as
circumstances were; as this would probably be a means of perpetuating an
unhappy division in the town; and there was to him no prospect of doing the
good there, which would counterbalance the evil. However, that he might do all
he ^ould to satisfy his tender and afflicted friends; and because (...)
multitude of counselors there is safety, he consent^^ to ask the advice of an
ecclesiastical council. Accordingly, a council was called, and convened at
Northampton on the 15th of May 1751.

THE town on this occasion was put into great tumult and fire. They who were
active in Mr. EDWARDS's dismission supposed, though without any ground, and
contrary to truth, that he was contriving and attempting with his friends,
ag^^n to introduce himself at Northampton. They drew up a remonstrance against
their proceedings, and laid it before the council (though they would not
acknowledge them to be an ecclesiastical) containing many heavy, though
groundless, insinuation^ and charges against Mr. EDWARDS, and bitter
accusations of the party who had adhered to him: But refused to appear and
support any of their charges, or so much as to give the gentlemen of the
council any opportunity to confer with them, about the affair depending; though
it was diligently sought.

THE council having heard what Mr. EDWARDS, and they who adhered to him, and
any others who desired to be heard, had to say, advised, agreeable to Mr.
EDWARDS's judgment and expectation, that he should leave Northampton, and
accept of the Mission to which he was invited at Stockbridge; of which a more
particular account will be given presently.

MANY other facts relative to this sorrowful, strange, surprising affair (the
most so doubtless of any of the kind, that ever happened in New England; and
perhaps, in any part of the christian world) might be related; but as this more
general history of it, may be sufficient to answer the ends proposed, viz. to
rectify some gross misrepresentations that have been made of the matter, and
discover the great trial Mr. EDWARDS had herein, it is thought best to suppress
other particulars. As a proper close to this melancholy story; and to confirm,
and further illustrate what has been related, the following letter from JOSEPH
HAWLEY, Esquire (a gentleman who was well acquainted with, and very active in the
transactions of this whole affair, and very much a head and leader in it,) to
the rev. Mr. Hall of Sutton, published in a weekly News-Paper in Boston, May
19. 1760. is here inserted.

To the Rev. Mr. HALL of Sutton.
Northampton, May 9. 1760. Rev. Sir.
I Have often wished that every Member of the two ecclesiastical councils (that
formerly sat in Northampton upon the unhappy differences between our former
most worthy and reverend pastor Mr. Jonathan Edwards and the church here)
whereof you was a member; I say Sir, I have often wished every of them truly
knew my real sense of my own conduct in the affairs that the one and the other
of said councils are privy to; and as I have long apprehended it to be my duty
not only to humble my self before God for what was unchristian and sinful, in
my conduct before said councils, but also to confess my faults to them, and
take shame to my self therefore before them I have often studied with my self in
what manner it was practicable for me to do it; and when I understood that you
Sir, and Mr Eato^ were to be at Cold Spring at the time of their late council,
I resolved to improve the opportunity fully to open my mind there to you and
him thereon; and thought that probably some method might be then thought of in
which my reflections on my self touching the matters above hinted at, might be
communicated to most if not all the gentlemen aforesaid, who did not reside in
this county: but you know, Sir, how difficult it was for us to converse
together by our selves when at Cold-Spring, without giving umbrage to that
people; I therefore proposed writing to you upon the matters which I had then
opportunity only most summarily to suggest; which you Sir, signified would be
agrea^le to you. I therefore now undertake what I then proposed, in which I
humbly ask the divine aid; and that I may be made most freely willing fully to
confess my sin and guilt to you and the world in those instances which I have
reason to suppose fell under your notice, as they were public and notorious
transactions, and on account whereof, therefore, you Sir, and all others who
had knowledge thereof, had just cause to be offended at me.

And in the first place Sir, I apprehend that with the Church and People of
Northampton, I sinned and erred exceedingly in consenting and laboring that
there should be so early a dism^ssion of Mr. Edwards from his pastoral relation
to us, even upon the supposition that he was really in a mistake in the
disputed point: not only because the dispute was upon matters so very
disputable in themselves and at the greatest remove from fundamental, but
because Mr. Edwards so long had approved himself a most faithful and painful
pastor to said church; and also changed his sentiments in that point wholly
from a tender regard to what appeared to him to be truth; and had made known
his sentiments with great moderation and upon great deliberation, against all
worldly motives, and from mere fidelity to his great master, and a tender
regard to the souls of his flock, as we had the highest reason to judge: which
considerations now seem to me sufficient; and would (if we had been of a right
spirit) have greatly endeared him to his people, and made us to the last
degree, reluctant to parting with him, and disposed us to the exercise of the
greatest candor, gentleness and moderation* how much of the reverse whereof
appear^d in us. I need not tell you Sir, who was an eye witness of our temper
and conduct.

And although it does not become me to pronounce decisively on a point so
disputable as what was then in dispute; yet I beg leave to say, that I really
apprehend that it is of the highest moment to the body of this church, and to
me in particular, most solicitously to enquire, whether like the Pharisees and
Lawyers in John Baptist's time we did not reject the counsel of God against our
selves, in rejecting Mr. Edwards and his doctrine: which was the ground of his
dismission. And I humbly conceive that it highly imports us all of this church,
most seriously and impartially to examine what that most worthy and able divine
about that time published in support of the same, whereby he being dead yet
speaks.

But there were three things Sir, especially in my own particular conduct
before the first council, which have been justly matter of great grief and much
trouble to me almost ever since, to wit.

In the first place I confess Sir, that I acted very immodestly and abusively
to you, as well as injuriously to the church and my self, when with much zeal
and unbecoming assurance, I moved the council that they would interpose to
silence and stop you in an address you was making one morning to the people,
wherein you was, if I don't misremember, briefly exhorting them to a tender
remembrance of the former affection and harmony that had long subsisted between
them and their reverend pastor, and the great comfort and profit which they had
apprehended that they had received from his ministry; for which Sir, I heartily
ask your forgiveness; and I think, that we ought instead of opposing an
exhortation of that nature, to have received it with all thankfulness.

Another particular of my conduct before that council, which I now apprehend
was criminal, and was owing to the want of that tender affection and reverend
respect and esteem for Mr. Edwards which he had highly merited of me, was my
strenuously opposing the adjournment of the matters submitted to that council,
for about two months; for which I declare my self unfeignedly sorry; and I with
shame remember, that I did it in a peremptory, decisive, vehement and very
immodest manner.

But Sir, the most criminal part of my conduct at that time, that I am
conscious of, was my exhibiting to that council a set of arguments in writing,
the drift whereof was to prove the reasonableness and necessity of Mr. Edward's
dismission in case no accommodation was then effected with mutual consent;
which tract by clear implication contained some severe, uncharitable, and if I
don't misremember, groundless and slanderous imputations on Mr. Edwards and
expressed in b^tter language; and although the o^iginal draft thereof was not
done by me, yet I foolishly and sinfully consented to copy it; and as agent for
the church, to read it and deliver it to the council, which I could never have
done, if I had not had a wicked relish for perverse things: which conduct of
mine, I confess was very sinful; am persuaded was highly provoking to God, and
for which I am ashamed, confounded, and have nothing to answer.

As to the church's remonstrance (as it was called) which their committee
preferred to the last of said councils, to all which I was consenting, and in
the composing whereof I was very active, as also in bringing the church to
their vote upon it: I would in the first place only observe, that I don't
remember any thing in that small part of it which was plainly discursive of the
expediency of Mr. Edwards's re-settlement here as pastor to a part of the
church, which was very exceptionable; but as to all the residue, which was much
the greatest part thereof (and I am not certain that any part was wholly free)
it was every where laided with unchristian bitterness, sarcastical and
unmannerly insinuations contained diverse direct, grievous and criminal charges
and allegations against Mr. Edwards; which I have since good reason to suppose
were all founded on jealous and uncharitable mistakes and so were really gross
slanders, also many heavy and reproachful charges upon diverse of Mr. Edwards's
adherents, and some severe censures of them all indiscriminately; all of which
(if not wholly false and groundless) yet were altogether unnecessary, and
therefore highly criminal. Indeed I am fully convinced, that the whole of that
composure, excepting the small part thereof abovementioned, was totally
unchristian* a scandalous, abusive, injurious libel, against Mr. Edwards and
his particular friends; especially the former, and highly provoking and
detestable in the sight of God; for which I am heartily sorry and ashamed; and
pray I may remember it with deep abasement and penitence all my days. Nor do I
now think that the church's cond^ct in refusing to appear and attend before
that council to support ^he charges and allegations in said remonstrance
against Mr. Edwards and said brethren, which they demanded was ever vindicated
by all the subtle answers that were given to said demand; nor do I think that
our conduct in that instance was capable of a defense, for it appears to me,
that by making charges of scandalous matters against them before said council,
we necessarily so far gave that council jurisdiction; and I own with sorrow and
regret, that I zealously endeavored, that the church should perseveringly
refuse to appear before said council for the purpose abovesaid; which I humbly
pray God to forgive.

Another part of my conduct, Sir, of which I have long repented, and for which
I hereby declare my hearty sorrow, was my obstinate opposition to the last
council's having any conference with the church; which said council earnestly
and rep^atedly moved for, and which the church finally denied (as you know.) I
think it discovered a great deal of pride and vain sufficiency in the church,
and showed them to be very opiniative, especially the chief sticklers, one of
whom I own I was, and think it was running a most presumptuous risk, and acting
the part of proud scorners, for us to refuse hearing and heartily and seriously
considering what that council could say or propose to us; among whom the^e were
diverse justly in great reputation for grace and wisdom.

In these instances* Sir, of my conduct, and other^ (to which you was not
p^^vy) in the course of that most melancholy contention with Mr. Edwards,
wherein I now see that I wa^ very much influenced by vast pride,
self-sufficiency, ambition and vanity. I appear to my self vile, and doubtless
much more so to others who are more impartial; and do in the review thereof,
abhor my self, and repent sorely: and if my own heart condemns me it behooves me
solemnly to remember, that God is greater* and knows all things: and I hereby
own, Sir, that such treatment of Mr Edward's, as is herein before mentioned,
wherein I was so deeply concerned and active, was particularly and very
aggravatedly sinful and ungrateful in me, because I was not only under the
common obligations of each individual of the society to him, as to a most able,
diligent and faithful pastor; but I had also received many instances of his
tenderness goodness, and generosi^y to me, as a young kinsman, whom he was
disposed to treat in a most friendly manner.

Indeed, Sir I must own, that by my conduct in consulting and acting against
Mr. Edwards within the time of ou^ most unhappy dispu^es with him, and
especially in and about that abominable remonstrance I have so far symbolized
with Balaam, Ahitophel and Judas, that I am confounded and filled with terror
oftentimes when I attend to the most painful similitude

And I freel^ confess, that on account of my conduct abovementioned, I have the
greatest reason to tremble at those most solemn and awful words of our Savior,
Matthew. 18.6. and those in Luke 10^h, at the 16^h: and I am most sorely sensible
that nothing but that infinite grace and mercy which saved some of the
betrayers and murderers of our blessed Lord and the persecutor^ of his martyrs,
can pardon me; in which alone I hope for pardon, for the sake of Christ, whose
blood (blessed be God) cleanses from all sin On the whole Sir, I am convinced,
that I have the greatest reason to say as David, Have mercy upon me, O God,
according to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies blot out my transgressions* wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin; for I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is eve^
before me: hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all m^ne iniquities: create
in me a clean heart, O God, and ren^w a right spirit within me; cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not t^y holy spirit from me. Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.

And I humbly apprehend that it greatly concerns the church of Nor^hampton most
seriously to examine whether the many hard speeches, spoken by many particular
members against their former pastor* some of which the church really
countenanced, and especially those spoken by the church as a body, in that most
vile remonstrance, are not so odious and ungodly, as to be utterly incapable of
defense; and whether said church were not guilty of great sin in being so
willing and disposed for so slight a cause, to part with so faithful and godly
a minister as Mr. Edwards was. And whether ever God will hold us guiltless
'till we cry to him for Christ's sake to pardon and save us from that judgment
which such ungodly deeds deserve, and publicly humble and take shame to our
selves therefore. And I most heartily wish and pray that the town and church of
Northampton would seriously and carefully examine whether they have not
abundant cause to judge that they are now lying under great guilt in the sight
of God; and whether those of us who were concerned in that most awful
contention with Mr Edwards, can ever more reasonably expect God's favor and
blessing, 'till our eyes are opened, and we become thoroughly convinced that we
have greatly provoked the most High, and been injurious to one of the best of
men; and until we shall be thoroughly convinced that we have dreadfully
persecuted Christ by persecuting and vexing that just man and servant of Ch^^^;
until we shall be humble as in the dust therefore, and till we openly in full
terms, and without baulking the matter, confess the same before the world, and
most humbly and earnestly seek forgiveness of God, and do what we can to honor
the memory of Mr. Edwards, and clear it of all the aspersi^ns which we unjustly
cast upon him; since God has been pleased to put it beyond our power to ask his
forgiveness. Such terms I am persuaded the great and righteous God will hold us
to, and that it will be in vain for us to hope to escape with impunity in any
other way. This I am convinced of with regard to my self, and this way I most
solemnly propose to take to my self (if God in his mercy shall give me
opportunity) that so by making free confession to God and man of my sin and
guilt, and publicly taking shame to my self therefore, I may give glory to the
God of Israel, and do what in me lies, to clear the memory of that venerable
man from the wrongs and injuries I was so active in bringing on his reputation
and character, and I thank God that he has been pleased to spare my life and
opportunity therefore to this time, and am sorry that I have delayed the affair
so long.

Although I made the substance of almost all the foregoing reflections in
writing, but not exactly in the same manner to Mr. Edwards and the brethren who
adhered to him, in Mr. Edwards's life, and before he removed from Stockbridge,
and I have reason to believe that he, from his great candor and charity,
heartily forgave me and prayed for me: yet because that was not generally
known, I look on my self obliged to take further steps; for while I kep:
silence, my bones waxed old, etc.

For all these my great sins therefore, in the first place, I humbly and most
earnestly ask forgiveness of God; nextly, of the relatives and near friends of
Mr. Edwards. I also ask the forgiveness of all those who were called Mr.
Edwards's adherents; and of all the members of the ecclesiastical councils
above mentioned; and lastly, of all christian people, who have had any
knowledge of the matters abovesaid, or any of them.

I have no desire, Sir, that you should make any secret of this letter; but
desire you would communicate the same to whom you shall judge proper and I
purpose (^f God shall give me opportunity) to procure it to be published in
some one of the public news papers; for I cannot devise any other way of making
known my sentiments of the foregoing matters to all who ought to be acquainted
therewith, and therefore I think I ought to do it, whatever remarks I may
foresee will be made thereon.

Probably when it comes out, some of my acquaintance will pronounce me quite
overrun with vapors, others will be furnished with matter for mirth and
pleasantry; others will cursorily pass it over as relating to matters qui^e
sta^e; but some I am persuaded will rejoice to see me brought to a sense of my
sin and duty; and I (...) self shall be conscious that I have done something of
what the nature of the case admits, toward undoing what is, and long has been,
to my greatest remorse and trouble that it was ever done.

Sir, I desire that none would entertain a thought from my having spoken
respectfully of Mr Edwards, that I am disaffected to our present pastor; for
^he very reverse is true; and I have a reverend esteem, real value, and hearty
effection for him, and bless God, that he has notwithstanding all our
unworthiness, given us one to succced Mr. Edwards, who, (as I have reason to
hope) is truly faithful.

I conclude this long letter, by heartily desiring your prayers, that m^
repentance of my sins abovementioned may be unfeigned and genuine, and such as
God in infinite mercy so Christ's sake will accept: and I beg leave to
subscribe any self,

Sir, your real, though very unworthy friend, and obedient servant, JOSEPH HAWLEY,


SECTION III. His MISSION to the INDIANS at Stockbridge etc.
THE India, Mission at Stockbridge (a Town in the western part of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, sixty Miles from Northampton) being vacant by the
death of the late reverend Mr. SERGEANT, the honored and reverend Commissioners
for Indian affairs, in Boston, who have the care and direction of it, applied
to him, as the most suitable person they could think of to betrust with that
mission. And he was at the same time invited by the inhabitants of Stockbridge;
and being advised by the council, above mentioned, to accept of the invitation,
he repaired to Stockbridge, and was introduced and fixed as missionary to the
Indians there by an ecclesiastical council called for that purpose, August 8
1751.

WHEN Mr. EDWARDS first engaged in the mission, there was a hopeful prospect of
it is being extensively serviceable, under his care and influence; not only to
that tribe of Indians which was settled at Stockbridge, but among the Six
Nations: some of whom were coming to Stockbridge to settle, and bring their
own, and as many of their neighbors children as they could get; to be educated
and instructed there. For this end, a house for a boarding school, which was
projected by Mr SERGEANT, was erected on a tract of land appropriated to that
use by the Indians at Stockbridge: where the Indian Children, male and female
were to be educated, by being clothed and fed, and instructed by proper
persons in useful learning. And the boys to be learned husbandry or mechanic
trades, and the girls all sorts of women's work. For the encouragement of
which, some generous subscriptions were made both in England and America. And
the great and general Court of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, did much
to promote the affair, and provided lands for the Mohocks to settle on, who
should incline to come. And the generous Mr. HOLLIS, to be encourage the thing,
ordered twenty four indian Children to be educated on the same footing, wholly
at his cost. Also the Society in London, for propagating the Gospel among the
Indians in and about New England, directed their Commissioners in Boston to do
considerable toward this design.

BUT partly by reason of some unhappy differences that took place among those
who had the chief management of this affair at Stockbridge, of which a
particular account would not be proper in this place; and partly by the war's
breaking out between England and France, which is generally very fatal to such
affairs among Indians, this hopeful prospect came to nothing.

Mr. EDWARDS'S labors were attended with no remarkable vasible success while
at Stockbridge: though he performed the business of his mission to the good
acceptance of the inhabitants in general, both English and Indians, and of the
Commissioners, who supported him honorably, and confided very much in his
judgment and wisdom in all matters relating to the mission.

STOCKBRIDGE proved to Mr. EDWARDS a more quiet, and, on many accounts, a much
more comfortable situation than he was in before. It being so much in one
corner of the country, his time was not so much taken up with company, as it
was at Northampton, though many of his friends, from almost all parts of the
land, often made him pleasant and profitable visits. And he had not so much
concern and trouble with other churches as he was obliged to have when at
Northampton, by being frequently sought to for advice, and called to assist in
ecclesiastical councils. Here therefore he followed his beloved study more
closely, and to better purpose than ever. In these six years he doubtless made
swifter advances in knowledge than ever before, and added more to his
Manuscripts than in any six Years of his life.

AND this was probably as useful a part of his life as any. For in this time he
wrote the two last books that have been published by him (of which a more
particular account will be given hereafter) by which he has doubtless greatly
served the church of Christ, and will be a blessing to many thousands yet
unborn.

THUS, after his uprightness and faithfulness had been sufficiently tried at
Northampton, his kind master provided for him a quiet retreat, which was
rendered the more sweet by the preceding storm; and where he had a better
opportunity to pursue and finish the work GOD had for him to do.

SECT. IV. His being made PRESIDENT of New Jersey College; his SICKNESS and
DEATH.
ON the 24th of September 1757. the Rev. Mr. AARON BURR President of New Jersey
College died, -- And at the next meeting of the Trustees, Mr. EDWARDS was
chosen his successor. The news of which was quite unexpected, and not a little
surprising to him. He looked on himself in many respects so unqualifyed for
that business, that he wondered that Gentlemen of so good judgment, and so well
acquainted with him, as he knew some of the Trustees were, should think of him
for that place. He had many objections in his own mind against undertaking the
business, both from his unfitness, and his particular circumstances; yet could
not certainly determine that it was not his duty to accept. The following
extract of a letter which he wrote to the Trustees, will give the reader a view
of his sentiments and exercises on this occasion, as well as of the great
designs he was deeply engaged in, and zealously prosecuting.

Stockbridge, 19th October 1757. Reverend and Honored Gentlemen,
I Was not a little surprised, on receiving the unexpected Notice of your
having made choice of me to succeed the late president BURR, as the Head of
Nassau Hall. -- I am much in doubt whether I am called to undertake the
business, which you have done me the unmerited honor to choose me for -- If
some regard may be had to my outward comfort, I might mention the many
Inconveniences and great detriment, which must be sustained, by my removing
with my numerous family, so far from all the estate I have in the world
(without any prospect of disposing of it, under present circumstances, without
lofing it, in great part) now when we have scarcely got over the trouble and
damage sustained by our removal from Northampton, and have but just begun to
have our affairs in a comfortable situation for a subsistence in this place;
and the expense I must immediately be at to put my self into circumstance
tolerably comporting with the needful support of the honor of the office I am
invited to; which will not well consist with my ability. -- But this is not my
main objection: The chief difficulty in my mind, in the way of accepting this
important and arduous office, are these two: First my own defects, unfitting me
for such an undertaking, many of which are generally known; besides other,
which my own heart is conscious to. -- I have a constitution in many respects
peculiar unhappy, attended with flucid solids, vapid, sizy and scarce fluids,
and a low tide of spirits; often occasioning a kind of childish weakness and
contemptibleness of speech, presence and demeanor; with a disagreable dullness
and stiffness, much unfiting me for conversation, but more especially for the
government of a College. -- This poorness of constitution makes me shrink at
the thoughts of taking upon me, in the decline of life, such a new and great
business, attended with such a multiplicity of cares, and requiring such a
degree of activity, alertness and spirit of government; especially as
succeeding one, so remarkably well qualified in these respects, giving occasion
to every one to remark the wide difference. I am also deficient in some parts
of learning, particularly in Algebra, and the higher parts of Mathematics, and
in the Greek Classicks; my Greek learning having been chiefly in the new
Testament -- The other thing is this; that my engaging in this business, will
not well consist, with those views, and that course of employ in my study,
which have long engaged, and swallowed up my mind, and been the chief
entertainment and delight of my life. --

And here, honored Sirs, (emboldned by the testimony, I have now received of
your unmerited esteem, to rely on your candor) I will with freedom open my self
to you.

My method of study, from my first beginning the work of the ministry, has been
very much by writing; applying my self in this way, to improve every important
hint; pursuing the clew to my utmost, when any thing in reading* meditation or
conversation, has been suggested to my mind, that seemed to promise light, in
any weighty point. -- Thus penning what appeared to me my best thoughts, on
innumerable subjects for my own benefit. -- The longer I prosecuted my studies
in this method, the more habitual it became, and the more pleasant and
profitable I found it. -- The further I traveled in this way, the more and
wider the field opened, which has occasioned my laying out many things, in my
mind, to do in this manner, if God should spare my life, which my heart has
been much upon: particularly many things against most of the preva^ling errors
of the present day, which I cannot with any patience see maintained (to the
utter subverting of the gospel of Christ) with so high a hand, and so long
continued a triumph, with so little control, when it appears so evident to me,
that there is truly no foundation for any of this glorying and insult -- I have
already published something on one of the main points in dispute between the
Arminians and Calvinists: and have it in view, God willing (as I have already
signified to the public) in like manner to consider all the other controverted
points, and have done much toward a preparation for it -- But besides these, I
have had on my mind and heart (which I long ago began, not with any view to
publication) a great work, which I call a History of the Work of Redemption, a
Body of Divinity in an entire new method, being thrown into the form of an
history, considering the affair of christian Theology, as the whole of it, in
each part, stands in reference to the great work of redemption by Jesus Christ;
which I suppose is to be the grand design, of all God's designs, and the summum
and ultimum of all the divine operations and degrees; particularly considering
all parts of the grand scheme in their historical order. -- The order of their
existence, or their being brought forth to view, in the course of divine
dispensations, or the wonderful series of successive acts and events; beginning
from eternity and descending from thence to the great work and successive
dispensations of the infinitely wise God in time, considering the chief events
coming to pass in the church of God, and revolutions in the world of mankind,
affecting the state of the church and the affair of redemption, which we have
account of in history or prophecy; 'till at last we come to the general
Resurrection, last Judgment, and consummation of all things; when it tshall be
said, It it done. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. Concluding
my Work, with the consideration of that perfect state of things, which shall be
finally settled, to last for eternity. -- This history will be carried on with
regard to all three Worlds, Heaven, Earth and Hell: considering the connected,
successive events and alterations, in each so far as the scriptures give any
light; introducing all parts of divinity in that order which is most scriptural
and most natural: which is a method which appears to me the most beautiful and
entertaining, wherein every divine doctrine, will appear to greatest advantage
in the brightest light, in the most striking manner, showing the admirable
contexture and harmony of the whole.

I have also for my own profit and entertainment, done much toward another
great work, which I call the Harmony of the old and new Testament in three
Parts -- The first considering the prophecies of the Messiah, his Redemption
and Kingdom; the Evidences of their Referrences to the Messiah etc. comparing
them all one with another, demonstrating their agreement and true scope and
sense; also considering all the various particulars wherein these prophecies
have their exact fulfillment; showing the universal, precise, and admirable
correspondence between predictions and events. The second Part: Considering the
Types of the old testament, showing the evidence of their being intended as
representations of the great things of the gospel of Christ and the agreement
of the type with the antitype. -- The third and great Part, considering the
harmony of the old and new testament, as to doctrine and precept. -- In the
course of this work, I find there will be occasion for an explanation of a very
great part of the holy scripture; which may, in such a view be explained in a
method, which to me seems the most entertaining and profitable, best tending to
lead the mind to a view of the true spirit, design, life and soul of the
scriptures, as well as to their proper use and improvement.

I have also many other things in hand, in some of which I have made great
progress, which I will not trouble you with an account of....Some of these
things, if divine providence favor I should be willing to attempt a
publication of -- So far as I my self am able to judge of what talents I have,
for benefiting my follow creatures by word, I think I can write better than I
can speak.

My heart is so much in these that I cannot find it in my heart to be wiling to
put my self into an incapacity to pursue them any more, in the future part of
my life, to such a degree as I must, if I undertake to go through the same course
of employ, in the office of a President, that Mr. Burr, did, instructing in all
the languages, and taking the whole care of the instruction of one of the
Classes in all parts of learning, besides his other labors. -- If I should see
light to determine me to accept the place offered me, I should be willing to
take upon me the work of a President, so far as it consists in the general
inspection of the whole society and subservient to the school, as to their
order and methods of study and instruction, assisting my self in immediate
instruction in the arts and sciences (as discretion should direct and occasion
serve, and the state of things require) especially the senior class: and added
to all, should be willing to do the whole work of a professor of divinity, in
public and private lectures, proposing questions to be answered, an some to be
discussed in writing and free conversation* in meetings of graduates and
others, appointed in proper seasons for these ends....It would be now out of my
way, to spend time, in a constant teaching of the languages; unless it be the
hebrew tongue, which I should be willing to improve my self in, by instructing
others.

On the whole, I am much at a loss, with respect to the way of my duty in this
important affair: I am in doubt, whether if I should engage in it, I should not
do what both you and I should be sorry for afterward. Nevertheless, I think
the greatness of the affair, and the regard due to so worthy and venerable a
body, as that of the Trustees of Nassau-Hall, requires my taking the matter
into serious consideration: And unless you should appear to be discouraged by
the things which I have now represented, as to any further expectation from me,
shall proceed to ask advice, of such as I esteem most wise, friendly and
faithful; if after the mind of the Commissioners in Boston is known, it appears
that they consent to leave me at liberty, with respect to the business they
have employed me in here.


IN this suspense he determined to ask the advice of a number of gentlemen in
the ministry, on whose judgment and friendship he could rely, and to act
accordingly. Who upon his, and his people's desire, met at Stockbridge, January
4. 1758. And having heard Mr. EDWARDS'S representation of the matter, and what
his people had to say by way of objection against his removal, determined it
was his duty to accept of the invitation to the presidency of the College.

WHEN they published their judgment and advice to Mr. EDWARDS and his people,
he appeared uncommonly moved and affected with it, and fell into tears on the
occasion; which was very unusual for him, in the presence of others: and soon
after said to the gentlemen, who had given their advice, that it was matter of
wonder to him, that they could so easily, as they appeared to do, get over the
objections he had made against his removal, to be the head of a college; which
appeared great and weighty to him But as he thought it his duty to be directed
by their advice, he should now endeavor cheerfully to undertake it, believing
he was in the way of his duty.

ACCORDINGLY, having had, by the application of the Trustees of the College,
the consent of the Commissioners to resign their mission; he girded up his
loins, and set off from Stockbridge for Prince-Town in January. He left his
family at Stockbridge, not to be removed till Spring. He had two daughters at
Prince-town, Mrs. BURR, the Widow of the late President BURR, and his oldest
daughter that was unmarried.

HIS arrival at Prince-town was so the great satisfaction and joy of the
college. And indeed all the greatest friends to the college, and to the
interest of religion, were highly satisfied and pleased with the appointment of
Mr. EDWARDS to the Presidency of that College, and had their hopes and
expectations greatly raised hereby. And his correspondents and friends, and
well-wishers to the College in Scotland, greatly approved of it.

THE Corporation met as soon as could be with convenience, after his arrival at
the College, when he was by them fixed in the president's chair.

WHILE at Prince-town, before his sickness, he preachd in the College-hall from
Sabbath to Sabbath, to the great acceptance of the hearers: but did nothing as
president, unless it was to give out some questions in divinity to the senior
class, to be answered before him; each one having opportunity to study and
write what he thought proper upon them. When they came together to answer them,
they found so much entertainment and profit by it, especially by the light and
instruction Mr. EDWARDS communicated in what he said upon the questions, when
they had delivered what they had to say, that they spoke of it with the
greatest satisfaction and wonder.

DURING this time, Mr. EDWARDS seemed to enjoy an uncommon degree of the
presence of GOD. He told his daughters, he had had great exercise, concern and
fear, relative to his engaging in that business; but since it now appeared, so
far as he could see, that he was called of God to that place and work, he did
cheerfully devote himself to it, leaving himself and the event with God, to
order what seemed to Him good.

THE Smallpox had now become very common in the country, and was then at
Prince-town, and likely to spread. And as Mr. EDWARDS had never had it, and
Inoculation was then practiced with great success in those parts, he proposed
to be inoculated, if the physician should advise to it, and the corporation
would give their consent.

Accordingly, by the advice of the physician, and consent of the corporation,
he was inoculated February 13. He had it favorably, and it was thought all
danger was over: But a secondary fever set in; and by reason of a number of
pustles in his throat, the obstruction was such, that the medicines necessary
to stench the fever, could not be administered. It therefore raged till it put
an end to his life on the 22d of March 1758. in the 55th Year of his Age.

AFTER he was sensible that he should not survive that sickness, a little
before his death, he called his daughter to him, who attended him in his
sickness, and addressed her in a few words, which were immediately taken down
in writing, as near as could be recollected, and are as follows, -- DEAR LUCY,
if seems to me to be the will of GOD that I must shortly leave you; therefore
give my kindest love to my dear wife, and tell her, that the uncommon union,
which has so long subsisted between us, has been of such a nature, as I trust
is spiritual, and therefore will continue for ever: And I hope she shall be
supported under so great a trial, and submit cheerfully to the will of GOD. And
as to my children, You are now like to be left fatherless, which I hope will be
an inducement to you all to seek a Father, who will never fail you. And as to
my funeral, I would have it to be like Mr. BURR's; and any additional sum of
money that might be expected to be laid out that way, I would have it disposed
of to charitable uses. President BURR ordered on his death bed, that his
funeral should not be attended with that pomp and cost, by procuring and giving
away a great number of costly mourning scarfs etc. and the consumption of a
great quantities spiritous liquors; which is an extravagance that is become too
customary in those parts especially at the funerals of the great and the rich:
and that nothing should be expended, but what was agreeable to the dictates of
christian decency. And that the sum which must be expended at a modish funeral,
over and above the necessary cost of a decent one, should be given to the poor,
out of his estate.

It is to be wished and hoped, that the laudable example of these two worthy
Presidents, in which they bear their dying testimony against a practice so
unchristian, and of such bad tendency so many ways, will have some good effect.







HE said but very little in his sickness; but was an admirable instance of
patience and resignation to the last. Just at the close of his life, as some
persons, who stood by, and expected he would breath his last in a few minutes,
were lamenting his death not only as a great frown on the college, but as
having a dark aspect on the interest of religion in general; to their surprise,
not imagining that he heard, or would ever speak another word, he said, "TRUST
IN GOD, AND YE NEED NOT FEAR." These were his last words. And what could have
been more suitable to the occasion! And what need of more! In these is as much
matter of instruction and support, as if he had wrote a volume. This is the
only consolation to his bereaved-friends, who are sensible of the loss they,
and the church of Christ have sustained in his death; GOD is all-sufficient,
and still has the care of his church.

HE appeared to have the uninterrupted use of his reason to the last, and died
with as much calmness and composure, to all appearance, as that with which one
goes to sleep.

THE physician who inoculated and constantly attended him in his sickness, has
the following words in his letter to Mrs. Edwards on this occasion: Never did
any mortal man more fully and clearly evidence the sincerity of all his
professions, by one continued, universal, calm, cheerful resignation and
patient submission to the divine will, through every stage of his disease, than
he. Not so much as one discontented expression, nor the least appearance of
murmuring through the whole. And never did any person expire with more perfect
freedom from pain: not so much as one distorted hair, but in the most proper
sense of the words, he really fell asleep.

PART IV. Containing an Account of his MANUSCRIPTS, and the BOOKS published by
him.
SECTION I. His MANUSCRIPTS.
MR. EDWARDS has left a great many Volumes in manuscript, which he wrote in a
miscellaneous way on almost all subjects in divinity; which he did, not with
any design they should ever be published in the form in which they are; but for
the satisfaction and imimprovement of his own mind, and that he might retain
the thoughts, which appeared to him worth preserving. Some idea of the progress
he had made, and the materials he had collected in this way, he gives in the
foregoing letter to the Trustees of Nassau-Hall, Page 75.
He has wrote much on the prophecies of the MESSIAH, Justification, the
Divinity of Christ, and the eternity of Hell Torments. He wrote a great deal on
the Bible, in the same way, by opening his thoughts on particular passages of
it, as they occurred to him in reading or meditation; by which he has cast much
light on many parts of the bible, which has escaped other interpreters. And by
which his great and painful attention to the Bible, and making it the only rule
of his faith, are manifest.

IF the public was willing to be at the cost, and publishing books of divinity
met with as much encouragement now, as it has sometimes, there might be a
number of volumes published from his manuscripts, which would afford a great
deal of new light and entertainment to the church of Christ: though they would be
more imperfect, than if he himself had prepared them for public view.

AS the method he took to have his miscellaneous writings in such order, as to
be able with ease to turn to any thing he had wrote upon a particular subject,
when he had occasion, is perhaps as good as any, if not the best that has been
proposed to the public; some account of it will here be given, as what may be
of advantage to young students, who have not yet gone into any method, and are
disposed to improve their minds by writing.

HE numbered all his miscellaneous writings. The first thing he wrote is No. 1.
the second No. 2. and so on. And when he had occasion to write on any
particular subject, he first set down the Number, and then wrote the Subject in
capitals or large character, that it might not escape his eye, when he should
have occasion to turn to it. As for instance, if he was going to write on the
happiness of Angels, and his last No. was 148, he would begin thus -- 149.
ANGELS, their HAPPINESS. -- And when he had wrote what he designed at that time
on that subject, he would turn to an alphabetical table which he kept, and
under the letter A, he would write, Angels, their happiness, if this was not
already in his alphabet; and then set down the Number, 149, close at the right
hand of it. And if he had occasion to write any new thoughts on this same
subject; if the Number of his miscellanies was increased, so that his last
Number was 261, he would set down the Number 262, and then the subject, as
before. And when he had done writing for that time, he turned to his table, to
the word Angels; and at the right hand of the Number 149, set down 162. By this
means he had no occasion to leave any chasms; but began his next subject where
he left off his last. The number of his miscellaneous writings ranged in this
manner, amounts to above 1400. And yet by a table contained on a sheet or two
of paper, any thing he wrote can be turned to, at pleasure.

SECT. II. His PUBLICATIONS.
MR. EDWARDS was greatly esteemed and famed as an AUTHOR, both in Europe and
America. His publications naturally raised in the reader of taste and judgment,
an opinion of his greatness and piety. His books met with a good reception in
Scotland especially, and procured him great esteem and applause there. A
gentleman of note there for his superior genius and talents, has the following
words concerning Mr. EDWARDS, in a letter to one of his correspondents in
America. I looked on him as incomparably the greatest divine and philosopher in
Britain or her Colonies; and rejoiced that one so eminently qualified for
teaching divinity was chosen President of New Jersey College. And in another
letter the same gentleman says, Ever since I was acquainted with Mr. EDWARDS's
writings, I have looked upon him as the greatest divine this age has produced.
And a rev. gentleman lately from Holland, says, That Mr. EDWARDS's writings,
especially on the Freedom of the Will, were had in great esteem there: that the
professors of the celebrated academy, presented their compliments to PRESIDENT
EDWARDS. Several members of the Classis of Amsterdam gave their thanks, by him,
to pious Mr. EDWARDS, for his just observations on Mr. Brainerd's life; which
book was translated in Holland, and was highly approved of by the University of
Utrect --.

A brief Account of what he published is therefore here subjoined.

A Sermon preached at Boston, on 1 Cor. i. 29, 30, 31. With a Preface by one of
the Ministers of Boston.

A Sermon preached at Northampton, in the year 1734, from Math. xvi. 17.
entitled, A divine and supernatural Light immediately imparted to the Soul by
the Spirit of GOD.

The Narrative which has been mentioned, wrote Nov. 6. 1736. which was first
printed in London, and recommended by Dr. WATTS, and Dr. GUYSE; and had two
Editions there. And then it had another Edition in Boston, in the year 1738.
recommended by four of the senior Ministers in Boston. To which were prefixed
five Discourses on the following Subjects.

I. Justification by Faith alone. II. Pressing into the Kingdom of GOD. III.
Ruth's Resolution. IV. The Justice of GOD in the Damnation of Sinners. V. The
Excellency of JESUS CHRIST.

Delivered at Northampton, chiefly at the time of the wonderful pouring out of
the Spirit of GOD there.

The Discourse on Justification by Faith alone, may be recommended as one of
the best things that has been wrote on that Subject; setting this truth in a
most plain, scriptural, and convincing light; and as well worthy the careful
perusal of all christians; especially candidates for the ministry. The other
Discourses are excellent, having much divinity in them, and tending above most
that are published, to awaken the conscience of the sinner, and instruct and
quicken the christian.

A Sermon preached at Enfield, July 8. 1741. entitled, Sinners in the Hands of
an angry GOD. Preached at a time of great awakenings there; and attended with
remarkable impressions on many of the hearers.

A Sermon on the distinguishing Marks of a work of the Spirit of GOD, preached
at New Haven, Sept. 10. 1741. from 1 Job. iv. 1. published with great
enlargements. This was reprinted in Scotland.

Some thoughts concerning the present revival of religion in New England, and
the way in which it ought to be acknowledged and promoted, humbly offered to
the public, in a treatise on that subject, in five parts. Published in the year
1742. This had a second edition in Scotland.

A Treatise concerning religious Affections. Published in the year 1746. These
three last have been mentioned before, with the particular occasion and design
of their publication. Page 46.


A treatise entitled, An humble attempt to promote explicit agreement, and
visible union of GOD's people in extraordinary prayer, for the revival of
religion etc. Recommended by five of the principal ministers in Boston.
Published in 1747. In which he shows his great acquaintance with scripture, and
his attention to, and good understanding of the prophetic part of it.

An account of the life of the rev. Mr. David Brainerd, minister of the gospel
and missionary to the Indians etc. with reflections and observations thereon.
Published in the year 1749.

An enquiry into the qualifications for full communion in the visible church.
Published in the year 1749. intended as an explanation and vindication of his
principles in the matter, which occasioned his dismission from Northampton.

A reply to the rev. Mr. William's answer to the forementioned inquiry.
Published in the year 1752.

A Sermon preached at Newark, before the Synod, Sept. 28. 1752. from Jam. ii.
19. entitled, True grace distinguished from the experience of Devils.

A careful and strict inquiry into the modern prevailing notion of that freedom
of will, which is supposed to be essential to moral agency etc. Published in
the year 1754.

This is justly thought by good judges to be one of the greatest efforts of the
human mind, that has appeared, at least, in this century. In which the author
shows that ^ice an strength of mind, that judgment, penetration and accuracy of
thought, that justly intitles him to the character of one of the greatest
genius's of this age. This treatise doubtless goes further toward settling the
main points in controversy between Calvinists and Arminians, than any thing
that has been wrote: he having herein abundantly demonstrated the chief
principles on which Arminians build their whole scheme, to be false and most
absurd. Whenever therefore this book comes to be generally attended to, it will
doubtless prove fatal to Arminian and Pelagian Principles. This was reprinted
in London Anno 1762: and has been introduced by the Rev. T. CLAP, PRESIDENT of
Yale College, to be recited there by the Students.

The great christian doctrine of Original Sin defended; evidences of its truth
produced, and arguments to the contrary answered. Containing, in particular, a
reply to the objections and arguings of Dr. JOHN TAILOR etc. Published in the
year 1758. This was in the press when he died.

Besides these, he published, several Ordination Sermons, and some others,
preached upon particular occasions.

APPENDIX, No. I. Containing a brief ACCOUNT of Mrs. ESTTER BURR, and some
Extracts of LETTERS wrote by her.
MRs. BURR and her children were inoculated at the same time her father was,
and were recovered when he died. But after she was perfectly recovered to all
appearance, she was suddenly seized with a violent disorder, which carried her
out of the world in a few days: and which the physician said he could call by
no name but that of A Messenger sent, suddenly to call her out of the world.
She died April 7. 1758. sixteen days after her father, in the 27th year of her
age. She was married to Mr. Burr, June 29. 1752. By him she had two children, a
son and a daughter.

Mrs. BURR exceeded most of her sex in the beauty of her person; and in a
decent and easy gesture, behavior and conversation: not stiff and starch on
the one hand, nor mean and indecent on the other, in her unaffected, natural
freedom with persons of all ranks, with whom she conversed. Her genius was much
more than common. She had a lively, sprightly imagination, a quick and
penetrating thought, and a good judgment. She had a peculiar smartness in her
make and temper, which yet was consistent with pleasantness and good nature:
and she knew how to be pleasant and fac^^ious without trespassing on the bounds
of gravity, or strict and serious religion. In short, she seemed to be formed
to please, and especially to please one of Mr. Burr's taste and talents, in
whom he was exceeding happy. But what crow^'d ^all her excellencies, and was
her chief glory, w^^ her RELIGION. She was hopefully converted when she was 7
or 8 years old; and she made a public profession of religion when she was
about 15 years of age; and her conversation and conduct to her death, was
exemplary and as becomes godliness. But as her religious sentiments and
exercises, will best be understood by those who were strangers to her, by her
own words; the following extracts are made from letters which she wrote not
long before her death.

THE following is an extract from a Letter she wrote to her Mother, not long
after Mr. Burr's death, dated at Prince-ton October 7. 1757. After giving some
account of Mr. Burr's death, and representing the sense she had of the
greatness of the loss she and her children had sustained, she writes in the
following words, NO doubt dear Madam, it will be some comfort to you, to hear
that GOD has not utterly forsaken, although he has cast down. I would speak it to
the glory of God's name, that I think he has in an uncommon degree discovered
himself to be an all-sufficient GOD, a full fountain of all good. Although all
streams were cut off, yet the fountain is left full.

I think I have been enabled to cast my care upon him, and have found great
peace and calm in my mind, such as this world cannot give, nor take.

I have had uncommon freedom, a nearness to the throne of grace. GOD has seemed
sen^^^y near in such a supporting and comforting manner, that I think I have
never experienced the like.

GOD has helped me to review my past and present mercies, with some
heart-affecting degree of thankfulness.

I think GOD has given me such a sense of the vanity of the world, and
uncertainty of all sublunary enjoyments, as I never had before. The world
vanishes out of my sight. Heavenly and eternal things appear m^^h more real and
important than ever before. I feel my self to be under much greater obligations
to be the Lord's, than before this sore affliction.

THE way of salvation by faith in Jesus Christ has appeared more clear and
excellent; and I have been constrained to venture my All upon Him; and have
found great peace of soul, in what I hope has been actings of faith. -- Some
parts of the Psalms have been very comforting and refreshing to my soul.

I hope GOD has helped me to eye his hand in this awful dispensation; and to
see the infinite right he has to his own, and to dispose of them as he pleases.

THUS, dear Madam, I have given you some broken hints of the exercises and
supports of my mind, since the DEATH of HIM, whose memory and example, will
ever be precious to me as my own life.

O dear Madam! I doubt not but I have your, and my honored father's prayers
daily for me; but give me leave to entreat you both to request earnestly of the
Lord, that I may never despise his chastenings, nor faint under this his severe
stroke; which I am sensible there is great danger of, if GOD should only deny
me the supports, that he has hitherto graciously granted.

O, I am afraid I shall conduct so as to bring dishonor on my GOD, and the
religion which I profess! -- No, rather let me die this moment, than be left to
bring dishonor on GOD's holy name. -- I am overcome -- I must conclude with
once more begging, that as my dear parents remember themselves, they would not
forget their greatly afflicted daughter, (now a lonely widow) nor her
fatherless children.

MY duty to my ever dear and honored parents, love to my brothers and sisters.
From, dear Madam,

your dutiful and affectionate daughter, ESTHER BURR.


To my ever honored Father.
Prince-ton, Nov. 2. 1757. Honored Sir,
YOUR most affectionate, comforting letter by my brother, -- was exceedingly
refreshing to me, although I was something damped by hearing that I should not
see you until spring. When Mr. Edwards wrote the Letter she refers to, he did
not think of going to Prince-ton till spring; but he afterward determined
otherwise, and went in January, as is before lated.
But it is my comfort in this disappointment, as well as under all my
afflictions, that GOD knows what is best for me, and for his own glory. Perhaps
I lotted too much on the company and conversation of such a nea^ and dear and
affectionate father and guide. I cannot doubt but all is for the best, and I am
satisfied that GOD should order the affair of your removal as shall be for his
glory, whatever comes of me.

SINCE I wrote my mother's letter, GOD has carried me through new trials, and
given me new supports. My little son has been sick with the slow fever, ever
since my brother left us, and has been brought to the brink of the grave. But I
hope in mercy God is bringing him up again. I was enabled to resign the child
(after a severe struggle with nature) with the greatest freedom. GOD showed me
that the child was not my own, but his; and that he had a right to recall what
he had lent, whenever he thought fit; and I had no reason to complain, or say
GOD was hard with me. This silenced me.

BUT O, how good is GOD! He not only kept me from complaining, but comforted me
by enabling me to offer up the child by faith, I think, if ever I acted faith.
I saw the fullness there was in Christ for little Infants, and his willnigness
to accept of such as were offered to Him. "Suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not;" were comforting words.

GOD also showed me in such a lively manner, the fullness there was in himself
of all spiritual blessings, that I said, Although all streams were cut off, yet
so long as my GOD lives, I have enough. He enabled me to say, "Although thou slay
me, yet will I trust in thee.

IN this time of trial, I was led to enter into a renewed and explicit covenant
with GOD, in a more solemn manner than ever before; and with the greatest
freedom and delight. After much self-examination and prayer, I did give up my
self and children to GOD, with my whole heart. Never until now, had I a sense
of the privilege we are allowed in covenanting with God! This act of soul left
my mind in a quiet and steady trust in GOD.

A few days after this, one evening, in talking of the glorious state my dear
departed husband must be in, my soul was carried out in such longing desires
after this glorious state, that I was forced to retire from the family to
conceal my joy. When alone, I was so transported, and my soul carried out in
such eager desires after perfection, and the full enjoyment of GOD, and to
serve him uninterruptedly, that I think my Nature would not have born much
more. I think, dear sir, I had that night, a foretaste of heaven. This frame
continued in some good degree the whole night. I slept but little, and when I
did, my dreams were all of heavenly and divine things. Frequently since, I have
felt the same in kind, though not in degree. Thus a kind and gracious GOD has
been with me in six troubles, and in seven.

BUT O Sir, what cause of deep humiliation and abasement of soul have I, on
account of remaining corruption; which I see working continually, especially
pride! O, how many shapes does pride cloak it self in!

SATAN is also busy shooting his darts; but, blessed be GOD, those temptations
of his, that used to overthrow me, as yet, have not touched me. O, to be
delivered from the power of satan, as well as sin! I cannot help hoping the time
is near. GOD is certainly fitting me for himself; and when I think it will be
soon that I shall be called hence, the thought is transporting.




APPENDIX, No. II. Containing a short Sketch of Mrs. EDWARDS's LIFE and
CHARACTER.
MRs. SARAH EDWARDS, the amiable consort of president EDWARDS, did not long
survive him. In September she set out in good health on a journey to
Philadelphia, to take care of her two orphan grandchildren, which were now in
that city; and had been, since the death of Mrs. Burr. As they had no relations
in those parts, Mrs. EDWARDS proposed to take them into her own family. She
arived there by the way of Princeton Sept. 21. in good health, having had a
comfortable journey. But in a few days she was suddenly seized with a violent
dysentery, which put an end to her life on the fifth day, October 2. 1758, in
the 49th Year of her age. She said not much in her sickness; being exercised
most of the time with violent pain. On the morning of the day she died, she
apprehended her death was near: when she expressed her entire resignation to
GOD, and desire that GOD might be glorified in all things; and that she might
be enabled to glorify him to the last: and continued in such a temper, calm and
resigned till she died.

HER remains were carried to Princeton, which is about 40 miles from
Philadelphia, and deposited with Mr. EDWARDS's. Thus they who were in their
lives remarkably lovely and pleasant, in their death were not much divided.
Here lie the Father and Mother, the Son and Daughter* who are laid together in
the grave, within the space of a little more than a year, though a few months
before their dwelling was more than 150 miles apart. Two presidents of the same
College, and their consorts, than whom it will doubtless be hard to find four
persons more valuable and useful; in a few months are cut off from the earth
forever; and by a remarkable providence are put, as it were, into one grave!
And we the survivors are left under the gloomy apprehension that these
righteous are taken away from the evil to come!

SURELY America is greatly emptied by these deaths! How much knowledge, wisdom
and holiness is gone from the earth for ever! And where are they who shall make
good their ground!

Mrs. EDWARDS was born in New Haven, in Connecticut, Jan. 9. 1709, 10. Her
father was the rev. Mr. JAMES PIERPOINT, who was long an eminently godly and
useful minister of the gospel at New Haven. He was the eldest son of Mr. John
Pierpoint of Roxbury, who came out of England. Her mother was Mrs Mary
Pierpoint, eldest daughter of the rev. Mr. Samuel Hooker, minister of the
gospel at Farmington in Connecticut, and son of the rev. Mr. Thomas Hooker,
once minister of the gospel at Hartford, and famous as a divine, through all the
churches in New England.
She was married to Mr. EDWARDS, July 20. 1727. in the 18th year of her age.

THOUGH Mrs. EDWARDS's full character will not be attempted here, yet it is
thought proper to mention a few things, in which she excelled, and set an
example worthy the imitation of all.

SHE remembered her creator in the days of her youth, and became truly and
remarkably religious at about five years old. Was a more than ordinary
beautiful person; of a pleasant, agreeable countenance; of an amiable, courteous
conversation and behavior: the law of kindness was in her tongue.

She was eminent for her piety and experimental religion. Religious
conversation was much her delight; and this she promoted in all companies as
far as was proper and decent for her: and her discourse showed her
understanding in divine things, and the great impression they had on her mind.
The friends of true religion, and they who were ready to engage in religious
conversation, and delighted in that which was most essential and practical in
true religion; were her peculiar friends and intimates. To whom she would open
her mind freely, and tell them the exercises of her own heart; and what God had
done for her soul, for their encouragement, and excitement in the ways of God.
Her mind appeared, to them who were most conversant with her, constantly to
attend to divine things, even on all occasions, and in all business of life.

THE religious duties of the closet, she was a great friend to, and took much
delight in them. She highly prized social worship. Was wont to attend the
private meetings for religious worship, which were kept up at Northampton,
while Mr. EDWARDS lived there. And promoted and attended meetings of persons of
her own sects only, in order for prayer and religious conversation. She was a
constant attender on public worship; and behaved with great gravity and
seriousness in the house of GOD.

SHE paid proper deference to Mr. EDWARDS, and treated him with decency and
respect at all times. As he was of a weakly, infirm constitution, and was
peculiar and exact in his diet, she was a tender nurse to him; cheerfully
attending upon him at all times, and ministering to his comfort: and spared no
pains to conform to his inclinations, and make things agreeable and comfortable
to him.

SHE accounted it her greatest glory, and that wherein she could best serve God
and her generation, in being a means of promoting Mr. EDWARDS's comfort and
usefulness in this way. And no person of discerning could be conversant in the
family without observing and admiring the great harmony and mutual love and
esteem that subsisted between them.

WHEN she her self labored under bodily disorders and pains, which was often
the case, she was not wont to be full of her complaints, and put on a dejected
or sour countenance, being out of humor with every body and every thing, as if
she was disregarged and neglected: but she would bare up under them with
patience, and a kind of cheerfulness and good humor.

SHE was a good oeconomist, managing her household affairs with discretion; in
which she was laborious and diligent. She was very careful that nothing should
be wasted and lost. And often, when she did any thing to save a small matter,
or directed her children to do it in any instance, or saw them waste any thing;
she would mention the words of our Savior; which, she said, she often though it
of, as containing a maxim worth remembering; when, as the reason why his
disciples should gather up the fragments, he says, THAT NOTHING BE LOST. She
took almost the whole care of the temporal affairs of the family, without doors
and within: and in this she was peculiarly suited to Mr. EDWARDS's disposition,
who chose to have no care of any worldly business.

SHE had an excellent way of governing her children: she knew how to make them
regard and obey her cheerfully without loud, angry words, or heavy blows. She
seldom struck her children a blow; and in speaking to them used mild, gentle
and pleasant words. If any correction was needful, it was not her manner to
give it in a passion. And when she had occasion to reprove and rebuke, she
would do it in few words, without heat and noise, with all calmness and
gentleness of mind. And in her directions or reproofs, in any matters of
importance, she would address herself to the reason of her children, that they
might not only know her inclination and will, but at the same time, be
convinced of the reasonableness of it. She need speak but once; she was
cheerfully obeyed; murmuring and answering again was not known among them. And
the kind and gentle treatment they had from their mother, while she strictly
and punctualy maintained her parental authority, seemed naturally to beget and
promote a filial regard and respect; and lead them to a mild, tender treatment
of each other; for quareling and contention, as it frequently takes place among
children, was not known among them. She carefully observed the first
appearances of resentment and ill will toward any, in her young children; and
did not connive at it and promote it, as many who have the care of children do,
but was careful to show her displeasure at it, and suppress it to her utmost:
not by angry, wrathful words and blows, which often provoke children to wrath,
and stir up and confirm their irascible passions, rather than abate and
suppress them.

AS she was sensible that in many respects, the chief care of forming children
by government and instruction, naturally lies on mothers; as they are most with
their children in their most pliable age, when they commonly receive
impressions by which they are very much formed for life: so she was very
careful to do her part in this important business. And when she met with any
special difficulty in this matter, or foresaw any, she was wont to apply to Mr.
Edwards for advice and assistance: and on such occasions they would both attend
to it, as a matter of great importance.

BUT this was not all, in which she expressed her care for her children. She
thought that parents had great and important duty to do toward their children
before they were capable of government and instruction. For them she constantly
and earnestly prayed, and bore them on her heart before God, in all her secret
and most solemn addresses to him; and that even before they were born. The
evidence of her pregnancy, and consideration that it was with a rational,
immortal creature, which came into existence in an undone, and infinitely
dreadful state, was sufficient to lead her to bow before God daily for his
blessing on it; even redemption, and eternal life by Jesus Christ. So that
through all the pain, labor and sorrow, which attended her being the mother of
children, she was in travail for them, that they might be born of GOD by having
Christ formed in them.

AS the law of kindness was in her tongue, so her hands were not withheld from
beneficence and charity. She was always a friend and patroness of the poor and
helpless; and much in acts of charity, as well as recommending it to others on
all proper occasions.

SHE was remarkable for her kindness to her friends and visitants, who resorted
to Mr. EDWARDS's. She would spare no pains to make them welcome, and provide
for their convenience and comfort. And she was peculiarly kind to strangers,
who came to her house. She would take such kind and special notice of such, and
so soon get acquainted with them, as it were, and show such regard and concern
for their comfort, and so kindly offer what she thought they needed, as to
discover she knew the heart of a stranger, and well understood how to do it
good; and so as to oblige them to feel in some measure as if they were at home.

SHE made it her rule to speak well of all, so far as she could with truth, and
justice to herself and others. She was not wont to dwell with delight on the
imperfections and failings of any; and when she heard persons speaking ill of
others, she would say what she thought she could with truth and justice in
their excuse; or divert the obloquy by mentioning those things that were
commendable in them. Thus she was tender of every one's character, even of
theirs who injured and spoke evil of her; and carefully guarded against the too
common vice of evil speaking and backbiting. She could bear injuries and
reproach with great calmness and patience, without any disposition to render
evil for evil; but on the contrary, was ready to pity and forgive those who
appeared to be her enemies.

SHE had long told her intimate friends that she had, after long struggles and
exercises, obtained, by God's grace, an habitual willingness to die her self,
or part with any of her most near relatives. That she was willing to bring
forth children for death; and resign up him whom she esteemed so great a
blessing to her and her family, her nearest partner, to the stroke of death,
whenever GOD should see fit to take him. And when she had the greatest trial in
the death of Mr. EDWARDS, she found the help and comfort of such a disposition.
Her conversation and conduct on this occasion was even to the admiration of her
friends. It was such as discovered that she was sensible of the great loss, she
and her children had sustained in his death; and at the same time showed, that
she was quiet and resigned, and had those invisible supports and comforts by
which she could trust in GOD with quietness, hope and humble joy.

THEY lived together in the married state above thirty years. In which time
they had eleven children* all which are now living, except the second daughter,
who died Febr. 14. 1748. (of whom the public have some account in the life of
Mr. Brainerd, p. 251.) and their third daughter, Mrs. Burr, before mentioned;
and their youngest daughter, named Elizabeth, who died since her parents. The
surviving children are three sons, and five daughters.

THE END.
SERMONS ON Various important SUBJECTS. Being some of the Remains of the late
Reverend and Learned Mr. JONATHAN EDWARDS, PRESIDENT of the COLLEGE at
NEW JERSEY.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. M,DCC,LXV.

The PREFACE
SUCH was the true character of the pious and learned author of the ensuing
Sermons, as that the lovers of pure religion, and unaffected learning, who were
intimately acquainted with him, and free from prejudice, need nothing further
to invite their attentive perusal of the following sheets, than only to be
informed that they were written by the late PRESIDENT EDWARDS.

These Sermons indeed appear under considerable disadvantages: The author
composed them only to be preached to a congregation in a country-town, where he
statedly labored in the work of the gospel ministry, for a course of years,
probably without the least design, or so much as even any distant view of their
ever making an appearance, by way of the press, before the world. For this, the
candid will make a generous allowance.

IF the author had published them himself, or had revised them near the close
of his life, with a view to their public appearance, it is not at all likely
they would have appeared as they do at present; but the difference in some
respects at least, must have been considerable. In several places, inlargements
would have been made; various parts would have been brightned with new
illustrations; the style in a number of instances would have been altered, and
the dress made more agreeable. And, in a word, the whole, taken together, would
have appeared in a much more advantageous light, more instructive, and
entertaining.

This might have been reasonably expected, from the author's masterly and
distinguished genius, which prompted him eagerly to pursue truth, even in her
most secret recesses. Especially, if it be considered, that the greater part of
these Sermons were penned more than twenty years before his death, in which
space of time, he made swift and amazing advances in divine knowledge, in
branches almost numberless. The same thing may be inferred from the author's
manner: Some Sermons, that he formerly published, received great enlargements
under his last and finishing hand; and howev'r engaging and entertaining they
were in the delivery, they appeared much ampler from the press, than the pulpit.

Besides, it is some unhappiness, through a mistake, the subjects are not placed
in that natural and advantageous order, which was designed.

Nevertheless, under all their disadvantages, the Sermons, it is apprehended,
will be well received by the candid, intelligent christian reader: And that
every person that is possessed of a happy degree of sound judgment, and good
taste, who shall seriously peruse them, will find that justness and clearness
of thought; that natural and lively representation of divine things; that vein
of piety and solid religion running through the whole; that extensive
knowledge, that commanding pungency, and spiritual savor, which may serve in a
measure to point out the author, and at the same time, to instruct, entertain
and quicken the reader.

The public may be assured that the Sermons are faithfully copied from the
original manuscripts. And where sentences, or paragraphs were found unfinished,
as there were various such instances, in most of the Sermons, marked with a
stroke of the pen, thus -- which the author used to supply in the delivery, --
the editor has not taken the liberty to complete them, except an instance or
two, in the Sermons upon the wisdom of God -- where the words added, are
carefully included in crotchets. Wherever therefore, the reader finds such a
stroke -- he is hereby notified, that something is left unexpress'd, which his
own mind is to supply.

The date, at the beginning of the Sermons, marks the time when they were
composed and preached.

These Sermons being some of the remains of an eminent man of God, and, friend
to men, are heartily recommended to the candid acceptance, and faithful
improvement of all into whose hands they may fall; and to the blessing of him
who is ALL and IN ALL, the great disposer of all events, who was pleased
signally to distinguish his servant, when living, with gifts and graces, and to
crown his labors with unusual success.

April 25. 1765. The Editor.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Jesus Christ gloriously exalted above all Evil in the Work of
Redemption. 1 Cor. xv. 25, 26. For he must reign, till he has put all Enemies
under his Feet. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. Page 1. SERMON
II, III. Joseph's great Temptation, and gracious Deliverance. Genesis xxxix. 12 --
And he left his Garment in her hand, and fled and got him out. P. 24. SERMON,
IV, V, VI. Man's natural Blindness. Psalm xciv. 8, 9, 10, 11. Understand ye
Brutish among the People, and ye Fools, when will ye be wise, etc. -- P. 59.
SERMON, VII, VIII, IX, X. Men naturally God's Enemies. Romans v. 10. For if when
we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. P. 104.
SERMON XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI. The wisdom of God as displayed in the Way
of Salvation by Jesus Christ, far superior to the Wisdom of the Angels. Ephesians.
iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers, in heavenly
Places might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. p. 165. SERMON
XVII, XVIII. The true Christian's Life, a Journey toward Heaven. Heb. ix. 13,
14. And confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth. For they
that say such Things, declare plainly that they seek a Country. P. 253.
By reason of the editor's distance from the press, the errors of it are
various: Some of which are pointed out in the following ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 6 from the bottom, for and read as. p. 24. l 8. fr. bot. f. an
r. an. p. 32 l. 6 del. not. p. 37. l. 7. f. notion. r. inclination p. 40. l.
11. dele first. p. 41. l. 13. fr bot. f. one r. he p. 42. l. 13. f. hurtful r.
hateful. l. 15. r. conceived. p. 44. l. 10. fr. bot. r. these. p. 47^ l. 8. f.
eating r. acting. l. 12. r. degrees, after and r acting. p. 48. r. led. p. 51.
l. 1. f. hitherto r. formerly. l. 12 fr. bot. f. a most r. the most p. 52. l.
5. f. is r. are. p. 54 l. 11. fr. bot f. that r. it. p. 76. l. 8 f. furies r.
fever. p. 79. l. 14 r. effect p^ 92. l. 5 d^le bron. p. 105. l. 21. f. fouls r
souls. p. 113 l. 3 fr. bot. r insuperable p. 119. l. 2. fr. bot. f. to r. for.
p. 138. l. 2. r. all. p. 166. l. 12 fr. bot. f. manifest r. manifold p. 196 fr.
bot. r. doubly. p 198 l. 19. f. or r. though. p. 203. l. 16 after so add by. p.
216. l. 10. f. Christ r. Christ's favor. l. 16. r. ours.

* Other mistakes which may have been overlooked, are submitted to the reader's
candor.

JESUS CHRIST gloriously exalted above all Evil, in the Work of Redemption.
[LECTURE August 1738.]
SERMON I.
1 CORINTHIANS xv. 25, 26. For he must reign, till he has put all Enemies
under his Feet. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death.


THE Apostle in this Chapter does particularly oppose some among the christian
Corinthians, who denied the Resurrection of the Dead, and much molested and
infected the Church of Corinth with their Doctrine. There were two sorts of
Persons in that Age, who were especially great Opposers of the Doctrine of the
Resurrection: one among the Jews, and the other among the Heathen Those among
the Jews were the Sadducees; of whom we read, Acts xxiii. 8 For the Sadducees
say, that there is no Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit. And we have the
same Account in other Places. Those among the Heathen that were the chief
Opposers of this Doctrine, were their Philosophers. The Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Dead, was not consistent with their Philosophy, by the
Principles of which, it was impossible that one who was deprived of the Habit
of Life, should ever receive it again. And therefore they ridiculed the
Doctrine when the Apostle preached it among them at Athens. Acts xvii.
It probably was chiefly from these latter that the Church at Corinth received
this Corruption, the Philosophers, and not the Sadducees. For Corinth was near
to Athens, which was the Place of the chief Resort of the Philophers of all the
Cities of that learned Country of Greece.

THE Apostle in opposing this Error, first insists on Christ's Resurrection
from the Dead; and next on the Resurrection of all the Saints at the end of the
World. And in the Verses next before the Text, shows how both are connected, or
that one arises or follows from the other. And then adds, Then comes the End,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he
shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power. For he must reign
till he has put all Enemies under his Feet. The last Enemy that shall be
destroyed is Death.

IT IS to my present Purpose to observe these two Things in the Words of the
Text.

1. HERE is something mentioned, as one Thing wherein appears the Glory of that
Exaltation and Dominion, that Christ has as our Redeemer, viz. that it issues
in the Subjection of all Enemies under his Feet. It is not said all his
Enemies, possibly because those that shall be put under his Feet, are not only
his Enemies; but also the Enemies of his Father, and of his People. Their being
under his Feet denotes their being perfectly vanquished and subdued, and
brought exceeding low under him, and his being gloriously exalted over them. It
shall be thus with respect to God's, and his, and his People's Enemies
universally, not one excepted: Which Universallity is signified here two Ways.
(1.) In the universal Terms that are used All Enemies. (2.) In that here is an
Account of the subjecting of the very last Enemy: When there shall be but one
Enemy left, that shall also be put under his Feet.

2. WE may learn what is here meant by Enemies, by the particular Instance here
given by the last that shall be destroyed, viz. Death. Which sh^ws that by
Enemies, is not only meant Persons that set themselves in Opposition to God and
his People; but Evils; whatever is any Way against God and his People, and does
oppose or molest Christ or his ^aints, are here called Enemies, whether they be
Persons or Things.

Hence the

DOCTRINE. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST, in the Work of Redemption, gloriously appears
above all Evil.
IN handling this Doctrine, I propose to show,

I. How Evil of all Kinds has prevailed, and highly exalted itself in the World.

II. THAT though Evil has so greatly prevailed, and how high soever it has
exalted itself, Christ appears gloriously above it, in the Work of Redemption.

I. EVIL of all Kinds has risen to an exceeding height in the World, and highly
exalted itself against God and Christ, and the Church.

This will appear by the following Particulars.

1. SATAN has highly exalted himself, and greatly prevailed. Satan is one who
is vastly superior, in his n^tural Capacity and Abilities, to Mankind. He was
originally one of the highest Rank of Creatures, b^ing a mighty Angel. He
proudly exalted himself in Rebellion against God in Heaven. For we are told
that Pride was the Condemnation of the Devil. 1 Timothy iii. 6.
He became proud of his own superior Dignity and mighty Abilities, and the
Glory which his Creator had put upon him; and probably thought it too much to
submit to the Son of God, and attempted to exalt his Throne above the Throne of
Christ. And he prevailed to draw away vast Multitudes, many Thousands and
Millions of the heavenly Hosts, into an open Rebellion against God.

AND after he was cast down from Heaven, he proudly exalted himself in this
World, and prevailed to do great Things here. By his subtle Temptations he
p^ocur'd the fall of our first Parents, and so brought about the Ruin of the
wh^le Race of Mankind. He procured their Ruin in Body and Soul, and the Death
of both; and that they should be exposed to all Manner of Calamity in this
World, and to eternal Ruin hereafter. He so far prevailed, that he drew Men off
from the Service of their Maker, and set up himself to be the God of this
World; and in a little Time drew the World into that almost universal
Corruption, which brought on the Flood of Waters, by which it was destroyed.
And after that, he again in a little Time drew all Nations, except the
Posterity of Jacob, off from the Worship of the true God, and darkened all the
World with the darkness of Heathenism; and held them under this Darkness for a
great many Ages: he himself being worshipped as God almost all over the World:
the Nations of the Earth offered Sacrifices to him; and Multitudes offered up
their Children in Sacrifice to him. And during that Time, he often so far
prevailed against the People of God, that he had almost swallowed them up The
Church was often brought to the very Brink of Ruin.

AND when Christ himself appeared in the World, how did he exalt himself
against him! and prevailed so far, as to influence Men to hate and despise him
all the Days of his Life. And at last persuaded one of his own Disciples to
betray him; and brought it to pass, that he was delivere^ into the Hands of
Men, to be mocked, buffeted and spit upon, and treated with the greatest
ignominy that unrestrained Malice could devise: and at last procured that he
should be put to the most cruel, ignominious kind of Death that was in use in
the World. And since that, he has greatly exalted himself against the Gospel
and Kingdom of Christ: has procured that the Church, for the most Part, has
been the Subject of great Persecution; has often bro^t it to the brink of utter
Destruction: Has accomplished great Works in setting up those great Kingdoms of
Antichrist and Mahomet; and darkened great Part of the World, that was once
enlightened with the Gospel of Christ with worse than heathen Darkness. And has
infected the christian World with Multitudes of Heresies and false Ways of
Worship, and greatly promoted Atheism and Infidelity. Thus highly has the Devil
exalted himself against God and Christ, and the Elect; and so far has he
prevailed.

2. GUILT is another Evil which has come to a great height in the World. All
Guilt is an Evil of a dreadful Nature: the least Degree of it is enough utterly
to undo any Creature. It is a Thing that reaches unto Heaven, and cries to God,
and brings down his Wrath. The guilt of any one Sin is so terrible an Evil,
that it prevails to bind over the guilty Person to suffer everlasting Burnings:
and so is an Evil that is in some Respect infinite, in that it obliges to that
Punishment which has no end; and so is infinitely terrible. But this kind of
Evil has risen to a most amazing height in this World; where not only some
Persons are guilty, but all in all Nations and Ages are naturally guilty
Wretches. And they who live to act any time in the World, are not only guilty
of one Sin, but of Thousands, and thousands of Thousands. What multiplied, and
what aggravated Sins are some Men guilty of! What Guilt lies on some particular
Persons! how much more on some particular populous Cities! How much more still
on this wicked World! How much does the Guilt of the World transcend all
Account; all Expression; all Powers of Numbers or Measures! And above all* how
vast is the Guilt of the World, in all Ages of it, from the beginning of the
World to the end of it! To what a Pitch has Guilt risen in the World; The World
being, as it were, on every Side, loaded with it, as with Mountains heaped on
Mountains above the Clouds and Stars of Heaven.

AND Guilt, when it was imputed to Christ, greatly prevailed against him; though
in himself innocent, and the eternal Son of God; even so as to hold him
Prisoner of Justice for a while; and to open the Floodgates of God's Wrath upon
him, and bring all his Waves and Billows over him.

3. CORRUPTION and Wickedness of Heart, is another Thing that has risen to an
exceeding height in the World. Sin has so far prevailed in the World, that it
has become universal: All Mankind that are mere Men, are become sinful and
corrupt Creatures. Let us attend to St. Paul's Description of the World. Rom
iii. 9 -- 18.
Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin. As it is written. There is none
Righteous, no not one: there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God. They are all gone out of the Way, they are together become
unprofitable, there is none that does Good, no not one. And not only is every
one corrupt; but they are all over corrupt, in every Power, Faculty and
Principle; every Part is depraved. Which is here represented by the several
Parts of the Body being corrupt, as the Throat, the Tongue, the Lips, the
Mouth, the Feet. "Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues they
have used Deceit, the Poison of Asps is under their Lips: whose Mouth is full
of cursing and bitterness: their Feet are swift to shed Blood." And not only is
every Part corrupt but exceeding corrupt; being possessed with dreadful
Principles of Corruption, horribly evil Dispositions and Principles of Sin,
that may be represented by the Poison of Asps; which makes Men like filthy
Beasts, like Vipers and Devils: Principles of all Uncleanness, Pride, Deceit,
Injustice, Enmity, Malice, Blasphemy, Murder, Here their Throats are compared
to an open Sepulcher, and their Mouth said to be "full of cursing and
bitterness*" and Destruction and Misery are said to be in their Ways.

AND there are not only those Principles of Sin that are very bad, but every
Kind; there is no Sort of Wickedness, but there is a Seed of it in Men. -- And
these Seeds and Principles have not only a Being in Men's Hearts, but are there
in great Strength: they have the absolute Possession and Dominion over Men, so
that they are sold under Sin. Yea, wicked Principles, and those only, are in
the Heart. The Imagination of the Thoughts of their Heart is evil and only
evil. There are bad Principles only, and no good ones. "There is no fear of God
before their Eyes." Thus the Hearts of all Men are "deceitful and desperately
wicked." Jer. xvii. 9.


AND if we look not only at the natural Corruption of the Heart, but the
contracted Habits of Sin, that Men are commonly under the Power of, by wicked
Education and Customs, how full shall we find the World of Wickedness, in this
Respect! How have Men by bad Customs in Sinning, broken down all Restraints
upon natural Corruption, and as it were abandoned themselves to Wickedness! So
far has Corruption and Wickedness prevailed in the World, and so high has it
risen, that it is become a great and universal Deluge, that overtops all
Things, and prevails with that Strength, that it is like the raging Waves of
the tempestuous Ocean; which are ready to bear down all before them.

4 MANY of the Devil's Instruments have greatly prevailed, and have been
exalted to an exceeding height in the World. It has been so in almost all Ages
of the World. Many of the Devil's Instruments have prosper'd and prevailed
'till they have got to the Head of great Kingdoms and Empires, with vast Riches
and mighty Power.

THOSE four great heathen Monarchies that rose in the World before Christ, the
Babilonian, Persian, Grecian and Roman Monarchies.
are spoken of in Scripture as Kingdoms set up in opposition to the Kingdom of
Christ. So they are represented in the Interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's
Dream, wherein he saw a great Image; the Head of Gold, his Breast and his Arms
of Silver, his Belly and his Thighs of Brass, his Legs of Iron, etc. Dan. ii,
36, 35
These Monarchies were exceeding powerful. The two last ruled over the bigger
Part of the then known World. And the last especially, viz. the Roman Empire,
was exceeding mighty: so that it is said to be diverse from all Kingdoms; and
that it should devour the whole Earth, and tread it down, and break it in
Pieces. Dan. vii. 23.
And is represented by the fourth Beast, which was dreadful and terrible; and
strong exceedingly; and had great iron Teeth, that devoured and break in
Pieces, and stamped the residue with his Feet. These four Kingdoms all
persecuted the Church of God in their Turns* and especially the last, viz. the
Roman One of the Governors of this Monarchy put Christ to Death And afterward
one Emperor after another, made dreadful Havoc of the Church; destroying
Thousands and Millions; making a Business Dan. vii. 7.
of it with the Force of all the Empire, to torment and destroy the Christians;
endeavoring if possible, to root out the Christian Name from under Heaven.

AND in these latter Ages, how have those two great Instruments of the Devil,
viz Antichrist and Mahomet, prevail^d, and to what a Pitch of Advancement have
they ar^ived; ruling over vast Empires, with mighty Wealth, Pride and Power: so
that the Earth has been, as it were, subdued by them. Antichrist has set up
himself as the Vicar of Christ; and has for many Ages usurped the Power of God.
"sitting in the Temple of God, and showing himself that he is God; and exalting
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped." And how
dreadfully has he ravaged the Church of God, being drunk with the Blood of the
Saints, and the Martyrs of Jesus! And has often, as it were deluged the World
in Christian Blood shed with the utmost cruelty that human Wit and Malice could
invent.

AND at this Day, many other Instruments of the Devil, many Heretics, Atheists
and other Infidels, are exerting themselves against Christ and his Church, with
great Pride and Contempt.

5. AFFLICTION and Misery have also prevailed and risen to an unspeakable
Height in the World. The spiritual Misery which the Elect are naturally in is
great. They are miserable Captives of Sin and Satan, and under Obligations to
suffer eternal Burnings. This Misery all Mankind are naturally in. And
spiritual Troubles and Sorrows have often risen to a great Height in the Elect.
The Troubles of a wounded Spirit and guilty Conscience, have been felt with
int^lerable and insupportable Weight. "A wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove
xviii. 14
And the Darkness that has risen to God's People after Conversion, through the
Temptations and Buffetings of the Devil, and the Hidings of God's Face, and
Manifestations of his Anger, have been very terrible. And temporal Afflictions
have often risen exceeding high. The Church of God has, for the most Part all
along, been a Seat of great Affliction and Tribulation. The Trouble and
Distress the Church has undergone, under those cruel Persecutions that have
often been and have been long continued, are such as we cannot have a full
Conception of, who have always enjoyed such Liberty and Peace.

BUT the height to which the Evil of Affliction has risen, no where appears so
much, as in the Afflictions that Christ suffered. The evil of Affliction and
Sorrow exalted itself so high, as to seize the Son of God himself, and to
handle him after such a Manner, as to cause him to be all in a bloody Sweat,
and made his Soul exceeding sorrowful even unto Death; and caused him to cry
out, "My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?" Affliction never prevailed to
such a Degree in this World, as in Christ, whose Soul was* as it were,
overwhelmed in an Ocean, and consumed as in a Furnace of it.

6. DEATH is an Evil which has greatly prevailed, and made dreadful Havoc in
this World. How does it waste and devour Mankind one Age after another; sparing
none, high or low, rich or poor, good or bad! Wild Beasts have destroyed many;
many cruel Princes have taken away the Lives of Thousands, and laid waste whole
Countries: but Death devours all; none are suffered to escape. And the Bodies
of the Saints as well as others, fall a Prey to this great Devourer. Yea so
high did this Enemy rise, that he took hold on Christ himself, and swallowed
him among the rest. He became the Prey of this great, insatiable Monster. By
his Means, was his bodily Frame destroyed, and laid dead in the dark and silent
Grave. And Death still goes on destroying Thousands every Day. And therefore
the Grave is one of those Things which, Agur says, never has enough Prove. xxx.
16.


SO have Evils of every Kind prevailed; and to such a Degree have they exalted
themselves in the World.

I come now,

II. To show, how our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Work of Redemption, gloriously
appears above all these Evils.

IT was not the Will of the infinitely wise and holy Governor of the World, that
Things should remain in this Confusion; thus under the Reign of Evil, which had
prevailed and exalted it self to such an Height. But he had a Design of
subduing it; and delivering an elect Part of the World from it, and exalting
them to the Possession of the greatest Good, and to reign in the highest Glory,
out of a State of Subjection to all these Evils. And he pitched upon his Son as
the Person most fit for this great Undertaking, that was infinitely too great
for any mere Creature: and he has undertaken it in the Work of o^r Redemption.
And though these Evils are so many and so great, and have prevailed to such a
Degree, and have risen to such an exceeding height, and have been, as it were,
all combined together; yet wherein they have exalted themselves, Christ in the
Work of Redemption, appears above them. He has gloriously prevailed against
them all, and brings them under his Feet; and rides forth, in the Chariots of
Salvation, over their Heads; or leading them in triumph at his chariot Wheels.
He appears in this Work infinitely higher and mightier than they, and
sufficient to carry his People above them, and utterly to destroy them all.

CHRIST gloriously appears above all these Evils -- In his procuring
Redemption, by what he did and suffered, when he was in his State of
Humiliation -- In his rising from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven -- In the
work of his Spirit in the Souls of the Elect in this World -- In glorifying the
Souls of Saints in Heaven -- In his Providence that he exerci^es toward the
World, as Head of the Church In the Consummation of the Work of Redemption, at
the End of the World.

1. CHRIST appears gloriously above all Evil in what he did to procure
Redemption for us in his State of Humiliation, by the Righteousness he wrought
out, and the Atonement he made for Sin then; and especially in his Sufferings.
The Evils which have been spoken of, never seemed so to prevail against him as
in these Sufferings: But in them, the Foundation was laid for their overthrow.
In them he appeared above Satan. Though Satan never exalted himself so high, as
he did in procuring these Sufferings of Christ; yet then Christ laid the
Foundation for the utter overthrow of his Kingdom. He slew Satan, as it were,
with his own Weapon: The spiritual David cut off this Goliath's Head with his
own Sword; and he triumphed over him in his Cross. "Having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a Show of them openly triumphing over them
in it." Coloss. ii. 15.
i. e. in his Cross, mentioned ^n the preceding Words. Then the Wisdom of
Christ appear gloriously above the subtilty of Satan. Satan, that old Serpent,
used a great deal of Subtilty to procure Christ's Death; and doubtless, when he
had accomplished it, thought he had obtained a complete Victory; being then
ignorant of the Contrivance of our Redemption. But so did the Wisdom of Christ
order Things, that Satan's Subtilty and Malice, should be made the very Means
of undermining the Foundations of his Kingdom: and so he wisely led him into
the Pit that he had dug.

IN this also Christ appeared gloriously above the Guilt of Men. For he offered
that Sacrifice, that was sufficient to do away all the Guilt of the whole
World. Though the Guilt of Man was like the great Mountains, whose Heads are
lifted up to the Heavens; yet his dying Love, and his Merits in this, appeared
as a mighty Deluge that over-flowed the highest Mountains; or like a boundless
Ocean that swallows them up: or like an immense Fountain of Light, that with
the fullness and redundance of its Brightness, swallows up Men's greatest Sins,
as little Mo^es are swallowed up and hidden in the Disk of the Sun.

IN this Christ appeared above all the Corruption of Man, in that hereby he
purchased Holiness for the chief of Sinners.

AND Christ in undergoing such extreme Affliction, got the Victory over all
Misery; and laid a Foundation for its being utterly abolished, with Respect to
his Elect. In dying he became the Plagues and Destruction of Death. When Death
slew him, it, as it were, slew it self: For Christ through Death, destroyed him
that had the Power of Death, even the Devil. Heb. ii. 14.
By this he laid the Foundation of the glorious Resurrection of all his People
to an immortal Life.

2. CHRIST appears gloriously exalted above all Evil, in his Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven. When Christ arose from the Dead, then it appeared that
he was above Death, in that Death, though it had taken him Captive, could not
hold him.

THEN he appeared above the Devil. Then this Leviathan that had swallowed him,
was forced to vomit him up again; and the Philistines that had taken captive
the Ark, were forced to return it; Dagon being fallen before it, with his Head
and Hands broken off, and only the Stumps left.

THEN he appear^d above our Guilt: For he was justified in his Resurrection.
Romans iv. iv. 25. 1 Timothy iii. 16.


IN his Resurrection he appeared above all Affliction. For though he had been
subject to much Affliction, and overwhelmed in it; he then emerged out of it,
as having gotten the Victory over it, never to conflict with any more Sorrow.

WHEN he ascended up into Heaven, he rose far above the Reach of the Devil and
all his Instruments, who had before had him in their Hands. And now has he sat
down at the Right hand of God, as being made Head over all Things to the Church
in order to a complete and perfect Victory over Sin. Satan, Death and all his
Enemies. It was then said to him, "Sit thou on my Right hand, until I make
thine Enemies thy Footst^ol." Psalm. cv^ 1


HE entered into a State of Glory, wherein he is exalted far above all these
Evils, as the Fore runner of his People; and to make Intercession for them till
they also are brought to be with him, in like Manner exalted above all Evil.

3. CHRIST appears gloriously above all Evil, in his Work in the Hearts of the
Elect, in their Conversion and Sanctification. This is what the Application of
Redemption, so far as it is applied in this World, consists in; which is done
by the Holy Ghost as the Spirit of Christ. In this Work of Christ in the Hearts
of his Elect, he appears glorious above Satan. For the strong Man armed is
overcome, and all his Armor wherein he trusted, is taken from him, and his
Spoil divided. In this Work, the Lamb is by the spiritual David, taken out of
the Mouth of the Lion and Bear: the poor Captive is delivered from his mighty
and cruel Enemies.

IN this Christ appears gloriously above the Corruption and Wickedness of the
Heart; above its natural Darkness in dispelling it, and letting in Light; and
above its Enmity and Opposition, by prevailing over it, drawing it powerfully
and irresistably to himself, and turning an Heart of Stone into an Heart of
Flesh: above the obstinacy and perverseness of the Will, by making them willing
in the Day of his Power. In this he appears above all their Lusts For all Sin
is mortifyed in this Work, and the Soul is delivered from the Power and
Dominion of it.

IN this Work the Grace of Christ does gloriously triumph over Men's Guilt. He
comes over the Mountains of their Sins and visits them with his Salvation.

A^^ God is wont often in this Work, either in the beginning of it in
Conversion, or progress of it, to give his People those spiritual Comforts, in
which he gloriously appears to be above all Affliction and Sorrow: and often
gives them to triumph over the Devil, and his powerful and cruel Instruments.
Many Saints, by Influences of Christ^s Spirit on their Hearts, have rejoiced
and triumphed, when suffering the greatest Torments and Cruelties of their
Persecutors And in this Work Christ sometimes gloriously appears above Death,
in carrying his People far above the fears of it, and making them to say to it,
"O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory?"

4. CHRIST gloriously appears above all these forementioned Evils, in his
glorifying the Souls of departed Saints in Heaven. In this he gives a glorious
Victory over Death. Death by it proves to be turned from an Enemy into a
Servant; and their Death, by the glorious Change that passes in the State of
their Souls, is become a Resurrection, rather than a Death. Now Christ exalts
the Soul to a State of Glory, wherein it is perfectly delivered from Satan, and
all his Temptations, and all his Instruments; and from all remains of Sin and
Corruption; and from all Affliction: "They shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any Heat -- and God shall
wipe away all Tears from their Eyes." Rev. vii. 16, 27.


5. CHRIST appears gloriously above these Evils, in what he does in his
Providence in the World, as Head and Redeemer of his Church. He appears
gloriously above Satan and all his Instruments in upholding his Church even
from it is first Establishment hitherto, through all the powerful Attempts that
have been made against it by Earth and Hell: hereby fulfilling his Promise,
that the Gates of Hell should never prevail against it. Matthew xvi. 18.


CHRIST gloriously triumphed over these hi^ Ene^^s, in that remarkable Success
that there was of his ^^spel, soon after his Ascension, when many Thousands in
Jerusalem, and all Parts of the World, were so soon turned from Darkness unto
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God: and in causing his Word to go on
and prosper, and his Church to increase and prevail against all the Opposition
of the heathen World, when they united all their Power to put a Stop to it, and
root it out. So that, in spite of all that the Philosophers and wise Men and
Emperors and Princes could do, the Gospel in a little Time, overthrew Satan's
old heathenish Kingdom in the whole Roman Empire, which was then the main Part
of the World. And so brought about the greatest and most glorious Revolution
that ever was in the World: when instead of one single Nation, that were God^s
People, as it formerly had been, now the greater Part of the Nations of the
known World were become God's People, instead of being the professed People of
the Devil, as they used to be.

AND Christ's exaltation above all Evil in his Government of the World in his
Providence, as the Redeemer of his People, has since gloriously appeared in
reviving his Church by the Reformation from Popery, after it had for many Ages
lain in a great Measure hid, and dwelt in a Wilderness, under antichristian
Persecution.

AND he will yet far more gloriously triumph over Satan and all his
Instruments, in all the mighty Kingdoms that have been set up in Opposition to
the Kingdom of Christ, at the Time of the fall of Antichrist, and the beginning
of those glorious Times so much spoken of in Scripture Prophecy. Then shall the
Stone that has been cut out without Hands, smite all these Kingdoms, and break
them to Pieces; and they shall become like the Chaff of the Summer threshing
Floors, and the Wind shall carry them away, that no Place shall be found for
them: and the Stone which smote them shall become a great Mountain, and fill
the whole Earth. Dan. ii, 34.35.
Then shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed;
and it shall break in Pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall
stand forever. ver. 44.
And then the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Rev* xi. ^15.
However great and mighty Empires have been set up, one after another in the
World, in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ, during the Succession of so many
Ages; yet then Christ's Kingdom shall be the last and the universal Kingdom,
which he shall have given him, as the Heir of the World. Whatever great Works
Satan has wrought; the final Issue and Event of all, in the winding up of
Things in the last Ages of the World, shall be the glorious Kingdom of Christ
through the World; a Kingdom of Righteousness and Holiness, of Love and Peace,
established every where. Agreeable to the ancient Prediction. I saw in the Night
Visions, and behold, one like the Son of Man, came with the Clouds of Heaven,
and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him. And
there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations
and Languages should serve him; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And the
Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven,
shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is
an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. Dan. vii.
13, 14, 27.


THEN shall Christ appear gloriously exalted indeed above all Evil: And then
shall all the Saints in Earth and Heaven gloriously triumph in him, and sing,
Hallelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God:
for true and righteous are his Judgments; for he has judged the great Whore,
which did corrupt the Earth with her Fornication, and has avenged the Blood of
his Servants at her Hand. Hallelujah: for the Lord God omnipotent reigns.
Rev. xix, 1, 2, 6.


6. CHRIST will appear gloriously above all Evil in the Consummation of the
Redemption of his elect Church at the End of the World. Then will be completed
the whole Work of Redemption with Respect to all that Christ died for, both in
it is Impetration and Application; and not till then. And then will Christ's
Exaltation above all Evil be most perfectly and fully manifest. Then shall the
Conquest and Triumph be completed with respect to all of them. Then shall all
the Devils, and all their Instruments be brought before Christ, to be judged
and condemned. And then shall be completed their Destruction in their
consummate and everlasting Misery; when they shall be all cast into the Lake of
Fire, no more to range and usurp Dominion in the World; or have liberty to make
Opposition against God and Christ: they shall for ever be shut up,
thenceforward only to suffer. Then shall Death be totally destroyed. All the
Saints shall be delivered everlastingly from i^. Even their Bodies shall be
taken from being any longer the Subjects of the Power of Death, by a glorious
Resurrection.

THEN shall all Guilt, and all Sin and Corruption, and all Affliction, all
Sighs and Tears, be utterly and eternally abolished, concerning every one of
the Elect; they being all brought to one complete Body, to the^r consummate and
immutable Glory. And all this as the Fruit of Christ's Blood, and as an
Accomplishment of his Redemption.

THEN all that Evil, which has so prevailed, and so exalted itself, and usurped
and raged, and reigned, shall be perfectly and for ever thrust down and
destroyed, with respect to all the Elect: and all will be exalted to a State
wherein they will be for ever immensely above all these things. And there shall
be no more Death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more
Pain: for the former Things are passed away. Rev. xxi. 4.


APPLICATION.
My Subject has led me to such a length in the doctrinal part, I have room left
but just, as it were, to hint at two or three, of the many Uses, that may be
copiously insisted on from it.

1. In this we may see how the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ appears in the
Work of Redemption. It was because the Father had from Eternity a Design of
exceedingly glorifying his Son, that he appointed him to be the Person, that
should thus triumph over the Evil in the World. The Work of Redemption is the
most glorious of all the Works of God that are made known to us. The Glory of
God does most remarkably shine forth in it. And this is one thing wherein the
Glory of it does eminently appear, that therein Christ appears so gloriously
exalted above Satan and all his Instruments; above all Guilt, all Corruption,
all Affliction, and above Death; above all Evil. And more especially, because
Evil has so exalted itself in the World, as we have heard; and exalted itself
against CHRIST in particular.

SATAN has ever had a peculiar Enmity against the Son of God. Probably his
first Rebellion, which was his Condemnation, was his proudly taking it in
Disdain, when God declared the Decree in Heaven, that his Son in Man's Naure,
should be the King of Heaven; and that all the Angels should worship him.
However that was, yet it is certain that his Strife has ever been especially
against the Son of God. The Enmity has always been between the Seed of the
Woman, and the Serpent. And therefore that War which the Devil maintains
against God, is represented by the Devil and his Angel^ fighting against
Michael and his Angels. Rev. xii. 7.
This Michael is Christ. Dan. x. 21. and xii. 1.


GOD had appointed his Son to be the Heir of the World; but the Devil has
contested this Matter with him, and has strove to set himself up as God of the
World, in opposition to Christ. And how exceedingly has the Devil exalted
himself against Christ! How did he oppose him as he dwelt among the Jews, in
his Tabernacle and Temple! And how did he oppose him when on Earth! And how has
he opposed him since his Ascension! What great and mighty Works has Satan
brought to pass in the World; how many Babels has he built up to Heaven, in his
opposition to the Son of God! How exceeding proud and haughty has he appeared
in his Opposition! How has he and his Instruments, and that Sin and Affliction
and Death that he is the Father of, raged against Christ! But yet Christ in the
Work of Redemption appears infinitely above them all. In this Work he triumphs
over them, however they have dealt proudly; and they all appear under his Feet.
In this the Glory of the Son of God in the Work of Redemption, remarkably
appears.

THE Beauty of Good appears with greatest Advantage, when compared with it is
contrary Evil. And the Glory of that which is excellent, then especially shows
it self, when it triumphs over it is contrary, and appears vastly above it, in
it is greatest Height.

THE Glory of Christ in this glorious Exaltation over so great Evil, that has
so exalted it is self against him, does the more remarkably appear, in that he
is thus exalted out of so low a State. Though he appeared in the World, as it
were a little Child; yet how does this Child of God triumph over the most
gigantick Enemies of God and Men! He who was "a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted
with Grief," is a Man of War, and triumphed over his Enemies in all their
Power. He who was meek and lowly of Heart, has triumphed over those proud Foes.
And he is exalted over them all, in that which appears most despicable, even
his CROSS.

2. HERE is Matter of exceeding great Encouragement for all sinful, miserable
Creatures in the World of Mankind, to come to Christ. For let them be as sinful
as they will, and never so miserable; Christ in the Work of Redemption is
gloriously exalted above all their Sin and Misery.

HOW high soever their Guilt has risen, though Mountains have been heaping on
Mountains all the Days of their Lives, till the Pile appears towering up to
Heaven, and above the very Stars; yet Christ in the Work of Redemption appears
gloriously exalted above all this Height.

THOUGH they are overwhelmed in a mighty Deluge of Woe and Misery; a Deluge that
is not only above their Heads, but above the Heads of the highest Mountains;
and they don't see how it is possible that they should escape; y^^ they have no
Reason to be discouraged from looking to Christ for help; who in the Work of
Redemption, appears gloriously above the Deluge of Evil.

THOUGH they see dreadful Corruption in their Hearts; though their Lusts appear
like Giants, or like the raging Waves of the Sea; yet they need not despair of
help; but may look to Christ* who appears, in the Work of Redemption,
gloriously above all this Corruption.

IF they apprehend themselves to be miserable Captives of Satan; and find him
too strong an Adversary for them; and the Devil is often tempting them, and
buffeting them, and triumphing over them with great cruelty. If it seems to
them that the Devil has swallowed them up, and has got full Possession of them,
as the Whale had of Jonah; yet there is Encouragement for them to look again,
as Jonah did, toward God's holy Temple, and to trust in Christ for Deliverance
from Satan, who appears so gloriously exalted above him in the Work of
Redemption.

IF they are ready to sink with that Darkness and those Sorrows which they meet
with; that Distress of Conscience, or those Frowns of God upon them; so that
God's Waves and Billows seem to pass over them; yet they have Encouragement
enough to look to Christ for Deliverance. These Waves and Billows have before
exalted themselves against Christ; and he appeared to be infinitely above them.

IF they are afraid of Death; if it looks exceeding terrible to them; as if it
was an Enemy that would swallow them up; yet let them look to Christ who has
appear^d so gloriously above Death; and their Fears will turn into Joy and
Triumph.

3 WHAT Cause have they who have an Interest in Christ, to glory in their
Redeemer! They are often beset with many Evils, and many mighty Enemies
surround them on every Side, with open Mouth ready to devour them: But they
need not f^^r any of them. They may glory in Christ, the Rock of their
Salvation, who appears so gloriously above them all. They may triumph over
Satan, over this evil World, over Guilt, and over Death. For as their Redeemer
is mighty, and is so exalted above all Evil; so shall they also be exalted in
him. They are now, in a Sense, so exalted: for nothing can hurt them. Christ
carries them, as on Eagles Wings, high out of the Reach of all Evils, so that
they cannot come near them, so as to do them any real Harm. And in a little
time, they shall be carried so out of their Reach, that they shall not be able
even to molest them any more for ever.

JOSEPH's great Temptation, and gracious Deliverance. -- 1738.
SERMON II.
GENESIS xxxix. 12. -- And he left his Garment in her Hand, and fled, and got
him out.


WE have an account here and in the Context, of that remarkable Behavior of
Joseph in the House of Potiphar, that was the Occasion, both of his great
Affliction, and also afterward of his high Advancement and great Prosperity in
the Land of Egypt. The Behavior that I speak of, is that which was ^n Occasion
of the Temptation that his Mistress laid before him to commit Uncleanness with
her.

WE read in the beginning of the Chapter, how Joseph after he had been so
cruelly treated by his Brethren, and sold into Egypt for a Slave, was advanced
in the House of Potiphar, who had bought him. Joseph was one that feared GOD,
and therefore GOD was with him; and wonderfully ordered Things for him, and so
influenced the Heart of Potiphar his Master, that instead of keeping him as a
mere Slave, to which Purpose he was sold, he made him his Steward and Overseer
over his House, and all that he had was put into his Hands: in so much, that we
are told,. 6. that he left all that he had in his Hand; and that he knew not
ought that he had, save the Bread which he did eat. -- While Joseph was in
these prosperous Circumstances, he met with a great Temptation in his Master's
House: so we are told, that he being a goodly Person, and well favored, his
Mistress cast her Eyes upon and lusted after him, and used all her Art to tempt
him to commit Uncleanness with her.

Concerning this Temptation, and his Behavior under it, many Things are worthy
to be noted.

WE may observe, how great the Temptation was, that he was under. It is to be
considered, Joseph was now in his Youth: a Season of Life, when Persons are
most liable to be overcome by Temptations of this Nature. And he was in a State
of unexpected Prosperity in Potiphar's House; which has a tendency to lift
Persons up, especially young Ones, whereby commonly they more easily fall
before Temptations.

AND then, the Superiority of the Person that laid the Temptation before him,
rendered it much the greater. She was his Mistress, and he a Servant under her.
And the Manner of her tempting him. She did not only carry her self so to
Joseph, as gave him Cause to suspect that he might be admitted to such criminal
Converse with her, that yet might be accompanied with some Apprehension, that
possibly he might be mistaken, and so deter him from adventuring on such a
Proposal; but she directly proposed it to him; plainly manifesting her
Disposition to it. So that here was no such Thing as a Suspicion of her
unwillingness to deter him, but a Manifestation of her desire to entice him to
it. Yea, she appeared greatly engaged in the Matter. And there was not only her
Desire manifested to entice him, but her Authority over him to enforce the
Temptation. She was his Mistress, and he might well imagine, that if he utterly
refused a Compliance, he should incur her Displeasure: and she, being his
Master's Wife, had Power to do much to his disadvantage, and to render his
Circumstances more uncomfortable in the Family.

AND the Temptation was the greater, in that she did not only tempt him once,
but frequently, Day by Day,. 10. And at last became more violent with him. --
She caught him by his Garment, saying, Lie with me: as in the Ver. of the Text.

HIS Behavior was very remarkable under these Temptations. He absolutely
refused any Compliance with them: he made no Reply that manifested as though the
Temptation had gained at all upon him; so much as to hesitate about it, or at
all to deliberate upon it. He complied in no Degree, either to the gross Act,
she proposed, or any thing tending toward it, or that should in a lesser
Degree be gratifying to her wicked Inclination. And he persisted resolute and
unshaken under her continual Solicitations*. 10. And it came to pass as she
spoke to Joseph Day by Day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or
to be with her. He to his utmost avoided so much as being where she was. And
the Motives and Principles, from which he acted, manifested by his Reply to her
Solicitations, are remarkable.

HE first sets before her, how injuriously he should act against his Master, if
he should comply with her Proposal: Behold my Master -- has committed all that
he has to my Hand; there is none greater in this House than I; neither has he
kept back any thing from me, but thee, because thou art his Wife. But h^ then
proceeded to inform her of that, which above all things, detered him from a
Compliance, viz. that it would be great Wickedness, and Sin against GOD. -- How
shall I do this, and sin against GOD! He would not do any such thing, as he
would not injure his Master; but that which influenced more than all on this
Occasion, was the fear of sinning against GOD. On this Account he persisted in
his Resolution to the last.

IN the Text we have an Account of his Behavior under the last and greatest
Temptation that he had from her. This Temptation was great, as we are told it
was at a Time when there was no Body in the House, but he and his Mistress,.
11. there was an Opportunity to commit the Fact with the greatest secrecy. And
at this Time it seems that she was more violent than ever before. She caught
him by the Garment etc. She laid hold on him, as though she were resolute to
attain her Purpose of him.

UNDER these Circumstances he not only refused her, but fled from her* as he
would have done from one that was going to assassinate, or murder him; he
escaped, as for his Life. He not only would not be guilty of such a Fact, but
neither would he by any Means be in the House with her, where he should be in
the Way of her Temptation.

THIS Behavior of Joseph is doubtless recorded for the Instruction of all.
Therefore from the Words I shall observe this

DOCTRINE. IT is our Duty, not only to avoid those Things that are themselves
sinful; but also, as far as may be, those Things that lead and expose to Sin.
THUS did Joseph: He not only refused actually to commit Uncleanness with his
Mistress, who enticed him; but refused to be there, where he should be in the
Way of Temptation,. 10. He refused to lie by her, or be with her. And in the
Text we are told, He fled, and got him out; would by no Means be in her
Company. Though it was no Sin, in it self, for Joseph to be in the House where
his Mistress was; but under these Circumstances it would expose him to Sin.
Joseph was sensible he had naturally a corrupt Heart, that tended to betray him
to Sin; and therefore he would by no Means be in the Way of Temptation; but
with haste he fled, he run from the dangerous Place. In as much as he was
exposed to Sin in that House where he was, he fled out of it with as much haste
as if the House had been all of a light Fire; or full of Enemies, who stood
ready with drawn Swords, to stab him to the very Heart. When she took him by
the Garment, he left his Garment in her Hands: he had rather lose his Garment,
than stay a Moment there, where he was in such Danger of losing his CHASTITY.

I say in the Doctrine, that Persons should avoid things that expose to Sin, as
far as may be, because the Case may be so, that Persons may be called to expose
themselves to Temptation; and when it is so, they may hope for divine Strength
and Protection under Temptation.

THE Case may be so, that it may be a Man's indispensable Duty to undertake an
Office, or Piece of Work, that is attended with a great deal of Temptation.
Thus, although ordinarily a Man ought not to run into that Temptation, of being
exposed to Persecution for the true Religion; lest the Temptation should be too
hard for him; but should avoid it, as much as may be; (Therefore CHRIST thus
directs his Disciples, Mat. x. 23. When ye be persecuted in one City, flee to
another.) Yet, the Case may be so, that a Man may be called not to flee from
Persecution; but to run the venture of such a trial, trusting in GOD to uphold
him under it. Ministers and Magistrates may be obliged to continue with their
People in such Circumstances; as Nehemiah says, Neh. vi. 11. -- Should such a
Man as I flee? So the Apostles. --

Yea they may be called to go into the midst of it; to those Places, where they
cannot reasonably expect but to meet with such Temptations. So sometimes the
Apostles did. Paul went up to Jerusalem, when he knew before hand, that there,
Bonds and Afflictions awaited him, Acts xx. 23.

SO in some other Cases, the Necessity of Affairs may call upon Men to engage
in some Business that is peculiarly attended with Temptations. But when it is
so, Men are indeed in this Way, least exposed to Sin; for they are always
safest in the Way of Duty. Prove. x. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks
surely. And the' there be many Things by which they may have extraordinary
Temptations, in the Affairs they have undertaken, yet if they have a clear Call
to it, it is no Presumption to hope for divine Support and Preservation in it.

BUT for Persons needlessly to expose themselves to Temptation, and to do those
Things that tend to Sin, is unwarrantable; and contrary to that excellent
Example, we have set before us in the Text. And that we ought to avoid not only
those Things that are in themselves sinful, but also those Things that lead and
expose to Sin, is manifest by the following Arguments.

I. IT is a Thing very evident and manifest, that we ought to use our utmost
Endeavors to avoid Sin: which is inconsistent with needlessly doing those
Things, that expose and lead to Sin. That we ought to do our utmost to avoid
Sin is manifest, that being the greatest Evil: And the greater any Evil is, the
greater Care, and the more earnest Endeavors does it require to avoid it. This
is plain, and what we by our practice show that we are all sensible of the
truth of. Those Things that appear to us very great and dreadful Evils, do we
use proportionably great Care to avoid. And therefore the greatest Evil of all,
requires the greatest and utmost Care to avoid it.

SIN is an infinite Evil, because committed against an infinitely great and
excellent BEING, and so a Violation of infinite Obligation: Therefore however
great our Care be to avoid Sin, it cannot be more than proportionable to the
Evil we would avoid. Our care and endeavor cannot be infinite, as the Evil of
Sin is infinite; but yet it ought to be to the utmost of our Power; we ought to
use every Method that tends to tho avoiding of Sin. This is manifest to Reason.

AND not only so, but this is positively required of us in the Word of GOD.
Josh. xxii. 5. Take diligent heed to do the Commandment and the Law, which
Moses the Servant of the LORD charged you, to love the Lord your GOD, and to
walk in all his Ways, and to keep his Commandments, and to cleave unto him, and
to serve him with all your Soul. Deuteronomy. iv. 15, 16. Take ye therefore g^od heed
unto your selves, lest ye corrupt your selves. Chap. xii. 30. Take heed to thy
self, that thou be not snared, etc. Luke xi. 36. Take heed and beware of
Covetousness. 1 Cor. x. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall. Deuteronomy. iv. 9. Take heed to thy self, keep thy Soul diligently. These
and many other Texts of Scripture, plainly require of us, the utmost possible
Diligence and Caution to avoid Sin.

BUT how can he be said to use the utmost possible diligence and caution to
avoid Sin, that voluntarily does those Things, that naturally expose and lead
to Sin? How can he be said with the utmost possible Caution to avoid an Enemy,
that voluntarily lays himself in his way? How can he be said to use the utmost
possible Caution to preserve the Life of his Child, that suffers it to go on
the Edge of Precipices or Pits; or to play on the Borders of a deep Gulf; or
to wander in a Wood, that is haunted by Beasts of Prey?

II. IT is evident that we ought to avoid those Things that expose and lead to
Sin; because a due Sense of the Evil of Sin, and a just hatred of it, will
necessarily have this Effect upon us, to cause us so to do.

IF we were duly sensible of the Evil and dreadful Nature of Sin, we should
have an exceeding dread of it upon our Spirits. We should hate it worse than
Death, and should fear it worse than the Devil himself: and dread it even as we
dread Damnation. But those Things that Men have an exceeding dread of upon
their Spirits, they naturally and necessarily keep at a great distance from;
and avoid those Things that they apprehend expose to them. As a Child that has
been greatly terrifyed by the sight of any wild Beast; will by no Means be
persuaded to go any where, where it apprehends that it shall be exposed to it,
or fall in it is Way.

SIN in it is own Nature is infinitely hateful, so in it is natural tendency, it
is infinitely dreadful. It is the tendency of all Sin, eternally to undo the
Soul. Every Sin naturally carries Hell in it! Therefore, all Sin ought to be
treated by us, as we would treat a Thing that is infinitely terrible. If it be
not so that any one Sin, yea the least Sin, don't necessarily bring eternal
Ruin with it; it is owing to nothing but the free Grace and Mercy of GOD to us,
and not to the Nature and Tendency of Sin it self. But certainly, we ought not
to take the less care to avoid Sin, or all that tends to it, for the freeness
and greatness of God's Mercy to us, through which, there is hope of Pardon; for
that would be a most ungrateful and vile abuse of Mercy indeed. If it were so,
that it were made known to us, that if we ever voluntarily committed any
particular Act of Sin we should be damned without any Remedy or Escape, should
we not exceedingly dread the commission of such Sins? Should we not be very
watchful and careful to stand at the greatest Distance from that Sin: and from
every thing that might expose us to it; and that has any tendency to stir up
our Lusts, or to betray us to such an Act of Sin? Let us then consider, that if
it be not so, that the next voluntary Act of known Sin, shall not necessarily
and unavoidably issue in certain Damnation; yet it will certainly deserve it:
We shall thereby really deserve to be cast off, without any Remedy or Hope: and
it can only be owing to free Grace, that it will not certainly and remedilesly
be followed with such a Punishment. And shall we be guilty of such a vile Abuse
of GOD's Mercy to us, as to take Encouragement from it, the more boldly to
expose our selves to Sin?

III. IT is evident that we ought not only to avoid Sin but Things that expose
and lead to Sin; because th^s is the Way we act in Things that pertain to our
temporal Interest.

MEN do not only avoid those Things that are themselves the hurt and ruin of
their temporal Interest, but also the Things that tend or expose to it. Because
they love their temporal Lives, they will not only actually avoid killing
themselves, but they are very careful to avoid those Things that bring their
Lives into Danger; though they do not certainly know but they may escape. They
are careful not to pass Rivers and deep Waters on rotten Ice, though they do not
certainly know that they shall fall through and drown: So they will not only
avoid those Things that would be in themselves the ruin of their Estates; such
as the setting their own Houses on Fire, and burning them up with their
Substance; their taking their Money, and throwing it into the Sea, etc. but
they carefully avoid those Things by which their Estates are exposed. They are
watchful, and have their Eyes about them; are careful who they deal with: they
are watchful, that they be not over reached in their Bargains; that they do not
lay themselves open to Knaves and fraudulent Persons.

IF a Man be sick of a dangerous Distemper, he is careful to avoid every thing
that tends to increase the Disorder; not only what he knows to be mortal in his
Situation, but other Things that he fears the Consequence of, or that may be
prejudicial to him. Men are in this Way wont to take care of their temporal
Interest, as what they have a great Regard for. And therefore if we are not as
careful to avoid Sin, as we are to avoid Injury in our temporal Interest, it
will show a regardless Disposition with Respect to Sin and Duty; or that we do
not much care though we do sin against GOD. God's Glory is surely a Thing of as
much Importance and Concern as our temporal Interest. Certainly we should be as
careful not to be exposed to sin against the MAJESTY of Heaven and Earth, as
Men are wont to be of a few Pounds; yea, the latter are but mere Trifles,
compared with the former.

IV. WE are wont to do thus by our dear earthly Friends.

WE not only are careful of those Things wherein the Destruction of their
Lives, or their Hurt and Calamity in any Respect do directly consist; but are
careful to avoid those Things that do but remotely tend to it. We are careful
to prevent and cut off all Occasions of their Loss or Damage, in any Respect;
and are watchful against that, which tends in any wise, to deprive them of
their Comfort or good Name; and the Reason is, because they are very dear to
us. In this Manner, Men are wont to be careful of the good of their own
Children, and dread the Approaches of any Mischief that they apprehend they
are, or may be exposed to. And we should take it hard if our Friends did not do
thus by us.

AND surely we ought to treat GOD as a dear FRIEND: We ought to act toward
Him, as those that have a sincere Love and unfeigned Regard to Him; and so
ought to watch and be careful against all Occasions of that which is contrary
to his Honor and Glory. If we have not a Temper and Desire so to do, it will
show that whatever our Pretenses are, we are not God's sincere Friends, and
have no true love to Him.

IF we should be offended at any that have professed Friendship to us, if they
treated us in this manner and were no more careful of our Interest; surely GOD
may justly be offended, that we are no more careful of his Glory.

V. WE would have GOD in his Providence toward us, not order those Things that
tend to our hurt, or expose our Interest: therefore certainly we ought to avoid
those Things that lead to sin against him.

WE desire and love to have God's Providence such toward us, as that our
Welfare may be well secured. No Man loves to live in exposed, uncertain and
dangerous Circumstances. While he is so, he lives uncomfortably, in that he
lives in continual fear. We desire that GOD would so order Things concerning
us, that we may be safe from fear of Evil: and that no Evil may come nigh our
Dwelling; and that because we dread Calamity. So we do not love the Appearance
and Approaches of it; and love to have it at a great Distance from us. We
desire to have GOD to be to us as a Wall of Fire round about us, to defend us;
and that he would surround us, as the Mountains do the Valleys, to guard us
from every Danger, or Enemy; that so no Evil may come nigh us.

NOW this plainly shows, that we ought in our Behavior toward GOD, to keep at
a great Distance from Sin, and from all that exposes to it; as we desire GOD in
his Providence to us, should keep Calamity and Misery at a great Distance from
us, and not order those Things that expose our Welfare.

VI. Seeing we a^e to pray we may not be led into Temptation; certainly we
ought not to run our selves into it.

THIS is one Request that Christ directs us to make to GOD in that Form of
Prayer, which he taught his Disciples -- Lead us not into Temptation. And how
inconsistent shall we be with our selves, if we pray to GOD, not to order it so
in his Providence, that we should be led into Temptations; and yet at the same
Time, we are not careful to avoid Temptation; but bring our selves into it, by
doing those Things that lead and expose to Sin. What Self-Contradiction is
there in it, for a Man to pray to GOD that he may be kept from that, which he
takes no care to avoid? By praying that we may be kept from Temptation, we
profess to GOD, that being in Temptation, is a Thing that is to be avoided; but
by running into it, show that we choose the contrary, viz. not to avoid it.

VII. The Apostle directs us to avoid those Things that are in themselves
lawful, but tend to lead others into Sin; surely then we should avoid what
tends to lead our selves into Sin.

THE Apostle directs to this, 1 Cor. viii. 9. -- Take heed lest -- this Liberty
of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. Romans xiv. 13. -- That
no Man put a stumbling Block, or an Occasion to fall in his Brother's Way. Ver.
15. But if thy Brother be grieved with thy Meat, now walk thou not
charitably. Destroy not him with thy Meat. -- Ver. 20.21. For Meat destroy not
the Work of GOD. All Things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that Man who
eats with Offense. It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor
any Thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

NOW if this Rule of the Apostle be agreeable to the Word of CHRIST, as we must
suppose, or expunge what he says out of the Canon of the Scripture; then a like
Rule obliges more strongly in those Things that tend to lead our selves into
Sin.

VIII. THERE are many Precepts of Scripture, that do directly and positively
imply, that we ought to avoid those Things that tend to Sin.

THIS very Thing is commanded by CHRIST, Mat. xxvi. 41. where he directs us to
watch lest we enter into Temptation. But certainly running our selves into
Temptation, is the reverse of watching against it.

Again, We are commanded to abstain from all Appearance of Evil; i. e. do by
Sin, as a Man does by a Thing he hates the Sight or Appearance of; and
therefore will avoid any Thing that favors of it, or looks like it; and will
not come near it, or in Sight of it.

Again, CHRIST commanded to separate from us, those Things that are stumbling
Blocks, or Occasions of Sin, however dear they are to us. Matthew. v. 29. If thy
right Eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee. Ver. 30. And if thy
right Hand offend thee, cut it off -- By the right Hand offending us, is not
meant it is paining us; but the Word in the original, signifies, being a
stumbling Block; if thy right Hand prove a stumbling Block, or occasion to
fall; i. e. an Occasion to Sin. Those Things are called Offenses or stumbling
Blocks in the New Testament, that are the Occasions of falling into Sin. We
ought to avoid running up against stumbling Blocks; i. e. we should avoid those
Things that expose us to fall into Sin.

Yea CHRIST tells us, we must avoid them, however dear they are to us, though as
dear as our right Hand or right Eye. If there be any Practice that we have been
accustomed to, that naturally tends and exposes us to Sin, we must have done
with it; though we love it never so well; and are never so loath to part with it;
though it be as contrary to our Notion, as to cut off our right Hand, or pluck
out our own right Eye; and that upon pain of Damnation, for it is intimated
that if we do not, we must go with two Hands and two Eyes into Hellfire.

AND again: GOD took great Care to forbid the Children of Israel those Things
that tended to lead them into Sin. For this Reason, he forbid them marrying
strange Wives, (Deuteronomy. vii. 3, 4.) neither shall thou make Marriages with them,
-- for they will turn away thy Son from following me, that they may serve other
Gods. For this Reason they were commanded to destroy all those Things, that the
Nations of Canaan had used in their Idolatry; and if any were enticed over to
Idolatry, they were to be destroyed without Mercy; though ever so near and dear
Friends. They were not only to be parted with, but stoned with Stones; yea they
themselves were to fall upon them, and put them to Death, though Son or Daughter,
or their Bosom Friend. (Deuteronomy. xiii. 6. etc.) If thy Brother -- or thy Son, or
thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or thy Friend, which is as thine own
Soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other Gods -- thou
shall not consent unto him -- neither shall thine Eye pity him, neither shall
thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him. But thou shall surely kill him;
thine Hand shall be first upon him to put him to Death.

Again, THE wise Man warns us to avoid those Things that tend and expose us to
Sin; especially the Sin of Uncleanness. Prove. vi. 27. Can a Man take Fire in
his Bosom, and his Clothes not be burnt? Can one go upon hot Coals, and his
Feet not be burnt? -- So -- whosoever touches her, shall not be innocent. This
is the Truth held forth; avoid those Customs and Practices, that naturally tend
to stir up Lust. And there are many Examples in Scripture, which have the force
of Precept; and recorded, as not only worthy, but demand our Imitation. The
Conduct of Joseph in the Text is one; and that recorded of KING DAVID, is
another. Psalm. xxxix. 1, 2. I said I will take heed to my Ways, that I sin not
with my Tongue: I will keep my Mouth with a Bridle, while the Wicked is before
me. I was dumb with Silence, I held my Peace, even from good -- even from good
-- that is, he was so watchful over his Words, and kept at such a great
Distance from speaking what might in any Way tend to Sin; that he avoided, in
certain Circumstances, speaking what was in it self lawful; lest he should be
betrayed into that which was sinful.

IX. A prudent Sense of our own weakness, and exposedness to yield to
Temptation, obliges us to avoid that which leads or exposes to Sin.

WHOEVER knows himself and is sensible how weak he is; and his constant
exposedness to run into Sin; how full of Corruption his Heart is, which like
Fuel, is exposed to catch Fire, and bring Destruction upon him; how much he has
in him to incline him to Sin; and how unable he is to stand of himself; who is
sensible of this, and has any Regard of his Duty, but will be very watchful
against every thing that may lead and expose to Sin? On this Account Christ
directed us, (Mat. xxvi. 41.) to watch and pray lest we enter into Temptation.
The Reason there is added, The Flesh is weak! He that in Confidence of his own
Strength, boldly runs the venture of sinning by going into Temptation,
manifests great Presumption, and a sottish Insensibility of his own Weakness.
He that trusts in his own Heart is a Fool, Prove. xxviii. 26.

THE wisest and strongest, and some of the most holy Men in the World, have
been overthrown by such Means. So was David: So was Solomon. -- His Wives
turned away his Heart. If such Persons, so eminent for Holiness, were this Way
led into Sin, surely it should be a warning to us. Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall.

SERMON, III.
GENESIS xxx^x. 12. -- And he left his Garment in her Hand, and fled, and got
him out.


DOCTRINE. IT is our Duty, not only to avoid those Things that are themselves
sinful; but also, as far in us lies, those Things that lead and expose to Sin.
THE Doctrine has been explained and proved in the foregoing Discourse. I now
proceed to the

APPLICATION.
In one Use of EXHORTATION.
TO Exhort all to a Compliance with their Duty in this Respect, no^ only to
avoid Sin, but those Things that lead and expose to Sin.

IF it be made out clearly and evidently from Reason and the Word of GOD, to be
our Duty so to do, this would be enough with all Christians. Will a Follower of
CHRIST stand objecting and disputing against a Thing, that is irrefragably
proved and demonstrated to be his Duty?

BUT here some may be ready to inquire: How shall we know what Things do lead
and expose to Sin? Let a Man do what he will, he cannot avoid sinning, as long
as he has such a corrupt Heart within him. And there is nothing a Man can do,
or turn his Hand to, but that he may find some Temptation in it. And though it be
true, as it is said in the first Doctrine, that a Man ought, as far as may be,
to avoid those Things that lead and expose to Sin. And it is evident by the
Arguments that have been brought, that those Things that have special tendency
to expose Men to Sin, are what we ought to shun, as much as in us lies: yet how
shall we judge and determine, what Things they are, that have a natural
tendency to Sin; or do especially lead to it?

I would answer in some Particulars, which are plain and easy; and which cannot
be denied without the greatest Absurdity.

Answ. 1. That which is bordering on those Sins, that the Lusts of Men's Hearts
strongly incline them to, is of this Sort. Men come into the World with many
strong and violent Lusts in their Hearts, and are exceeding prone of themselves
to transgress; even in the safest Circumstances they can be placed in. And
surely so much the nearer they are to that Sin, which they are naturally
strongly inclined to; so much the more are they exposed. If any of us that are
Parents, should see our Children near the Brink of some deep Pit; or close by
the edge of the Precipice of an high Mountain; and not only so, but the Ground
upon which the Child stood, slippery, and sleeply descending directly toward he
Precipice; should we not reckon a Child exposed in such a Case? Should we not
be in haste to remove the Child from it is very dangerous Situation?

IT was the manner among the Israelites, to build their Houses with flat Roofs,
so that Persons might walk on the Tops of their Houses. And therefore God took
care to make it a Law among them, that every Man should have Battlements upon
the Edges of their Roofs; lest any Person should fall off and be killed. Deuteronomy.
xxii. 8. When thou buildest a new House, then thou shall make a Battlement for
thy Roof, that thou bring not Blood upon thine House, if any Man fall from
thence. And certainly we ought to take the like care that we don't fall into
Sin; which carries in it eternal Death. We should as it were, six a Battlement,
a Guard to keep us from the Edge of the Precipice. Much more ought we to take
care, that we don't go upon a Roof that is not only without Battlements, but
when it is steep, and we shall naturally incline to fall.

MEN's Lusts are like strong Enemies, endeavoring to draw them into Sin. If a
Man stood upon a dangerous Precipice, and had Enemies about him, pulling and
drawing him, endeavoring to throw him down; would one, in such a Case, choose,
or dare to stand near the Edge? Would he look upon himself safe close on the
Brink? Would he not endeavor for his own safety, to keep at a Distance?

2. THOSE Things that tend to feed Lusts in the Imagination, are of this Kind.

They lead and expose Men to Sin. Those Things that have a natural tendency to
excite in the Mind, the Idea or Imagination of that which is the Object of the
Lust, certainly tend to feed and promote that Lust. What can be more plain and
evident, than that a presenting the Object, tends to stir up the Appetite?
Reason and Experience teach this.

THEREFORE, all Things, whether they be Words or Actions, have a tendency and
expose to Sin, that tend to raise and uphold in the Mind's Imaginations or
Ideas, those Things which the Lust tends to. It is certainly wrong and unlawful
to feed a Lust even in the Imagination. It is quite contrary to the holy Rules
of God's Word. (Prove. xxiv. 9) The Thought of foolishness is Sin. (Mat. v. 28.)
Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery --. A
Man by gratifying his Lusts in his Imagination and Thoughts, may make his Soul
in the Sight of GOD, to be a Hold of foul Spirits; and like a Cage of every
unclean and hurtful Bird. And sinful Imaginations tend to sinful Actions and
outward Behavior in the End. Lust is always first contrived in the
Imagination, and then brought forth in the outward Practice. You may see the
P^ogress of it in, Jam. i. 15. Then when Lust has conceived, it brings forth
Sin.

THEREFORE for a Man to do those Things that tend to excite the Objects of his
Lusts in his Imagination, he does that which has as natural a tendency to Sin,
as a Conception has to a Birth. And such Things are therefore abominable in the
Sight of a pure and holy GOD. We are commanded to keep at the greatest Distance
from spiritual Pollution; and to hate even the very Garment spotted with the
Flesh, Jude 23.

3. THOSE things that the Experience and Observation of Mankind show to be
ordinarily attended or followed with Sin, are of this Sort.

Experience is a good Rule to determine by in things of this Nature. How is it
we know the natural tendency of any thing, but only by Observation and
Experience? Men observe and find, time after time, that such Things are
commonly attended and followed with such other things. And hence Mankind
pronounce of them, that they have a natural tendency to them. We have no other
Way to know the tendency of any thing. Thus Men by Observation and Experience
know that the warmth of the Sun, and showers of Rain, are attended with the
growth of Plants of the Earth: and hence they learn, that they have a tendency
to it. So they find by Experience, that the bite of some Kinds of Serpents, is
commonly followed with Illness; and often with Death. Hence they learn, that
the bite of such Serpents has a natural tendency to bring Disorder upon the
Body, and exposes to Death.

AND so, if Experience and common Observation shows, that any particular
Practice or Custom is commonly attended with that which is very sinful, we may
safely conclude that such a Practice tends to Sin; that it leads and exposes to
it.

THUS we may determine that Tavern-haunting and Gaming, are things that tend to
Sin; because common Experience and Observation show, that those Practices are
attended with a great deal of Sin and Wickedness. The Observation of all Ages
and all Nations, with one Voice declares it. It shows, where Taverns are much
frequented, for drinking and the like, they are especially Places of Sin, of
Profaneness and other Wickedness: and it shows, that those Towns, where there
is much of this, are Places where no Good generally prevails. And it also
shows, that those Persons that are given much to frequenting Taverns, are most
commonly vicious Persons. And so of Gaming; as playing at Cards, Experience
shows, that those Persons that practice this, do generally fall into much Sin.
Hence these Practices are become infamous among all sober virtuous Persons.

4. ANOTHER way by which Persons may determine of some Things, that they lead
and expose to Sin, is by their own Experience, or what they have found in
themselves.

IF Persons have found in themselves, from time to time, that they have
actually led them into Sin, this surely is enough to convince them, that such
things do actually lead and expose to Sin: For what will convince Men, if their
own Experience will not? Thus if Men have found by undeniable Experience, that
any Practice or Custom stirs up Lust in them, and has betrayed them into
foolish and sinful Behavior, or sinful Thoughts; they may determine, that they
lead and expose to Sin. Or if they upon examining themselves, must own that
such a Custom or Practice, has time after time, had that Effect upon them, as
to dispose them to Sins of Omission of known Duty; such as secret Prayer; and
make them more backward to it: and also to indispose them to reading and
religious Meditation; and they, after they have been doing such or such a
thing, have found this has commonly been the Effect of it, that they have been
more apt to cast off Prayer; or has had a tendency to the neglect of Family
Prayer. Or if it seems to lead to unwatchfulness; they find since they have
complied with such a Custom, they are less watchful of their Hearts, less
disposed to any thing that is serious; that the frame of their Mind is more
light, and their Hearts less on the things of another World, and more after
Vanity; those are sinful Effects; and therefore if Experience shows a Custom or
Practice to be attended with these things, then Experience shows that they lead
and expose to Sin.

5. WE may determine whether a thing be of an evil tendency or not, by the
Effect that an out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD, and a general flourishing of
Religion, has with respect to it.

IF a pouring out of the Spirit of GOD on a People, puts a stop to any Practice
or Custom, and roots it out; surely it argues, that that Practice or Custom is
of no good tendency. For if there be no hurt in it, and it tends to no hurt,
why should the Spirit of GOD destroy it? The Spirit of GOD has no tendency to
dedroy any thing that is neither sinful, nor has any tendency to sin. Why
should it? Why should we suppose, that the Spirit of GOD should be an Enemy to
that which has no hurt in it; nor has any tendency to that which is hurtful?

THE flourishing of Religion has no tendency to abolish or expel any thing that
is no way against Religion. That which is not against Religion, Religion will
not appear against. Religion has no tendency to destroy any Custom or Practice,
that has no tendency to destroy that. It is a Rule that holds in all contraries
and opposites: the Opposition is equal on both Sides. So contrary as Light is
to Darkness, so contrary is Darkness to Light. It is equal both Ways. So, just
so contrary as the flourishing of Religion is to any Custom, just so contrary
is that Custom to the flourishing of Religion. That Custom that Religion tends
to destroy, that Custom, if it prevail, tends also to destroy Religion.
Therefore, if the flourishing of Religion and the out-pouring of the Spirit of
GOD, tends to overthrow any Custom, that takes Place or prevails, we may surely
determine, that that Custom is either in it self sinful, or tends and exposes
to Evil.

6. WE may determine by the Effect that a general decay of Religion has with
respect to them, whether they be Things of a sinful tendency or not.

IF they be Things that come with a decay of Religion, that creep in as that
decays, we may determine they are things of no good tendency. The withdrawing
of Good, don't let in Good but Evil. It Is Evil, not Good, comes in, as Good
gradually ceases. What is it but Darkness that comes in, as Light withdraws.

Therefore if there be any decay of Religion in the Town, or in particular
Persons, and upon this, any certain Customs or Practices take Place and are
allowed, which were wholly abstained from and renounced, when Religion was in a
more flourishing State; we may safely conclude that such Customs and Practices
are contrary to the Nature of true Religion: and therefore in themselves
sinful, or tending to Sin.

7. WE may in many things determine whether any Custom be of a good tendency,
by considering what the Effect would be, if it was openly and universally owned
and practiced.

THERE are many things that some Persons practice somewhat secretly, and are
partly hidden in; and that they plead to be not hurtful; which, if they had
suitable Consideration to discern what the Consequence would be, if every Body
openly practiced the same, it would soon show that the Consequence would be
Confusion, and a most woeful State of things. If therefore there be any Custom,
that is of such a Nature, that it will not bear universal open Practice and
Profession; but if it should come to that, the least Consideration will show
that the Consequence would be lamentable; we may determine that that Custom is
of an ill tendency. For if there is no hurt in it, and it is neither sinful in
it self, nor tends to any thing sinful, then it is no matter how open and
universal the World is in it; for we need not be afraid of that Custom's being
too prevalent and universal, that has no ill tendency in it.

THUS I have mentioned some general Rules, by which to determine and judge,
what things are of a bad and sinful tendency. And these things are so plain,
that for a Person to deny them, would be absurd and ridiculous.

I would now, in the Name of GOD, warn all Persons to avoid such things, as
appear by these Rules to lead and expose to Sin. And particularly, I would now
take Occasion to warn our young People, as they would approve themselves
Fearers of GOD, to avoid all such things in Company, that being tried by these
Rules, will appear to have a tendency or lead to Sin. Avoid all such Ways of
talking and eating as have a tendency to this; and follow the Example of Joseph
in this.

NOT only the most gross Acts of Uncleanness, but all Deg^ees of Laciviousness,
both in talking and eating, are strictly forbidden in Scripture; as what should
not be so much as once named among Saints or Christians. (Gal. v. 9.) Now the
Works of the Flesh are manifest, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Laciviousness. (Ephesians. v. 3, 4, 5.) But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, let it
not be once named among you, as becomes Saints: neither filthiness, nor
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: -- for this ye know,
that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, -- has any Inheritance in the Kingdom
of CHRIST, and of GOD. We should hate even the Garments spoted with the Flesh,
i. e. should hate and shun all that in the least approaches to any such thing,
or savours of it.

AND I desire that certain Customs that are common among young People in the
Country, and have been so a long time, may be examined by those Rules that have
been mentioned. That Custom in particular, of young People of different Sexes
lying in Bed together; however light is made of it, and however ready Persons
may be to laugh at it is being condemned: if it be examined by the Rules that
have been mentioned, it will appear, past all Contradiction, to be one of those
things that lead and expose to Sin: And I believe what Experience and Fact will
show of the Consequence and Event of it, does abundantly bear Witness to it.
And whoever wisely considers the Matter, must say, that this Custom of this
Country (to which it seems to be peculiar, among People that pretend to uphold
their Credit) has been one main thing that has lead to that growth of
Uncleanness, that has been in the Land. And so there are other Customs and
Liberties that are customarily used, among young People in Company, that they
that use them know that they lead to Sin. -- They know that they tend to stir
up their Lusts -- that it does do it -- and this is the very End for which they
do it, to gratify their Lusts in some Measure. Little do such Persons consider,
what a holy GOD they are soon to be judged by, that now make a mock at Sin; who
abominates the Impurities of their Hearts.

IF therefore they do actually stir up and feed Lust, then certainly they tend
to further Degrees and more gross Acts. That which stirs up Lust, makes it more
violent, and does therefore certainly the more expose Persons to be overcome by
it. How evident and undeniable are these things; and how strange that any
should cavil against them, or make a Derision of them!

Possibly you may be confident of your own Strength; and may think with your
self, that you are not in Danger, that there is no Temptation in these things,
but what you are able easily to overcome. But you should consider that the most
self-confident are most in danger. Peter was very confident, that he should not
deny CHRIST, but how dreadfully otherwise was the Event! If when others that
have fallen into gross Sins, should be inquired of, and should declare how it
was with them; doubtless they would say, that they at first though it there was no
danger; they were far from the Thought that ever they should commit such
Wickedness; but yet by venturing further and further, they fell at last into
the foulest and grossest Transgressions. And Persons may long withstand
Temptation, and be suddenly overcome at last. None so much in danger, as the
most bold. They are most safe, that are most sensible of their own Weakness;
and most distrustful of their own Hearts; and most sensible of their continual
need of restraining Grace. Young Persons, with respect to the Sin of
Uncleanness, are dealt with by the Devil, just as some give an account of some
sort of Serpents charming of Birds, and other Animals down into their Mouths --
if the Serpent takes them with his Eyes; though they seem to be affrighted by it;
yet will not flee away; but will keep the Serpent in Sight, and approach nearer
and nearer to him, till they fall a Prey.

ANOTHER Custom that I desire may be examined by the forementioned Rules, is
that of young People of both Sexes getting together in the Nigh^ in those
Companies for Mirth and Jollity, that they call Frolicks; so spending the time
together 'till late in the Night, in their Jollity. I desire our young People
to suffer their Ears to be open to what I have to say upon this Point; as I am
the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts to them; and not determine that they will
not hearken, before they have heard what I shall say. I hope there are but few
Persons among us so abandoned, as to determine that they will go on in a
Practice, whether they are convinced that it is unlawful or not; or though it
should be proved to them to be unlawful by undeniable Arguments.

Therefore let us examine this Custom and Practice by what has been said. It
has been proved undeniably, that we ought not to go on in a Practice that leads
and exposes to Sin; and Rules have been laid down to judge what does thus
expose and lead to it, that I think are plain and undeniable.

Therefore now let us try this Custom by these Rules, and see whether it will
bear the Test or not. Certainly a Christian will not be unwilling to have his
Practices examined and tried by the Rules of Reason and God's Word; but will
rather rejoice in it.

AND I desire particularly that the Practice may be tried by that sure
Touchstone of Experience. Let it be tried by the Consideration of what is
experienced in fact abroad in one Town and Place and another. This is one of
the Rules of Trial that have been mentioned, that that Custom that the
Experience and Observation of Mankind shows to be ordinarily attended or
followed with Sin, may be determined and concluded to be unlawful. And if we
look abroad in the Country, I doubt not but these two things will be found.

1. THAT as to those Towns, where there is most of this carried on among young
People, (as there is more of it in some Places than others) it will be found,
as a thing that universally holds, that they the young People there are
commonly a loose, vain and irreligious Generation; little regarding GOD, Heaven
or Hell, or any thing but vanity. And that commonly in those Towns where is
most frolicking carried on, there are the most frequent breakings out of gross
Sins; Fornication in particular.

2. IF we try it by Persons. If we go through the Country, we shall for the most
Part find, that those Persons that are the greatest Frolickers, and are most
addicted to this Practice, which we are speaking of; they are the Persons
furthest from serious Thought, and are the vainest and loosest upon other
Accounts. And whence should this be, if such a Practice was not sinful, or had
not a natural tendency to lead Persons into Sin.

AND furthermore, I appeal to the Experience of you here present, as to what
you have found in your selves. I desire those of you that have made Pretenses
of serious Religion, and saving Piety, and have hitherto pretended to keep up
Religion in your Closets, and your own Souls; that you would seriously ask your
selves whether or no you have not found, that this Practice has indisposed you
to serious Religion, and taken off your Minds from it? Has it not tended to
your neglect of secret Prayer? Have you not found, that after you have been to
a Frolic, you have been more backward to that Duty? And if you have not wholly
neglected it, have you not found that you have been abundantly more slighty,
and ready to turn it off in any Manner, and glad to have it done with? And more
backward to reading and serious Meditation, and such things? And that your Mind
has been exceedingly diverted from Religion, and that for some time?

I don't send you far off to find out whether this Custom be not of bad
tendency -- not beyond the Sea, to some distant Country: I send you no further
than to your own Breast to examine your own Experience in this Matter; let the
Matter be determined by that.

AND then again, let us try this Custom, by the Effect the Out-pouring of the
Spirit of GOD on a People has with Respect to it. This we are under great
Advantage to do; because there has lately been here in this Place, a most
remarkable out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD, that ever has been in NEW ENGLAND,
and it may be in the WORLD; since the Apostles Days. And it is known, that
before this, that Custom of young People's Frolicking did prevail in the Town.
And here we all know the Effect it had. It put an end to it. -- It was a Custom
that was wholly done with -- It was altogether laid aside; and was so for
several Years.

IT has been already shown that there is no account can be given why the Spirit
of GOD, and the flourishing of Religion should abolish such a Custom, unless it
be because that Custom, is either in its Nature or Tendency an Enemy to the
Spirit of GOD, and Religion.

THE Fruits of the Spirit of GOD are good, and I hope there is none that have
the Blasphemy to say otherwise. And therefore it is good that this Custom
should be removed; for this is plainly one of the Effects of the Spirit of GOD.
And if so, it is because the Custom is bad, either in it is Nature or Tendency;
otherwise there would be no good in its being removed. The Spirit of GOD
abolished this Custom for this Reason, because if it had been kept up in the
Town, it would have had a direct tendency to hinder that Work that the Spirit
was about to do amongst us. This was undeniably the Reason.

Supposing such a Custom had been begun and set up, by the young People all
over the Town, in the midst of the Time of the late out-pouring of the Spirit,
all of a sudden; would any wise Persons, that have truly the Cause of Religion
at Heart; rejoiced at it? Would not every one at first Thought have concluded,
without any hesitation, that it was a thing that looked darkly upon the
Interest of Religion; and that there was great Danger that it would take off
People's Minds from Religion, and make them vain; and so put an end to the
flourishing of Religion? Would not every considerate Person in this Town have
thought thus of it? And if such a Custom would have had an ill tendency then,
so it will now.

Objection. The Town is not in such Circumstances now, as it was then. And though
it might have done hurt then, by putting an end to the great Concern; yet now
it may do no hurt: for there is now no such great Concern to be put an end to
by it.

Answer. Though the Town is not in such Circumstances now as it was then, yet it
ought to be; there ought to be as much Engagedness of Mind about Religion; as
much Concern among Sinners, and as much Engagedness among the godly, as then:
and it is to our Shame that there is not. And if such a Practice would have
tended to destroy such a religious Concern, then it certainly tends to prevent
it now. It is a Rule that will hold, That that which has a tendency to destroy
a Thing when it is, tends to prevent it when it is not. And are we not praying
from Sabbath to Sabbath, and from Day to Day, for such a Concern again? And do
not those of you that pretend to be converted, that have lately set up this
Custom, pray for the same? Are you a Convert, a Saint, and yet not desire that
there should be any more pouring out of the Spirit of GOD? The Town has Cause
to be ashamed of such Converts, if it has any such? And if you do, why do you
do what tends to prevent it?

Again, LET this Practice be tried by the Effect that a general Decay of
Religion has with respect to it. Now we have a trial: it is now a Time that
Religion is greatly decayed amongst us; and the Effect is, that this Custom
comes in with this Decay. Young People begin again to set up their old Custom
of Frolicking, and spen^ing great Part of the Night in it, to the violation of
Family Orders. What is the Reason, if this Custom is not bad, either in its
Nature or Tendency, that it did not come in before, when Religion was lively?
Why does it stay 'till it can take the Advantage of the withdrawment of
Religion? This is a sign that it is a Custom that shuns a Spirit of lively
Religion, as Darkness shuns the Light, and never comes in 'till Light withdraws.

AND here again, I would send Persons to their own Experience. How did this
Practice come in with you in particular: you, that two or three Years ago,
seemed to be so engaged in Religion? Did it not come in, did you not begin to
practice it, as the sense of Religion wore off? And what is the matter? Why did
not you set up the Practice then, when your Heart was taken up about reading,
Meditation, and secret Prayer to GOD? If this do not at all stand in the Way of
them, and is no hindrance to them, why was you not engaged in both together?
What account can you give of it? Why did you leave off this Practice and
Custom, or abstain from it? To what Purpose is this changing? One while it must
be avoided as evil, and another while practiced and pleaded for as good? The
making such an alteration does not look well, nor will it be for the honor of
Religion in the Eye of the World. For whether the Practice be lawful or no, yet
such a thing will surely be improved to our disadvantage. For your avoiding of
it then, has this appearance, in the Eye of the Country; that then you
condemned it: and therefore your now returning to it, will appear to them as
backsliding in you. Such Changelings are ever more, in the Eye of the World,
greatly to the dishonor of the Profession they are of, let it be what it will.

Indeed, this Custom as it is practiced, does not only tend to Sin, but is in
it self very disorderly, sinful and shameful. For it is attended late in the
Night, and in the dead of the Night, to the neglect of Family Prayer, and
violating all family Order; which is Disorder and Profaneness. Is that lawful
to rob GOD of his ordinary Sacrifices, for the sake of your Pleasure,
Diversion, and Jollity? Are you of that Mind, that it is a decent thing, that
the stated Worship of the great GOD, should give Way to your Mirth, and your
Diversions? Is this the Way of GOD's holy Children, to talk after this Manner?
Those Works that are commonly done in the dead of the Night, seem to have a
black Mark set upon them, by the Apostle, and Christians are exhorted to avoid
them, Romans xiii. 12, 13. -- Let us cast off the Works of Darkness, and let us
put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk honestly, as in the Day; not in Rioting
and Drunkenness; not in Chambering and Wantonness --. The Word here rendered,
rioting is of far different Signification from the term, as used in our Laws:
for the forcible doing an unlawful Thing, by three or more Persons assembled
together for that Purpose. Words as they are terms in the Law, are often used
very much beside their common Signification. But the Word here properly
signifies, a disorderly Convention of Persons to spend their time together in
Pleasure and Jollity. So the Word is commonly used in Scripture* (Prove. xxiii.
20.) Be not amongst riotous eaters of Flesh. (Prove. xxviii. 7.) -- He that is a
Companion of riotous Men, shameth his Father. (Luk xv. 13.) -- wasted his
Substance with riotous living.

Again, a black Mark seems to be set on such in Scripture, (as in 1 Thessalonians. v.
5.6, 7, 8.) Ye are all Children of the Light, and the Children of the Day: we
are not of the Night, nor of Darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as do others;
but let us watch and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the Night; and
they that be drunk, are drunken in the Night.

MANY of you that have lately set up this Practice of frolicking and jollity,
profess to be Children of the Light and of the Day; and not to be the Children
of Darkness. Therefore walk as in the Day: and do not those Works of Darkness,
that are commonly done at unseasonable Hours of the Night.

Such things are not only condemned by the Apostle, but are looked upon
infamous through the World in all Ages among soberer sort of People; and all past
Writings show it. Therefore it is a thing of bad Report, and so forbidden
(Phil. iv. 8) -- Whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be any Virtue
-- any Praise, think on these Things.

Objection. 1. But the wise Man allows of this Practice, when he says, Eccles.
iii. 4. There is a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

Answer. This is nothing to the Purpose; for the utmost that any can pretend
that it proves, is denying it to be lawful, and allowing it may be used under
some Circumstances: but not at all, that dancing and other things used by our
young People in their Frolicks are lawful, in those Circumstances; any more
than what is said in the same Chapter,. 3. -- there is a time to kill, proves
that it is lawful for a Man to commit Murder.

To deny that dancing under any Circumstances whatever, was lawful, would be
absurd: for there was a religious dancing in the Jewish Church, that was a way
of expressing their spiritual Mirth. So David danced before the LORD. And he
calls upon others to praise GOD in the dance. So there may be other
Circumstances wherein dancing may not be unlawful. But all this makes nothing
to the present Purpose; to prove that this particular Custom, that we have been
speaking of amongst our young People, is not of a bad tendency. And besides,
when the wise Man says, there is a time to dance, that does not prove, that the
dead of the Night is the time for it. The same wise Man don't justify carnal
Mirth, but condemns it. Eccl. ii. 2. I said of Laughter it is mad; and of
Mirth, what does it?

Object. 2. If we avoid all such things, it will be the way for our young
People to be ignorant how to behave themselves in Company.

Answ. But consider what this Objection comes to. It certainly comes to this,
viz. That the pouring out of the Spirit of GOD upon a People, tends to banish
all good Conduct, good Breeding and decent Behavior from among them; and to
sink them down into Clownishness and Barbarity. And if such a pouring out of
the Spirit of GOD, as has been amongst us, should be continued, it would tend
to have this Effect; for that we have seen by Experience. The Spirit of GOD did
actually put an end to this Practice among us.

BUT who is it amongst us that is not ashamed to make such an Objection? Will
any of our young Converts talk thus? Will you that think you was converted by
the late pouring out of the Spirit of GOD, and are made holy Persons, Heirs of
eternal Life, talk so blasphemously of it?

IF our young People are resolute still to go on, notwithstanding all that has
been said, I hope that those of them that call themselves converted will first
find out some rational, satisfying Answer to the Arguments that have been used
against it. This at least may be reasonably expected of them, seeing they make
such a Profession. You have this Day been partaking of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, and therein solemnly renewed your Profession --

If after such Light set before you, and such Mercy given, you will go on, BE
IT KNOWN TO YOU, that your eating now, and at other times, will prove only an
eating and drinking Judgment to your selves.

AND I desire Heads of Families, if they have any Government over their
Children; or any command of their own Houses; would not tolerate their Children
in such Practices, nor suffer such Conventions in their Houses.

I don't desire that young People should be abridg'd of any lawful and proper
Liberties. -- But this Custom can be of no Benefit or Service in the World: it
tends only to Mischief. --

SATAN doubtless would be glad to have such an Interest amongst us as he used
to have; and is therefore striving to steal in, while we are sleeping: But let
us rouse up our selves, and vigorously oppose his Encroachments.

I shall repeat those Words of the Apostle, Romans xiii. 12, 13, 14. and leave
them to the serious Consideration of all Persons, old and young: The Night is
far spent, the Day is at Hand: Let us therefore cast off the Works of Darkness,
and let us put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk honestly as in the Day, not
in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and
Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Man's natural Blindness in the Things of Religion. [ February 1740.]
SERMON, IV.
PSALM xciv. 8, 9, 10, 11. Understand, ye brutish among the People: and ye
Fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? he
that formed the Eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the Heathen, shall he
not correct? he that teaches Man Knowledge, shall he not know? The Lord
knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are vanity.


IN these Words the following Things are to be observed. 1. A certain spiritual
Disease charged on some, viz. Darkness and blindness of Mind, appearing in
their Ignorance and Folly. 2. The great Degree of this Disease; so as to render
the Subjects of it Fools. "Ye Fools, when will ye be wise?" And so as to reduce
them to a Degree of Brutishness. "Ye brutish among the People." This Ignorance
and Folly was to such a Degree, as to render Men like Beasts. 3. The obstinacy
of this Disease; expressed in that Interrogation, when will ye be wise? Their
blindness and folly was not only very great; but deeply rooted and established,
resisting all manner of cure. 4. Of what Nature this blindness is. It is
especially in things pertaining to God. They were strangely ignorant of his
Perfections, like Beasts: and had foolish Notions of him, as though he did not
see, nor know; and as though he would not execute Justice, by chastising and
punishing wicked Men. 5. The unreasonableness and sottishess of the Notion they
had of God, that he did not hear, did not observe their Reproaches of him and
his People, is shown by observing that he planted the Ear. It Is very
unreasonable to suppose that he who gave Power of perceiving Words, to others,
should not perceive them himself. And the sottishness of their being insensible
of God's all seeing Eye, and particularly of his seeing their wicked Actions,
appears, in that God is the Being who formed the Eye, and gave others a Power
of seeing. The sottishness of their Apprehenhension of GOD, as though he did not
know what they did, is argued from his being the Fountain and Original of all
Knowledge. The unreasonablenss of their expecting to escape God's just
Chastisements and Judgments for Sin, is set forth by his chastising even the
Heathen, who did not sin against that Light, or against so great Mercies, as
the Wicked in Israel did; nor had ever made such a Profession as they. 6. We
may observe, that this dreadful Disease is ascribed to Mankind in general. "The
Lord knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are vanity." The Psalmist had been
setting forth the vanity and unreasonableness of the Thoughts of some of the
Children of Men; and immediately upon it observes, that this vanity and
foolishness of Thought is common and natural to Mankind.

DOCTRINE. THERE is an extreme and brutish Blindness in Things of Religion,
which naturally possesses the Hearts of Mankind.
This Doctrine is not to be understood as any Reflection on the Capacity of the
human Nature; for God has made Man with a noble and excellent Capacity. The
Blindness I speak of, is not a merely negative Ignorance; such as is in Trees
and Stones, that know nothing. And no wonder; for they have no Faculties of
Understanding and Perception, whereby they should be capable of any Knowledge.
And such as is in inferior Animals, who though they have sensitive Perception,
yet are not capable of any intellectual Views. There is no fault to be found
with Man's natural Faculties. God has given Men those Faculties that are very
noble and excellent; well capable of true Wisdom and divine Knowledge.

Nor is the blindness I speak of merely negative, in the manner in which the
Ignorance of a newborn Infant is so. Though this don't arise from want of
Faculties; yet it arises from want of necessary Opportunity to exert these
Faculties.

The blindness that is in the Heart of Man, which is spoken of in the Text and
Doctrine; is neither for want of Faculties, nor opportunity to know; but from
some positive Cause. There is a positive Principle in the Heart, of a blinding
and besotting Nature, that hinders such Exercises of his Faculties about the
things of Religion, as God has made them well capable of, and gives him
abundant Opportunity for. There is a Principle which may be called, a positive
Principle of Ignorance and Blindness; a Proneness or Inclination in the Heart
of Man to such sottishness in these great things.

In order to make it appear, that such an extreme brutish blindness, with
respect to the things of Religion, does naturally possess the Hearts of Men, I
shall, 1. Show how this is manifest in those things that appear in Men's open
Profession. 2. I shall show, how it is manifest in those Things that are found
by inward Experience, and are visible in Men's Practice.


I. I would show, how it is manifest that there is a sottish and brutish
Blindness in the Hearts of Men in the things of Religion, by those things which
appear in Men's open Profession.

1. It appears in the grossness of that Ignorance and those Delusions, which
have appeared among Mankind. Man has Faculties given him whereby he is well
capable of arguing the being of the Creator, from the Creatures: For the
invisible things of God are very plainly and clearly to be seen by the things
that are made: and the Perfections of the Divine Being, his eternal Power and
Godhead, are very manifest in the Works of his Hands. And yet grossly absurd
Notions concerning the Godhead have prevailed in the World. Instead of
acknowledging and worshipping the true GOD, they have fallen off to the worship
of Idols. In stead of acknowledging the one only true GOD, they have made a
Multitude of Deities. Instead of worshipping a GOD, who is an Almighty,
infinite, alwise and holy Spirit, they have worshipped the Hosts of Heaven, the
Sun, Moon and Stars; and the Works of their own Hands, Images of Gold and
Silver, Brass and Iron, Wood and Stone; Things without Life; Gods that can
neither hear nor see, nor walk, nor speak, nor do, nor know^ any thing. Some in
the shape of Men, others in the shape of Oxen and Calves: some in the shape of
Serpents, others of Fishes, etc.

THE sottishness of Men in thus worshipping the lifeless Images which they
themselves have made, is elegantly represented by the Prophet Isaiah. The Smith
with the Tongs both works in the Coals, and fashioneth it with Hammers, and
works it with the Strength of his Arms. Yea he is hungry, and his Strength
fails; he drinks no Water and is faint. The Carpenter stretches out his
Rule: he marketh it out with a Line: he fitteth it with Planes, and he marketh
it out with the Compass, and makes it after the Figure of a Man, according to
the beauty of a Man, that it may remain in the House. He heweth him down
Cedars, and takes the Cypress and the Oak, which he strentheneth for himself
among the Trees of the Forest: he planteth an Ash, and the Rain does nourish
it. Then shall it be for a Man to burn; for he will take thereof and warm
himself; yea, he kindles it, and baketh Bread; yea, he makes a god, and
worshipeth it: he makes it a graven Image, and falls down thereto. He
burns part thereof in the Fire: with Part thereof he eats Flesh: he rosteth
roast and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and says, Aha, I am warm, I
have seen the Fire. And the residue thereof he makes a god, even his graven
Image: he falls down unto it, and worshipeth it, and prays unto it, and
says, Deliver me, for thou art my god. They have not known, nor understood:
for he has shut their Eyes, that they cannot see; and their Hearts, that they
cannot understand. And none considers in his Heart, neither is there
knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the Fire, yea,
also I have baked Bread upon the Coals thereof: I have roasted Flesh, and eaten
it, and shall I make the residue thereof an Abomination? shall I fall down to
the Stock of a Tree? Isai. xliv. 12, -- 19.


Many of the Images which the Heathen worshipped were made in the most monstrous
and terrible Shapes they could devise; and the more hideous and frightful they
appeared, the better they supposed they would serve their turn for gods. Some
of their Images were made so as to be the most unclean Representations; Images
of Men openly exposing their Nakedness. These unclean Images they judged
appeared in a godlike manner, and worthy to be worshipped.

Many, instead of worshipping a holy and good God, and infinitely perfect Being,
ascribed many Vices to many of the Gods which they worshipped. One god they
reckoned notorious for Drunkenness; others notorious for Uncleanness: to
others, they ascribed Lying and Stealing; to others Cruelty; and yet looked
upon them worthy to be worshipped as Gods.

Many worshipped Devils, who appeared to them; which they themselves reckoned to
be evil Spirits: but yet built Temples to them, and offered Sacrifices to them,
because they were afraid of them.

Many worshipped Beasts and Birds and Fishes; and the most hateful and loathsome
Animals were most worshipped, as particularly Serpents were more commonly
worshipped, then any other Beast. Many worshipped Rivers and Trees* and
Mountains. They worshipped many Diseases. There is scarce any thing that Men
have not made gods of.

And so far has that Principle of Blindness with respect to the things of
Religion prevailed, that it has in a great Measure extinguished all Light in
the Minds of many, even in Matters of Morality and Civility, and things that
have but a distant Relation to Religion. So that many whole Nations have
professedly approved of many things directly contrary to the Light of Nature;
and the most horrid Vices and Immoralities have been esteemed harmless, yea
accounted Virtues among them: such as Revenge, Cruelty and Incest. Many Nations
have openly allowed the Practice of Sodomy. And with some it has been accounted
commendable to marry their nearest Relations. Many have even worshipped their
gods in their Temples with Acts of Drunkenness and Whoredom, and the most
abominable Lewdness. And the more filthy they were in their Uncleanness; they
thought their gods the more pleased and delighted with it.

Many Nations have been so under the Influence of this blindness of Mind which
we are now speaking of* that they have been void of all Civility, and have been
reduced to a State very little above the Beasts in their common Customs, and
ordinary way of living; and in a great many Things far below the Beasts: being,
if I may so speak, much more beastly than the Beasts themselves.

Now this has not been, because these Men and Nations, with whom this has been
the Case, have not had the same Faculties that we have. That we be not as
ignorant as they, is not because we have better natural Understandings, or that
our Minds are by Nature more clear, and Eyes more discerning; or that our
Hearts be not naturally so inclined to Sottishness and Delusion as their's. But
only because God has not left us so much to our selves, as he has them. He has
given us more Instruction to help us against our Delusions. GOD has so ordered
it in his Providence, that we should have his good Word to instruct us; and has
caused that we should grow up from our Infancy in christian Instruction.

2. The extreme blindness and sottishness in things of Religion, which is
naturally in the Hearts of Men, appears not only in embracing and professing
those Errors that are very great, but also those that are so unnatural. They
have not only embraced Errors which are very contrary to Truth, but very
contrary to Humanity: not only against the Light of Nature, but against the
more innocent Inclinations of Nature. Such has been, and is the blindness of
many Nations in the World, that they embrace those Errors which do not only
exclude all true Virtue, all holy Dispositions; but those that have swallowed
up the more harmless Inclinations of human Nature. Their blindness has led them
to many things that are most unnatural, and what the very Nature of Man by its
more innocent tendency, seems to shrink at exceedingly.

Thus they have embraced many gross Delusions, that are as contrary as possible
to natural Affection. Such as offering up their own Children in Sacrifice to
their Idol; which has been a common thing in the heathen World. And the Parents
have not only offered them up to Death; but they have brought them, and offered
them up to the most cruel and tormenting Deaths: as to be burnt alive: to be
scalded to Death in burning Brass: which was the Way of offering up Children to
Moloch. The Image of the Idol being made of Brass, in a horrid shape, was heat
red hot; and the poor Child was laid naked in this burning Brass, and so burnt
to Death. And the Parents themselves brought the Child to this offering*
however sweet and pleasant a Child it might be. And thus the innocent Child was
tormented till it died, without any regard to it is piteous Cries. And it has
been the manner of some Nations, to offer in Sacrifice the fairest and
likeliest, and best beloved Child that they had. And thus many Thousands of
poor Babes have been offered up. So strong has been the tendency of the Hearts
of Men to Delusion, that it has thus overcome those strong natural Affections
which Men have to the Fruit of their own Bodies.

And many of the Delusions which Men have embraced, have been against Nature
also, as they have been against Men's natural Love of their own Ease, and
aversion to Pain. Many have worshipped their Idols, and do so to this Day, with
such Rites as are most painful and tormenting: cutting and gashing, and
mangling, their own Flesh. Thus they sottishly worshipped Baal of old. "And they
cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with Knives and Lancets,
till the Blood gushed out upon them." 1 King, xviii 28.
And it is still the Custom in some Nations grievously to torment themselves*
to kindle a Fire to scorch their own Bodies in a most miserable manner: and to
put themselves to various and long continued Torments to please their Idols.
And it is the manner in some Nations for many, on some Occasions, to kill
themselves: yea, to put themselves to cruel Deaths, to cast themselves into
great Fires, and there burn themselves to Death. How strong must be the
Delusions of Men's Minds, and how strong the tendency of the Heart of Man to
Delusion, to carry them such a Length, and so to overcome such strong
Inclinations of human Nature!

3. The extreme blindness of the Mind of Man will appear further, if we
consider how general gross Ignorance and Delusion has been. It has for the most
part prevailed through the greater Part of the World For most of the time from
Noah's Flood to the coming of Christ, all Nations, except the Children of
Israel, were overspread with gross heathenish Darkness; being given up to the
most vain and ridiculous Notions, and all manner of Superstitious, barbarous,
absurd and unnatural Practices. And for the bigger Part of the time since that,
the much greater Part of the Nations of the World, have been covered with gross
Darkness.

It is so at this Day. Many Nations are under popish Darkness, and are in such
gross Delusions that they worship the Virgin Mary, and a great Multitude of
dead Men, whom their Church has canonized for Saints: some real Saints, and
others abominably wicked Men. So they worship the Bread in the Sacrament, and
account it not only the real Body of Christ, but real Christ in Body and Soul,
and Divinity. They carry a Wafer, a small piece of Bread in Procession, and
fall down before it and adore it, and account it Christ himself, both in his
divine and human Nature: and yet believe that the Body of Christ is in Heaven,
and in ten thousand different Places on Earth at the same time. They think they
can do Works of Supererogation: that is, more good Works than they are obliged
to do, whereby they bring God into Debt to them. They whip themselves, and put
themselves to other ridiculous Penances and Sufferings, whereby they think they
appease the Anger of GOD for their Sins. And they pay Money to the Priests, to
buy the Pardon of their Sins: yea, they buy Indulgencies for future Crimes, or
Pardon for Sins before they commit them. They think they defend themselves from
evil Spirits, by sprinkling holy Water. They pay Money to buy the Souls of
their departed Friends out of Purgatory: They worship the Relics of dead
Saints; such as pieces of their Bones, their Teeth, their Hair, pieces of their
Garments, and the like. And innumerable other such foolish Delusions they are
under.

A great Part of the Nations of the World are Mahometans: many of the Articles
of whose Belief are too childish and ridiculous to be publicly mentioned in a
solemn Assembly.

But the bigger Part of the Inhabitants of the World are to this Day gross,
barbarous Heathens, who have not the Knowledge of the true GOD, but worship
Idols and Devils, with all manner of absurd and foolish Rites and Ceremonies;
and are destitute of even common Civility: Multitudes of Nations being like
Beasts in human Shape.

Now this barbarous Ignorance and gross Delusion, being of such great extent
and continuance; of such extent through so many Ages, even the bigger part of the
Time from Noah's Flood to this Day, shows the Cause is general, and the defect
is in the corrupt Nature of Mankind; and the natural blindness of Man's Mind,
and proneness of his Heart to Delusion.

4. The sottish blindness and folly of the Heart of Men appears in their being
so prone to fall into such gross Delusions, soon after they have been favored
with clear Light. Were not the Minds of Men exceeding dark, they never would
entertain such absurd Notions at all; for they are as contrary as possible to
Reason: Much less would they fall into them, after they had once been
instructed in the Truth. For were it not for very strange sottishness indeed,
they would, when they come to be informed of the Truth, and had Opportunity to
compare it with those gross Errors, so plainly see the difference; they would
see such a Reasonableness in the Truth, and such Absurdity in those Errors,
that they would never be in danger of being deluded by them any more. But yet
so it is; Mankind, after they have been fully instructed, and have lived in
clear Light, have time after time, presently lost the Knowledge of the Truth,
and have exchanged it for the most barbarous and brutish Notions.

So it was soon after the Flood, whereby the wicked World, those that were
visibly so, were destroyed: and none were left but those who professed the true
Religion: And they had such an eminently holy Man as Noah to instruct them. And
though the true GOD had so wonderfully and astonishingly manifested himself in
that great Work of Vengeance against his Enemies, his destroying the old World:
yet the Posterity of Noah, great part of them, presently lost the Knowledge of
the true GOD, and fell away to Idolatry; and that even while Noah was living.
And the Ancestors of Abraham were tainted with that Idolatry: and even Terah
his own Father. "And Joshua said unto all the People, "Thus says the Lord God
of Israel. Your Fathers dwelt on the other side of the Flood in old Time, even
Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father of Nachor: and they served other
gods. And I took your Father Abraham from the other Side of the Flood etc."
Josh. xxiv. ii^ 3 4.
It seems as though Abraham was called away from his Father's House, and from his
own Country for this Reason, that the Country was overrun with Idolatry.

And even many of the Posterity of Abraham and Isaac, Abraham's Posterity by
Hagar and Keturah, and that part of Isaac's Posterity which were of Esau, though
the true Religion was so thoroughly taught and practiced in the Houses of those
holy Patriarchs, and God had from time to time so wonderfully and miraculously
manifested himself to them, yet soon cast off the true GOD, and fell away to
Idolatry. For not very long after we read of the Posterity of Jacob as being
the only People of God, that he had in all the Earth.

And so the People of that Part of the Land of Canaan, that were under that
holy King Melchizedeck, soon totally cast off the worship of the one only true
GOD, which he taught and maintained. For before Joshua brought in the Children
of Israel, the Inhabitants of that Land were wholly given to Idolatry. So the
People of the Land of Uz, who were under the Government of so great and holy a
Man as Job, soon lost the Knowledge of the true GOD, and all those religious
Truths which were then known among them, and sunk into gross Idolatry.

So the Posterity of Jacob themselves, though God had manifested himself so to
them, and had wrought such Wonders for them in Jacob's and Joseph's time; yet
presently fell to worshipping the gods of Egypt. This appears from the Words of
Joshua, "Put away the gods which your Fathers served on the other Side of the
Flood, and in Egypt." Josh. xxiv. 14.
And how soon did they fall to worshipping a golden Calf in the Wilderness, in
the midst of the wonderful and miraculous Manifestations of the one only true
GOD! And notwithstanding Idolatry was so strictly forbidden, and the Folly and
Wickedness of it so clearly manifested in the Law of Moses and in God's
Providence; and it was so much guarded against every way in the Revelation
given them, and the whole of God's Conduct toward them; yet how soon did they
fall into Idolatry after they were brought into the Land of Canaan! And when
God raised up eminent Men, Judges to instruct and govern them, and reclaim them
from their idolatrous Practices, from time to time; and they professed to be
convinced of their Delusion and Folly, and to repent; yet they would soon fall
away again into the most sottish Idolatry. And this they did soon after such
great Light as they enjoyed in Samuel's, David's and Solomon's time. And so
they did from time to time down to the Babylonish Captivity.

And in the Apostles times, when such great things were done to rouse the
Attention of Mankind, and such great Light was spread over many Nations,
Multitudes, after they had been instructed in the Christian Religion by the
Apostles and others, fell away into the grossest Heresies, and embraced the
most corrupt and absurd Notions.

After the roman Empire had been converted from Heathenism to Christianity, and
the Light of the Gospel had driven out the sottish Ignorance, and gross
Absurdities of pagan Idolatry, in which they had continued so long; they soon
begun to fall away again from the Truth into Antichristian Superstition and
Idolatry, in which are Opinions and Practices no less absurd than those of the
Heathen. And a great Part of the christian World fell away to Mahometism.

And since the Reformation, wherein GOD wonderfully restored Gospel Light in a
great Part of the christian World, which was not but about two hundred Years
ago, many are fallen away again, some to Popery, and some to gross Heresies,
and some to atheistical Principles: so that the reformed Church is greatly
diminished.

And our Nation in particular, which has been a Nation favored with Light,
since the Reformation, above most, if not any in the World; how soon has it in
great Part fallen away! A great Part of it to Atheism and Deism, to gross
Infidelity; and others to Arminianism, and to the Socinian and Arian Heresies,
to believe that Christ is a created dependent God; and to hold other foolish
Absurdities! And many have of late openly disputed and denied the moral Evil of
some of the greatest and most heinous Vices.

These Things show how desperately prone Mankind are to Blindness and Delusion,
how addicted they are to Darkness.

GOD now and then, by his Instructions, lifts some Nations out of such gross
Darkness: but then, how do they sink down into it again, as soon as his Hand is
withdrawn! like an heavy Stone, which though it may be forced upwards by Strength
of Hand; yet, if it be let go, sinks down again: and will continue to sink
lower and lower with a swift progress, if no stop be put to it, if there be
nothing without to restrain it: There is a strong bent that Way. That is the
tendency of the Mind of Man since the Fall, notwithstanding his noble Powers
and Faculties, to sink down into a kind of Brutality, to loose and extinguish
all useful Light, and to gather darkness: and to sink lower and lower into
darkness.

5. The extreme and brutish blindness that possesses the Hearts of Men
naturally, appears in their being so confident in gross Errors and Delusions.
Some things that have been already said, show how confident and assured they
are: as particularly, their running such great ventures upon it, as offering up
their Children; and cutting and mangling themselves. Multitudes live and die in
the most foolish and absurd Notions and Principles, and never seem to make any
Doubt of their being in the right.

The Mahometans seem to make no Doubt but that when they die they shall go to
such a Paradise as Mahomet has promised them: where they shall live in all
manner of sensual Pleasures: and shall spend their time in gratifying the Lusts
of the Flesh.

Mahomet promised them that all that die in War for the defense of the
Mohammedan Religion, shall go to this Paradise: and they make no Doubt of it;
and therefore many of them, as it were, willingly rush on upon the Point of the
Sword.

The Papists many of them make no Doubt of the Truth of those foolish Notions
of a Purgatory, and the Power of the Priests to deliver them out of it, and
give them eternal Life. And therefore will not spare vast Sums of Money to
purchase Deliverance for themselves, from those imaginary Torments. And how
confident are many Heretics in the grossest Heresies: many Quakers in their
Quakerism: and how bold are many Deists in their Infidelity!

SERMON, V.
PSALM xciv. 8, 9, 10, 11. Understand, ye brutish among the People: and ye
Fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? he
that formed the Eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the Heathen, shall he
not correct? he that teaches Man Knowledge, shall he not know? The Lord
knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are vanity.


DOCTRINE. THERE is an extreme and brutish Blindness in Things of Religion,
which naturally possesses the Hearts of Mankind.
I Have undertaken to show, how manifest this is in those things that appear in
Men's open Profession. In order to this, I have already considered (...)
Particulars.

I now proceed to observe,

6. The desperateness of that blindness which is in the Heart of Man appears in
that no Nation or People in the World, ever have had any Remedy or Deliverance
from such gross Ignorance and Delusion, from themselves.

There is no Instance can be mentioned of any People whatsoever, who have once
fallen into heathenish Darkness, or any other gross Supe^stitions and
ridiculous Opinions in Religion, that ever had any Remedy by any Wisdom of
their own: or that have of themselves bethought themselves, and grown wiser by
the improvement of their own Faculties, and by instructing one another: or that
ever had any Remedy at all, by the teaching of any wise Men, who did not
professedly act, not as of themselves, but as moved and directed of God; and
did not declare, that they had their Instructions in the first Place from him.

Thus in the heathen World: Before Christ's time the whole World excepting the
Jews, lay in their Darkness for a great many Hundred Years, even time out of
Mind, beyond all Time that they had any certain History of among them. And
there was no remedy, nor appearance of any Remedy: but so they continued Ages
after Ages, rather waxing worse and worse, sinking deeper and deeper. Among all
the many Nations that were in the World, no one ever be-thought themselves, and
emerged out of their brutish Darkness. There were some Nations in that time
that emerged out of Slavery to other Nations, and cast off the Yoke of their
Enemies, and grew great and conquered great Part of the World: but never
conquered the blindness of their own Hearts.

There were some Nations that excelled in other Knowledge: The Greeks and
Romans did so. They excelled in Policy, and in the fo^m of their civil
Government. They had wise politic Rulers: They had excellent civil Laws for
regulating their civil State: many of which have been looked upon, and imitated
as a Pattern by many christian Nations since. They excelled many other Nations
in Arts and Government and Civility, almost as much as Men do Beasts.

Yet they never could deliver themselves from their heathenism. Though they were
so wise in other things, yet in Matters of Religion they were very absurd and
brutish. For even the Greeks and Romans in their most flourishing State,
worshipped innumerable gods: and some to whom they ascribed great Vices: and
some they worshipped with most obscene and horrid Rites. To some they offered
human Sacrifices. The Romans had a Temple dedicated to the Furies, which they
worshipped as a God. And they had a Multitude of childish Notions and Fables
about their gods.

And though there were raised up some wise Men and Philosophers among the Greeks
and Romans, who borrowed some things concerning the true GOD from the Jews; yet
their Instructions never were effectual to deliver any one People, or even one
City or Town, from their barbarous Heathenism, or so much as to get any one
Society or Company of Men to unite in the public Worship of the true GOD. And
these Philosophers themselves had many grossly absurd Opinions mingled with
those scraps of Truth, which they had gathered up.

And the Jews, when they fell away to Idolatry, as they often did, never
recovered of themselves. Never any Remedy appeared, unless God raised up, and
extraordinarily moved some Person to reprove and instruct them.

And in this Age of Knowledge, an Age wherein Learning is carried to such a
great height, even many learned Men seem really to be carried away with the
gross Errors and Fooleries of the popish Religion.

Europe is a Part ^f the World the most famed for Civility, and for Arts and
Sciences of any: and these things have been carried to a much greater height in
this Age, than in many others: yet many learned Men in Europe at this Day, who
do greatly excel in human Arts and Literature, are still under popish darkness
A deceived Heart has turned them aside: nor do they seem to have any Power to
deliver their Souls: nor does it come into their Minds, that there is a Lie in
their right Hands.

Many Men in France and other Countries, who are indeed Men of vast Learning
and Knowledge, and great Abilities, yet seem really to think that the Church of
Rome is the only true Church of Christ; and are zealous to uphold and propagate
it. And though now within this hundred Years, human Learning has been very much
promoted, and risen to a greater height than ever in the World: and has greatly
increased not only in our Nation, but in France and Italy, and other popish
Countries: yet there seems to be no such effect of it, as any considerable
turning from popish Delusions; but the Church of Rome has rather increased of
late, than otherwise.

And in England, a Land wherein Learning flourishes as much as in any in the
World, and which is perhaps the most favored with Light of any; there are many
Men of vast Learning, and great and strong Reason, who have embraced, and do at
this Day, embrace the gross Errors of the Arians and Deists. Our Nation, in all
its Light and Learning, is full of Infidels, and those that are further from
Christianity, than the very Mahometans themselves. Of so little avail is human
Strength, and human Reason and Learning, as a Remedy against the extreme
blindness of the Mind of Man. The blindness of the Mind of Man, or an
Inclination to Delusion in Things of Religion is so strong, that it will
overcome the greatest Learning, and the strongest natural Reason, and as it
were, swallow up these Things.

Men, if let alone, will not help one another: nor will they help themselves.
The Disease always proves without Remedy, unless God delivers. This was
observed of old: And none considers in his Heart, neither is there Knowledge
nor Understanding to say, I have burnt Part of it in the Fire, yea also I have
baked Bread upon the Coals thereof: I have ^osted Flesh and eaten of it, and
shall I make the residue thereof an Abomination? Shall I fall down to the Stock
of a Tree? He feeds of Ashes: a deceived Heart has turned him aside, that he
cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a Lie in my right Hand? Isai.
xliv. 19, 20.


If God lets Men alone, no Light arises: but the Darkness grows thicker and
thicker. How is it now at this Day among all the Nations where the Light of the
Gospel has not come? Many of whose Ancestors, without doubt, have been in the
midnight Darkness of Heathenism for above three thousand Years: and not one
People have delivered themselves, who have not had the Light of the Gospel. And
this is not owing to their want of as good natural Abilities as we have: nor is
it because they have an Inclination more to neglect their natural Abilities, or
make a worse Improvement of them than we.

7. The extreme blindness of Man's Heart in Matters of Religion appears by
Men's falling into gross Delusions, or continuing in them, at the same time
that they have been under great Means of Instruction from GOD.

We have many Instances of this. Rachel in Jacob's Family -- The Israelites in
the Wilderness. They had great Means of Instruction, yet set up the golden Calf
etc. And after Joshua's time -- they persisted in their Del^sions and Folly
from time to time, even under the Reproofs of the Prophets -- even in such
horrid Delusions, so contrary to natural Affection, as offering their Children
in Sacrifice to Moloch, burning them alive, in a most cruel manner.

In Christ's and the Apostles times the Jews had great Means of Instruction,
and most of the Nations of the World were put under great Advantages to come to
the Knowledge of the Truth: Yet --

The Papists in the time of the Reformation, and since --

The Deists and Arians in our Day --

8. The exceeding blindness of Men in things of Religion appears in the endless
Disputes and Controversies, that there have been, and are, among Men, about
those things which concern Religion.

Of old the wise Men and Philsophers among the Heathen, were, as it were,
infinitely divided among themselves. Varro, who was one of them, reckons up
several hundred Opinions that they had about that one Point, Wherein Man's
happiness consisted. And they were continually in Disputes one with another.
But the Effects of their Disputes was not any greater Union or any better
Agreement in their Opinions. They were as much divided after they had disputed
many Ages, as they were at first: yea much more.

So there have long been Disputes in the christian World about Opinions and
Principles in Religion. There is a vast variety of Sects and Opinions; and
Disputes have been carried on, Age after Age, with great warmth, and thousands
of Volumes have been written one against another. And all these Disputes have
not terminated the Differences that have been, but they subsist still as much
as ever: yea, they increase and multiply more and more. In stead of ending
Controversies by disputing, they do but increase them: one Dispute only lays a
Foundation for another. And thus the World goes on jangling and contending,
daily writing and printing; being, as it were, deluged with controversial
Books: and all to no Purpose.

The increase of human Learning don't bring these Controvesies to an Issue, but
does really increase and multiply them; as is evident in this learned Age, and
in our Nation, where Learning has lately been carried to a very great height.
There probably never was a Time in our Nation wherein there was such a vast
variety of Opinions in Matters of Religion, as at this Day. Every now and then,
a new Scheme of things is broached, and various and contrary O^inions are mixed
and jumbled, divided and subdivided: And every new Writer is willing to have
the credit of some new Notion.

And after this Manner does this miserable World go on in endless Confusion;
like a great Multitude of foolhardy Persons, who go on in the dark, stumbling
and justling one against another, without perceiving any Remedy for their own,
or affording any for their Neighbor's Calamity.

Thus I have shown how the extreme blindness that possesses the Hearts of Men
is manifest in what appears in their Profession.

I come now,

II. To show, how this is manifest in those Things that are found by inward
Experience, and are visible in Men's Practices under the Light of the Gospel.

1. This appears in their being so prone to be deceived so many Ways, or being
liable to such a multiplicity of Deceits. There are Thousands of Delusions in
things which concern the Affairs of Religion, that Men commonly are led away
with, who yet live under the Light of the Gospel.

They are many ways deceived about GOD. They think him to be an exceeding
diverse kind of Being from what he is. They think him to be altogether such an
one as themselves. Psalm. l. 21.
They are deceived about his Holiness, they don't realize it, that he is such a
holy Being as he indeed is: or that he hates Sin with such an hatred as he
declares he does. They are not convinced of his Truth, or that he certainly
will fulfill his Threatenings or his Promises. -- They are not convinced of his
Justice in punishing Sin, as he does. --

They have very wrong Notions of Christ. They are not co^^ced of his Ability to
save them, or of the Suffici^^y of his Sacrifice and Righteousness; nor of his
wil^^ness to receive them.

They commonly are subject to a great many Errors about their Duty. They are
ready to bring their Principles to agree with their Practices, in stead of
bringing their Practices to their Principles, as they ought to do. They will
put innumerable false Glosses on the Rules of God's Word, to bend them to a
compliance with their Lusts: And so they "put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter."

They are subject to Deceits and Delusions about the Things of this World. They
imagine that there is Happiness and Satisfaction to be found in the Profits and
Pleasures and Honors, which are to be had here. They believe all the deluding
Flatteries and Promises of a vain World. And they will hold that Deceit and
grand Delusion, That these Things are the highest Good; and will act
accordingly; will choose these things for their Portion. And they will hold and
practice upon that Error, That these things are o^ long Continuance, and are to
be depended upon.

They are greatly deceived about the things of another World. They undervalue
that heaven^y Glory that is promised to the Saints; and are not much terrified
with what they hear of the Damnation of Hell: they cannot realize it, that the
Torments of it are so dreadful as they hear: and are very ready to imagine that
they are not eternal, but will some time or other have an end.

They are deceived about the State of good Men. They think they are not happy,
but live a melancholy Life. And they are deceived about the Wicked. They envy
the State of many of them, as accounting them well off. "They call the proud
happy, Mal. iii. 15.
and bless the covetous, whom God abhors." Psalm. x. 3.
And they strive a great deal more after such Enjoyments as they have, than
after such as ^^e the Portion of the godly.

They are subject to a thousand Deceits and Delusions about themselves. They
think themselves wise, when they are Fools. They are deceived about their own
Hearts: they think them much better than they be. They think they see many good
things in themselves, when indeed there is nothing good there. They appear
lovely in their own Eyes, when they are nothing but Lumps of Filthiness, and
their Hearts are like the inside of a Grave, full of dead Men's Bones and rotten
Flesh, and crawling Worms, and all uncleanness. Or rather, the inward Vault of
Hell, that is an Habitation of Devils and every foul Spirit. Those things in
their Hearts are highly esteemed by them, which are an Abomination in the Sight
of God.

Men are very prone to be deceived about their own State: to think themselves
something, when they are nothing; and to suppose themselves "rich and increased
in Goods, and to have need of nothing; when they are wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and BLIND, and naked" They are greatly deceived about the Principles
they act from. They think they are sincere in that in which there is no
Sincerity. They think they do those things from love to God, which they do only
from love to themselves. They call mere speculative or natural Knowledge,
spiritual Knowledge: and put Conscience for Grace; and a servile, for a
child-like fear: and common Affections, that are only from natural Principles,
and have no abiding effect, for high Discoveries, and eminent actings of Grace.
Yea, it is common with Men to call their vicious Dispositions by the Name of
some Virtue. They call their Anger and Malice, zeal for the righteous Cause, or
zeal for the public Good. They call their Covetousness, frugality.

They are vastly deceived about their own Righteousness. They think their
Affections and Peformances lovely to God, which indeed are to him as a
menstruous Cloth. They think their Tears and Reformations and Prayers,
sufficient to make Atonement for their Sins; when indeed if all the Angels in
Heaven should offer themselves in Sacrifice to God, it would not be sufficient
to atone for one of their Sins. They think their Prayers and Works, and
religious Doings, a sufficient Price to purchase God's Favor and eternal
Glory; when they, as they perform them, do nothing but merit Hell.

They are greatly deceived about their Strength. They think they are able to
mend their own Hearts, and work some good Principles in themselves; when they
can do no more toward it, than a dead Corpse does toward raising it self to
Life. They vainly flatter themselves, they are able to come to Christ --

They are greatly deceived about the stability of their own Hearts. They
foolishly think their own Intentions and Resolutions of what good they will do
hereafter, to be depended on; when indeed there is no dependence at all to be
had on them. They are greatly deceived about their Opportunities. They think
that the long Continuance of their Opportunity is to be depend^d on, and that,
to Morrow is to be boasted of; when indeed there is the utmost uncertainty of
it. They flatter themselves that they shall have a better Opportunity to seek
Salvation hereafter, than they have now; when there is no probability of it,
but a very great improbability.

They are greatly deceived about their own Actions and Practices. Their own
Faults are strangely hid from their Eyes. They live in many Ways that are ^ery
unbecoming Christians, but yet seem not to be at all sensible of it. Those evil
Ways of theirs, which are very plain to others, are hid from them. Yea, those
very things, which they themselves account great Faults in others, yet they
will justify themselves in. Those things for which they will be very angry with
others, yet they at the same time do themselves, and often times in a much
higher Degree, and never once think of it. While they are zealous to pull the
Mote out of their Brother's Eye, they know not that a Beam is in their own Eye.

Those Sins that they commit, which they are sensible are Sins, yet they are
woefully deceived about. They call great Sins, little ones; and in their own
Imaginations, find out many Excuses, which make the Guilt very small; while the
many heinous Aggravations are hid from their Eyes.

They are greatly deceived about themselves, when they compare themselves with
others. They esteem themselves better than their Neighbors, who are indeed
much better than themselves. They are greatly deceived about themselves, when
they compare themselves with GOD. They are very insensible of the difference
there is between God and them, and act in many things as if they thought
themselves his Equals; yea, as if they thought themselves above him. Thus
manifold are the Deceits and Delusions that Men fall into.

2. The desperate Blindness that is natural to Men, appears in their being so
ignorant and blind in things that are so clear and plain. Thus if we consider
how great GOD is, and how dreadful Sin against him must be* and how much Sin we
are guilty of, and of what Importance it is that his infinite Majesty should be
vindicated; how plain is it, that Man's Righteousness is insufficient! And yet
how greatly will Men confide in it! How will they ascribe more to it, than can
be ascribed to the Righteousness of any, or all of the sinless and glorious
Angels of Heaven. So, what can be more plain in it self, than that eternal
Things are of infinitely greater Importance than temporal things? And yet, how
hard is it thoroughly to convince Men of it! How plain is it, that eternal
Misery in Hell is infinitely to be dreaded? And yet how few appear to be
thoroughly convinced of this! How plain is it, that Life is uncertain: and yet
how much otherwise do most Men think! How plain is it, that it is the highest
Prudence in Matters of infinite Concern to improve the first Opportunity,
without trusting to another: but yet how few are convinced of this? How
reasonable is it, considering that God is a wise and just Being, to suppose
that there shall be a future State of Rewards and Punishments, wherein every
Man shall receive according to his Works? And yet, how does this seem like a
Dream to most Men.

What can be in it self more plain and manifest, and easily to be known by us,
if it were not for a strange Blindness, th^n We to our selves, who are always
with our selves, never absent from our selves; always in our own View, as it
were, before our own Eyes? Who have Opportunity to look into our own Hearts,
and see all that passes there. And yet what is there that Men are more ignorant
of, than they are of themselves? There are many vicious Practices, the
unlawfulness of which is very plain; the Sins are gross, and contrary not only
to the Word of God, but to the Light of Nature: and yet Men will often times
plead there is no harm in such Sins: such as many Acts of gross Uncleanness:
and many Acts of Fraud, Injustice and Deceitfulness; and many others that might
be mentioned.

There is no one thing whatsoever more plain and manifest, and more
demonstrable, than the Being of a GOD. It is manifest in our selves, in our own
Bodies and Souls, and in every thing about us wherever we turn our Eye,
whether to Heaven, or to the Earth, the Air or the Seas. And yet how prone is
the Heart of Man to call the Being of God into question? So inclined is the
Heart of Man to Blindness and Delusion, that it is prone to Atheism itself.

3. The greatness of the blindness of the Heart of Man appeas in that so little
a thing will deceive him, and confound his Judgment of things. A little
self-interest; or only the Bait of some short Gratification of a sensual
Appetite; or a little stiring of Passion, will blind Men's Eyes, and make them
argue and judge most strangely and perversely, and draw up the most absurd
Conclusions; such, as if they were indifferent, they would see to be most
unreasonable. The Devil finds easy Work with Men, to deceive them a thousand
Ways: which is an Argument of the great weakness and blindness of our Minds. As
a little Child, that is weak in Understanding, is very easily deceived.

4. The wofulness of the blindness tha^ possesses the Hearts of Men naturally,
appears in their being all naturally totally ignorant of that in God, which
they had most need to know; viz. the glory and excellency of his Nature. Though
our Faculties which we have above the Beasts were chiefly given us, that we
might know this; and though it be that without the knowledge of which, all other
Knowledge will signify nothing to us; and our Faculties are as capable of it,
as of any other Knowledge whatsoever; and that which is as plainly and
abundantly manifested as any thing whatsoever innumerable Ways, both in the
Word and Works of God: yet all Men naturally are totally ignorant of this; as
ignorant, as one born blind is of Colors. Natural Men of the greatest
Abilities and Learning, are as ignorant of it, as the weakest and the most
unlearned; yea, as ignorant as the very Stocks and Stones; for they see, and
can see nothing at all of it.

5. It appears, in that they are so blind in those same Things in religious
Matters, which they are sufficiently sensible of in other Matters. In temporal
things they are very sensible that it is a point of Prudence to improve the
first Opportunity in things of great Importance. But in Matters of Religion,
which are of infinitely the greatest Importance, they have not this discerning.
In temporal Matters they are sensible it is a great folly long to delay and put
off, when Life is in danger, and all depends upon that. But in the Concerns of
their Souls, they are insensible of this Truth. So in the Concerns of this
World they are sensible it is Prudence to improve times of special Advantage --
to embrace a good offer when made them -- They are sensible that things of long
Continuance are of greater Importance, than those of short Duration -- Yet in
religious Concerns, none of these Things are sensibly discerned. In temporal
things they are sufficiently sensible, that it is a point of Prudence to lay up
for hereafter, in Summer to lay up for Winter -- to lay up for their Families,
after they are dead: but Men do not generally discern the Prudence, in making a
proper Provision for a future State -- In Matters of Importance in this World,
they are sensible of the wisdom of taking thorough care to be on sure Grounds.
But in their Soul's Concerns, they see nothing of this -- Our Savior observed
this to be the Case with the Jews when he was upon Earth. "Ye Hypocrites, ye
can discern the face of the Sky, and of the Earth: but how is it that ye do
not discern this time?" Luke xii. 56.


6. The desperate blindness that naturally possesses the Hearts of Men under
the Gospel, appears in their remaining so stupidly insensible and deceived,
under so great Means of Instruction and Conviction. If they were brought up
under heatheanish Darkness, it would not be so full a Demonstration of it; but
thus they remain, though under the clearest Light, under the glorious Light of
the Gospel, where they enjoy God's own Instructions in his Word, in a great
fullness and plainness, and have the Evidence and Truth of things set before
them from time to time in the plainest manner. They have the Arguments of God's
Being and Perfection -- of another World -- Are told how eternal things are of
greater Importance than temporal -- Of what Importence it is to escape eternal
Misery. How much it is worth while to take Pains for heavenly Glory -- How vain
their own Righteousness is -- But yet --

And they have not only great Means of Instruction in God's Word, but also in
Providence. They have the Evidences of the shortness and uncertainty of Life.
"He sees that wise Men die, likewise the fool and the brutish Person perish,
and leave their Wealth to others." Yet "their inward thought is, that their
Houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling Places to all Generations:
They call their Lands after their own Names. Nevertheless Man being in Honor,
abides not: He is like the Beasts that perish. This their way is their folly:
yet their Posterity approve their sayings." They find the World is vain and
unsatisfactory. -- They find the great instability and treachery of their own
Hearts; and how their own good Intentions and Resolutions are not to be
depended on -- They often find by Experience, their Attempts to make them
better fail -- But yet --

Such abundant Evidence is there, both in what appears in the open Profession
of Men; and also by what is found in their inward Experience, and is evident in
their Practice, of the extreme and brutish Ignorance and blindness, which
naturally possesses their Hearts.

SERMON VI.
PSALM xciv. 8, 9, 10, 11. Understand, ye brutish among the People: and ye
Fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? he
that formed the Eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the Heathen, shall he
not correct? he that teaches Man Knowledge, shall he not know? The Lord
knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are vanity.


DOCTRINE. THERE is an extreme and brutish Blindness in Things of Religion,
which naturally possesses the Hearts of Men.
HAVING shown how the Truth of the Doctrine is evident, both by what appears in
Men's open profession, and by those Things which are found by inward Experience,
and are manifest by what is visible in Men's practice; I proceed to the

APPLICATION.
The first Use may be of Instruction, in the following Particulars.

I. By this we may see how manifest are the Ruins of the fall of Man. It is
observable in all the Kinds of God's Creatures that we behold, that they have
those Properties and Qualities, which are every way proportioned to their End;
so that they need no more, they stand in need of no greater degree of
Perfection, in order well to answer the special use for which they seem to be
designed. The brute Creatures, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and Insects, though there
be innumerable Kinds of them, yet all seem to have such a decree of Perception
and Perfection given them, as best suits their Place in the Creation, and their
manner of living, and the Ends for which they were made. There is no defect
visible in them: they are perfect in their kind; there seems to be nothing
wanting, in order to their filling up their Place in the World. And there can
be no reasonable Doubt but that it was so at first with Mankind It is not
reasonable to suppose, that God would make many thousands of Kinds of Creatures
here in this lower World, and one Kind the highest of them all, to be the head
of the rest; and that all the rest should be complete in their Kinds, every way
endowed with such Qualifi^ations as are proportioned to their Use and End: And
this most noble Creature of all, only left exceeding imperfect, notoriously
destitute of what he principally stands in need or to answer the End of his
being.

The principal Faculty by which God has distinguished this noble Creature from
the rest, is his Understanding: But would God so distinguish Man in his
creation from other Creatures, and then seal up that Understanding with such an
extreme blindness, as to render it useless, as to the principal Ends of it; and
wholly to disenable him from answering the Ends of an understanding Creature,
and to make his Understanding rather a misery rather than a blessing to him;
and rendering him much more mischievous than useful?

Therefore, if the Scripture had not told us so, yet we might safely conclude,
that Mankind are not now, as they were made at first; but that they are in a
fallen State and Condition.

II. From what has been said, plainly appears the absolute necessity of divine
Revelation. The Deist^ deny the Scripture to be the Word of God, and hold that
there is no revealed Religion; that God has given Mankind no other Rule but his
own Reason; which is sufficient, without any Word or Revelation from Heaven, to
give Man a right understanding of divine Things, and of his Duty. But how has
it proved in fact? How much trial has there been, whether Man's Reason, without
a Revelation, would be sufficient or no? The whole World, excepting one Nation,
had the trial from about Moses's time, to the coming of Christ, about fifteen
Hundred Years. And was not this long enough for a trial, whether Man's Reason
alone was sufficient to instruct him? Those Nations, who all that time lay in
such gross darkness, and in such a deplorable helpless Condition, had the same
natural Reason that the Deists have. And during this time, there was not only
one Man, or a Succession of single Persons that had the trial, whether their
own Reason would be sufficient to lead them to the Knowledge of the Truth; but
all Nations, who all had the same human Faculties that we have. If human Reason
is really sufficient, and there be no need of any thing else, why has it never
proved so? Why has it never happened, that so much as one Nation, or one City
or Town, or one Assembly of Men have been brought to tolerable Notions of
divine Things, unless it be by the Revelation contained in the Scriptures? If
it were only one Nation that had remained in such Darkness, the trial might not
be thought so great; because one particular People might be under some
Disadvntages, which were peculiar. But thus it has been with all Nations,
except those which have been favored with the Scriptures, and in all Ages.
Where is any People, who to this Day have ever delivered themselves by their
own Reason, or have been delivered without Light fetched from the Scriptures,
or by Means of the Gospel of Jesus Christ?

If human Reason is sufficient without the Scripture, it is strange that in
these latter Ages, since Navigation has been been so improved, and America and
many other Parts of the World have been discovered, which were before unknown;
and many hundreds of Nations have been found out, which the christian World
before knew nothing of: I say, it is very strange, that among all these newly
discovered Nations, no one Nation has any where been found already enlightened
and possessed of true Notions about the Divine Being and his Perfections, and
free from heathenish Darkness, by virtue of that human Reason, they have been
possessed of this so many thousand Years. The many poor, barbarous Nations here
in America had the faculty of human Reason to do what they pleased with, before
the Europeans came hither, and brought over the Light of the Gospel. If this
human Reason alone was sufficient, it is strange no one People were found, in
any corner of the Land, who were helped with their Reason.

There has been a great trial as to what Men's Reason can do, without divine
Help, in those endless Disputes that have been maintained. If human Reason
alone could help Mankind, it might be expected that these Disputes would have
helped them, and have put an end to Men's darkness. The heathen Philosophers had
many hundreds of Years to try their Skill in this way; but all without effect.

That divine Revelation, which the Church of God has been possessed of, has
been in the World "as a Light shining in a dark Place. 2 Pet. i. 19.
It Is the only Remedy which God has provided for the miserable, brutish
blindness of Mankind: a Remedy without which, this fallen World of Mankind
would have sunk down for ever in barbarism and brutality without any Remedy. It
is the only means that the true God has made successful in his Providence, to
give the Nations of the World the Knowledge of himself; and to bring them off
from the worship of false gods.

If human Reason be the only proper Means, the Means that God has designed for
the enlightening of Mankind, it is very strange that it has not been sufficient
for this, nor has answered this end in any one Instance. All the right
speculative knowledge of the true God, which the Deists themselves have, has
been derived from divine Revelation --

How vain is it to dispute against Fact, and the Experience of so many thousand
Years? And to pretend that human Reason is sufficient without divine
Revelation, when so many thousand years Experience, among so many hundreds of
Nations, of different Tempers, Circumstances and Interests, has proved the
contrary? One would think that all should acknowledge, that so long a time is
sufficient for a trial; especially considering the Miseries that the poor
Nations of the World have been under all this while, for want of Light: The
innumerable temporal Calamities and Miseries; such as sacrificing Children, and
many other Cruelties to others, and even themselves: besides, that eternal
Perdition, which may reasonably be supposed to be the Consequence of such
Darkness.

III. This Doctrine should make us sensible, how great a Mercy it is to
Mankind, that God has sent his own Son into the World, to be the Light of the
World.

The Doctrine shows what great need we stand in of some Teacher to be sent from
God. And even some of the wiser Men among the Heathen saw the need of this.
They saw that they disputed and jangled among themselves without coming to a
satisfying discovery of the Truth; and hence they saw the need there was of a
Teacher sent from Heaven; and spoke of such a thing. And it is a wonderful
Instance of divine Mercy that God has so beheld us in our low Estate, as to
provide such a glorious Remedy. He has not only sent some created Angel to
instruct us, but his own SON, who is in the Bosom of the Father, and of the
same Nature and Essence with him; and therefore infinitely better acquainted
with him, and more sufficient to teach a blind World. He has sent him to be the
Light of the World, as he says of himself, "I am come a Light into the World.
Joh. xii. 46.
When he came he brought glorious Light into the World. It was like the Day
spring from on high, visiting a dark World, as Zacharias observes. Luke i.
77.78.79.
After Christ came, then the glorious Gospel began to spread abroad in the
World into one Nation and another, delivering those "that had sat in Darkness,
and in the Region of the shadow of Death."

What reason have we to rejoice and praise God, that he has made such excellent
Provision for us; and has set so glorious a Sun in our Firmament, such a "Sun
of Righteousness," after we had extinguished the Light, which at first
enlightened us; and had, as it were, brought the World into that State, in
which it was when "without Form, and void, and Darkness was on the face of it".
Joh. xii. 46.


The glory of that Light which God has sent into the World, is fully answerable
to the grossness of that Darkness which filled the World. For Christ who came
to enlighten us, is Truth and Light it self, and the Fountain of all Light."
"He is Light, and in him is no darkness at all. Luke i. 77.78.79.


IV. Hence we may learn, what must be the thing that will bring to pass those
glorious Days of Light, which are spoken of in God's Word.

Though Mankind be fallen into such Darkness, and the World is mostly in the
Kingdom of Darkness: yet the Sea Jer. iv. 22, 23.
Joh. i. 5.
Scripture often speaks of a glorious Day, wherein, Light shall fill the Earth.
"For behold the darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross darkness the People
but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And
the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising." Isai. lx. 2, 3.
"And he will destroy in this Mountain, the face of the covering cast over all
People, and the vail that is spread over all Nations" Isai. lx. 2, 3.
"The knowledge of God shall fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the Seas"
Isai. xxv. 1.


By what we have heard, we may on good Grounds conclude that whenever this is
accomplished, it will not be effected by human Learning, or by the skill or
wisdom of great Men. What has been before observed of this learned Age, is an
Evidence of this; wherein spiritual Darkness does so increase, with the
increase of Learning. God will again make foolish the wisdom of this World; and
will, as it were, say in his Providence, "Where is the wise! where is the
Scribe! where is the disputer of this World!"

When this shall be accomplished, it will be by a remarkable pouring out of
God's own Spirit, with the plain preaching of the Gospel of his Son; the
preaching of the spiritual, mysterious Doctrines of Christ crucified, which to
the learned Men of this World are foolishness. By the Spirit of God
accompanying the preaching of those Doctrines, which are the Stumbling Block of
this learned Age. "Not by might, nor power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
Hosts." Isai. xi. 6*
It will not be by the enticing Words of Man's wisdom; but by the demonstration
of the Spirit, and of Power. Not by the wisdom of this World, nor the Princes
of this World, that comes to naught: but by the Gospel, that contains the
wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which none of the Princes
of this World, who have nothing to enlighten them but their own learning, know
any thing of.

The Spirit of God, who searches all things, even the deep things of God, must
reveal it. For let natural Men be never so worldly wise and learned, they
receive not the things of the Spirit; they are foolishness to them; nor can
they know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

This great effect, when it is accomplished, will be a glorious effect indeed:
and it will be accomplished in such a manner, as most remarkably to show it to
be the Work of God, and his only. It will be a more glorious Work of God than
that which we read of in the beginning of Genesis. "And the Earth was without
form and vold, and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the Waters: And God said, Let there be light, and
there was light." Gen, i. 2, 3.


V. Hence we may learn the misery of all such Persons, as are under the Power
of the darkness, which naturally possesses their Hearts. There are two degrees
of this misery.

1. That which all that are in a natural Condition are the subjects of. The
Doctrine shows, that all such as are in a natural Condition, are in a miserable
Condition; for they are in an extremely dark and blind Condition. It Is
uncomfortable living in outward Darkness. What a sorrowful State should we all
be in, if the Sun should no more rise upon us, and the Moon were to withdraw
her shining, and the Stars to be put out, and we were to spend the rest of our
time in darkness? The World would soon perish, in such Darkness. It was a great
Plague in Egypt, when they had a total Darkness for three Days. Outward
blindness is justly looked upon as a great Calamity. They who are deprived of
Sight, are deprived of the most noble of the Senses: they have no benefit of
external Light, one of the most excellent and needful of the Things which God
has made in the visible Creation. But they who are without spiritual Sight and
Light, are destitute of that which is far more excellent and necessary.

That natural Men are not sensible of their blindness, and the Misery they are
under by Reason of it, is no Argument that they are not miserable. For it is
very much the Nature of this Calamity to be hid from itself, or from those who
are under it. Fools are not sensible of their Folly. Solomon says The Fool is
wiser in his own Conceit than seven Men that can render a Reason Prove. xxvi. 16.
The most barbarous and brutish Heathen are not sensible of their own Darkness;
are not sensible but that they enjoy as great Light, and have as good
Understanding of Things, as the most enlightened Nations in the World.

2. ANOTHER Degree of this Misery is of those who are judicially given up of
God, to the blindness of their own Minds. The Scripture teaches us that there
are some such What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for,
but the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. Romans xi. 7.
But their Minds were blinded: for until this Day remains the same Veil
untaken away. 2 Cor. iii. 14
And he said, go and tell this People, hear ye indeed, but understand not; and
see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the Heart of this People fat, and their
Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with
their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and convert and be healed. Isai.
vi. 9.10.
This Judgment, when it is inflicted on Men, is commonly for the Contempt and
Abuse of Light which has been offered them. For the commission of presumptuous
Sins, and being obstinate in Sin, and resisting the Holy Ghost, after many
gracious Calls and Counsels, Warnings and Reproofs.

Who the particular Persons are, that are thus judicially given up of God to
the blindness of their Minds, is not known to Men. But we have no Reason to
suppose that there are not Multitudes of them; and most in Places of the
greatest Light. There is no manner of Reason to suppose, that this Judgment
which is spoken of in Scripture, is in a great Measure peculiar to those old
Times. As there were many that fell under it in the Times of the Prophets of
Old, and of Christ and his Apostles; so doubtless there are now a Days too. And
though the Persons are not known, yet doubtless there may be more Reason to fear
it concerning some than others. All that are under the Power of the blindness
of their own Minds, are miserable; but such as are given up to this Blindness,
are especially miserable: For they are reserved, and sealed over to the
blackness of darkness for ever.

And the Consideration of what has been said of the desperate blindness which
possesses the Hearts of all naturally, may well be terrifying to such as are
yet in a Christless Condition in this place of Light, where the Gospel has been
so long enjoyed, and where God has in Times past, so wonderfully poured out his
Spirit.

And let such Persons, for their awakening, consider the following Things.

1. That they are blinded by the God of this World. Their blindness is from
Hell. This Darkness which natural Men are under, is from the Prince of
Darkness. This the Apostle says expressly of those who remain in unbelief and
blindness under the Gospel. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that
are lost; in whom the God of this world has blinded the Minds of them that
believe not. 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4.
They belong to the Kingdom of Darkness. In that Darkness which reigns in their
Souls, the Devil reigns, and holds his dominion there.

2. Consider, how God in his Word manifests his Abhorrence and Wrath toward
those who remain so sottishly blind and ignorant, in the midst of Light. How
does God speak of them! "Have all the workers of Iniquity no Knowledge?" Psalm.
xiv. 4.
"Forty Years long was I grieved with this Generation, and said, it is a people
that do err in their Heart, and they have not known my Ways. Unto whom I swear
in my Wrath, that they should not enter into my Rest." Psalm. xcv. 10, 11.
"The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib: But Israel does not
know, my People does not consider Ah sinful Nation! -- they have provoked the
Holy One of Israel unto Anger." Isai. i. 3. 4.
"It is a People of no Understanding; therefore he that made them will not have
Mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no Favor." Isai. xxvii.
19
"My People is foolish, they have not kmown me, they are sottish Children, and
they have no Understanding: They are wise to do Evil, but to do Good they have
no Knowledge." Jer. iv. 22.
"Declare this in the House of Jacob, and publish it in the House of Judah,
saying, hear now this, O foolish People, and without Understanding, which have
Eyes and see not, which have Ears and hear not. Fear ye not ME says the Lord:
Will ye not tremble at MY Presence." Jer. v. 20. 21, 22.


3. Consider how much wilfulness there is in your Ignorance. Sinners are ready
wholly to excuse themselves in their blindness, and say -- Whereas, as has been
observed already, the blindness that naturally possesses the Hearts of Men, is
not a merely negative Thing; but they are blinded by "the deceitfulness of
sin." Heb. iii. 13.
There is a perverseness in their blindness. There is not a mere Absence of
Light, but a malignant opposition to the Light: As God says, "They know not,
neither will they understand they walk on in Darkness." Psalm. lxxxii. 5.
Christ observes, "That every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light." And that "This is their Condemnation that Light is come
into the World, yet Men loved Darkness rather than Light," Joh. iii. 19, 20.
And I may appeal to your own Consciences, whether you have not wilfully
rejected the many Instructions you have had: and refused to hearken? Whether
you have not neglected to seek after the Light -- Neglected your Bible --
Whether you have not been a very negligent Hearer of the Word preached -- And
neglected other proper Means of Knowledge -- Neglected to cry to God for that
Wisdom which you need? Yea, have you not resisted the Means of Knowledge? Have
you not resisted and quenched the Motions of the Spirit, which at some Times
you have had? And hugged your own fottishness: And taken a Course to make
yourself more and more stupid, by stiffling the Convictions of your own
Conscience, and doing contrary to the Light thereof; whereby you have done
those Things that have tended to sear your Conscience, and make yourself more
and more senseless and fottish?

4. Consider what is the Course that God will take to teach those that will not
be taught by the Instructions of his Word. He will teach them by Briars and
Thorns, and by the Flames of Hell. Though natural Men will remain to all Eternity
ignorant of the Excellency and Loveliness of God's Nature, and so will have no
spiritual Knowledge; yet God in another World will make them thoroughly to
understand many Things which senseless, unawakened Sinnners are sottishly
ignorant of in this World. Their Eyes in many Respects, shall be thoroughly
opened in Hell. Their Judgments will be rectified. They shall be of the same
Judgment with the godly. -- They shall be convinced of the Reality of those
Things which they would not be convinced of here -- Of the Being of a God --
His Power -- Holiness -- justice. -- That the Scriptures are the Word of God.
-- That Christ is the Son of God. -- That Time is short and uncertain. They
will be convinced of the Vanity of the World -- Of the blessed Opportunity they
had in the World -- How much it is Men's Wisdom to improve their Time -- We read
of the rich Man, who was so sottishly blind in this World, that, "In Hell he
lift up his Eyes, and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom." Luke
xvi. 23.
It Is so with many Men, that the first Time they open their Eyes is in Hell.

God will make all Men to know the Truth of those great Things whigh he speaks
of in his Word, one way or another: For he will vindicate his own Truth. He has
undertaken to convince all Men. They who will not be convinced in this World,
by the gentle and gracious Methods which God uses with them now, shall be
convinced hereafter by severe Means. If they will not be convinced for
Salvation, they shall be convinced by Damnation: God will make them know that
he is the Lord -- And he will make them know that he bears Rule. "Consume them
in Wrath, that they may not be; and let them know that God rules in Jacob,
unto the Ends of the Earth." Psalm. lix. 13.
"Let them be confounded and troubled for ever* Yea, let them be put to Shame
and perish. That Men may know, that thou, whose Name is JEHOVAH, art the Most
High over all the Earth." Psalm. lxxxiii. 17. 18.


VI. HENCE we may learn what great Care we had need all have, that we be not
deceived in Matters of Religion. If it be so that our Hearts are all naturally
possessed with such an extreme brutish Ignorance and Blindness in things of
Religion, and we are exceedingly prone to Delusion; then surely great Care
ought to be taken to avoid Delusion. For that we are naturally prone to
Delusion, shows our Danger: But the greater our Danger of any Calamity is, the
greater had our watchfulness need to be.

Let us therefore be hence warned to take heed that we be not deceived about
our Duty -- About our own Hearts -- About our Ways -- About our State -- About
our Opportunities -- Thousands are deceived in these Things, and Thousands
perish by that Means. Multitudes fall on our right Hand and on our left, and
are ruined eternally by Delusion in these Things.

VII. IF we are naturally so blind and ignorant, and prone to Delusion; then
hence we learn how foolish a Thing it is for Men to lean to their own
Understandings, and trust their own Hearts. If we are so blind, then our own
wisdom is not to be depended on; and that Advice of the wise Man is most
reasonable; "Trust in the Lord with all thine Heart, and lean not to thine own
Understanding." Prove. iii. 5.
So is that Saying of his, "He that trusts in his own Heart, is a Fool."
Prove. xxviii 26.


They therefore are Fools, who trust to their own Wisdom, and will question the
mysterious Doctrines of Religion. Such as -- because they cannot see through
them -- and will not trust to the infinite Wisdom of God

And they who are confident and stiff in their own Judgment of themselves, and
their own State, from an Opinion of their own good discerning.

And they who trust to their own Resolutions.

The Second Use may be of Direction.

If it be so, that we are naturally under the Power of such sottish Blindness,
in the Things of Religion; then this leads and directs us to these two Methods
in order to our being truly wise.

1. That we should become Fools: Be sensible of our own natural Blindness and
Folly. There is a Treasure of Wisdom contained in that one Sentence, "If any
Man among you seems to be wise in this World, let him become a Fool, that he
may be wise." 1 Cor. iii. 18.
Seeing our own ignorance and blindness, is the first Step toward having true
Knowledge. "If any Man think that he knows any Thing, he knows nothing yet
as he ought to know." 1 Cor. viii. 2.


2. To ask Wisdom of God. If we are so blind in ourselves, then Knowledge is
not to be sought for out of our own Stock, but must be sought from some other
Source. And we have no where else to go for it, but to the Fountain of light
and wisdom.

True Wisdom is a precious Jewel: And none of our fellow Creatures can give it
us, nor can we buy it with any Price we have to give. It is the sovereign Gift
of God. The Way to obtain it, is to go to him, sensible of our Weakness and
Blindness, and Misery on that Account. "If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask of
God."

Jam. i. 5.
Men naturally GOD's Enemies. August, 1736. SERMON, VII.
ROMANS v. 10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son.


THE apostle, from the beginning of the epistle, to the beginning of this
chapter, had insisted on the Doctrine of Justification by faith alone. And
having particularly spoken to that, in this chapter he goes on to consider the
benefits that are consequent on Justification. And there are three that flow
from justification, which are here spoken of, viz. Peace with God, Present
happiness, and Hope of glory. Peace with God is mentioned in the first verse.
"Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ." In the following verses he speaks of present blessedness, and
hope of glory, as benefits accompanying Justification. "By whom also we have
access by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the
glory of God.

And concerning this benefit of the hope of glory, the apostle does
particularly take notice of two things, viz. the blessed nature of this hope,
and the sure ground of it.

1. He insists on the blessed nature of this hope, in that it enables us to
glory in tribulations. This excellent nature of true christian hope is
described in the following Words. "And not only so, but we glory in tribulation
also knowing that tribulation works patience; and patience experience, and
experience hope; and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.' Ver. 3. 4. 5.
Q. D. Through hope of a blessed reward, that will abundantly more than make up
for all tribulation, we are enabled to bear tribulation with patience;
patiently bearing, and patiently waiting for the reward. And patience works
experience; for when we thus bear tribulation with patient waiting for the
reward, this brings experience of the earnest of the reward, viz. the earnest
of the spirit, in our feeling the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost. So that our hope don't make us ashamed; though we do bear
tribulation, our hope is not disappointed; for in the midst of our tribulation,
we experience those ble^ed incomes of the spirit in our souls, that make even a
time of tribulation sweet to us; and is such an earnest as abundantly confirms
our hope: and so experience works hope.

2. The apostle takes notice of the sure and abundant ground there is for this
hope; or the abundant evidence we have, that we shall obtain the glory hoped
for, in that peace that we have with God, in our justification through Christ's
blood; because that while we were without strength, in due time Christ died for
us; while we were ungodly and sinners, enemies to God and Christ. See ver. 6 --
10.
The apostle's argument is exceeding clear and strong. That if God has done
already so great a thing for us, as to give us Christ, to die and shed his
precious blood for us, which was vastly the greatest thing, we need not doubt
but that he will bestow life upon us, after all this is already done. It Is but
a small thing for God actually to bestow eternal life, after it is purchased;
to what it is for him to give his own Son to die, to purchase it. The giving
Christ to purchase it, was vertually all: It included the whole grace of God in
salvation. When Christ had purchased salvation at such a dear rate, all the
difficulty was got through, all was vertually over and done. It Is a small
thing, in comparison, for God to bestow salvation, after it has been thus
purchased at a full price. Sinners that are justified by the death of Christ,
are already vertually saved: the thing is, as it were, done: What remains, is
no more than the necessary consequence of what is done. Christ when he died
made an end of sin: And when he rose from the dead, he did vertually rise with
the elect: He brought them up from death with him, and ascended into heaven
with them. And therefore, when this is already done, and we are thus reconciled
to God through the death of his son, we need not fear but that we shall be
saved by his life. The love of God appears much more in his giving his son to
die for sinners, than in giving eternal life after Christ's death.

The giving of Christ to die for us is here spoken of as a much greater thing,
than the actual bestowment of life, on two accounts.

1. That this is all that has any difficulty in it.

2. When God did this for us, he did it for us, as sinners and enemies. But in
actually bestowing salvation on us after we are justified, we are not looked
up- sin as sinners. After we are justified, God don't look on us any longer as
sinners, but as perfectly righteous persons: he beholds no iniquity in us. We
are no more enemies, for then we are reconciled. When God gave Christ to die
for the elect, he looked on them as they are in themselves; but in actually
bestowing eternal life, he don't look on them as they are in themselves, but as
they are in Christ.

There are three epithets used in the text and context, as appertaining to
sinners as they are in themselves.

1. They are without strength, they cannot help themselves. Ver. 6, 7, 8.
2. They are ungodly or sinners, 3. They are enemies: as in the text.
DOCTRINE. Natural men are God's Enemies.
GOD, though the creator of all things, yet has some enemies in the world.

Men in general will own, that they are or have been sinners. There are few, if
any at all, whose consciences are so blinded as not to be sensible they have
been guilty of sin. And most sinners will own that they have bad hearts. They
will own that they don't love God so much as they should do; and that they
ben't so thankful as they ought to be for mercies; and that in many Things they
fail. And yet few of them are sensible that they are God's enemies. They don't
see how they can be truly so called: they are not sensible that they wish God
any hurt, or endeavor to do him any.

But we see that the scripture speaks of them as enemies to God. So in our
text, and elsewhere. "And you that were sometime alienated, and enemies in your
minds by wicked works." Col i. ^1.
"The carnal mind is enmity against God." Romans vii. 7.


And that all natural, or unregenerate men are indeed so, is what I shall
endeavor now particularly to show. Which I propose to do in the following
method.

1. I shall show, in what respects they are enemies to God. 2. To how great a
degree they are enemies. ^. Why they are enemies. 4. I shall answer some
objections.
I. I am to show, in what respects they are enemies to God.

1. THEIR enmity appears in their judgments; in the judgment and esteem they
have of God. They have a very mean esteem of God. Men are ready to entertain a
good esteem of those with whom they are ^^nds: They are apt to think highly of
their qualities, to give them their due praises; and if there be defects, to
cover them But those to whom they are enemies, they are disposed to have mean
thoughts of; they are apt to entertain a dishonorable opinion of them: they
will be ready to look contemptibly upon any thing that is praiseworthy in them.

SO is it with natural men toward God. They entertain very low and
contemptible thoughts of God. Whatever honor and respect they may pretend and
make a show of toward God, if their practice be examined, it will show, that
they do certainly look upon him to be a being, that is but little to be
regarded. They think him one that is worthy of very little honor and respect,
not worthy to be much taken notice of. The language of their hearts is, "Who is
the Lord, that I should obey his voice?" Exodus v. 2.
"What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we
have if we pray unto him?" Job. xxi. 15.
They count him worthy neither to be loved nor feared. They dare not behave
with that slight and disregard toward one of their fellow creatures, but a
little raised above them in power and authority, as they dare, and do toward
God. They value one of their equals much more than God, and are ten times more
afraid of offending such an one, than of displeasing the God that made them.
They cast such exceeding contempt on God, as to prefer every vile lust before
him. And every worldly enjoyment is set higher in their esteem, than God. A
morsel of meat, or a few pence of worldly gain, is preferred before him. God is
set last and lowest in the esteem of natural men.

2. THEY are enemies in the natural relish of their souls. They have an inbred
distaste and disrelish of God's perfections. God is not such a sort of being as
they would have. Though they are ignorant of God; yet from what they hear of him,
and from what is manifest by the light of nature of God, they don't like him.
By his being endowed with such attributes as he is, they have an aversion to
him. They hear God is an infinitely holy, pure and righteous Being, and they
don't like him upon this account; they have no relish of such kind of
qualifications: they take no delight in contemplating them. It would be a mere
task, a bondage to a natural man, to be obliged to set himself to contemplate
these attributes of God. They see no manner of beauty or loveliness, nor taste
any sweetness in them. And upon the account of their distaste of these
perfections, they dislike all the other of his attributes. They have greater
aversion to him because he is omniscient and knows all things; because his
omniscience is an holy omniscience. They are not pleased that he is omnipotent,
and can do whatever he pleases; because it is a holy omnipotence. They are
enemies even to his mercy, because it is a holy mercy. They do not like his
immutability, because by this he never will be otherwise than he is, an
infinitely holy God.

It Is from this disrelish that natural men have of the attributes of God, that
they don't love to have much to do with God. The natural tendency of the heart
of man is to fly from God, and keep at a distance from him; and to get as far
off as possible from God. A natural man is averse to communion with God, and is
naturally disinclined to those exercises of religion, wherein he has
immediately to do with God. It is said of wicked men, "God is not in all his
thoughts." Psalm. x. 4.
It Is evident that the mind of man is naturally averse to thinking about God:
And hence if any thoughts of God be suggested to the mind, they soon go away;
such thoughts be not apt to rest in the minds of natural men. If any thing is
said to them of God, they are apt to forget it: it is like seed that falls upon
the hard path, it don't at all enter in, and the fowls of the air soon catch it
away: or like seed that falls upon a rock. Other things will stick; but divine
things, do, as it were, rebound: and if they are cast into the mind, they meet
with that there which soon thrusts them out again: they meet with no suitable
entertainment, but are soon chased away.

Hence also it is that natural men are so difficultly persuaded to be constant
in the duty of secret prayer. They would not be so averse to spending a quarter
of an hour, night and morning, in some bodily labor; but it is because they are
averse to a work, wherein they have so immediately to do with God; and they
naturally love to keep at a distance from God.

3. THEIR wills are contrary to his will. God's will and their's, are exceeding
cross the one to the other. God wills those things that they hate, and are most
averse to; and they will those things that God hates. Hence they oppose God in
their wills: they set up their wills against the will of God. There is a
dreadful, violent and obstinate opposition of the will of natural men to the
will of God.

They are very opposite to the commands of God. It Is from the enmity of the
will, that "the carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be" Romans vii. 7.
Hence natural men are enemies to God's government. They are not loyal
subjects, but enemies to God, considered as lord of the world. They are entire
enemies to God's authority.

4. THEY are enemies to God in their affections. There is in every natural man
a seed of malice against God: yea, there is such a seed of this, rooted in the
heart of man naturally. And it does often dreadfully break forth and appear.
Though it may in a great measure lie hid in secure times, when God lets men
alone, and they meet with no great disturbance of body or mind; yet, if God
does but touch men a little in their consciences, by manifesting to them a
little of his wrath for their sins, this often times brings out the principle of
malice against God, which is exercised in dreadful heart-risings, inward
wranglings and quarrellings, and blasphemous thoughts: wherein the heart is
like a viper, hissing, and spitting poison at God. There is abundance of such a
principle in the heart. And however free from it the heart may seem to be, when
let alone and secure, yet a very little thing will set it in a rage.
Temptations will show what is in the heart. The alteration of a man's
circumstances will often discover the heart: a change of circumstance will
bring that out which was hid before. Pharaoh had no more natural enmity against
God than other men; and if other natural men had been in Pharaoh's
circumstances, the same corruptions would put forth themselves in as dreadful a
manner. The Scribes and Pharasees had naturally no more of a principle of
malice in their hearts against Christ, than other men; and other natural men
would, in their case, and having as little restraint, exercise as much malice
against Christ as they did. When wicked men come to be cast into hell, then
their malice against God will appear. Then will it appear what dreadful malice
they have in their hearts. Then their hearts will appear as full of malice, as
hell is full of fire. But when wicked men come to be in hell, there will be no
new corruptions put into their heart; but only old ones will then break forth
without restraint. That is all the difference between a wicked man on earth,
and a wicked man in hell, that in hell there will be more to stir up the
exercise of corruption, and less to restrain it than on earth: but there will
be no new corruption put in. A wicked man will have no principle of corruption
in hell, but what he carried to hell with him. There are now the seeds of all
the malice that will be exercised then. The malice of damned spirits is but a
branch of the root, that is in the hearts of natural men now. A natural man has
a heart* like the heart of a devil; but only as corruption is more under
restraint in man than in devils.

5 THEY are enemies in their practice."They walk contrary to him." Lev. xxvi.
21.
Their enmity against God don't lie still, but they are exceeding active in it.
They are engaged in a war against God. Indeed they cannot hurt God, he is so
much above them; but yet they do what they can. They oppose themselves to his
honor and glory* they oppose themselves to the interest of his kingdom in the
world: they oppose themselves to the will and command of God; and oppose him in
his government. They oppose God in his works, and in his declared designs;
while God is doing one work, ^^ey are doing the contrary, and as much as in
them lies, counterworking. God seeks one thing, and they seek directly the
contrary. They list under Satan's banner, and are his willing soldiers in his
opposing the kingdom of God. I proceed now,

II. TO say something with respect to the degree of this enmity: tending in
some measure to show, how great enemies natural men are to God.

1. THEY have no love to God; their enmity is mere enmity without any mixture
of love. A natural man is wholly destitute of any principle of love to God, and
never had the least exercise of this love. Some natural men have better natural
tempers than others; and some are better educated than others; and some live a
great deal more soberly than others: but one has no more love to God than
another; for none have the least spark of that. The heart of a natural man is
as destitute of love to God, as a dead, stiff, cold corpse is of vital heat. "I
know you, that ye have not the love of God in you." Jon. v. 43.


2. EVERY faculty and principle of action is wholly under the dominion of
enmity against God. The nature of man is wholly infected with this enmity
against God. He is tainted with it throughout, in all his faculties and
principles. And not only so, but every faculty is entirely and perfectly
subdued under it, and enslaved to it. This enmity against God, has the absolute
possession of the man. The apostle Paul, speaking of what he was naturally,
says, "I am carnal, sold under sin. Romans vii. 14.


The understanding is under the reigning power of this enmity against God, so
that it is entirely darkened and blinded with regard to the glory and excellency
of God. The will is wholly under the reigning power of it. All the affections
are governed by enmity against God: there is not one affection, nor one desire,
that a natural man has, or that he is ever stired up to act from, but that
contains in it enmity against God. A natural man is as full of enmity against
God, as any viper, or any venomous beast, is full of poison.

3. THE power of the enmity of natural men against God, is so great, that it is
insupp^^able by any finite power. It has too great and strong a possession of
the heart, to be overcome by any created power. Natural men cannot overcome
their own enmity, let them strive never so much with their own hearts. Indeed,
a natural man never sincerely strives to root out his enmity against God; his
endeavors are hypocritical: he delights in his enmity, and chooses it. Neither
can others do it, though they sincerely, and to their utmost endeavor to
overcome this enmity. If godly friends and neighbors labor to persuade them
to cast away their enmity, and become friends to God, they cannot persuade them
to it. Though ministers use never so many arguments and entreaties, and set forth
the loveliness of God, and tell them of the goodness of God to them, and hold
forth to them God's own gracious invitations, and entreat them never so
earnestly to cast off their opposition and enmity, and to be reconciled, and
become friends; yet they cannot overcome it: still they will be as bad enemies
to God, as ever they were. The tongue of men or of angels cannot persuade them
to relinquish their opposition to God. Miracles will not do it. How many
miracles did the children of Israel see in the wilderness! yet their enmity
against God remained; as appeared by their often murmuring. And how often did
Christ use miracles to this end without effect, but the Jews yet obstinately
stood out. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not." Mat. xxiii 37.
And how great did the enmity of these people appear to be after all; how
spiteful and venomous were their hearts toward Christ, as appears by their
cruel treatment of him, in his last sufferings!

4. THEY are mortal enemies to God; i. e. They have that enmity in their
hearts, that strikes at the life of God. A man may be no friend to another, and
may have an ill spirit toward him; and yet not be his mortal enemy: his enmity
will be satisfied and gluted with something short of the death of the person.
But it is not so with natural men, with respect to God: they are mortal
enemies. Indeed, natural men cannot kill God. They have no hope of it, and so
make no attempts: It has ever been looked upon so much above their power, that,
it may be, it is not thought of. But that is no argument that this is not the
tendency of the principle.

Natural men are enemies to the dominion of God; and their nature shows their
good will to pull him down out of heaven, and dethrone him if they could! Yea,
they are enemies to the Being of God, and would be glad if there was no God.
And therefore it necessarily follows, that they would kill him, and cause that
there should be none, if they could.

"The fool has said in his heart, there is no God." Psalm. xiv. 1.
This saying in his heart, There is no God, imples in it, not only an aptness
to question the Being of God; but it implies, that he inclines it should be so.
His heart says, i. e. his inclination says. The words in the original are thus,
"The fool has said in his heart, No God." The words, there is, are not in the
original, but were put in by the translators. Now if we read the words so, "The
fool has said in his heart, No God," they will perhaps show the Psalmist's
meaning more fully, than as they are now translated. "The fool has said in his
heart, No God." That is, "I would have none, I don't desire any, I wish there
was none; that would suit my inclination best." That is the language of the
inclinations of a natural man; no God. Let there be no God for me, let me have
no God: Let the world be emptied of a God, he stands in my way." And hence he
is an Atheist in his heart, he is ready to think there is none; and that also
is ready to be the language of his heart, "There is no God."

The viper's poison is deadly poison; and when he bites, he seeks the precious
life. And men are in this respect a generation of vipers. Their poison, which
is enmity against God, seeks the life of God. O generation of vipers." Mat.
iii. 7.
"The wicked are estranged from the womb -- Their poison is like the poison of
a serpent." Psalm. lvlii. 3, 4.
"For their vine is the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their
grapes are the grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. Their wine is the
poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 32, 33.


The divine nature being immortal, and infinitely out of our reach, there is no
other trial possible, whether the enmity that is naturally in the heart against
God, be mortal or no, but only for God to take on him the human nature, and
become man; so as to come within man's reach, that they should be capable of
killing him. There can be no other experiment but this. And this trial there
has been. And what has been the event? Why, when once God became man, and came
down to dwell here, among such vipers as fallen men, they hated him, and
persecuted him; and never left 'till they had imbrued their hands in his blood.
There was a multitude of them that appeared combined in this design. Nothing
would do, but he must be put to death. All cry out, "Crucify him, crucify him.
Away with him." They had rather Barrabbas, who greatly deserved death, should
live, than he should not die. Nothing would restrain them from it; even all his
preaching and all his miracles: but they would kill him. And it was not the
ordinary kind of execution that would satisfy them: but it must be the most
cruel, and most ignominious they possibly could invent. And they in the time of
it, added to it, and aggravated it as much as ever they could, by mocking him,
and spiting on him, and scourging him. This shows what the nature and tendency
of man's enmity against God is; here it appeared in its true colors.

5. NATURAL men are greater enemies to God, than they are to any other being
whatsoever. Natural men may be very great enemies to their fellow creatures;
but not so great as they are to God. There is no other being that so much
stands in sinners way, in those things that they chiefly set their hearts upon,
as God. Men are wont to hate their enemies in proportion to two things, viz.
their opposition to what they look upon to be their interest, -- and their
power and ability. One that is looked upon a great and powerful enemy, will be
more hated, than one that is weak and impotent. But none of their enemies is so
powerful as God.

Man's enmity to other enemies may be got over: time may wear it out, and they
may be reconciled, and be friends. But natural men, without a mighty work of
God to change their hearts, will never get over their enmity against God. They
are greater enemies to God, than they be to the devil. Yea, they treat the
devil as their friend and master, and join in with him against God. "Ye are of
your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a
murderer from the beginning. Joh. viii. 44.
.

SERMON, VIII.
ROMANS v. 10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son.


DOCTRINE. Natural Men are God's Enemies.
In speaking to this Doctrine, it was proposed, 1. TO show in what respects
they are enemies to God. 2. TO how great a degree they are enemies. 3. WHY they
are enemies. 4. TO answer some objections.


The two first things proposed, have been attended to in the foregoing
discourse. I now proceed,

III. TO show why, or on what account they are enemies to God.

The general Reason is, That God is opposite to them in the worship of their
idols.

The apostasy of man does summarily consist in departing from the true God, to
idols, forsaking his creator, and setting up other things in his room.

When God at first created man, he was united to his creator; the God that made
him was his God. The true God was the object of his highest respect, and had
the possession of his heart. Love to God was the principle in his heart, that
ruled over all other principles; and every thing in the soul, was wholly in
subjection to it. But when man fell, he departed from the true God, and the
union that was between his heart and his creator was broken: he wholly lost the
principle of love he had to God. And henceforward man clave to other gods. He
gave that respect to the creature, which is due to the creator. When God ceased
to be the object of his supreme love and respect, other things of course became
the objects of it.

Man will necessarily have something that he respects as his God. If man don't
give his highest respect to the God that made him, there will be something else
that has the possession of it. Men will either worship the true God, or some
idol: it is impossible it should be otherwise; something will have the heart of
man. And that which a man gives his heart to, may be called his God: and
therefore when man by the fall extinguished all love to the true God, he set up
the creature in his room

And so man came to be at enmity against the true God. For having lost his
esteem and love of the true God, and set up other gods in his room, and in
opposition to him; and God still demanding their worship, and opposing them in
their worship of those false gods; and man continuing still to worship idols,
enmity necessarily follows.

That which a man chooses for his God, he sets his heart mainly upon. And
nothing will so soon excite enmity, as opposition in that which is dearest. A
man will be the greatest enemy to him who opposes him in what he chooses for
his God: he will look on none as standing so much in his way, as he that would
deprive him of his God. "Ye have taken away my gods; and what have I more?"
Judge. vxiii. 24.
A man, in this respect, cannot serve two masters, that stand in competition to
his service. And not only, if he serves one, he cannot serve the other; but if
he cleaves to one, he will necessarily hate the other. "No man can serve two
masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will
hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." Mat.
vi. 24
And this is the very reason that men hate God. In this case it is, as when two
kings set up in one kingdom, in opposition one to the other; and they both
challenge the same throne, and are competitors for the same crown: they that
are loyal, hearty subjects to the one, will necessarily be enemies to the
other. It always happens so, nor indeed can it be otherwise.

As that which is a man's God, is the object of his highest love; so that God
which chiefly opposes him in it, must be the object of his greatest hatred.

The gods which a natural man worships, instead of the God that made him, are
himself and the world. He has withdrawn his esteem and honor from God, and
proudly exalts himself. As satan did: he was not willing to be in such
subjection; and therefore rebelled, and set up himself for God. So a natural
man, in the proud and high thoughts he has of himself, sets up himself upon
God's throne. And he gives his heart to the world, worldly riches, and worldly
pleasures, and worldly honors: they have the possession of that regard which is
due to God. The apostle sums up all the idolatry of wicked men in their love of
the world. "Love not the World, neither the things that are in the world. If
any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him. For all that is
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, is not of the father, but is of the world." 1 John ii. 15.16.
And the apostle James observes, that a man must necessarily be the enemy of
the true God, if he be a friend of the world. "Know ye not that the friendship
of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world, is the enemy of God. Jam. iv.


All the sin that men commit, is what they do in the service of their idols:
there is no one act of sin, but what is an act of service to some false God.
And therefore wherein soever God opposes sin in them, he is opposite to their
worship of their idols: on which account they are enemies to God.

God opposes them in their service of their idols, in the following respects.

1. HE manifests his utter abhorrence of their worship of their idols. Their
idols are what they love above all things: they would by no means part with
them. This wickedness is sweet unto them. Jam. iv.
If you take them away, what have they more? If they loose their idols, they
loose their all. To rend away their idols from them, would be more grievous to
them, than to rend body and soul asunder: it is like rending their heart in
twain. They love their idolatry; but God don't approve of it, but exceedingly
hates it: he hates it implacably, and will by no means be reconciled to it; and
therefore they hate him. God declares an infinite hatred of every act of sin
which they do; or every act that they do in the service of their false gods. He
app^oves of it in no part, but hates it all. He declares himself to be an holy
God, and a jealous God; a God that is very jealous of his own honor; and that
greatly abhors the giving that honor to another.

2. HE utterly forbids their cleaving to those idols, and all the service that
they do to them. He not only shows that he dislikes it, but he utterly forbids
it; and demands that they should worship him, and serve him only, and give
their hearts wholly to him; without tolerating any competitor. He allows them
to serve their idols in no degree; but requires them to cast them away Jov. xx.
12
utterly, and pay no more worship to them, at any time. He requires a final
parting with their idols. Not only that they should refrain from them for a
while, but cast them away forever; and never gratify their idolatrous respect
to them any more. This is so exceeding contrary to them, and what they are so
averse to and so obstinate in their refusal of, that they are enemies to God
for it. They cannot endure God's commands, because they forbid all that which
their hearts are so engaged in. And as they hate God's commands, so they hate
Him whose commands they are.

3. HE threatens them with everlasting damnation for their service of their
idols. He threatens them for their past idolatry. He threatens them with his
eternal wrath, for their having departed from him, and their having chosen to
themselves other gods. He threatens them for that disposition they have in
their hearts to cleave to other gods: He threatens the lest degrees of that
respect which they have in their hearts to their idols. He manifests that he
will not tolerate any regard to them, but has fixed eternal death, as the wages
of every degree of it. And he will not release them from their guilt; he holds
them to their obligations; he will not acquit them at all: And he will accept of
no atonement that they can make. He will not forgive them, whatever they do in
religion; whatever pains they take; whatever tears they shed. He will accept of
no money or price that they have to offer.

And he threatens every future act of their idolatry. He not only forbids them
ever to be guilty of the least act, but forbids them on pain of eternal
damnation. So strictly does God prohibit them from the service of their idols,
that are so dear to them, that are their all, and which they would on no
account part with. He threatens them with everlasting wrath for all exercises
of inordinate love of worldly profit: for all manifestations of inordinate
regard to worldly pleasures, or worldly honors. He threatens them with
everlasting torments for their self exaltation. He requires them to deny
themselves, and renounce themselves, and to abase themselves at his feet, on
pain of bearing his wrath to all eternity.

The strictness of God's law is a principle cause of man's enmity against God.
If God were a God that did not so much hate sin: if he were one who would allow
them in the gratification of their lusts, in some degree; and his threatenings
were not so awful against all indulgence of their lust: if his threatenings were
not so absolute; if his displeasure could be appeased by a few tears, and
little reformation, or the like; they would not be so great enemies, nor hate
him so much as they do now. But God shows himself to be an implacable enemy to
their idols, to every degree of their service of them; and has threatened
everlasting wrath, infinite calamity for all that they do in the service of
their lusts; and holds them bound under his wrath therefore. And this makes them
irreconcilable enemies to him.

For this reason, the Scribes and Pharisees were such bitter enemies to Christ;
because he showed himself to be such an enemy to their pride, and conceit of
their own wisdom, and their self-righteousness, and inordinate affectation of
their own honor, which was their God. Natural men are enemies to God, because
he is so opposite to them, in that in which they place their all. If you go to
take away that which is very dear to a man, nothing will provoke him more. God
is infinitely opposite to that in which natural men place all their delight,
and all their happiness, viz. their gods. He is an enemy to that which natural
men value as their greatest honor and highest dignity; and which they trust
wholly to, that which is all their dependence, viz. their own righteousness.

Hence natural men are greater enemies to God, than they are to any other
being. Some of their fellow creatures may stand very much in their way, with
regard to some things they set their hearts upon; but God opposes them with
respect to all their idols, and those gods which are their all. And then God's
opposition to their idols, which are above all things dear to them, is
infinitely great. None of our fellow creatures ever opposes us in any of our
interests so much as God opposes wicked men in their idolatry: For God has an
infinite opposition against it. His infinite opposition is manifested by his
threatening an infinite punishment, viz. his dreadful wrath to all eternity,
misery without end. Hence we need not wonder that natural men are enemies to
God.

Having thus shown, in some measure, why natural men are God's enemies; I
proceed to the last thing proposed.

IV. TO consider and make answer to some objections, that some may be ready to
make against this.

Natural men don't generally conceive themselves to be so bad: they have not this
notion of themselves, that they are enemies to God. And therefore when they
hear such doctrine as this taught them, they stand ready to make objections.

Obj. I. SOME natural men may be ready to say, "I don't know that I feel any
such enmity in my heart against God, as is spoken of. I am not sensible that I
am such a dreadful enemy, so as to hate God, and to have a mortal enmity
against him: and to have a disposition, if I could, to kill him. I feel no such
thing in myself, and why should I think that I have such a thing in me? If I
have such enmity, why don't I feel it? If I am a mortal enemy, why should not I
know it better than any body else? How can others see what is in my heart,
better than I myself? If I hate one of my fellow creatures, and have a spirit
against him, I can feel it inwardly working." To such an objection I would

Ans. I. If you do but observe yourself, and search your own heart, unless you
are strangely blinded, you may be sensible of those things, wherein enmity does
fundamentally consist. As particularly, you may be sensible that you have at
least had a low and contemptible esteem of God; and that you in your esteem set
the trifles and vanities of this world, far above him; so as to esteem the
enjoyment of these things far before the enjoyment of God, and to value these
things better than his love. And you may be sensible that you despise the
authority of God, and value his commands and his honor but very little. Or if
by some means you have blinded yourself now, so as to think you do regard them
now, doubtless you can look back and see that you have not regarded them. You
may be sensible that you have had a disrelish and aversion toward God; an
opposite on to thinking of God, or to have any thing to do with him; so that it
would have been a very uncomfortable task to have been confined to it for any
time; and that when the vanities of the world, at the same time, have been very
pleasing to you; and you have been all swallowed up in them, while you have
been averse to the things of religion.

If you look into your heart, it is there plain to be seen, that there is an
enmity in your will, that your will is contrary to God's will; for you have
been opposing the will of God all your life long. These things are plain in
natural men; it is nothing but some great delusion that can hide them from you.
And these things are the foundation of all enmity: if these things be in you,
all the rest that we have spoken of will follow of course.

2. ONE reason why you have not more sensibly felt the exercises of malice against
God, is that your enmity is now exercised partly in your unbelief of God's
being; and this prevents its appearing in other ways, that otherwise it would.
Man has naturally a principle of atheism in him; an indisposition to realize
God's being, and a disposition to doubt of it. The being of God don't
ordinarily seem real to natural men. All the discoveries that there are of
God's being, in his works, will not overcome the principle of atheism, that is in
the heart. And though they seem in some measure to be rationally convinced, yet
it don't appear real; the conviction is faint, there is no strong conviction
impressed on the mind, that there is a God: and often times they are ready to
think that there is none. Now this will prevent the exercise of this enmity,
that otherwise would be felt; particularly, it may be an occasion of there not
being those sensible exercises of hatred, that otherwise there would be.

It may in some measure be illustrated by this: If you had a rooted malice
against another man, a principle that had been long established there; if you
should hear that he was dead, and so should conceive that he had no being, the
sensible workings of your malice would not be felt, as when you realized it
that he was alive, or that there was such a person: and that although there be
the same thing in the foundation, which would appear, if you should afterward
hear the news contradicted, and perceive that your enemy was still alive; you
would feel the same workings of hatred that you did before. And when you
thought he was dead, you might feel the exercise of your enmity, in being glad
of it. And thus your not realizing it, that God has a being, may prevent those
sensible workings of hatred, that otherwise you would have. If wicked men in
this world were sensible of the reality of God's being, as the wicked are in
another, they would feel more of that hatred, that men in another world do. The
exercise of corruption in one way, may, and often does prevent its working in
other ways. As covetousness may prevent the exercise of pride, so atheism may
prevent malice; and yet it may be no argument of there being any the less of a
principle of enmity in the heart; for it is the same enmity, working in another
way. The same enmity that in this world works by atheism, will in another
world, where there will be no room for atheism, work by malice and blasphemy.
The same mortal enmity that, if you saw there was a God, might make you to wish
him dead, and to desire, if it were possible, to kill him, may now dispose and
incline to think there is none. Men are very often apt to think things are so
as they would have them to be. The same principle disposes you to think God has
no life, which, if you knew he had, would dispose you, if it were possible to
take it away.

3. IF you think that there is a God, yet you don't realize it, that he is such
a God as he is. You don't realize it, that he is so holy a God as he is: You
don't realize it, that he has such an hatred of sin as indeed he has. You don't
realize it, that he is so just a God as he is, that will by no means clear the
guilty. But that in the Psalms is applicable to you: "These things have thou
done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as
thy self. Psalm. l. 21.
So that if you think there is a God, you don't think there is such a God as
there is. And your atheism appears in this, as well as in thinking there is no
God. For that God that you think there is, is not that God that indeed is; but
another, one of your own feigning, the fruit of your own vain, deluded
imagination. So that your objection arises from this, th^^ you don't find such
a sensible hatred against that God which you have formed, to suit your self; a
God that you like better than the true God. But this is no argument that you have not bitter enmity against the true God; for it was your enmity against the
true God, and your not liking him, that has put you upon forming up another in
your imagination, that you like better. It is your enmity against those
attributes of God's holiness and justice, and the like, that has put you upon
conceiting another, who is not so holy as he is, and don't hate sin so much,
and will not be so strictly just in punishing it; and whose wrath against sin is
not so terrible.

But if you was sensible of the vanity of your own conceits, and that God was
not such an one as you have imagined; but that he is, as he is indeed, an
infinitely holy, just, sin hating and sin revenging God, who will not tolerate
nor endure the worship of idols, you would be much more liable to feel the
sensible exercises of enmity against him, than you are now. And this experience
confirms. For we see that when men come to be under convictions, and to be made
sensible that God is not as they have heretofore imagined; but that he is such
a jealous, sin hating God, and whose wrath against sin is so dreadful, they are
much more apt to have sensible exercises of enmity against God, than before.

4. YOUR having always been taught that God is infinitely above you, and out of
your reach, has prevented your enmity's being exercised in those ways, that
otherwise it would have been. You have always from your infancy been taught,
that God is so high, that you cannot hurt him; that notion has grown up with
you. And hence you be not sensible, that you have any disposition to hurt him;
because it has been conceived so impossible, that it has not come into your
mind. And hence your enmity has not been exercised in revengeful thoughts;
because revenge has never found any room here; it has never found any handle to
take hold of; there has been no conception of any such thing, and hence it has
lain still. A serpent will not bite, or spit poison at that which it sees at a
great distance; which if it saw near, would do it immediately. Opportunity
shows what men be often times, whether friends or enemies. Opportunity to do,
puts men in mind of doing; wakens up such principles as lay dormant before.
Opportunity stirs up desire to do, where there was before a disposition, that
without opportunity would have lain still. If a man has had an old grudge
against another, and has a fair opportunity to be revenged, this will revive
his malice, and waken up a desire of revenge.

If a great and sovereign prince injures a poor man, and though what he does is
looked upon very cruel, that will not ordinarily stir up that passionate revenge,
as if he sustained no bigger an injury from one of his equals, because he is so
much above him, and out of his reach. Many a man that has appeared calm and
meek when he has had no power in his hands, and has not appeared, either to
himself or others, to have any disposition to these and those cruel acts; that
yet afterward when he came to have opportunity by unexpected advancement, or
otherwise, has appeared like a ravenous wolf, or devouring lion. So it was with
Hazael. "And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I know
the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt
dash their children, and rip up their women with child. And Hazael said, But
what, is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing! And Elisha
answered, The Lord has showed me that thou shall be king over Syria." 2 Kings
viii. 12, 13.
Hazael was then a servant; he had no power in his hands to do as he pleased;
and so that cruel disposition that was in him had lain hid, and he did not
himself imagine that it was there: Bu^ afterward, when he became king of
Syria, and was absolute, and had none to control him; then it broke out and
appeared, and he did as the prophet had foretold. He committed those very acts
of cruelty, that he thought it was not in his heart to do. And it was want of
opportunity that was the thing that made the difference. It was all in his
heart before: he was such a dog then as to do this thing, but only had not had
opportunity. And therefore when he seems surprised that the prophet should say
so of him, all the reason the prophet gives is, "The Lord has showed me that
thou shall be king over Syria."

And some natural men are such dogs as to do things, if they had opportunity,
which they don't imagine it is in their hearts to do. You object against your
having a mortal hatred against God; that you never felt any desire to kill him.
But one reason has been, that it has always been conceived so impossible by
you, and you have been so sensible how much desires would be in vain, that it
has kept down such a desire. But if the life of God were within your reach, and
you knew it, it would not be safe one hour. Who knows what thoughts would
presently arise in your heart by such an opportunity, and what disposition
would be raised up in your heart! Who would trust your heart, that there would
not presently be such thoughts as these, though they are enough to make one
tremble to mention them? "Now I have opportunity to set myself at liberty --
that I need not be'kept in continual slavery by the strict law of God. -- Then
I may take my liberty to walk in that way I like best, and need not be
continually in such slavish fear of God's displeasure. And God has not done
well by me, in many instances. He has done most unjustly by me, in holding me
bound to destruction for unbelief, and other things which I cannot help -- He
has shown mercy to others, and refused it to me. I have now an opportunity to
deliver my self, and there can be no danger of my being hurt for it: God will
not be alive to revenge it. And then there will be no God for us to be
terrified about, and so keep us in slavery."

Who would trust your heart, that such thoughts would not arise? And others,
much more horrid? too dreadful to be mentioned! and therefore I forbear. Those
natural men are foolishly insensible of what is in their own hearts, who think
there would be no danger of any such workings of heart, if they knew they had
opportunity.

5. YOU little consider, how much your having no more of the sensible exercises
of hatred to God, is owing to a being restrained by fear. You have always been
taught what a dreadful thing it is to hate God. And you have been taught what a
dreadful Being GOD is, and how terrrible God's displeasure is; that God sees
the heart and knows all the thoughts; and that you are in his hands, and he can
make you as miserable as he pleases, and as soon as he pleases. And these
things have restrained you: and the fear that has risen from these things, has
kept you from appearing what you be; it has kept down your enmity, and made
that serpent afraid to show it is head, as otherwise it would do. If a man were
wholly under the power of an enemy, though he were never so much of an enemy to
him, he would be afraid to exercise his hatred in outward acts, unless it was
with great disguise. And if it be supposed that such an enemy, in whose power
he was, could see his heart, and know all his thoughts; and apprehended that he
would put him to a terrible death, if he saw the workings of malice there, how
greatly would this restrain! He would be afraid so much as to believe himself,
that he hated his enemy: But there would be all manner of smothering, disguise
and hypocrisy, and feigning even of thoughts and affections.

Thus your enmity has been kept under restraint; and thus it has been from your
infancy. You have grown up in it, so that it is become an habitual restraint.
You dare not so much as think you hate God. If you do exercise hatred, you have
a disguise for it, whereby you endeavor even to hide it from your own
conscience; and so have all along deceived your self. And your deceit is very
old and habitual: And hence you are so difficultly convinced. But this has been
only restraint: it has been no mortification. But there has been an enmity
against God in its full strength. It has been only restrained, like an enemy
that durst not rise up and show himself.

SERMON, IX.
ROMANS v. 10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son. --


DOCTRINE. Natural Men are God's Enemies.
HAVING shown, -- in what respects they are enemies, -- to how great a degree
they are enemies -- and why they are so; I proceeded to answer some Objections.

The objection now under consideration is, that many natural men may make from
their not being sensible that they are God's enemies, whence they conclude,
that they have no enmity against God. See the objection stated at large, p. 124.


This objection has been answered in five particulars. I now proceed to

Ans. 6. One reason why you have not felt more sensible hatred to God may be
because you have not had much trial of what is in your heart. It may be God has
hitherto in a great measure let you alone. The enmity that is in men's hearts
against God, is like a serpent, which if it be let alone lies still; but if any
body disturbs it, will soon hiss, and be enraged, and show its serpentine
spiteful nature.

Notwithstanding the good opinion you have of your self, yet a little trial
would show you to be a viper, and your heart would be set all on a rage against
God. One thing that restrains you now is your hope. You hope to receive many
things from God. Your own interest is concerned; you hope to make great gains
of God. So that both hope and fear operate together, to restrain your enmity
from such sensible exercises, as otherwise would be. But if once hope was gone,
you would soon show what you was: you would soon feel your enmity against God
in a rage.

7. IF you pretend that you do not feel enmity against God, and yet act as an
enemy, you may certainly conclude that it is not because you are no enemy; but
because you do not know your own heart. Actions are the best interpreter of the
disposition: They show better than any thing else, what the heart is. It must
be because you do not observe your own behavior, that you question whether you
are an enemy to God.

What other account can you give of your own carriage, but only your being
God's enemy? What other account can be given of your so opposing God in your
ways; walking so exceeding contrary to him, contrary to his counsels, contrary
to his commands, and contrary to his glory? What other account can be given of
your casting so much contempt upon God; your setting him so low; your acting so
much against his authority, and against his kingdom and interest in the world?
What other account can be given of your so setting your will in opposition to
God's will, and that so obstinately, for so long a time, against so many
warnings as you have had? What other account can be given of your joining so
much with satan, in the opposition he is making to the kingdom of God in the
world? And that you will join with him against God, though it be so much against
your own interest, and though you expose your self by it to everlasting misery?

Such like behavior in one man toward another, would be looked on as
sufficient evidence of a man's being an enemy to another. If he should be seen
to behave thus from time to time, and that it was his constant manner, none
would want any better evidence that he was an enemy to his neighbor. If you
your self had a servant that carried it toward you, as you do toward God, you
would not think there was need of any greater evidence of his being your enemy.
If your servant should manifest so much contempt of you; should disregard your
commands as much as you do the commands of God; and should go so directly
contrary, should in so many ways act the very reverse of your commands; and
should seem so set himself in ways that were contrary to your will so
obstinately and incorrigibly, without any amendment from your repeated calls
and warnings and threatenings; and should act so cross to you day and night, as
you do to God; when you sought one thing, he would seek the contrary; when you
did any work, he would, as much as in him lay, undo and destroy your work; and
should continually drive at such ends, as tended to overthrow the ends you
aimed at: when you sought to bring to pass any design, he would endeavor to
overthrow your design; and should set himself as much against your interest, as
you do your self against God's honor. And you should moreover see him from time
to time with others that were your declared mortal enemies; and making them his
counselors, so much as you do the devils, God's declared mortal enemies: and
hearkening to their counsels, as much as you do to satan's temptations: Should
you not think you had sufficient evidence that he was your enemy indeed?

Therefore consider seriously your own ways, and weigh your own behavior. "How
can thou s^y, I am not polluted --? see thy way in the valley, know what thou
have done." Jer. ii. 23.


Obj. II. NATURAL men may be ready to object, the respect they show to God from
time to time. This mak^s many to think that they are far from being such
enemies to God. They carry it respectfully toward God: they pray to him in
secret, and do it in as humble a manner as they are able. They attend on public
worship, and take a great deal of pains to do it in a decent manner. It seems
to them that they show God a great deal of respect: they use many very
respectful terms in their prayer: they give him all the honor they can: they
are respectful in their manner of speaking, and in their voice, and their
gestures, and the like.

But to this, I

Answer, That all this is done in mere hypocrisy. All this seeming respect is
feigned there is no sincerity in it: there is external respect, but no respect
in the heart: there is a show, and nothing else. You only cover your enmity
with a painted vail. You put on the disguise of a friend, but in your heart you
are a mortal enemy for all that. There is external honor, but inward contempt:
There is a show of friendship and regard, but inward hatred. You do but deceive
yourself with your show of respect; and endeavor to deceive God: not
considering that God looks not on the outward appearance, but that he looks on
the heart.

Here consider particularly,

1. THAT much of that seeming respect which natural men show to God, is owing
to their education. They have been taught from their infancy that they ought to
show great respect to God. They have been taught to use respectful language,
when speaking about God, and to behave with solemnity, when attending on those
exercises of religion, wherein they have to do with God. They from their
childhood have seen that this is the manner of others, when they pray to God,
to use reverential expressions, and a reverential behavior before him. And
their show of respect, which they make to God, is owing in a great measure to
this.

Those who are brought up in places where they have commonly from their
infancy, heard men take the name of God in vain, and swear and curse, and
blaspheme; they learn to do the same; and it becomes habitual to them so to do.
And it is the same way, and no other, that you have learned to behave
respectfully toward God; not that you have any more respect to God than they:
but they have been brought up one way, and you another. In some parts of the
world, men are brought up in the worship of idols of silver, and gold, and
wood, and stone, made in the shape of men and beasts. "They say of them, Let
the men that sacrifice, kiss the calf." (...) xiii. 2.
In some parts of the world, they are brought up to worship serpents, and are
taught from their infancy to carry it with great respect to them. And in some
places, they are brought up in worshipping the devil, who appears to them in a
bodily shape; and to behave with a show of great reverence and honor toward
him. And what respect you show to God has no better foundation; it comes the
same way, and is worth no more.

2. THAT show of respect which you make is forced. You come to God, and make a
great show of respect to him, and use very respectful terms, with a respectful,
reverential tone and manner of speaking; and your countenance is grave and
solemn; and you put on an humble aspect; and you kneel, and use humble,
respectful postures, out of fear. You are afraid that God will execute his
wrath upon you; and so you feign a great deal of respect, that he may not be
angry with you. "Through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit
themselves unto thee." Psalm. lxvi. 3.
In the original it is, "shall thine enemies lie to thee." It is rendered
therefore in the margin, "shall yield feigned obedience to thee." All that you
do in religion is forced and feigned. Through the greatness of God's power, you
yield feigned obedience. You are in God's power, and he is able to destroy you;
and so you feign a great deal of respect to him, that he might not destroy you.
As one might do toward an enemy that had taken him captive, though he at the
same time would gladly make his escape, if he could, by taking away the life of
him who had taken him captive.

3. IT is not real respect that moves you to behave so toward God: you do it
because you hope you shall get by it. It Is respect to yourself, and not respect
to God, that moves you. You hope to move God to bestow the rewards of his
children, by it. You are like the Jews who followed Christ, and called him
Rabbi, and would make him a king. Not that they honored him so much in their
hearts, as to think him worthy of the honor of a king; or that they had the
respect of sincere subjects; but they did it for the sake of the loaves. "Jesus
perceived that they would come and make him a king. And when they had found him
on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Rabbi, how came thou
hither? Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Ye
seek me, not because you saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
loaves, and were filled." Joh. vi 15 25, 26.


These things don't argue but that you are implacable enemies to God
notwithstanding. If you examine your prayers and other duties, your own
consciences will tell you, that the seeming respect which you have shown to God
in them, has been only in hypocrisy. That oftentimes you have set forth in your
prayers, that God was a great God, and a glorious God, and an infinitely holy
God, as if you greatly honored him on the account of these attributes; and you,
at the same time, had no sense in your heart of the greatness and gloriousness
of God, or of any excellency in his holiness. And so your own consciences will
tell you, that you have often pretended to be thankful; you have told God, that
you thanked him that you was alive, and thanked him for these and those
mercies, when you have not found the least jot of thankfulness in your heart.
And so you have told God of your own unworthiness, and set forth what a vile
creature you was; when you have had no humble sense of your own unworthiness.

And if these forementioned restraints were thrown off, you would soon throw
off all your show of respect. Take away fear, and take away a regard to your
own interest, and there would soon be an end to all those appearances of love,
honor, and reverence, which now you make. All these things are not at all
inconsistent with the most implacable enmity.

The devil himself made a show of respect to Christ, when he was afraid that he
was going to torment him; and when he hoped to persuade Christ to spare him
longer. "When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a
loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou son of God most high?
I beseech thee, torment me not." Luke viii. 28.


Obj. III. SOME may perhaps object against this doctrine of their being God's
enemies, the religious affections they have sometimes experienced. They may be
ready to say, That when they have come before God in prayer, they have not only
used respectful terms and gestures, but they have prayed with affection; their
prayers have been attended with tears, which they are ready to think showed
something in the heart.

Ans. THESE affections have risen from other causes, and not from any true
respect to God.

As pa^ticularly,

1. THEY have risen from self-love, and not love to God. If you have wept
before God, from the consideration of your own pitiful case; that has been
because you loved your self, and not because you had any respect to God. And if
your tears have been from sorrow for your sins; you have mourned for your sins,
because you have sinned against your self, and not because you have sinned
against God. "When ye fasted and mourned, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto
ME?" Zech. vii 5.


2. PRIDE, and a good thought of themselves, very commonly has a great hand in
the affections of natural men. They have a good opinion of what they are doing
when they are praying; and the reflection on that affects them: they are
affected with their own goodness. Men's self-righteousness often occasions
tears. An high opinion of themselves before God, and an imagination of their
being persons of great account with him, has affected them, in their
transactions with God.

There is commonly abundance of pride in the midst of tears; and pride is in a
great measure the scource of them. And then they are so far from being an
argument that you be not an enemy to God, that on the contrary, they are an
argument, that you be. In your very tears, you are, in a vain conceit of
yourself, exalting your self against God.

3. THE affections of natural men do often arise from wrong conceits that they
have of God. They conceive of God after the manner they do of men, as though he
were a being liable to be wrought upon in his affections. They conceive of him
as one whose heart could be drawn, whose affections can be overcome, by what he
sees in them. They conceive of him as being taken with them, and their
performances; and this works on their affections; and thus one tear draws
another, and their affections increase by reflection. And oftentimes they
conceive of God as one that loves them, and is a friend to them: and such a
mistake may work much on their affections. But such affections that arise
toward God, as they conceit him to be, is no argument that they have not the
same implacable hatred toward God, considered as he really is. There is no
concluding that men are not enemies, because they are affected and shed tears
in their prayers, and the like. Saul was very much affected when David
expostulated with him about pursuing after him, and seeking to kill him.
David's words wrought exceedingly upon Readiness affections. "And it came to pass
when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said,
Is this thy voice, my son David? and Saul lift up his voice and wept." 1 Samuel
xxiv. 16, Chap. xxvi. 1, etc.
He was so affected that he wept aloud, and called David his Son, though he was
but just before seeking his life. But this affection of Readiness was no argument
that he did not still continue in his enmity against David. He was David's
mortal enemy before, and sought his life; and so he did afterward. It was but
a pang: his enmity was not mortified or done away. The next news we hear of
Saul is, that he was pursuing David, and seeking his life again.

The APPLICATION.
This shall be of Instruction, in several Inferences.

INF. I. IF it be so, that natural men are God's enemies; then hence we may
learn, how much we are indebted to God for his restraining grace. If all
natural men are God's enemies, what would they not do, if they were not
restrained! For what has one that is an enemy, within himself, or in his
disposition, to restrain him from acting against him tha^ he is an enemy to?
Hatred will not restrain a man from acting any thing whatsoever against him that
is hated. Nothing is too bad for hatred, if it be mere hatred, and no love;
nothing is too bad for that to do toward the object of it. Hatred shows no
kindness either in doing, or forbearing. Only hatred will never make a man
forbear to act any thing whatsoever against God; for the very nature of hatred
is to seek evil. But wicked men, as has been shown, are mere enemies to God.
They have hatred, without any love at all. And hence natural men have nothing
within them, in their own nature, to restrain them from any thing that is bad,
be it never so bad: and therefore their restraint must not be owing to nature,
but to restraining grace. And therefore whatever wickedness we have been kept
from, it is not because we have not been bad enough to commit it; but it is God
has restrained us, and kept us back from sin. There can be no worse principle,
than a principle of hatred to God. The devils in hell don't do any thing from
any worse principle than this. And there can be no principle that will go
further in wickedness than this, if it be neither mortified nor restrained. But
it is not mortified in natural men; and therefore all that keeps them from any
degree of wickedness, is restrained. If we have seen others do things that we
never did; and if they have done worse than we, this is owing to restraining
grace. If we have not done as bad as Pharaoh, it is owing to divine restraints.
If we have not done as bad as Judas, or as the Scribes and Pharisees, or as bad
as Herod, or Simon Magus, it is because God has restrained our corruption. If
we have ever heard or read of any that have done worse than we; if we have not
gone the length in sinning, that the most wicked pirates or carnal persecutors
have gone, this is owing to restraining grace. For we are all naturally the
enemies of God as much as they. If we have not committed the unpardonable sin,
it is owing to restraining grace. There is no worse principle in exercise in
that sin, than enmity against God. There is the entire fountain, and all the
foundation of the sin against the Holy Ghost, in that enmity against God, that
we all have in us, and naturally reigns in us.

It is not we our selves that restrain our selves from the commission of the
greatest imaginable wickedness; for enmity against God reigns in us and over
us; we are under the power and dominion of it, and are sold under it. We do not
restrain that which reigns over us. A slave, as long as he continues a mere
slave, cannot control his master. "He that commits sin, is the servant of
sin. Joh. viii. 34.
So that the restraint of this our cruel tyrant, is owing to God, and not to
us. What does a poor, impotent subject do to restrain the absolute Lord, that
has him wholly under his power?

How much will it appear that the world is indebted to the restraining grace of
God, if we consider that the world is full of enemies to God. The world is full
of inhabitants; and almost all are God's enemies, his implacable and mortal
enemies. What therefore would they not do; what work would they not make, if
God did not restrain them?

GOD's work in the restraint that he exercises over a wicked world, is a
glorious work. God's holding the reins upon the corruptions of a wicked world,
and setting bounds to their wickedness, is a more glorious work, than his
ruling the raging of the sea, and setting bounds to its proud waves, and
saying, hitherto shall thou come, and no further. In hell, God lets the
wickedness of wicked spirits have the reins, to rage without restraint; and it
would be in a great measure upon earth as it in hell, did not God restrain the
wickedness of the world.

But in order to the better understanding how it is owing to the restraining
grace of God, that we are kept and withheld from the highest acts of sin, I
would here observe several things.

1. WHENEVER men are with held from sinning by the common influence of God's
spirit, they are withheld by restraining grace. If sinners are awakened
sinners, and are made sensible of the great guilt that sin brings, and that it
exposes to a dreadful punishment; they under such circumstances dare not allow
themselves in wilful sin: God restrains them by the convictions of his spirit;
and therein their being kept from sin, is owing to restraining grace. And
sinners that live under the gospel, that are not awakened sinners, but in a
great measure secure, yet commonly have some degrees of the influence of God's
spirit with his ordinances influencing natural conscience. And though they be not
sufficient thoroughly to rouse them out of security, or make them reform; yet
they keep them from going such lengths in sin, as otherwise they might do. And
when it is thus, this is restraining grace. They are very stupid and sottish;
yet they would be a great deal more so, if God should let them wholly alone.

2. ALL the restraints that men are under from the word and ordinances, is from
restraining grace. The word and ordinances of God might have some degree of
influence on men's natural principles of self-love, to restrain them from sin,
without any degree of the influence of God's spirit: But this would be the
restraining grace of God; for God's goodness and mercy to a sinful world,
appears in his giving his word to be a restraint on the wickedness of the
world. When men are restrained by fear of those punishments that the word of
God threatens; or by the warnings of the word, or by the offers and promises of
it; when the word of God works upon hope, or upon fear, or natural conscience,
to restrain men from sin, this is the restraining grace of God. When we are
restrained thus, it is owing to the mercy of God that we are restrained. It Is an
instance of God's mercy that he has revealed hell, to restrain men's
wickedness; and that he has revealed a way of salvation, and a possibility of
eternal life. This is a thing that has great influence on men, to restrain them
from sin; and this is the restraining grace of God.

3. WHEN men are restrained from sin, by the light of nature, this also is
restraining grace. If men are destitute of the light of God's word, yet the
light of natural conscience teaches that sin brings guilt, and exposes to
punishment. The light of nature teaches that there is a God who governs the
world, and will reward the good and punish the evil. When men are restrained by
this, they are to attribute their restraints to the restraining grace of God;
for it is God who is the author of the light of nature, as well as the light of
revelation. He in mercy to mankind, makes known many things by natural light to
work upon men's fear and self love, to restrain their corruptions.

4. WHEN God restrains men's corruptions by his providence, this is restraining
grace. And that whether it be his general providence, or his providence in
ordering the state of mankind; or his particular providence, or providential
disposals toward them in particular.

(1.) GOD does greatly restrain the corruption of the world, by ordering the
state of mankind. He has set mankind here in a mortal state, and that is a
great restraint on their corruption. He has set mankind in a state of
probation for eternity, and that is a great restraint to corruption. God has
so ordered the state of mankind, that ordinarily many kinds of sin and
wickedness are disgraceful, and what tend to the hurt of a man's character and
reputation amongst his fellow men; and that is a great restraint. He has so
disposed the world, that many kinds of wickedness are many ways very contrary
to men's temporal interest; and that is a great restraint. God has so disposed
the state of mankind that they are led to prohibit many kinds of wickedness by
human laws; and that is a great restraint. God has set up a church i^ ^he
world, made up of those who, if they are answerable to their profession, have
the fear and love of God in their hearts; and they by holding forth light and
the word of God, and keeping up the ordinances of God in the world, and by
warning others, are a great restraint to the wickedness of the world.

But in all these things, the restraining grace of God appears. It is God's
mercy to mankind, that he has so ordered their state, that they should have so
many things, by fear and a regard to their own interest, to restrain their
corruptions. It is God's mercy to the world, that the state of mankind here,
does so differ in that respect, from the state of the damned in hell; where men
will have none of these things to restrain them: they will not be in such
circumstances that will so influence their hope and fear, to restrain them from
sin.

The wisdom of God, as well as the attributes of God's grace, greatly appears
in thus disposing things for the restraining of the wickedness of men.

(2) GOD does greatl^ restrain the corruptions of men by his particular
providence, or providence toward particular persons; by placing men in such
circumstances as to lay them under restraints. And to this it is often owing
that some natural men never go such lengths in sinning, or are never guilty of
such atrocious wickedness as some others, that providence has placed them in
different circumstances. If it were not for this, many thousands of natural
men, who now live sober and orderly lives, would do as Pharaoh did. The reason
why they ^o not, is, that providence has placed them in different
circumstances. If they were in the same circumstances as Pharaoh was in, they
would do as he did And so, if in the same circumstances as Manassah -- as Judas
-- as Nero -- But providence restrains their corruptions, by putting them in
such circumstances, as not to open such a door or outlet for their corruption,
as he did to them. So some do not do such horrid things as others, they do not
live such horribly vicious lives as some others, because providence has
restrained them by ordering that they should have a better education than
others. Providence has ordered that they should be the children of pious
parents, it may be, or should live where they should enjoy many means of grace;
and so providence has laid them under restraints. Now this is restraining
grace. The attribute of God's grace is exercised in thus restraining persons in
providence.

And oftentimes God restrains men's corruptions by particular events of
providence. By particular afflictions they are brought under, or by particular
occurrences, whereby God does, as it were, block up men's way in their course
of sin, or in some wickedness that they had devised, and that otherwise they
would perpetrate. Or something happens unexpected to hold men back from that
which they were about to commit. When men are restrained thus, it is God that
restrains them. Thus God restrained David by his providence from sheding blood,
as he intended to do. "Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD lives, and as thy
soul lives, seeing the LORD has witholden thee from coming to shed blood, and
from avenging thy self with thine own hand -- " 1 Samuel xxv. 26.
God witheld him from it no otherwise, than by ordering it so in his providence
that Abigail should come, and by her wisdom should cool and pacify him, and
persuade him to alter his purpose See ver. 32, 33, 34.
.

5. GODLY persons are greatly indebted to restraining grace, in keeping them
from dreadful acts of sin. So it was in that instance of David, that has been
just mentioned. Godly persons when God has left, and has not restrained them,
have fallen into drea^ful acts of sin. So did David, in the case of Uriah. --
Lot -- Peter -- And when other godly persons are kept from falling into such
sins, or much worse sins than these, it is owing to the restraining grace of
God. Merely having a principle of grace in their hearts, or merely their being
godly persons, without God's presence to restrain them, will not keep them from
great acts of sin. That the godly do not fall into the most horrid sins that
can be conceived of, is owing not so much to any inconsistence between their
falling into such sins, and the having a principle of grace in the heart, as it
is owing to the covenant mercy of God, whereby he has promised never to leave
nor forsake his people; and that he will not suffer them to be tempted above
what they are able; but with the temptation will make a way for them to escape.
If saving grace restrains men from great acts of sin, this is owing to God who
gives such exercises of grace at that time when the temptation comes, that they
are restrained.

Let not the godly therefore be insensible of their indebtedness to the
restraining grace of God Though the godly cannot be said to be enemies to God,
because a principle of enmity does not reign; yet they have the very same
principle and seed of enmity in them, though it be mortified. Though it be not in
reigning power, yet it has great strength; and is too strong for them, without
God's almighty power to help them against it. Though they be not enemies to God,
because they have another principle, besides a principle of enmity, viz. a
principle of love; yet their old man, the body of sin and death that yet
remains in them, is a mortal enemy to God. Corruption in the godly, is not a
whit better than it is in the wicked. The corruption in them is of as bad a
nature every whit, as that which is in a mortal enemy to God: it aims at the
life of God, where ever it is. And though it be not in reigning power; yet it
would dreadfully rage, were it not for God's restraining grace.

GOD gives his restraining grace to both natural men and godly men; but only
there is this difference. God gives his restraining grace to his children in
way of covenant mercy: it is part of the mercy promised to them in his covenant.
God is faithful, and will not leave them to sin in like manner as wicked men
do; otherwise they would do every whit as bad.

Let not therefore the godly attribute it to themselves, or merely to their own
goodness, that they be not guilty of such horrid crimes as they hear of in
others: let them consider it is not owing to them, but to God's restraints.

Thus all both godly and ungodly, may learn from this doctrine, their great
indebtedness to the restraining grace of God.

SERMON, X.
ROMANS v. 10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son, --


DOCTRINE. Natural Men are God's Enemies.
IN speaking to this doctrine, it has been shown, in wh^t respects they are
God's enemies, -- to what degree they are enemies, -- and why they are so. And
some objections have been answered. -- And we have proceeded to the improvement
of the doctrine, in one inference. I now proceed to

INF. II. HENCE we may learn the reason why natural men will not come to
Christ: For they do not come because they will not come. "Ye will not come to
me, that ye might have life." Joh. v. 40.
When we say that natural men be not willing to come to Christ, it is not meant
that they are not willing to be delivered from hell; for without do^bt, no
natural man is willing to go to hell. 'Nor is it meant, that they are not
willing that Christ should keep them from going to hell. Without doubt, natural
men that are under awakenings, do often greatly desire this. But if they do
desire it, this don^t argue that they are willing to come to Christ* for
notwithstanding their desire to be delivered from hell, yet their heart don^t
close with Christ, but are averse to him. They see nothing in Christ wherefore
they should desire him; no beauty or comeliness to draw or incline their hearts
to him. And they are not willing to take Christ as he is; they would feign
divide Christ. There are some things in him that they like, and others that
they greatly dislike; but consider him as he is, and as he is offered to them
in the gospel, and they will not have him. They are not willing to accept of
Christ as he is offered; for in doing so, they must of necessity part with all
their sins; they must sell the world, and part with their own righteousness But
they are not willing to do that; they had rather, for the present, run the
venture of going to hel^ than do that.

When men are truly willing to come to Christ, they are freely willing. It is
not what they are forced and drove to by threatenings; but they are willing to
come, and choose to come without being driven. But natural men have no such
free willingness; but on the contrary have an aversion. And the ground of it is
that which we have heard, viz. That they are enemies to God. Their having such
a reigning enmity against God, makes them obstinately refuse to come to Christ.
If a man is an enemy to God, he will necessarily be an enemy to Christ too; for
Christ is the Son of God; he is infinitely near to God, yea he is God. He has
the nature of God, as well as the nature of man. He is a savior appointed of
God. God anointed him, and sent him into the world. And in doing what he did in
the work of redemption, he wrought the works of God He always did those things
that pleased God; and all that he does as a savior, is to the glory of God.
And one great thing that he aimed at in his redemption, was to deliver them
from their idols which they had chosen, and bring them to God. The c^se being
so, and sinners being enemies to God, they will necessarily be opposite to
coming to Christ; for Christ is of God, and as a savior seeks to bring them to
God only: But natural men are not of God, but are averse to him.

INF. III. FROM this doctrine we may learn, how dreadful the condition of
natural men is. Their state is a state of enmity with God. If we consider what
God is, and what men are, it will be easy for us to conclude that such men as
are God's enemies, must be miserable. Consider, ye that are enemies to God, how
great a God he is that you are enemies to. He is the eternal God; the God that
fills heaven and earth, and whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain. He is
the God that made you; the God in whose hand your breath is, and whose are all
your ways; the God in whom you live and move, and have your being; the God who
has your soul and body in his hands every moment.

You would look on yourself as in very unhappy circumstances, if your
neighbors were all your enemies, and none of your fellow creatures were your
friends. If every body was set against you, and all despised and hated you, you
would be ready to think, you had better be out of the world than in it. But if
it be such a calamity to have enmity maintained between you and your fellow
creatures, what is it, when you and the almighty God are enemies one to
another? What avails either the friendship or enmity of you neighbors, poor
little worms of the dust, that are about you, in comparison of the friendship
or enmity of the great God of heaven and earth? Consider,

1. IF you continue in your enmity a little longer, there will be a mutual
enmity between God and you to all eternity. God will appear to be your dreadful
and irreconcilable enemy. And you know not how soon it will come to this. If
you should die an enemy to God, there will be no such thing as any
reconciliation after death. God will then appear in hatred of you. As you are a
mere enemy to God, so God will then appear a mere enemy to you; he will appear
in perfect hatred, without any love, and without any pity, and without any
mercy at all. As you hate God, he will hate you. And that will be verified of
you: "My soul loathed them, and their soul abhored me." Zech. xi. 8.
And then God will be your enemy forever. If you be not reconciled so as to
become his friend in this life, God never will become your friend after death.
If you continue an enemy to God 'till death, God will continue an enemy to you
to all eternity. There will nothing avail to reconcile God to you hereafter.
You will find that you cannot move the heart of God by any of your cries. You
will have no mediator offered you; there will be no days man betwixt you. So
that it becomes you to consider what it will be to have God your enemy to all
eternity, without any possibility of being reconciled.

Consider, what will it be to have this enmity to be mutual, or maintained for
ever on both sides? For as God will for ever continue an enemy to you, so you
will for ever continue an enemy to God. If you continue God's enemy until
death, you will always be his enemy. And after death your enmity will have no
restraint, but it will break out and rage without control. When you come to be
a firebrand of hell, you will be a firebrand in two respects, viz. As you
will be all on fire full of the fire of God's wrath: and also as you will be
all on a blaze with spite and malice toward God. You will be as full of the
fire of malice, as you will with the fire of divine vengeance, and both will
make you full of torment. Then you will appear as you be, a viper indeed. You
are now a viper; but under great disguise; a wolf in sheep's clothing: But
then your mask will be pulled off; you shall loose your garments, and walk
naked. Rev. xvi. 15.
Then will you as a serpent spit poison at God, and vent your rage and malice
in fearful blasphemies. Out of that mouth, out of which, when you open it, will
proceed flames, will also proceed dreadful blasphemies against God. That same
tongue, to cool which you will wish for a drop of water, will be eternally
employed in cursing and blaspheming God and Christ. And that not from any new
corruption being put into your heart; but only from God's withdrawing his hand
from restraining your old corruption. And what a miserable way will this be of
spending your eternity!

(2) Consider, What will be the consequence of a mutual enmity between God and
you, if it be continued. Now you find your self left alone; you find no very
terrible event: but there will be great changes. Though hitherto you have met
with no very great changes, yet they will come. After a little while, dying
time will come; and then what will be the consequence of this enmity? God,
whose enemy you be; has the frame of your body in his hands. Your times are in
his hand; and he it is that appoints your bounds. And when he sends death to
arrest you, and change your countenance, and dissolve your frame, and take you
away from all your earthly friends, and from all that is dear and pleasant to
you in the world; what will be the issue then of God and you being enemies one
to another? Will not you then stand in need of God's help? Would not he be the
best friend in such a case, worth more than ten thousand earthly friends? If
God be your enemy, then who will you betake your self to for a friend? When you
launch forth into the boundless gulf of eternity, then you will need some
friend to take care of you, but if God be your enemy, where will you betake
your self? Your soul must go naked into another world, in eternal separation
from all worldly things: and you will not be able to dispose of your self; your
soul will not be in its own power to defend, or dispose of it self. Will you
not then need to have God for a friend, into whose hands you may commend your
spirit? And how dreadful will it be, to have God your enemy then!

The time is coming when the frame of this world shall be dissolved Christ
shall descend in the clouds of heaven, in the glory of his Father; and you,
with all the rest of mankind, must stand before the judgment seat of God. Then
what will be the consequence of this mutual enmity betw^en God and you! If God
be your enemy, who will stand your friend? Who else will be able to help you,
and what will you do? And what will be the event of God's being your enemy
then? Now, it may be, it does not appear to be very terrible to you to have God
for your enemy; but when such changes as these are brought to pass, it will
greatly alter the appearance of things. Then God's favor will appear to you of
infinite worth. They, and they only will then appear happy, who have the love
of God: and then you will know that God's enemies are miserable.

But under this head, consider more particularly several things,

(1.) WHAT God can do to his enemies. Or rather, what can he not do? How
miserable can he who is almighty make his enemies, and those that he is an
enemy to? Consider, you that are enemies to God, whether or no you shall be
able to make your part good with him. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are
we stronger than he? 1 Cor. x. 22,
Have you such a conceit of your own strength, as that you think to try it out
with God? Do you intend to run the risque of an encounter with him? Do you
imagine that your hand^ can be strong, or your heart endure? Do you think you
shall be well able to defend yourself? Or will you be able to escape out of his
hand? Or do you think to harden your own heart, and fortify yourself with
courage, and set yourself to bear? And do you think that you shall be able to
uphold your spirits, when God acts as an enemy toward you? If so, then gird up
your loins, and prepare to meet God, and see what the event will be. Therefore
thus will I do unto thee, -- and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to
meet thy God. -- " Amos, iv. 12.
Is it not in vain to set the briars and thorns in battle against God? Is it
not like setting dry briars and thorns in battle array against devouring
flames; which though they seem to be armed with natural weapons, yet the fire
will pass through them, and burn them together? See Isai. xxvii. 4.


And if you endeavor to support yourself under God's wrath, cannot God lay so
much upon you as to sink and crush you? Can^t he lay you under such misery, as
to cause your spirit quite to fail; so that you shall find no strength to
resist him, or to uphold yourself? Why should a little worm think of supporting
himself against an omnipotent adversary? Has not he that made you, and gave you
your strength and your courage, got your strength and courage in his hands? Is
it an hard thing for him to overcome it? Consider God has made your soul; and
he that made it. knows how to punish it, to what degree he will. He can fill it
with misery; he can bring what degree of sorrow, and anguish, and horror he
will. And he that made your body, can bring what torments he will upon it. He
has made every vein and sinew: and has every one in his hands, and he can fill
every one as full of torments as he will. God who made you, has given you a
capacity to bear torment; and he has that capacity in his hands; and he can
enlarge it, and make you capable of more misery, as much more as he will. If
God hates any one, and sets himself against him as his enemy, what cannot he do
with him? How dreadful must it be to fall into the hands of such an enemy!
Surely, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." Heb.
x 31.


2. IF God be your mere enemy, you may rationally conclude that he will act as
such in his dealings with you. We have already observed that you are a mere
enemy to God; that is, have enmity without any love or true respect. So, if you
continue to be so, God will appear to be your mere enemy; and will be so
forever, without being reconciled. But if it be so, he will doubtless act as
such. If he eternally hates you, he will act in his dealings with you, as one
that hates you with mere hatred, without any love or pity. The proper tendency
and aim of hatred is the misery of the object hated; misery, and nothing else.
So that you may expect God will make you miserable, and that you will not be
spared; for sparing is not the effect of hatred, but of pity and mercy; which
is a quite different thing from enmity.

NOW God does not act as your mere enemy: If he corrects you, it is in measure.
He now exercises abundance of mercy to you. He threatens you now; but it is in
a way of warning, and so in a merciful way. He now calls and invites, and
strives with you, and waits to be gracious to you. But hereafter there will be
an end to all these things: In another world God will cease to show you mercy.

3. IF you will continue God's enemy, you may rationally conclude that God will
deal with you so as to make it appear how dreadful it is to have God for an
enemy. It is very dreadful to have a mighty prince for an enemy. "The wrath of
a king, is as the roaring of a lion." Prove. xix. 12.
But if the wrath of man, a fellow-worm, be so terrible, what is the wrath of
God! And God will doubtless show it to be immensely more dreadful. If you will
be an enemy, God will make you know that it is not a light thing to be an enemy
to God, and have him for an enemy to you. God will doubtless glorify himself as
an enemy, in his dealings with those to whom he is an enemy. That is, he will
act so as to glorify those attributes which he exercises as an enemy; which are
his majesty, his power and justice. God will deal so with you as to glorify
these attributes in your destruction. His great majesty, his awful justice, and
mighty power, shall be showed upon you. "What if God willing to show his wrath
and to make his power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction?" Romans ix. 22


(4.) Consider, What God has said he will do to his enemies. He has declared
that they shall not escape; but that he will surely punish them. "Thine hand
shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find out all those that
hate thee." Psalm. xxi. 8
And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be
slack to him that hates him, he will repay him to his face." Deuteronomy. vii. 10.
"The Lord shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an
one as goes on still in his trespasses. Psalm. lxviii. 21^


Yea, God has sworn that he will be avenged on them; and that in a most awful
and dreadful manner. "For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for
ever. If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I
will render vengeance to mine enemies, and I will reward them that hate me. I
will make mine arrows drunk with blood (and my sword shall devour flesh) and
that with the blood of the slain -- from the beginning of revenges on the
enemy." Deuteronomy. xxxii. 40* 41, 42.
The terribleness of that destruction that God will bring on his enemies, is
here variously set forth. As particularly: In God's "wheting his glittering
sword, as one that prepares himself to do some great execution. "His hands take
hold on judgment," to signify that he will surely reward them as they deserve.
"He will render vengeance to his enemies, and reward them that hate him." i. e.
He will render their full reward; he will not fail or come short. As in the
forementioned place it was said, he would not be slack in this matter. "I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood.' This signifies the greatness of the
destruction. It shall not be a little of their blood that shall satisfy; but
his arrows shall be glutted with their blood "And his sword shall devour
flesh." That is, it shall make dreadful waste of it. Hereby is very livelily
set forth the terrible manner in which God will one day rise up and execute
vengeance on his enemies.

Again, the totalness and perfection of their destruction is represented in the
following words: "The wicked shall perish, the enemies of the Lord shall be as
the fat of lambs, they shall consume: into smoke shall they consume away. Psalm
xxxvii. 20.
The fat of lambs, when it is burnt in the fire, burns all up; there is not so
much as a cinder left; it all consumes into smoke. This is made use of here to
represent the perfect destruction of God's enemies in his wrath. So God has
promised Christ; that he would make his enemies his footstool. Psalm. cx. 1.
i. e. He would pour the greatest contempt upon them, and as it were tread them
under foot.

Consider, that all these things will be executed on you, if you continue God's
enemies.

INF. IV. If it be so, that natural men are God's enemies, hence we may learn
how justly God may refuse to show you mercy. For is God obliged to show mercy
to his enemies? Is God bound to set his love on them that have no love to him;
but hate him with perfect hatred? Is God bound to come and dwell with them that
have an aversion to him, and choose to keep at a distance from him, and fly
from him as one that is hateful to them? If you earnestly desire the salvation
of your soul, is God bound to comply with your desires, when you do always
resist and oppose his will? Is God bound to be persuaded and overcome by your
prayers, when you are obstinate in your opposition to him, and refuse to yield
obedience to him? Is God bound to put honor upon you, and to advance you to
such dignity as to be a child of the King of Kings, and the heir of the kingdom
of glory, while you at the same time have God in the greatest contempt, and set
him too low to have the lowest place in your heart? Is God bound to spare your
life, and deliver you from eternal death, when you are a mortal enemy to God,
and would, if you could, destroy the Being of God? Is God obliged to set his
great and transcendant love on you, so as to give you benefits purchased by the
blood of his own Son, when your heart is all the while full of that enmity that
strikes at the life of God?

This doctrine affords a strong argument for the absolute sovereignty of God,
with respect to the salvation of sinners. If God is pleased to show mercy to
his haters, it is certainly fit that he should do it in a sovereign way,
without acting as any way obliged. God will show mercy to his mortal enemies;
but then he will not be bound, he will have his liberty to choose the objects
of his mercy; to show mercy to what enemy he pleases, and punish and destroy
which of his haters he pleases. And certainly this is a fit and reasonable
thing. It is fit that God should distribute saving blessings in this way, and
in no other, viz. in a sovereign and arbitrary way. And that ever any body
thought of or devised any other way for God to show mercy, than to have mercy
on whom he would have mercy, must arise from ignorance of their own hearts,
whereby they were insensible what enemies they naturally are to God.

But consider here the following things,

1. How causelessly you are enemies to God. You have no manner of reason for it,
either from what God is, or from what he has done. You have no reason for this
from what he is. For he is an infinitely lovely and glorious Being; the
fountain of all excellency: All that is amiable and lovely in the universe, is
originally and eminently in him. Nothing can possibly be conceived of that
could be lovely in God, that is not in him, and that in the greatest possible
degree, even infinitely.

And you have no reason for this, from what God has done. For he has been a
good and bountiful God to you. He has exercised abundance of kindness to you;
has carried you from the womb, preserved your life, taken care of you, and
provided for you, all your life long. He has exercised great patience and long
suffering toward you. If it had not been for the kindness of God to you, what
would have become of you? What would have become of your body? And what, before
this time would have become of your soul? And you are now, every day, and hour,
maintained by the goodness and bounty of God. Every new breath you draw, is a
new gift of God to you. How causelessly then are you such dreadful enemies to
God? And how justly, might God, for it, eternally deprive you of all mercy,
seeing you do thus requite God for his mercy and kindness to you?

2. Consider, how you would resent it, if others were such enemies to you, as
you are to God. If they had their hearts so full of enmity to you; if they
treated you with such contempt, and opposed you, as you do God; and injured you
so much as you do God, how would you resent it? Do you not find that you are
apt greatly to resent it, when any oppose you, and show an ill spirit toward
you? And though you excuse your own enmity against God from your corrupt nature
that you brought into the world with you, which you could not help; yet you do
not excuse others for being enemies to you from their corrupt nature that they
brought into the world, which they could not help; but are ready bitterly to
resent it notwithstanding.

Consider therefore, if you, a poor, unworthy, unlovely creature, do so resent
it, when you be not loved, but hated, how may God justly resent it when you are
enemies to him, an infinitely glorious Being; and a Being from whom you have
received so much kindness?

3. How unreasonable is it for you to imagine that you can oblige God to have
respect to you by any thing that you can do, continuing still to be his enemy.
If you think you have prayed and read, and done considerable for God; yet who
cares for the seeming kindness of an enemy?

What value would you your self set upon it, if a man should seem to carry it
respectfully to you, with a fair face, talking smooth, and making a show of
friendship; when you knew at the same time, that he was inwardly your mortal
enemy? Would you look upon yourself obliged for such respect and kindness?
Would you not rather abhor it? Would you count such respect to be valued, as
Joab's toward Amasa, who took him by the beard, and kissed him, and said, Art
thou in health my brother? and smote him at the same time und^^ the fifth rib,
and killed him?

What if you do pray to God? Is God obliged to hear the prayers of an enemy?
What if you have taken a great deal of pains, is God obliged to give heaven for
the prayers of an enemy? God may justly abhor your prayers, and all that you do
in religion, as the flattery of a mortal enemy. No wonder God does not accept
any thing from the hands of an enemy.

INF. V. HENCE we may learn how wonderful is the love that is manifested in
giving Christ to die for us. For this love is love to enemies. That is taken
notice of in the text, "While we were ENEMIES, we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son." How wonderful was the love of God the Father in giving such
a gift, to such, who not only were such as could not be profitable to him, and
such as could merit nothing from him, and poor little worms of the dust; but
were his enemies, and enemies, to so great a degree! They had that enmity that
aimed at his life; yet so did he love them, that he gave his own Son to lay
down his own life, to save their lives. Though they had that enmity that sought
to pull God down out of his throne; yet God so loved them, that he sent down
Christ from heaven, from his throne there, to be in the form of a servant; and
in stead of a throne of glory, gave him to be nailed to the cross, and to be
laid in the grave, that so we might be brought to a throne of glory.

How wonderful was the love of Christ, in thus exercising dying love toward
his enemies! That he should so love those that hated him, with hatred that
sought to take away his life; so as voluntarily to lay down his life, that they
might have life through him. "Herein is love; not that we loved him, but that
he loved us, and laid down his life for us.

INF. VI. IF we are all naturally God's enemies, hence we may learn what a
spirit it becomes us to be of toward our enemies. Though we are enemies to God,
yet we hope that God has loved us; and we hope that Christ has died for us; and
we hope that God has forgiven or will forgive us; and will do us good, and
bestow infinite mercies and blessings upon us, so as to make us happy for ever.
All this mercy, we hope has been, or will be exercised toward us, while
enemies.

Certainly then, it will not become us to be bitter in our spirits against those
that are enemies to us, and have injured and ill treated us; and though they have
yet an ill spirit toward us. Seeing we depend so much on God's forgiving us,
though enemies, we should be of a spirit of forgiveness toward our enemies. And
therefore our Savior inserted it in that prayer, which he dictated as a
general directory to all; "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors," to
enforce the duty upon us, and to show us how reasonable it is. And we ought to
love them even while enemies; for so we hope God has done to us. We should be
the children of our father, who is kind to the unthankful and evil. Luke vi. 35.


If we refuse thus to do, and are of another spirit, we may justly expect that
God will deny us his mercy, as he has threatened! "If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Mat.
vi. 14, 15.
The same we have in the parable of the man, who owed his lord ten thousand
talents. Mat. xviii. 23, -- 35.


The Wisdom of GOD, as displayed in the Way of Salvation by JESUS CHRIST, far
superior to the Wisdom of the Angels. [ March 1733.] SERMON, XI.
EPHESIANS iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.


THE apostle, in speaking here in the context of the glorious doctrine of the
redemption of sinners by Jesus Christ; and how it was in a great measure kept
hid in the past ages of the world; and that it was a mystery that they did not
understand, but now, was in a glorious manner brought to light.. 3, 4, 5. --
"By revelation he made known unto me the mystery, (as I wrote before in few
words; whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ) which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets, by the spirit." And. 8 and 9.
"Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I
should preach among the gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make
all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which, from the beginning of
the world, has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ."

And the apostle, in the text, informs us, that what Christ had accomplished
toward his church, in the work of redemption, had not only in a great measure
unvailed the mystery to the church here in this world; but God had more clearly
and fully opened it to the understanding, even of the angels themselves: And
that this was one end of God in it, to discover the glory of his wisdom to the
angels. "To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly
places, might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God."

We may observe in the text,

1. One end of the revealing God's counsels concerning the work of redemption
specified, viz. The glorifying, or making known God's wisdom.

2. The epithet given to the wisdom of God appearing in the work of redemption:
it is called manifold wisdom; because of the manifold glorious ends that are
attained by it. The excellent designs, hereby accomplished, are very manifest.
The wisdom of God in this is of vast extent. The contrivance is so manifold,
that one may spend an eternity in discovering more of the excellent ends and
designs accomplished by it; and the multitude and vast variety of things that
are, by divine contrivance, brought to conspire to the bringing about those
ends.

3. We may observe, to whom it is that God would manifest this his wisdom, by
revealing the mystery of our redemption; -- and they are not only men, but the
Angels. "To the intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places might be known -- the manifold wisdom of God." The Angels are often
called principalities and powers, which seems to be because of the exalted
dignity of their nature The Angels are of a very noble and excellent nature.
They excel in strength and wisdom. Those that are the wise men of the earth,
are called princes in the ^^ile of the apostle, 1 Cor. ii. 6. "Howbeit we sp^^
^^om among them that are perfect, yet not the wisd^m o^ ^his world, nor of the
princes of this world --. 8. "W^^ch none of the princes of this world knew; for
had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory." So the
Angels are called principalities for their great wisdom. They may also be so
called for the honor God has put upon them, in improving them ^s his ministers
and instruments, wherewith he ^overns the world: and therefore are called
thrones ^omini^^ (...) principalities and powers, Col. i. 16.

They are called principalities and powers in hea^^ places, as distinguishing
them from those that are (...) places of earthly power and dignity. The
offices, or places of dignity and power, that the angels sustain, are not
earthly but heavenly. They are in places of honor and power in the heavenly
city and the heav^^ly kingdom.

One end of God in revealing his design or contrivance for redemption, as he
has so fully and gloriously done by Jesus Christ, is that the angels in heaven
may behold the glory of his wisdom by it. Though they are such bright
intelligencies, and do always behold the face of God the father, and know so
much; yet here is matter of instruction for them. Here they may see more of the
divine wisdom than ever they had seen before. It was a new discovery of the
wisdom of God to them.

4. Observe the time when this display of the wisdom of God was especially made
to the angels, and that is, when Christ introduced the gospel dispensation,
implied in those words, "To the intent that Now unto the principalities*" etc.
When Christ came into the world and died, and actually performed the work of
redemption, had fully and plainly revealed the counsels of God concerning it;
and accordingly introduced the evangelical dispensation, and erected the gospel
church, -- then the angels understood more of the mystery of ma^'s redemption,
and the manifold designs and counsels of divine wisdom, than ever they had done
before.

This is very plainly implied in the text and context.

In the foregoing verse, the apostle after speaking of revealing of this wisdom
of God to man, "And to make all men see, what is the fellowship of this mystery
etc. He then speaks of this mystery as a thing from the beginning kept hid till
now. "The mystery, which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God
-- that now, etc

^^w (...) ^^is verse, he mentions another end, and that ^^at h^ may also at
the same time, make the angels (...) to see [God's wisdom in his glorious
scheme of redemption]

Now at this time, i. e. now Christ has actually wro't out redemption; and
fully revealed [it to the angels] which implies that it was also before a
mystery kept hid from them in comparison of what it is now.

And this need not seem strange; for here is room enough for the angels to
discover more and more to all eternity, of the wisdom of God in this work. So
manifold and infinite is the wisdom thereof.

5. Observe the medium by which the angels come by this knowledge, viz. the
church -- "That now unto principalities -- might be known by the church, -- i.
e. by the things they see done in the church, or toward the church: and by
what they see concerning the church. So has it pleased the sovereign God that
the angels should have the most glorious discoveries of divine wisdom by his
doings toward his church, toward a sort of beings much inferior to
themselves. It has pleased God to put this honor upon us,

DOCTRINE. The wisdom appearing in the way of salvation by JESUS CHRIST, is far
above the wisdom of the Angels.
This is evidently taught in this text; for here it is mentioned as one end of
God in revealing the contrivance for our salvation, that the angels thereby
might see and know how great and manifold the wisdom of God is; to hold forth
the wonderfulness of divine wisdom to the angel's view and admiration. But why
is it so, if this wisdom be not higher than their own wisdom? It never would
have been mentioned as one end of revealing the contrivance of redemption, that
the angels might see how manifold God^s wisdom is; if all the wisdom to be seen
in it was no greater than their own. It is mentioned as such a wisdom as they
had never seen before, not in God, much less in themselves. That now might be
known how manifold the wisdom of God is; now, four thousand years since the
creation. In all that time the angels had always beheld the face of God; and
had been studying God's works of creation for four thousand years together; yet
they never till that day, had seen any thing like that: never knew how manifold
God's wisdom is, as now they knew it by ^he church. Here I would show,

I. That there is great wisdom manifested in contriving the way of salvation by
Christ.

II. That this wisdom is above the wisdom of the angels.

1. I would show, that there is great wisdom manifested in contriving the way
of salvation.

And to show this, I would consider two things, viz. 1. The wonderfulness of
the things done, by which redemption is procured. 2. The wonderfulness of the
good that is attained thereby.

First, I would consider the wonderfulness of the things done by which
redemption is procured. Such is the choice of the person chosen to be our
redeemer, -- the substituting of him in our room; -- his incarnation -- his
life -- his death -- and exaltation. And in the

1st place. We will consider the choice of the person to be our redeemer. When
God designed the redemption of mankind, his great wisdom appears in that he
pitched upon his own, and only begotten Son, to be the person to perform the
work. He was a redeemer of God's own choosing, and therefore he is called in
scripture. God's elect, (Isai. 42 1.) The wisdom of choosing this person to be
the redeemer, appears in his being every way a fit person; and in his being the
only fit person; and in that, it shows a divine wisdom, to know that he was a
fit and suitable person.

He was every way a fit person for this undertaking. It was necessary, that the
person that is the redeemer, should be a divine person. None but a divine
person was sufficient for this great work. The work is infinitely unequal to
any creature. It was requisi^e, that the redeemer of sinners, should be himself
infinitely holy. None could take away the infinite evil of sin, but only one
that was infinitely far from and contrary to sin himself. Christ is a fit
person upon this account.

It was requisite, that the person, in order to be sufficient for this
undertaking, should be one of infinite dignity and worthiness, that he might be
capable of meriting infinite blessings. The Son of God is a fit person on this
account.

It was necessary, that he should be a person of infinite power and wisdom; for
this work is so difficult, that it requires such an one. Christ is a fit person
also upon this account.

It was requisite, that he should be a person infinitely dear to God the
father, in order to the giving an infinite value to his transactions in the
father's esteem, and that the father's love to him might balance the offense
and provocation by our sins. Christ is a fit person upon this account.
Therefore called the beloved, (Ephesians. 1.6.) He has made us accepted in the
beloved.

It was requisite, that the person should be one that could act in this as of
his own absolute right: one that, in himself, is not a servant or subject;
because, if he is one that cannot act of his own right, he cannot merit any
thing. He that is a servant, and that can do no more than he is bound to do,
cannot merit. And then he that has nothing that is absolutely his own, cannot
pay any price to redeem another. Upon this account Christ is a fit person; and
none but a divine person can be fit.

And he must be a person also of infinite mercy and love; for no other person
but such an one would undertake a work so difficult, for a creature so unworthy
as man. Upon this account also Christ is a fit person.

It was requisite that he should be a person of unchangeable perefct truth and
faithfulness; otherwise he would not be fit to be depended on by us in so great
an affair. Christ is also a fit person upon this account.

The wisdom of God in choosing his eternal Son, appears, not only in that he is
a fit person; but in that he was the only fit person of all persons that are
either created or uncreated. No created person, neither man, nor angel, was fit
for this undertaking; for we have just now shown, that he must be a person of
infinite holiness -- dignity -- power -- wisdom; infinitely dear to God -- of
infinite love and mercy; and one that may act of his own absolute right. But no
creature, how excellent soever, has any one of these qualifications.

There are three increated Persons, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and Christ
alone of these was a suitable person for a Redeemer. It was not meet, that the
Redeeme^ should be God the Father; because he, in the divine economy of the
persons of the trinity, was the person that holds the rights of the Godhead,
and so was the person offended, whose justice required satisfaction; -- and was
to be appeased by a mediator.

It was not meet it should be the Holy Ghost, for in being mediator between the
Father and the saints, he is in some sense so between the Father and the
Spirit. The saints, in all their spiritual transactions with God, act by the
Spirit: or rather, it is the Spirit of God, that acts in them: they are the
temples of the holy Ghost. The holy Spirit dwelling in them, is their principle
of action, in all their transactings with God.

But in these their spiritual transactings with God, they act by a Mediator.
These spiritual and holy exercises cannot be acceptable, or avail any thing
with God, as from a fallen creature, but by a mediator. Therefore Christ, in
being mediator between the Father and the saints, may be said to be mediator
between the Father and the holy Spirit, that acts in the saints. And therefore
it was meet, that the mediator should not be either the Father or the Spirit,
but a middle person between them both.

It is the Spirit in the saints, that seeks the blessing of God, by faith and
prayer; and, as the apostle says, with groanings that cannot be uttered, ( Romans
8.26.) Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what
we should pray for as we ought; but the spirit it self makes intercession for
us, with groanings that cannot be uttered. The spirit in the saints seeks
divine blessings of God, by and through a mediator: and therefore that mediator
must not be the spirit, but another person.

It shows a divine wisdom, to know that he was a fit person. No other but one
of divine wisdom could have known it. None but one of infinite wisdom could
have thought of him to be a redeemer of sinners. For he, as he is God, is one
of the persons offended by sin; whom sin is enmity against; whom man by his sin
had rebelled against, and cast contempt upon. Who but God infinitely wise could
ever have thought of him to be a redeemer of sinners! Him they had sinned
against, were enemies to, and deserved infinitely ill of! Who would ever have
thought of him as one that should set his heart upon man, and exercise infinite
love and pity to him, -- and infinite wisdom and power and merit in redeeming
him! We proceed

2. To consider the substituting this person in our room. After the choosing
the person to be our redeemer, the next step of divine wisdom, is, in
contriving the way how he should perform this work. If God had declared who the
person was, that his wisdom had pitched upon, to do this work, and had gone no
further, there is no creature could have thought which way this person could
have performed the work. If God had told them, that his own Son must be the
Redeemer; and that he alone was a fit person for the work: and that he was a
person every way fit and sufficient for it, -- but had proposed to them to have
contrived a way how this fit and sufficient person should do the work, -- Here
we may well suppose that all created understandings would have been utterly at
a loss.

The first thing necessary to be done, is that this Son of God should become
our representative and surety; and so be substituted in the sinner's room. But
who of created intelligences would have though it of any such thing as the eternal
and infinitely beloved Son of God his being substituted in the room of sinners!
His standing in stead of a sinner, a rebel, an object of the wrath of God! And
should in the sinner's stead place himself in the woeful circumstances, that he
has brought himself into, by sin! Who would have thought of a person, that was
the eternal God, a person of infinite glory, his undertaking to stand before
God, as representing sinful worms, that had made themselves by sin infinitely
provoking and abominable!

For, if the Son of God be substituted in the sinner's room, then his sin must
be charged upon him: He will thereby take the guilt of the sinner upon himself;
and all that was due to the sinner for his sin, becomes now due to him; and he
must be subject to the same law that man was, both as to the commands, and
threatenings: but who would have thought of any such thing concerning the Son of
God! Who would have thought, that it was fit to be, or could be! But we proceed,

3. To consider the incarnation of Jesus Christ. The next step of divine wisdom
in contriving how Christ should perform the work of redeeming sinners, was in
determining his incarnation. If God had revealed his counsels thus far to
created understandings, not only that his own Son was the person he had pitched
upon, for this work, but also that he had substituted him in the sinner's room;
and appointed him to represent the sinner, and to become his surety; and so to
take the sinner's ^^ligations and guilt on himself: -- and had revealed no
more, but had left the rest to them to find ou^ (...) is no way probable, that
even then they could ever ^ave thought of a way, whereby this person might
actually h^ve performed the work of redemption. For if the Son of God be
substituted in the sinner's stead, then the Son of God takes the sinner's
obligations on himself: as for instance; he must take the obligation the sinner
is under to perform perfect obedience to the divine law. But it is not
probable, that any creature could have conceived how that could be possible.
How should a person that is the eternal JEHOVAH, become a servant, be under
law, and perform obedience to the law of man!

And again, if the Son of God be substituted in the sinner's stead, then he
comes under the sinner's obligation to suffer the punishment, which man's sin
had deserved. And who could have thought that to have been possible! For how
should a divine person, who is essentially, unchangeably, and infinitely happy,
suffer pain and torment! And how should he that is the object of God's
infinitely dear love, suffer the wrath of his father!

It is not to be supposed, that created wisdom ever would have found out a way
how to have got over these difficulties. But divine wisdom has found out a
way, viz. by the incarnation of the Son of God. That the word should be made
flesh, that he might be both God and man, in one person: what created
understanding could have thought or conceived of such a thing as that! or could
have conceived that such a thing was possible!

And if God had revealed to them, that it was possible, and that it should be,
but left them to find out how it should be; -- how may we well suppose that
they would all have been puzzled and confounded, to conceive of a way for so
uniting a man to the eternal Son of God, that they should be one person: that
one that is truly a man in all respects, as truly and properly a man as any
man, should indeed and in truth, be the very same Son of God, that is God, and
was with God from all eternity. This is a great mystery to us. Hereby, a person
that is infinite, omnipotent and unchangeable, is become a finite, a feeble
man: a man subject to our sinless infirmities, passions and calamities! The
great God, the sovereign of heaven and earth, is become a worm of the dust.
(Psalm. 22.6) "I am a worm, and no man." He that is eternal and self existent,
is born of a woman as the rest of us are! He that is the great original spirit
is clothed with flesh and blood like one of us! He that is independent and
self-sufficient and all-sufficient, that supplies all creatures out of his
bountiful hand; -- he now is come to stand in need of food and clothing to
keep him alive: He becomes poor, "has not where to lay his head;" -- stands in
need of the charity of men; and is maintained by it! It is far above us, to
conceive how it is done. It is a great wonder and mystery to us: but it was no
mystery to divine wisdom.

4. The next thing to be considered, is the life of Christ in this world. The
wisdom of God appears in the circumstances of his life -- and in the work and
business of his life. Particularly,

1. The circumstances of his life. If God had revealed that his own Son, should
be incarnate, and should live in this world, in the human nature; and it had
been left to men to determine what circumstances of life would have been most
suitable for the Son of God to appear in here, -- human wisdom would have
determined, that he should appear in the world in a most magnificent manner;
with very extraordinary outward ensigns of honor, authority and power far above
any of the kings of the earth: that here he should reign in great visible pomp
and splendour over all nations. -- And thus it was that men's wisdom did
determine, before Christ came. The wise, great men among the jews, scribes and
pharisees, who are called "princes of this world;" did expect that the messiah
would thus appear. But the wisdom of God chose quite otherwise: It chose that
when the Son of God was incarnate and became man, he should begin his life in a
stable; that he should for many years dwell obscurely in a family of low degree
in the world; and afterward should be in low outward circumstances: that he
should be poor, and not have where to lay his head; -- that he should be
maintained by the charity of some of his disciples; -- That he should "grow up
as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground," ( Isa. 53.2.) "That he
should not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to he heard in the streets," (
Isai. 42.2.) That he should come to Zion in a lowly manner, "riding on an ass,
and a colt the fool of an ass." -- "That he should be despised and rejected of
men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief."

And now the divine determination in this matter is made known, we may safely
conclude that it is far the most suitable: and that it would not have been at
all suitable for God, when he was manifest in flesh to appear with earthly
pomp, wealth and grandeur, as though he affected such things as these. No! these
things are infinitely too mean, and despicable. For the Son of God to show as
if he affected or esteemed them.

Men, if they had had this way proposed to them of the eternal Son of God,
appearing on earth, viz. in such mean, low circumstances, would have been ready
to condemn it, as foolish and very unsuitable for the Son of God. "But the
foolishness of God is wiser than men," (1 Cor. 1.25.) "And God has brought to
naught the wisdom of this world, and the princes of this world," (1 Cor. 2.6.)

CHRIST, by thus appearing in mean and low outward circumstances in the world,
has poured contempt upon all worldly wealth and glory; and has taught us to
despise it. It is becoming of christians to be above these things and to
despise them. And if it becomes mean men to despise them, how much more did it
become the Son of God! And then Christ hereby has taught us to be lowly in
heart. We see hereby how lowly that Person was, that was infinitely high and
great. How lowly then should we be, who are indeed so low and vile.

Again,

2. The wisdom of God appears in the work and business of the life of Christ.
That he should perfectly obey the law of God, under such great temptations:
That he should have conflicted with and overcome, for us, in a way of
obedience, the powers of earth and hell: That he should be subject to, not only
the moral law, but the ceremonial also, that heavy yoke of bondage.

CHRIST went through the time of his public ministry, in delivering to us divine
instructions and doctrines. The wisdom of God appears in giving us such an one
to be our prophet and teacher, who is a divine person: who is himself the very
wisdom and word of God: And was from all eternity in the bosom of the Father:
-- that he should find such an one to teach us: His word will tend to be of
greater authority and weight than if delivered by the mouth of an ordinary
prophet. And then it is wisely ordered that the same should be our teacher,
that is our redeemer: that his relations and offices, as redeemer, might the
more sweeten and endear his instructions to us. We are ready to give heed to
things that are said by one that is dear to us. Our love to their persons make
us to delight in their discourse. It is therefore wisely ordered, that he that
has done so much to endear himself to us, should be appointed our great prophet
to deliver to us divine doctrines.

5. The next thing to be considered is the death of Christ. The only begotten
Son of God his dying, is a means of salvation for poor sinners, that no other
but divine wisdom would have pitched upon. And when it was revealed, was
doubtless greatly to the surprise of all the hosts of heaven. This is what they
admired with great admiration when they saw it; and never will cease to wonder
at. And how astonishing is it, that a person that is blessed for ever, and is
infinitely and essentially happy, should endure the greatest sufferings that
ever was endured on earth! That a person that is the supreme lord and judge of
the world, should be arraigned, and should stand at the judgment seat of mortal
worms, and then be condemned. That a person that is the living God, and the
fountain of life, should be put to death. That a person that created the world,
and gives life to all his creatures, should be put to death by his own
creatures. That a person that is one of infinite majesty and glory, and so the
object of the love* praises and adorations of angels, should be mocked and spit
upon by the vilest of men. That a person that is infinitely good, and that is
love it self, should suffer the greatest cruelty. That a person that is
infinitely beloved of the father, should be put to inexpressible anguish under
his own father's wrath. That he that is king of heaven, has heaven for his
throne, and the earth for his footstool, should be buried in the prison of the
grave.

How wonderful a thing is this! and who would ever have thought of any such
thing coming to pass. But yet this is the way that God's wisdom has pitched
upon, as the way of sinners salvation: and this not unsuitable, or any
dishonor to Christ.

6. The last thing done to procure salvation for sinners, that we shall here
consider, is Christ's exaltation. Divine wisdom saw it needful or most
expedient, that the same person that was incarnate, and that died upon the
cross, should sit on his own right hand, on his own throne as supreme Governor
of the world; and should have particularly the absolute disposal of all things
relating to man's salvation, and should be the judge of the world. This was
needful, because it was requisite that the same person that purchased
salvation, should have the bestowing of it; for it is not fit, that God should
at all transact with the fallen creature in a way of mercy, but by a mediator.
And this is exceedingly for the strengthening of the faith and comfort of the
saints, that he that has endured so much to purchase salvation for them, has
all things in heaven, and in earth delivered unto him; that he might bestow
eternal life to them that he purchased it for. And that the same person that
loved them so greatly, as to shed his precious blood for them, was to be their
judge, whose sentence there could be no reversing.

But this was another thing full of wonders, that he that was man as well as
God; he that was a servant, and died like a malefactor; that this person not
exclusive of the human nature, should be exalted to be made the sovereign lord
of heaven and earth, angels and men; the absolute disposer of eternal life and
death; the supreme judge of all created intelligent beings, for eternity: and
should have committed to him, all the governing power of God the Father; and
that, not only as God; but as God-man, not exclusive of the human nature.

As it is wonderful, that a person that is divine should be humbled, so as to
become a servant, and to suffer as a malefactor: so it is in like manner
wonderful, the other way, tha^ he that is God-man, not exclusive of the man
hood, should be exalted to the power and honor of the great God of heaven and
earth. But such wonders as these has infinite wisdom contrived, and
accomplished in order to our salvation.

SERMON, XI.
EPHESIANS iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.


WE proceed now in the second place, to show, how the wisdom of God will appear
by the consideration of the good that is obtained by those forementioned
things. The wisdom of the contrivance of our redemption will appear by
considering,

First, How great and manifold the good ends are that are obtained.

Secondly, The wonderful circumstances of the attainment thereof.

First. The good ends that are attained by those things done in the work of
redemption, are exceeding great and manifold.

1. The good is exceeding manifold.

Particularly,

(1.) All manner of glory redounds to God hereby. He is glorified in all his
attributes: and each person of the trinity is, in this work exceedingly
glorified.

GOD has greatly glorified himself in the work of creation; -- and in many of
his other works of providence: but above all, is he glorified in this work of
redemption. All God^s works do praise him. His glory shines brightly from them
all: but as some stars differ from others in glory, so the glory of God shines
brighter in some of his works than in others. And amongst all these, the work
of redemption is like the sun in his strength. The glory of the author is
abundantly the most respendent in this work.

1. Each attribute of God is glorified in the work of redemption.

(1.) In this work, God has exceedingly glorified his wisdom; as may more fully
appear before we have done with this subject.

(2.) God has exceedingly glorified his power in this work. It shows the great
and inconceivable power of God to unite natures so infinitely different, as the
divine and human nature, in one person. If God can make one that is truly God,
and one that is truly man, one and the self same person, what is it that he
cannot do? This is a greater and more mavelous effort, by far, than creation
or producing something out of nothing.

The power of God most gloriously appears in man's being actually saved and
redeemed in this way. In his being brought out of a state of sin and misery,
into a conformity to God; and at last to the full and perfect enjoyment of God.
This is a more glorious demonstration of divine power, than creating things out
of nothing, upon two accounts. One is, the effect is greater and more
excellent. To produce the new creature is a more glorious effect, than merely
to produce a creature. The making a holy creature, a creature in the spiritual
image of God; in the image of the divine excellencies, and a partaker of the
divine nature -- is a greater effect than merely to give being to a thing. And
therefore as the effect is greater, it is a more glorious manifestation of
power.

And then, upon another account also is it a more glorious manifestation of
divine power, and that is, that in this effect of the actual redemption of
sinners, the term from which, is more distant from the term to which, than in
the work of creation. The term from which, in the work of creation is nothing,
and the term to which, is being. But the term from which, in the work of
redemption, is a state infinitely worse than nothing; and the term to which, a
holy and a happy being, a state infinitely better than mere being. The terms in
the production of the last, are much more remote from one another, than in the
first.

And then the production of this last effect, is a more glorious manifestation
of power, than the work of creation; because, though in creation the terms are
very distant: nothing is very remote from being; yet there is no opposition.
The power of God in producing that effect is not opposed. Nothing, makes no
opposition to the creating power of God. But in redemption, the power of God
meets with and overcomes great opposition. There is great opposition in a state
of sin to a state of grace. Men's lusts and corruptions are exceeding opposite
to grace and holiness; and do greatly resist the p^oduction of the effect. This
opposition is overcome in actual redemption.

And besides, there is great opposition from satan. The power of God is very
glorious in this work, because it therein conquers the strongest and most
powerful enemies, making the most violent opposition they are capable of. Power
never appears more illustrious than in conquering. Jesus Christ in this work,
conquers and triumphs over thousands of devils, strong and mighty spirits,
uniting all their strength against him. Luke xi. 21. "When a strong man armed
keeps his palace, his goods are in peace: but when a stronger than he shall
overcome him, he takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and
divides his spoil. Col. ii. 15. "And having spoiled principalities and powers,
he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in the cross.

(3) The justice of God is exceedingly glorified in this work. God is so
strictly and immutably just, that he would not spare his Son when he took upon
him the guilt of men's sins, and was substituted in the room of sinners; he
spared him not at all. He would not abate him the least mite of that debt which
justice demanded. Justice should take place, though it cost his infinitely dear
Son his precious blood; and his enduring such extraordinary reproach and pain
and death in it is most dreadful form Such was God's justice, that his love to
his own Son would not influence him to abate the least of what justice required.

(4.) The holiness of God is also exceeding glorious in this work. Never did
God so manifest his hatred of sin as in the death and sufferings of his only
begotten Son. Hereby he showed himself unappeasable to sin. And that it was
impossible for him to be at peace with it.

(5.) God has also exceedingly glorified his truth in this way, both in his
threatenings and promises. Herein is fulfilled the threatenings of the law,
wherein God said, "in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die." "And
cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the book of
the law to do them." God showed hereby, that not only heaven and earth should
pass away, -- but, which is a great deal more, that the blood of him, who is
the eternal Jehovah, should be spilt, rather than one jot, or tittle of his
word should fail, till all be fulfilled.

(6) And lastly, Especially has God exceedingly glorified his mercy and love,
in this work. The mercy of God was an attribute never seen before, in the
exercises of it, till it was seen in this work of redemption, or the fruits of
it. The goodness of God appeared toward the angels in giving them being and
blessedness. It appeared glorious toward man in his primitive state, a state
of holiness and happiness.

But now God has shown that he can find in his heart, to love sinners, those
that deserve his infinite hatred: that have provoked him by rebellion against
him; and that are enemies to him. And not only has he shown that he can love
them, but love them so as to give them more and do greater things for them than
ever he did for the holy angels, that never sinned or offended their creator.
He loved sinful men so as to give them a greater gift than ever he gave the
angels: so as to give his own Son, and not only to give him to be their
possession and enjoyment; but to give him to be their sacrifice. And herein he
has done more for them, than if he had given them all the visible world; yea
more, than if he had given them all the angels, and all heaven besides.

GOD has loved them so, that hereby he purchased for them, deliverance from
eternal misery, and the possession of immortal glory.

2dly. Each person of the trinity is exceedingly glorified in this work This is
a thing wherein the work of redemption is distinguished from all the other
works of God. The attributes of God are glorious in other works of God: but the
three persons of the trinity are distinctly glorified in no work as in this
work of redemption. In this work every distinct person has his distinct parts
and offices assigned him. Each one has his particular and distinct concern in
it, agreeable to their distinct, personal properties and relations and
oecomical offices.

The persons of the trinity are each of them, distinctly and equally glorified
in this work. The redeemed have an equal concern with and dependence upon each
person, in this affair, and owe equal honor and praise to each of them.

The Father appoints and provides the Redeemer, and accepts the price of
redemption. The Son is the Redeemer and the price. He redeems by offering up
himself. The Holy Ghost immediately communicates to us the thing purchased:
yea, and he is the good purchased. The sum of what Christ purchased for us is
holiness and happiness. But the Holy Ghost is the great principle both of all
holiness and happiness. The Holy Ghost is the sum of all that Christ purchased
for men. Gal. iii. 13, 14. "He was made a curse for us, that we might receive
the promise of the spirit, through faith.

The blessedness of the redeemed consists in partaking of Christ's fullness,
which consists in partaking of that Spirit, which is given not by measure unto
him. This is the oil that was poured upon the head of the Church* which ran
down to the members of his body; to the ski^ts of his garment.

Thus we have an equal concern with, and dependence upon each of the persons of
the trinity, distinctly; upon the Father, as he that provides the Redeemer, and
the Person of whom the purchase is made; -- the Son as the purchaser, and the
price; the Holy Ghost as the good purchased.

[Thus we have considered how God is glorified in this work; which is part of
the good obtained in the work of Redemption.]

We proceed now

II. To consider the wisdom of God appearing in the variety, and exceeding
greatness of the good that is hereby procured for men.

Here we may distinctly consider -- The variety -- and the greatness of the
good procured for men.

1. Here are all sorts of good procured for fallen man, that he does or can
stand in need of, or is capable of. The wisdom of God appears in the way of
salvation in that it is so sufficient a way. Herein it is most worthy of an
infinitely wise God, as it is every way perfect and sufficient, and answers all
our needs.

We in our fallen state are most necessitous creatures, full of our wants: but
they are all answered in this way of salvation. Every sort of good is here
procured. Every thing that would really contribute to our happiness that we can
think of, and a great many things we could not have thought of, had not Christ
purchased them for us, and revealed them to us. Every demand of our
circumstances, and craving of our natures, is here exactly answered.

First, As for instance, we stand in need of peace with God. We had provoked
God to anger, and the wrath of God abode upon us, and we needed to have it
appeased. This is done for us in this way of salvation. Christ, by shedding his
blood, has fully satisfied justice, and appeased God's wrath, for all that
shall believe in him. We were by the sentence of the law condemned to hell. We
needed to have our sins pardoned that we might be delivered from hell. In this
work, pardon of sin, and deliverance from hell, is purchased for us.

Secondly, We needed not only to have God's wrath appeased, and our sins
pardoned; but we needed to have the favor of God. To have God, not only not
our enemy, but our friend. God's favor is also purchased for us by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, We needed not only to be delivered from hell, but to have some
satisfying happiness bestowed. Man is of such a nature, that he has a natural
craving and thirst after happiness. And will thirst and crave, till his
capacity is filled. And his capacity is of vast extent; and nothing but an
infinite good can fi^^ it, and satisfy his desires. But notwithstanding,
provision is made in this way of salvation to answer those needs of our souls.
And there is a satisfying happiness purchased for us: that which is fully
answerable to the capacity and cravings of our souls.

Here is food procured in this way of salvation to answer all our appetites and
faculties of our souls. God has made the soul of man of a spiritual nature; and
therefore he needs a spiritual happiness: some spiritual object, in the
enjoyment of which he may be happy. And in this way of salvation, there is good
procured, that is suitable to this spiritual nature of man, a spirit. Christ
has purchased the enjoyment of God, as the portion of our souls, -- who is the
great and original Spirit. And he has purchased the Spirit of God to come and
dwell in us to be an internal principle of happiness.

GOD has made man a rational, intelligent creature. And man needs some good,
that shall be a suitable object of his understanding, for him to contemplate;
wherein he may have full and sufficient exercise for hi^ capacious faculties,
in the utmost extent of them: or in the utmost extent they are capable of; --
an object that is great and noble, and worthy of the exercise of the noblest
faculties of the rational soul.

Provision is made for this also, in this way of salvation. Here it is provided
that God himself should be theirs, for them forever to behold and contemplate;
whose glorious perfections and works are most worthy objects of the improvement
of their faculties: And there is room enough for them to improve them, and
still to exercise their faculties to all eternity.

And what object can be more worthy to exercise the understanding of a rational
soul, than the glories of the divine being, with which the heavenly
intelligencies, and the infinite understanding of God himself is entertained!

Our souls need some good that shall be a suitable object of the will and
affections: a suitable object for the choice, the acquiescence, the love and
joy of the rational soul. Provision is made for this also in this way of
salvation. There is an infinitely excellent Being offered to be chosen, to be
rested in, to be loved, to be rejoiced in, by us: even God himself, who is
infinitely lovely, the fountain of all good; a fountain that can never be
exhausted, where we can be in no danger of going to excess, in our love and
joy: and may be assured ever to find our joy and delight in the enjoyment
answerable to our love and desires.

Fourthly. There is all possible enjoyment of this object procured in this way
of salvation. When persons entirely set their love upon another they naturally
desire to see that person: merely to here of the person, don't satisfy love. So
here is provision made that we should see God, the object of our supreme love.
Not only that we should hear and read of him in his word, but that we should
see him with a spiritual eye here: and not only so, but that we should have the
satisfaction of seeing God face to face, hereafter. This is promised ( Mat.
5.8) Blessed are the pure in Heart; for they shall see God. It is promised,
that we shall not see God, as through a glass darkly, as we do now, but face to
face. 1 Cor. 13.12. That we shall see Christ as he is. 1 John 3.2.

We naturally desire not only to see those that we love, but to converse with
them. Provision is made for this also, that we should have spiritual
conversation with God while here in this world; and that we should be hereafter
admitted to converse with Christ in the most intimate manner possible.
Provision is made in this way of salvation, that we should converse with God
much more intimately, than otherwise it would have been possible for us; for
now Christ is incarnate, he is in our nature: he is become one of us; whereby
we are under advantages for an immensely more free and intimate conversation
with him, than could have been, if he had remained only in the divine nature;
and so in a nature infinitely distant from us.

We naturally desire not only to converse with those that we greatly love, but
to dwell with them. Provision, through Christ, is made for this It is purchased
and provided that we should dwell with God in his own house in heaven, which is
called our father's house. -- To dwell for ever in God's presence, and at his
right hand.

We naturally desire to have a right to that person that we greatly love.
Provision is made in this way of salvation, that we should have a right in God;
a right to him. This is the promise of the covenant of grace, "That he will be
our God. God with all his glorious perfections and attributes: with all his
power and wisdom; and with all his majesty and glory, will be ours: so that we
may call him our inheritance, and the portion of our souls: what we can
challenge, having this portion made over to us, by a firm instrument; by a
covenant ordered in all things and sure.

And we way also hereby challenge a right to Jesus Christ. -- Love desires that
the right should be mutual. The lover, desires not only to have a right to the
beloved, but that the beloved should also have a right to him: he desires to be
his beloved's, as well as his beloved should be his. Provision is also made for
this, in this wise method of salvation, -- that God should have a special
propriety in those that are redeemed, that they should be in a distinguishing
manner his: that they should be his peculiar people. We are told that God sets
apart the godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. They are called God's jewels. The
spouse speaks it with great satisfaction and rejoicing, Cant. 2.16. My beloved
is mine, and I am his.

Love desires to stand in some near relation to the beloved. Provision is made
by Christ, that we should stand in the nearest possible relation to God, that
God should be our father; and we should be his children. We are often
instructed in the word of God, that God is the father of believers, and that
they are his family.

And not only so, but they stand in the nearest relation to Christ Jesus. There
is the closest union possible. The souls of believers are married to Christ.
The church is the bride the lamb's wife. Yea, there is yet a nearer relation
than can be represented by such a similitude as this. Believers are as the very
members of Christ, and of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. Yea, this is
not near enough yet, but "they are one spirit." 1 Cor. 6.17.

Love naturally inclines to a conformity to the beloved. To have those
excellencies, upon the account of which he is beloved, copied in himself.
Provision is made in this way of salvation, that we may be conformed to God;
that we shall be transformed into the same image. 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open
face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory. -- And that hereafter we shall see him as he is, and
be like him.

It is the natural desire of love to do something for the beloved, either for
his pleasure or honor. Provision is made for this also in this way of
salvation; that we should be made instruments of glorifying God, and promoting
his kingdom here, and of glorifying him to all eternity.

Fifthly, In this way of salvation, provision is made for our having every sort
of good that man naturally craves; as honor, wealth, and pleasure.

Here is provision made that we should be brought to the highest honor. This is
what God has promised. "That those that honor him, he will honor." And that
true christians shall be kings and priests unto God.

Christ has promised them, "That as his father has appointed unto him a
kingdom, so he will appoint unto them, that they may eat and drink at his table
in his kingdom." -- He has promised to crown them with a crown of glory, -- and
that "they shall sit with him in his throne." And that he will confess their
names before his father, and before his angels." "Will give them a new name."
-- And that they "shall walk with him in white."

CHRIST has also purchased for them the greatest wealth. All those that are in
Christ are rich. They are now rich. They have the best riches. Are rich in
faith, and the graces of the spirit of God. They have gold tried in the fire.
They have durable riches and righteousness. They have treasure in heaven, where
neither thief approaches, nor moth corrupts. An inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away. They are possessors of all things.

CHRIST has also purchased pleasure for them. Pleasures that are immensely
preferable to all the pleasures of sense, most exquisitely sweet, and
satisfying. He has purchased for them fullness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore at God's right hand: And that they may drink of the river of God's
pleasure.

Sixthly, CHRIST has purchased all needed good both for soul and body. While we
are here, we stand in need of these earthly things: as Christ observes.

CHRIST has purchased all that we stand in need of, and are best for us. He has
purchased that God should feed, and cloth us. Matthew. 6.26. How much more shall
he feed you, O ye of little faith!" How much more shall he cloth you! Christ
has purchased that God should take care of us, and provide what is needed, and
shall be best, of these things, as a father provides for his children. 1 Pet
5.7. Casting your care upon him, for he cares for you.

Seventhly, CHRIST has purchased good that is suitable for his people in all
conditions. There is, in this way of salvation respect had to, and provision
made for all circumstances that they can be in. Here is provision made, for a
time of affliction, of all they shall stand in need of, at such a time. --

Here is provision made for a time of poverty and pinching want. --

-- For a time of bereavement and mourning. --

-- For spiritual darkness --

-- A Day of temptation. --

-- A time of persecution. --

There is a suitable provision made for a time of death. Sufficient provision
in this way of salvation for such a time as that. Here is such a provision made
that is sufficient to carry a person above death, and all its terrors; and to
give him a complete triumph over that king of terrors. Here is enough in this
way of salvation to sweeten the grave, and make it cease to seem terrible. Yea,
enough to make death, in prospect to seem desirable; and in its near approach
to be not terrible but joyful.

Eighthly, There is provision made in this way of salvation for the life and
blessedness of soul and body to all eternity. Christ has purchased that we
should be delivered from a state of temporal death, as well as spiritual and
eternal. He has purchased that the bodies of the saints shall be raised to a
resurrection of life. He has purchased all manner of perfection for the body
that it is capable of; that it shall be raised a spiritual body, in
incorruption, and glory: and be made like Christ's glorious body, and shine as
the sun in the kingdom of his father. And that it should be glorified with the
soul and exist in a glorified estate in union with the soul to all eternity.

Ninthly. But man in his fallen state still needs something else in order to
his happiness, than that these forementioned should be purchased for him. i. e.
He needs to be qualified for the possession and enjoyment of them. In order to
our having a title to these blessings of the covenant of grace, there is a
certain condition must be performed by us. We must believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and accept of him as offered in the gospel, for a Savior. But this we
cannot do of our selves. -- But Christ has purchased this also for all the
elect. He has purchased that they shall have faith given them; whereby they
shall be united to Christ, and so have a title to his benefits.

But still something further is necessary for man, in order to his coming to
the actual possession of the inheritance. A man, as soon as he has believed,
has a title to the inheritance: but in order to come to the actual possession
of it, he must persevere in a way of holiness. There is not only a gate that
must be entered; but there is a narrow way that must be traveled before we can
arrive at heavenly blessedness; and that is a way of universal and persevering
holiness. But men after they have believed, cannot persevere in a way of
holiness, of themselves. But there is sufficient provision made for this also,
in the way of salvation by Jesus Christ. The matter of a saint's perseverance
is sufficiently secured by the purchase that Christ has made.

But still there is something else needful in order to qualify a person for the
actual entering upon the enjoyments and employments of a glorified estate, viz.
that he should be made perfectly holy: that all remainders of sin should be
taken away; for there cannot any sin enter into heaven. No soul must go into the
glorious presence of God, with the least degree of the filth of sin. But there
is provision made; for Christ has purchased that all sin shall be taken away
out of the hearts of believers at death; and that they should be made perfectly
holy: whereby they shall be fully and perfectly qualified to enter upon the
pleasures and enjoyments of the new Jerusalem.

CHRIST has purchased all both objective and inherent good: not only a portion
to be enjoyed by us; but all those inherent qualifications necessary to our
enjoyment of it. He has purchased not only justification, but sanctification
and glorification; both holiness and happiness.

Having considered the good attained in the way of salvation, as manifold and
various: I now proceed, as proposed

II. To consider the good attained, by this way of salvation, for us, as
exceeding great.

There is not only every sort of good we need but of every sort, in that degree
so as to answer the extent of our capacity, and the greatest stretch of our
desires, and indeed of our conceptions.

-- Greater than our conceptions are here. --

-- Greater than ever they could be, were it not that God's revelation, and our
own experience will teach us --

-- Greater than the tongue of angels can declare --

-- The deliverance that we have in it is exceeding great: --

-- From guilt -- -- From sin it self -- -- Anger of God -- -- Miseries of Hell
-- -- Objective and inherent good -- Objective -- -- God -- -- Jesus Christ --
-- Love great -- -- Relation near -- -- Union close -- -- Communion intimate --
-- Vision clear -- Communication great -- Conformity perfect -- Enjoyment full
-- Honor great -- Glory ineffable, of both soul and body -- Riches immense --
God and all things are the christian's treasure -- Pleasures unspeakable and
inconceivably great -- Rivers of pleasure -- As to duration infinite --
--

The benefit procured for us, is double infinite. Our deliverance is an
infinite benefit; because the evil we are delivered from, is infinite --

And the positive good bestowed is eternal. The full enjoyment of all those
blessings merited, will last as long as God will last.

SERMON, XIII.
EPHESIANS iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.


From whence we observed, this

DOCT. The wisdom appearing in the way of salvation by JESUS CHRIST, is far
above the wisdom of the angels.

For the more distinct handling of which, we proposed to illustrate two
propositions.

I Prop That there is great wisdom manifested in contriving the way of
salvation by Christ II That this wisdom is above the wisdom of the Angels
To show that it was a wise way, we proposed to consider two things

First The wonderfulness of the things done, by which redemption is procured.
-- The choice of a person -- substituting him -- The incarnation of Christ --
his life -- his death -- and his exaltation

Secondly. The wonderfulness of the way appertaining to the good obtained by
it. Under which, we proposed to consider two things. 1. How great and manifold
the good ends are that are obtained by it. 2. The wonderful circumstances of
the attainment.

(1) How great and manifold the good ends are, that are attained by it, as they
relate -- to God -- to men -- to angels -- and devils. 1. How God is glorified
hereby. 2. What good is procured for men. 3. What benefits the angels have
hereby. 4. How satan is overthrown.

Having in the preceding Sermon considered -- the glory that is brought to God
-- and the good that is procured for man. I proceed,

III. To consider, what benefit the Angels have by what is done in the affair
of our redemption. So has the wisdom of God contrived this affair, that the
benefit of what he has done therein should be so extensive, as to reach the
elect angels. It is for men that the work of redemption is wrought out; and yet
the benefit of the things done in this work is not confined to them, or all
that is properly called redemption, or included in it is confined to men. The
angels cannot partake in this, for they have no need of any redemption, having
never fallen. Neither have they that direct benefit, by what is done in this
work, that man has: yet they have great indirect benefit by it.

GOD has so wisely ordered, that what has been done directly and especially
for men, in this, should redound to the exceeding benefit of all intelligent
creatures, that are in favor with God. That the benefit of it should be so
diffusive as not to be confined to earth, but reach heaven itself. So great and
manifold is the good attained in this work, that those glorious spirits that
are so much above us, and were so highly exalted in happiness before, yet
should receive great addition hereby.

I will show how in some particulars.

1. The angels hereby see a great and wonderful manifestation of the glory of
God The happiness of angels as well as of men, consists very much in beho^ding
the glory of God. The excellency of the divine Being is a most de^ight full
s^bject of contemplation to the saints on earth; but ^uch more to the angels in
heaven. The more holy any being is, the more swee^ and delight full will it be
to him to behold the glory and beauty of the supreme Being.

Therefore the beholding the glory of God must be exceeding ravishing to the
holy angels, that are perfect in ho^iness, and never had their minds leavened
with sin. The manifestations of the g^ory of God, are as it were the food that
satisfies the ange^s: they live thereon. It is their greatest happiness.

And it is exceeding delightful to them to behold the glory of God manifested
in his works. It is without doubt much of their employment to behold the glory
of God appearing in his works. Therefore this work of redemption greatly
contributes to their happiness and delight, as the glory of God is so
exceedingly manifested by it. For what is done, is done in the sight of the
angels, as is evident by our text and many other passages of holy scripture.
And they behold the glory of God appearing hearin with entertainment and
delight; as it is manifest by 1 Pet. 1.12. Which things the angels desire to
look into.

The angels have this advantage that now they may behold the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, where it shines with a peculiar luster and
brightness. This is spoken of, 1 Timothy 3.5. Great is the mystery of godliness,
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels. Perhaps
all God^s attributes are more gloriously manifested in this work, than in any
other that ever the angels saw. There is certainly a fuller manifestation of
some of his attributes, than ever they saw before; as is evident by the text,
as we have observed already. And especially, it is so with respect to the mercy
and grace of God, that sweet and endearing attribute of the divine nature The
angels of heaven never saw so much grace manifested before, as in the wo^k of
redemption; nor in any measure equal to it. It i^ exceeding ravishing to them
to behold such a discovery of this amiable perfection of God. How full of joy
does it fill the heart of the angels, to see such a boundless and bottomless
ocean of love and grace in the heart of God. And therefore with what rejoicing
do all the angels praise Christ for this work of divine grace, his being slain!
Rev. 5.11, 12. And I beheld, and heard the voice of many angels round about the
throne, and the beasts and the elders: And the number of them was ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice, worth
is the lamb that was slain to receive power and riches and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory and blessing.

2. They have this benefit by it, that hereby Jesus Christ, God-man, is become
their head. God, subsisting in three persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, was
the king of angels, and would have been, if it had not been for our redemption.
But it was owing to what is done in this work, that Jesus Christ, as God man,
becomes the head of the angels. Christ is now not only the head of angels
simply as God, but as God man. Col. 2.10. And ye are complete in him, who is
the head of all principality and power. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22 Which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him on his own right hand in
heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and might and dominion,
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is
to come. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over
all things to the church.

This is a part of the exaltation and glory of Christ, which God confers on
him, as his reward. But not only so, but it is greatly to the angels benefit.
It is God's manner in his dealings with his elect creatures, in the same works
wherein he glorifies himself, or his Son, greatly to benefi^ them. The same
dealings of his that are most for his glory, shall be most for their good.

That Christ God-man should be made the head of the angels, is greatly to their
benefit,

First, because they become hereby more nearly related to so glorious a person.
They have a more near relation and close union with the Son of God, than
otherwise they would have. The angels esteem it a great honor done them to be
related to such a Person as Jesus Christ, God-man, who by reason that he is a
divine Person is an infinitely honorable person.

The angels by Christ^s becoming their head, are become nearly related to him.
They with the saints are gathered together in one in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. They by
virtue hereof, though Christ be not their redeemer as he is our's, yet have a
right and propriety in this glorious Person, as well as we. He is theirs: though
not their Savior, yet he is their head of government, and head of influence.

Secondly. Again this is greatly to their benefit; as they, as well as we,
hereby are under advantages for a far more intimate converse with God. The
divine nature is at an infinite distance from the nature of angels, as well as
from the nature of man. This distance forbids that familiarity and intimacy of
intercourse --.

It is therefore a great advantage to the angels, that God is come down to them
in a created nature; and in that nature is become their head; so that their
intercourse and enjoyment may be more intimate. They are invited by the similar
qualifications of the created nature, that the Son of God is in.

Thirdly, It is for the benefit of the angels, as hereby the elect of mankind
are gathered into this Society. Christ by the work of redemption, gathers in
the elect of mankind to join the angels of heaven: Ephesians. 1.10. That in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him.

Men are brought in to join with the angels; to join with them in their work of
praising God; to partake with them of their enjoyments. The angels greatly
rejoice at this. They rejoice when but one person is gathered in, as Christ
teaches us, Luke 15.10. Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence
of the angels of God, over one sinner that repents. The heavenly society is
made more complete by this accession of the saints to it. The saints and angels
will contribute to the happiness of each other. The angels rejoice that others
are added to join them and assist them in praising God.

The vacancy by the fall of angels is filled up --

Fourthly, It tends to make the angels the more to prize their happiness, when
they see how much it cost to purchase the same happiness for man. The angels
though they knew so much, yet be not incapable of being taught more and more of
the worth of their own happiness. For the worth of it is infinite, and
therefore the understanding of an angel cannot comprehend it. But when they saw
how much it cost to purchase the same happiness for man; that it cost the
precious blood of the Son of God. This tended to give them a great sense of the
infinite value of their happiness. They never saw such a testimony of the value
of the eternal enjoyment of God before.

Thus we have shown, how the wisdom of God appears in the work of redemption in
the good ends attained thereby, with respect to God, men and angels.

We come now

IV. To show what good ends are obtained with respect to the devil, God's grand
enemy, in his overthrow and the ruin of his kingdom. Satan and his angels
rebelled against God in heaven. He proudly presumed to try his strength with
God's. He opposed strength. And when God by his almighty power over came the
strength of satan, and sent him like lightning from heaven to hell with all
his army; satan does not give out: but though he was conquered when he opposed
his strength to God's, yet he hoped to get the victory by subtilty. Though he
could not overcome God by power, yet he hoped to succeed by craft: though he
found that God's power could easily cast them headlong from heaven to the
bottomless pit; yet this proud spirit did not despair of out-witting God; and
so his subtilty, disappointing him of his end in creating this lower world.

GOD therefore has shown his great wisdom in overthrowing satan's design. He
has disappointed the devises of the crafty, so that they cannot perform their
enterprise. He has carried satan's counsel headlong.

1. Satan thought to have disappointed God of his own glory, that he designed
in creating this lower world: And to make mankind, which God had made for his
own glory, not to be for God's, but for his own glory, in setting up himself
God over them.

Now Christ, by what he has done, in the work of redemption, has ovorthrown,
satan, has utterly frustrated him, as to this end of his, viz. robbing God of
his glory. God is not robbed of his glory; but is exceedingly glorified in
mankind -- in the elect to the surprise of angels and devils. God by redemption
has all the glory of mankind that he intended, and more than ever, either men,
angels or devils thought of, or imagined that God intended.

Satan did not know any way how God could have his intended glory by mankind,
after he had procured their fall. But God knew a way that the devil never
thought of. Neither could the wisest angel in heaven have thought o^ it.

GOD might have glorified his justice in the destruction of a^l mankind. But it
was God's design in creating the world to glorify his goodness and love; and
not only to be glorified eventually, but to be served and glorified actually by
mankind. Satan intended to frustrate God of this end; but his design is
confounded by the redemption of Jesus Christ.

2. Another design of the devil, was to gratify his envy, in the utter
destruction of mankind. But by the redemption of Jesus Christ, this malicious
design of satan's is crossed: because all the elect, whom God designed should be
happy when he made the world, are brought to their designed happiness; which is
much greater than ever satan thought it was in God's heart to bestow on man.

And though some of mankind are left to be miserable yet that does not answer
satan's end; for this is ordered for God's glory. No more are left miserable
than God saw meet to glorify his justice upon.

One end why God suffered satan to do what he did in procuring the fall of man,
was that his Son might be glorified in conquering that strong, subtle and proud
spirit, and triumphing over him.

How glorious does Christ Jesus appear in baffling and triumphing over this
proud king of darkness, and all the haughty confederate rulers of hell.

How glorious a sight is it to see the meek and patient Lamb of God, leading
that proud, malicious and mighty enemy in triumph! What songs does this cause
in heaven!

It was a glorious sight in Israel to see David carrying the head of ^oliah in
triumph to Jerusalem. It appeared a glorious sight to the daughters of Israel,
who came out with timbrels and with dances, and sang, " Saul has slain his
thousands, and David his ten thousands." But how much more glorious to see the
Son of David and the Son of God, carrying the head of the spiritual Goliath, the
champion of the armies of hell, in triumph to the heavenly Jerusalem.

This victory of Christ is much celebrated. It is with a principal view to
this, that Christ is called, "The Lord of Hosts or Armies, and a Man of War*
Exodus 15.3. And Psalm. 24 8. "Who is this King of Glory! The Lord strong and
mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle."

Thus we have briefly shown, how the wisdom of God appears, in the contrivance
of our salvation, by the greatness and manifoldness, of the good ends that are
obtained. We proceed,

Secondly To show how the wisdom of God appears in the wonderful manner and
circumstances, of the attainment of this good. And here,

1. I would observe some things under this head, with respect to the glory of
God that is obtained thereby.

1. By this contrivance for our redemption, God's greatest dishonor is made an
occasion of his greatest glory. Sin is a thing by which God is greatly
dishonored; the nature of it is principle is enmity against God, and contempt
of him. And man by his rebellion has greatly dishonored God. But this
dishonor by the contrivance for our redemption, is made an occasion of the
greatest manifestation of God's glory that ever was. Sin, the greatest evil, is
made an occasion of the greatest good

It is made an occasion of a greater glory, than before was, or than otherwise
would have been. It is the nature of a principle of sin that it seeks to
dethrone God; but this is hereby made an occasion of the greatest manifestation
of God's royal majesty and glory that ever was. By sin, man has slighted and
despised God. But this is made an occasion of his appearing the more greatly
honorable. Sin casts contempt upon the authority and law of God. But this is,
by the contrivance for our redemption, made the occasion of the greatest honor
done to that same authority, and that very law, that ever was. It was a greater
honor to the law of God that Christ was subject to it, and obeyed it, than if
all mankind had obeyed it. It was a greater honor to God's authority that
Christ showed such great respect, and such entire subjection to it, than the
perfect obedience of all the angels in heaven.

Man by his sin showed his enmity against the holiness of God: but this is made
an occasion of the greatest manifestation of God's holiness. The holiness of
God never appeared to the degree it did when God executed vengeance upon his
own dear Son.

2. So has the wisdom of God contrived that those attributes are glorified in
man's salvation; whose glory seemed to require his destruction. When man had
fallen, several attributes of God seemed to require his destruction. The
justice of God seemed to require it; for the justice of God requires that sin
be punished as it deserves: But it deserves no less than eternal destruction.
God proclaims it as a part of the glory of his nature, that he will in no wise
clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7.

And so again the holiness of God seemed to require man's destruction; for God
by his holiness infinitely hates sin. This seemed to require therefore that God
should manifest a proportionable hatred of the sinner; and that he should be
for ever an enemy unto him.

And the truth of God seemed also to require man's destruction; for eternal
death was what God had threatened for sin, one jot or tittle of which word
cannot by any means pass away.

But yet so has God contrived that those very attributes not only do allow of
man's redemption, and are not opposite unto it; their glory is not only not
inconsistent with it, but they are glorified in it. That same vindictive
justice is glorified in this way of salvation. It is manifest in the death and
sufferings of Christ: So that same holiness of God and hatred of sin, that
seemed to require man's damnation, is seen in Christ's dying for sinners. --

So here^^ also is manifested and glorified the truth of God, in the
threatenings of the Law. --

3. Yea, it is so ordered now that the glory of these attributes requires the
salvation of those that believe. The justice of God that required man's
damnation, and seemed inconsistent with his salvation, now does as much require
the salvation of those that believe in Christ, as ever before it required their
damnation. Salvation is an absolute debt to the believer from God, so that he
may in justice demand and challenge it; not upon the account of what he himself
has done; but upon the account of what his Surety has done. For Christ has
satisfied justice fully for his sin; so that it is but a thing that may be
challenged that God should now release the believer from the punishment; it is
but a piece of justice, that the creditor should release the debtor, when he
has fully paid the debt. And again, the believer may demand eternal life,
because it has been merited by Christ, by a merit of condignity. So it is
contrived that that justice that seemed to require man's destruction, now
requires his salvation.

So it is with the truth of God. The truth of God that seemed to require man's
damnation, now requires man's salvation. At the same time that the threat^ning
of the law stands good, there is a promise of eternal life to many of them that
have broken the law. They both stand good at the same time: and the truth of
God requires that both should be fulfilled. And how much soever they seemed to
interfere one with another, yet so is the matter contrived in this way of
salvation, that both are fulfilled and do not interfere one with another.

At the very same time that God uttered that threatening, "In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die:" and at the same time that Adam had first
eaten the forbidden fruit; there was then a promise stood good, that many
thousands of Adam's race should obtain eternal life; for this promise was made
before the world was to Jesus Christ. What a difficulty and an inconsistence
did here seem to be? But it was no diffiulty to the wisdom of God, which had so
contrived that there should appear no inconsistence; but that that promise, and
that threatening should be both fully accomplished to the glory of God's truth
in each of them Psalm 85.10. Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and
peace have kissed each other.

4. Those very attributes which seemed to require man's destruction, are more
glorious in his salvation, than they would have been in his destruction.

The revenging justice of God is a great deal more manifested in the death of
Christ, than it would have been if all mankind had been damned to all eternity;
and that because, if man had remained under the guilt and imputation of sin,
the justice of God would not have had such a trial, as it had, when his own Son
was under the imputation of sin. If all mankind had stood guilty, and justice
had called for vengeance upon them, -- that would have been, in no wise, such a
trial of the inflexibleness and unchangeableness of the justice of God, as when
his own Son, that was the object of his infinite love, and in whom he
infinitely delighted, stood with the imputation of guilt upon him.

This was the greatest trial that could be, whether or no God's justice was
perfect and unchangeable, or not. This was the greatest possible trial whether
or no God was so just that he would not upon any account, abate of what justice
required. This was the greatest trial that can be conceived of, whether or no
God would have any respect to persons, in judgment. And God when there was such
a trial, has appeared immutably just. He excted aall, even the utmost farthing
of the debt due to justice, of his Son.

So the majesty of God appears much more in the sufferings of Christ th^n it
would have done in the eternal sufferings of all mankind, -- that his justice
should be executed upon so great a person, a person of infinite dignity. It
exceedingly shows the awful majesty of God; as the majesty of a prince appears
greater in the just punishment of great personages that are under the guilt of
treason, than lesser persons.

And then the sufferings of Christ have this advantage of the eternal
sufferings of the wicked, for impressing upon the minds of the spectators a
sense of the dread majesty and infinite justice of God, and his infinite hatred
of sin; viz. that the eternal sufferings of the wicked never will be seen
actually accomplished and finished; whereas they have seen that which is
equivalent to those eternal sufferings actually fulfilled and finished in the
sufferings of Christ.

5. Such is the wisdom of this way of salvation, that the more any of the elect
have dishonored God, the more is God glorified in this redemption. Such
wonders as these are accomplished by the wisdom of this way of salvation. Such
things as these, if they had been proposed to any creature intelligence, would
have seemed strange and unaccountable paradoxes, till the counsels of divine
wisdom concerning the matter were unfolded.

So sufficient is this way of salvation, that it is not inconsistent with any
of God's attributes to save the chief of sinners. However great a sinner any
one has been, yet God can, if he pleases, save without any injury to the glory
of any one attribute. And not only so, but the more sinful any one has been,
the more does God glorify himself in his salvation. The more does he glorify
his power, that he can redeem one in whom sin so abounds, and of whom satan has
such strong possession. The greater triumph has Christ over his grand
adversary, in redeeming and setting at liberty from his bon^age those that were
his greatest vassals. The more does the sufficiency of Christ appear, in that
it is sufficient for such vile wretches.

The more is the sovereignty, and boundless extent of the mercy of God
manifested, in that it is sufficient to redeem those that are most undeserving.
Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.

SERMON, XIV.
EPHESIANS iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.


We now come,

II. TO take notice of some wonderful circumstances of the attainment of our
good, hereby; which shows the great wisdom of this contrivance.

^. So has God contrived in this way, that a sinful creature, should become
not guilty; and he that has no righteousness of his own, should become
righteous. These things if they had been proposed, wou^d have appeared
contradictions to any but only the divine understanding.

If it had been proposed to any creature, to find out a way that a sinful
creature should not be a guilty creature, how impossible would it have been
judged, that there should be any way at all. It would doubtless have been
judged impossible but that he that has committed sin, must stand guilty of the
sin he has committed. And if sin be such a thing as necessarily obliges to
punishment, then* that it must ob^ige to punishment him that has committed it.
If punishment and sin be inseparable, then that punishment and the sinner are
inseparable. If the law denounces death to the person that is guilty of sin,
and it be impossible, that the law should not take place, then that he that has
committed sin must die Thus any created understanding would have thought.

And so if it had been proposed that there should be some way found out wherein
man might be righteous, without fulfilling righteousness himself; so that he
might reasonably and properly be looked upon and accepted as a righteous
person, and adjudged to the reward of righteousness, and yet have no
righteousness at all of his own; and nothing but the contrary. That he should
be righteous by the righteousness of the law, by a perfect righteousness, and
yet have broken the law and done nothing else but break it; this would
doubt^ess have been looked upon impossible and contradictions.

But yet the wisdom of God has truly accomplished each of these things. He has
accomplished, that though men are sinners, yet they should be without guilt, in
that he has found out a way that the threatenings of the law should truly and
properly be fulfilled, and punishment be executed on sin, and yet not on the
sinner. The sufferings of Christ do answer the demands of the law, with respect
to the sins of those that believe in Christ; and justice is truly fulfilled and
satisfied thereby. And the Law is fulfilled and answered by the obedience of
Christ, so that his righteousness should properly be our righteousness. Though
not performed by us, yet it is properly and reasonably accepted for us, as much
as if we had performed it our selves. Divine wisdom has so contr^ved, that such
an interchanging of sin and righteousness -- should be consistent, and most
agreeable with reason, with the law, and his own holy attributes. And that
because Jesus Christ has so united himself to us, and us to him, as to make
himself our's, -- to make himself our head. He has united himself to the elect
by his dying love. The love of Christ to the elect is so great, that God the
Father looks upon it proper and suitable to account Christ and the elect as
one; and accordingly to account what Christ does and suffers, as if they did
and suffered it.

That love of Christ that is so great as to render Christ willing to put
himself in the stead of the elect, and to bear the misery that they deserved,
does in the Father's account so unite Christ and the elect, that they may be
look^d upon as legally one.

2. It shows wonderful wisdom that our good should be procured by such
seemingly unlikely and opposite means, as the humiliation of the Son of God.
When Christ was about to undertake that great work of redemption, he did not
take that metho^ that any creature-wisdom would have thought the most proper.
Creature-wisdom would have determined that in order to his effectually and more
gloriously accomplishing such a great work, he should rather have been exalted
higher, if it had been possible, rather than humbled so low.

Earthly kings and princes when they are about to engage in any great and
difficult work, will put on their strength, and will appear in all the majesty
and power that they are masters of, that they might be successful.

But when Christ was about to perform the great work of redeeming a lost world,
the wisdom of God took an opposite method, and determined that Christ in order
to the successfully performing of it, should be humbled and abased to a mean
state, that he should appear in low circumstances. He did not deck himself with
his strength and glory, but he laid aside his glory. He emptied himself. Phil.
2.6, 7, 8. "Being in the form of God -- made himself of no reputation, and took
on him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross

Creature-wisdom would have thought that Christ, in order to perform this great
work, should deck himself with all his strength, and if possible be made more
strong. But divine wisdom determined, that Christ, in order to perform it,
should be made weak, that he should put on the infirmities of human nature. The
wisdom of God saw this infirmity and weakness needful in order to the working
out our salvation.

And why did divine wisdom determine that he should become thus weak? It was
that he might be subject to want, and to suffering, and to the power and malice
of his enemies. But then what advantage could it be of to him in this work, to
be subject to the power and malice of his enemies! It was the very design that
he came into the world upon, to overcome his enemies, to overthrow them. Who
would have thought that this was the way to overthrow them, to become weak and
feeble, and for that very end that he might be subject to their power and
malice. But this is the very means that the wisdom of God pitched upon, whereby
Christ was to overthrow his enemies, viz. his being weak, and so being for a
time subject to their power and malice.

This was the means by which God determined that Christ should prevail against
his enemies, that he should be so subject to their power, that they might
prevail against him, so as to put him to great disgrace and to great pain, and
even so as to kill him.

What other wisdom but divine wisdom could ever have determined -- that this
was the way to be taken in order to the being successful in the work of our
redemption. This would have appeared to creature-wisdom the most wrong way that
could be thought of, the directest course to be frustrated that could be
devised. But it was indeed the way to glorious success, and the only way. "The
foolishness of God is wiser than men." 1 Cor. 1.25. God has brought strength
out of weakness, glory out of ignominy and reproach. Christ's shame and
reproach are the only means, by which way is made to our eternal glory and
honor.

The wisdom of God has made Christ's humiliation the means of our exaltation;
his coming down from heaven is that which brings us to heaven. The wisdom of
God has made life the fruit of death The death of Christ was the only means,
we could have eternal life. The death of a person that was God, was the only
way by which we could come to have life in God.

Here favor is made to arise out of wrath: our acceptance into God's favor,
out of God's wrath upon his own Son. A blessing rises out of a curse. Our
everlasting blessedness from Christ's being made a curse for us. Our
righteous^ess is made to rise out of Christ's imputed guilt. He was made sin
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5.21. By such
wonderful means has the wisdom of God procured our salvation.

3. Our sin and misery, is by this contrivance made an occasion of our greater
blessedness. This is a very wonderful thing. It would have been a very
wonderful thing if we had been merely restored from sin and misery, to be as we
were before bu^ it was a much more wonderful thing that we should not only be
restored, but bro't to a higher blessedness than ever; and that our sin and
misery should be the occasion of it, and should make way for it.

It was wonderful that both our sin and misery, should be made the occasion of
our greater blessedness.

First. It was wonderful that our sin should be made the occasion of our
greater blessedness; for sin is the thing that deserves misery. By our sin we
had deserved to be everlastingly miserable. But yet this is so turned by divine
wisdom, that it is made an occasion of our being more happy.

It was a strange thing that sin should be the occasion of any thing else but
misery: and nothing but divine wisdom could have made it an occasion of any
other. It was a strange thing that after man had fined it should be possible
for him to escape misery. But divine wisdom has found out a way whereby the
sinner might not only escape being miserable, but that he should be happier
than before he sinned; yea, than he would have been if he had never sinned at
all. And this sin and unworthiness of his, is the thing that is the occasion of
this greater blessedness.

Secondly. It was a wonderful thing that man's own misery should be an
occcasion of his greater happiness. For happiness and misery are contraries. It
shows divine wisdom to bring contraries thus one out of another. Especially
when it is considered how great man's misery was. He was under the wrath and
curse of God, and condemned to everlasting burnings.

This sin and misery of man, is by this contrivance, made an occasion of his
being more happy, not only than he was before the fall, but more happy than he
would have been, if he never had fallen. Man if he never had fallen, -- if he
had performed the required obedience of the law, would have had a more high
degree of happiness than he had while in a state of trial.

Our first parents, if they had stood and persever'd in perfect obedience,
'till God had given them the fruit of the tree of life as a seal of their
reward, they would have been advanced to higher happiness; for they before were
but in a state of probation for their reward. And it is not to be supposed but
that their happiness was to have been greater after they had persisted in
obedience, and had actua^ly received the reward, than it was, while they were
in a state of trial for it. But by the redemption of Christ, the sin and misery
of the elect is made an occasion of their being brought to a higher happiness
than mankind would have had if they had persisted in obedience 'till they had
received the reward. As is manifest in the following things.

1st. Man is hereby brought to a greater and nearer union with God. If man had
never fallen, God would have remained man's friend; he would have enjoyed God^s
savor, and so would have been the object of Christ, as he would have had the
favor of all the persons of the trinity.

But now Christ becoming our surety and Savior, and having taken on him our
nature, occasions between Christ and us an union of a quite different kind, and
a nearer re^ation than otherwise would have been. Christ is become our's now,
in a manner than otherwise would not have been. The fall is the occasion of
Christ's becoming our head, and the church his body. And believers are become
his brethren and kinsfolk, and spouse, in a manner that otherwise would not
have been. And by our union with Christ we have a greater union with God the
Father. We, if we had stood, should have been the children of God in a sense as
the angels are said to be the sons of God, Job 38.7.

But now we are sons in a different, more excellent manner, that is by a
special relation to Christ the eternal Son of God, and a certain participation
of his relation to the Father. We are sons by virtue of our union with the
natural son of God. Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. When the fullness of time was come, God sent
forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, abba,
father. And therefore Christ has taught us, in all our addresses to God, to
call him Our Father, in like manner as he calls him Father, Joh. 20.17. Go tell
my brethren, behold I ascend to my Father, and your Father.

This is one of the wonderful things brought about by the work of redemption.
That thereby our separation from God, is made an occasion of a greater union,
than was before, or otherwise would have been.

When we fell, there was a dreadfu^ separation made betwixt God and us, but
this is made an occasion of a greater union. Joh. 17.20, 21 22, 23. Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word: that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee: that
they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou have sent me.
And the glory which thou gave me I have given them: that they may be one even
as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

2dly. Man now has greater manifestations of the glory and love of God, than
otherwise he would have had. Man's happiness consists principally in the
manifestations of these two things, viz. of the glory -- and love of God. Now,
man by the work of redemption, has greater manifestation of both of them, than
^^herwise he would have had. We have already spoken particularly of the glory
of God, and what advantages even the Angels have by the discoveries of it in
this work. But if they have such advantages, much more, will man who is far
more directly concerned in this affair than they.

And here is in this work, immensely greater displays of the love of God, than
man had before he fell; or, as we may well suppose, than he would have had, if
he had never fallen. God now manifests his love to his people, by sending his
Son into the world, to die for them. There never would have been any such
testimony of the love of God, if man had not fallen.

CHRIST manifests his love, by coming into the world, and laying down his life.
This is the greatest testimony of divine love that can be conceived, immensely
gr^ater than all blessings would have been, if bestowed upon man in innocence,
and without any humiliation, or suffering of any of the divine persons. This is
a greater testimony of divine love than otherwise would have been thought of,
or known to be possible. Now surely the greater discoveries God's people have
of God's love to them, the more happy must they be: the more they see of God's
love to them, the more occasion will they have to rejoice in that love. Here
will be a de^ightful theme the saints will have to contemplate to all eternity,
which they never could have had, if man never had fallen, viz the dying love of
Christ. They will have occasion now to sing that song for ever, in the first
chapter of Revelations, ver. 5, 6. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own blood, and has made us kings and priests unto God and his
father, to whom be glory and dominion forever, amen.

3dly. Man now has greater motives offered him to love God than otherwise he
ever would have had. Man's happiness consists in mutual love between God and
man; -- in seeing God's love to him and in reciprocally loving God. And the
more he sees of Gods love to him, and the more he loves God, the more happy
must he be. His love to God is as necessary in order to his happiness, as the
seeing God^s love to him; for he can have no joy in the beholding God's love to
him, any otherwise than as he loves God.

This makes the saints prize God's love to them, because they love him. If they
did not love God, it wou^d not rejoice them to make them happy, to see his love
to them; because they would make light of his love and despise it. The more any
person loves another, the more will he be delighted in the manifestations of
that other's love.

There is provision therefore made for both in the work of redemption. Both,
that there should be greater manifestations of the love of God to us, than
there would have been, if man had not fallen, and also that man should love God
more than he would have done, if he had not fallen. And that therefore there
are greater motives to love him than otherwise there would have been. There are
greater obligations to love him, for God has done more for us to win our love.
Christ has died for us. Man would have had no such motives to the love of God,
if man had not fallen: none to be compared to it. The greater motives God's
people have to love God, the more will their hearts indeed be drawn forth to
love, and consequently the more happy will men be.

And then, man is now brought to a more universal and immediate and sensible
dependence on God, than otherwise he would have been. All his happiness is now
of him, through him, and in him. If man had not fallen, he would have all his
happiness of God, but he would have had it by his own righteousness; but now it
is by the righteousness of Christ. He would have had all his holiness of God,
but not so sensibly; because then he would have been holy from the beginning,
as soon as he received his being; there never would have been a time when he
was not holy, and so it is derivation from God would not have been so sensible
as it is now, when he is first sinful and universally corrupt, and afterward
is made holy. If man had held his integrity and persever'd in obedience through
the time of trial, he would have had all his happiness from God, but not so
sensibly; for he would have been happy from the time when he first began to
exist in a constant uninterrupted manner, and misery would have been a stranger
to him; and therefore happiness would not have been so sensible a derivation
from God, as it is now, when man looks to God from the deeps of distress, cries
repeatedly to him, and waits upon him, being convinc^d by abundant experience,
that he has no where else to go but to God, who is graciously pleased in
consequence of man's earnest and persevering suit to appear to his relief, take
him out of the miry clay and horrible pit, and set him upon a rock, and
establish his goings, and put a new song into his mouth.

By man's having thus a more immediate, and universal and sensible dependence,
God does more entirely secure man's undivided respect. There is greater motive
for man to make God his all in all, -- to love him and rejoice in him as his
only portion.

4thly. By the contrivance for our salvation, man's sin and misery are but an
occasion of his being brought to a more full and free converse with, and
enjoyment of God than otherwise would have been. For as we have observed
already, the union is greater; and the greater the union, the more full the
communion, and intimate the intercourse.

And then, man has this advantage, that Christ is come down to him, in his own
nature; and hereby he may converse with Christ more intimately, than the
infinite distance of the divine nature would allow. I have before observed this
advantage as what the angels have, but it is more man's advantage than the
angels. For Christ is not only in a created nature, but he is in man's own
nature.

And so we have advantages for a more full enjoyment of God. This end is also
obtained in the work of redemption, viz. that by Christ's incarnation, the
saints may see God with their bodily eyes* as well as by an intellectual view.
They may see him in both ways of seeing, which their natures, being body and
spirit, are capable of. The saints after the day of judgment, will consist of
both body and soul: And so they will have outward as well as spiritual sight.
It is now ordered of divine wisdom, that God himself or a divine person should
be the principal entertainment of both these kinds of sight, spiritual and
corporal. And that the saints in heaven should not only have an intellectual
sight of God, but that they should see a divine person as they see one another:
which shall not only be spiritua^ly, but outwardly.

The body of Jesus Christ will therefore appear with that transcendent visible
majesty and beauty, that is exceeding expressi^e of the divine majesty beauty
and glory. The body of Christ shall appear with the glory of God upon it, as
Christ tel^s us that he will come at the day of judgment, with the glory of his
Father, Mat. 16.27. The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father. This
will be a great happiness to the saints thus to see God. Job comforted himse^f
with this, that he should see God with his bodily eyes, Job 19.26 And though
after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.

5ly. and lastly. Man's sin and misery is made an occasion of his greater
happiness, as he has now a greater relish of happiness, by reason of his
knowledge of both. In order to happiness, there must be two things, viz. his
union to a p^oper object -- and a relish of the object. Man's sin and misery is
made an occasion of increasing both these, by the work of redemption. We have
shown already that the union is increased. And that is not only increased but
the re^ish too; and that by the knowledge that man now has of evil. These
contraries, good and evil, heighten the sense of one another. And therefore the
forbidden tree was called the tree of knowledge of good and evil. It Is the tree
of the knowledge of evil; because it was by that that we came to the experience
of evil. If it had not been for our eating of that tree, we never should have
known what evil was. And it is also the tree of the knowledge of Good, because
we should never have known so we^l what good was, if it had not been for that
tree. We are taught the value of good, by our knowledge of it is contrary, evil.
This teaches us to prize good, and makes us the more to relish it and rejoice
in it.

This is made to be the effect of the fruit of that tree to the saints by the
work of redemption. They thereby know something what a state of sin and
alienation from God is. They know something what the anger of God is, and what
it is to be in danger of hell. And this makes them the more exceedingly to
rejoice in the favor of God, and in the enjoyment of God.

Take two persons: one that never knew what evil was, never was in any misery;
but that was happy from the first moment of his being, having the favor of
God, and all manner of tokens of it. And another that is in a very doleful,
lost and undone condition: and let there be bestowed upon these two persons the
same blessings, the same good things: and let them be objectively in the same
glorious circumstances, -- and which will rejoice most? Doubtless he that was
brought to this happiness out of a miserable and doleful state. So the saints
in heaven will for ever the more rejoice in God, and in the enjoyment of his
love, for their being brought to it out of a most lamentable state and
condition. They thereby know what evil is, and great danger of it.

Other things might be mentioned, where the happiness that the saints have by
the redemption of Christ does excel the happiness that man had before the
fall; or that he would have had, if he had stood. But these may suffice.

Having thus observed some wonderful circumstances of the good attained for us
by this contrivance, for our redemption, -- I proceed now*

IIIdly. To take notice of some wonderful circumstances of the overthrow of
Satan that is attained thereby. The wisdom of God does greatly and remarkably
appear in so exceedingly baffling and confounding all the subtilty of the old
serpent.

As we have already observed, power never appears so conspicuous as when
opposed and conquering opposition: so the same may be said here of wisdom. It
never appears so brightly and with such advantage as when opposed by the
subtilty of some very crafty enemy: and in baffling and confounding that
subtilty.

The devil is exceeding subtle. The subtil^y of the serpent is emblematical of
it, spoken of, Genesis 3.1. Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the
field -- He was once one of the brightest Intelligences of heaven, and one of
the brightest if not the very brightest of all. And all the devils were once
morning stars, of a glorious brightness of understanding. They still have the
same faculties, though they ceased to be influenced and guided by the holy spirit
of God; and so their heavenly wisdom is turned into hellish craft and subtilty.

GOD in the work of redemption has wondrously baffled the utmost craft of the
devils: and that though they are all combined, and have al^ as it were laid their
heads together to contrive to frustrate God, in his designs of glory to
himself, and goodness to men.

The wisdom of God appears very gl^rious herein. We shall take notice of some
instances wherein.

1. The weak and seemingly despicaple means and weapons that God makes use of
to overthrow satan withal. Christ poured the greater contempt upon satan, in
the victory that he obtained over him; by reason of the means of his preparing
himself to fight with him, and the weapons that he has made use of. Christ
when he prepared himself to fight with satan, he as it were lays aside his
strength: he takes on him the human nature, and makes himself a weak mortal. He
chooses to fight with satan in the human nature, in a poor, frail, afflicted
state. It was his will to overcome satan thus. He did as David did. David when
he was going against the philistine refused to go with Readiness armor, with a
helmet of brass upon his head and a coat of mail, and his sword. No, be puts
them off him. Goliath comes mighti^y armed against David, with a helmet of brass
upon h^s he^d, and a coat of mail weighing five thousand sh^kels of brass, and
greaves of brass upon his legs and a target of b^ass be^ween his shoulders; and
a spear, whose staff was like a weaver^s beam; and the spear's head weighing
six hundred shekels of iron And besides a^l this, had one bearing a shield that
went before him But David takes nothing but a staff in his hand, and a
shepherd's bag and a sling, and goes against the philistine. And the weapons
that Christ made use of were his poverty, afflictions and reproaches,
sufferings and death. His principal weapon was his own cross: the instrument of
his own reproachful death. These were seemingly weak and despicable
instruments, to go and fight against such a giant as satan with. And doubtless
the devil disdained them as much as Goliath did David's staves and sling. But
with such weapons as these has Christ in a human, weak, mortal nature,
overthrown all the reproach and baffled all the craft of hell.

Such disgrace and contempt has Christ poured upon satan, much more than if he
had overcome satan with some very pompous and magnificent apparatus of armor,
as he that overcomes his enemy with a wooden sword puts him to the greater
disgrace, and he has the greater triumph over him. As David had a more glorious
victory over Goliath for his conquering him with such dispicable instruments:
and Samson over the Philistines, for kil^ing so many of them with such a
despicable weapon as the jaw bone of an ass.

It is spoken of in scripture as a glorious triumph of Christ over the devil,
that he should overcome him, by such a despicable weapon as his cross. Col.
2.14, 15. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross:
and having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it.

GOD shows his great and infinite wisdom in taking this method, to confound the
wisdom and subtilty of his enemies. He hereby shows how easily he can do it,
and that he is infinitely wiser than they 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. God has chosen
the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the
weak things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty: and the base
things of the world and things that are despised, has God chosen: yea, and
things that are not to bring to naught the things that are.

SERMON, XV.
EPHESIANS iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.


2. ANother wonderful circumstance of the overthrow of satan, in the work of
redemption, is, God has hereby confounded satan with his own weapons. It is so
contrived in the work of redemption, that our grand enemy should be made a
means of his own confusion: and that, by those very things, whereby he
endeavors to rob God of his glory, and to destroy mankind. He is made a means
of frustrating his own designs. His most subtle and powerful endeavors for the
accomplishing his designs are made a means of confounding them, and of
promoting the contrary.

Of this, I will mention but two instances.

First His procuring man's fall is made an occasion of the contrary to what he
designed.

Indeed he has hereby procured the ruin of multitudes of mankind, which he
aimed at. But in this he does not frustrate God; for this was God's design from
all eternity, to glorify himself in the damnation of multitudes of mankind. And
it will prove no content to him, but his own misery.

But what satan did in tempting man to fall is made an occasion of the contrary
to what he intended, in that it gave occasion for God to glorify himself the
more: and as also it gives occasion for the elect's being bro't to higher
happiness: as we have shown.

The happy state that man was in was envied by satan, -- That man that was of
earthly original should be advanced to such honors; when he who was orginally
of a so much more noble nature should be cast down to such disgrace. His pride
could not bear it, -- that man that dwelt in a house of clay, should be made so
much of, while he was in such misery.

And how, may we conclude, that satan triumphed when he had brought him down!

The devil tempted our first parents with this, that if they eat of the
forbidden fruit, they should be as Gods: it was a lie in satan's mouth; for he
aimed at nothing else but to fool man out of his happiness, and make him his
own slave and vassal, with a blinded expectation of being like a god.

But little did satan think that God would turn it so, as to make man's fall an
occasion of one in the human nature actually being a divine person. Man's
eating the forbidden fruit is made an occasion of God's becoming man: and so an
occasion of our nature's being advanced to a union to God, so as to be the same
person.

By this means it comes to pass, that one in mans' nature, that satan so
envyed, now sits at the right hand of God, invested with divine power and
glory,and reigns over heaven and earth with a god-like power and dominion. Thus
is satan disappointed in his subtilty. As he intended, that saying, "Ye shall
be as gods -- was a lie, to decoy and be fool man. Little did he think, that it
would be in such manner verified, as it is, by the incarnation of the son of
God.

And then this is the occasion also, of all the elect being united to this
divine person, so that they become one with Christ; are as it were parts of
him. Believers are as Christ; or, members and parts of Christ. So the Church is
called Christ. Little did satan think, that his telling that lie to our first
parents, -- Ye shall be as Gods, would be the occasion of their being as Christ
the Son of God.

Again, satan is made a means of his own confusion in this: -- It was satan's
design in tempting man to sin, to make man his captive and slave for ever; to
have plagued him and triumphed over him. And this very thing is a means to
bring it about, that man instead of being his vassal should be his judge. It is
the very means, that the elect, instead of being his captives, to be for ever
tormented and triumphed over by him, should sit as judges to sentence him to
everlasting torment. It has been the means, that one in man's nature, viz.
Jesus Christ should be his supreme judge. It was man's nature that satan so
envied, and sought to make a prey of. But Jesus Christ at the last day, shall
come in man's nature; and the devils shall be all brought to stand trembling at
his bar: and he shall judge, and condemn them, and execute the wrath of God
upon them.

CHRIST shall come in the human nature: in a nature in it self much inferior to
the original nature of the devils -- to do this. And this, satan's tempting man
to sin, has been the occasion of. For it was the fall of man that satan
procured, which was the occasion of Christ's being in the human nature.

And not only shall Christ in the human nature judge the devils, but all the
saints shall judge them with Christ; as assessors with him in judgment. 1 Cor.
6.3. Know ye not that we shall judge angels.

Secondly. In another instance satan is made a means of his own confusion; and
that is in his procuring the death of Christ. Satan set himself to oppose
Christ as soon as he appeared. He sought by all means to procure his ruin. He
set the jews against him. He filled the minds of the scribes and pharisees with
the most bitter persecuting malice against Christ. He sought by all means to
procure his death; and that he might be put to the most ignominious death that
could be. We read "that satan entered into Judas, and tempted him to betray him.
Luke 22.3. And Christ speaks of his sufferings as being the effects of the
power of darkness, Luke 22.53. When I was daily with you in the temple, ye
stretched forth no hands against me: but this is your hour and the power of
darkness.

But satan hereby overthrows his own kingdom. Christ came into the world to
destroy the works of the devil. And this was the very thing that did it, viz.
the death of Christ. Christ overcomes satan by his blood. Here it is that the
whole work of redemption is built, even the blood of Christ. The cross was the
devil's own weapon. Christ overthrew satan with this weapon. As David cut off
Goliath's head with his own sword.

CHRIST's thus making satan a means of his own confusion was typify^d of old by
Samson^s getting honey out of the carcass of the lion. There is more implied in
Samson's riddle. "Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came
forth sweetness, than ever the philistines explained. And it was a saying that
is verified by Christ in a far more glorious manner than by Samson's getting
honey out of the carcass of the lion. God's enemy and our's are taken in the
pit which they themselves have dug: and their own soul is taken in the net
which they have laid.

Thus we have shown in some measure the wisdom of this way of salvation by
Jesus Christ.

This introduces the next general head, which was to show,

II. That this wisdom is above the wisdom of the Angels. This wisdom is
altogether divine. And though the angels are spirits of glorious wisdom, yet it
was above their wisdom to contrive such a way of salvation. If it had been put
to them to find out a way for man's redemption, they all would have been
nonplus'd.

The wisdom of this contrivance appears to have been above the wisdom of the
angels by the following things.

1. It appears that this wisdom in that they themselves did not fully
comprehend the contrivance, 'till they saw it accomplished. They knew that man
was to be redeemed, long before Christ came into the world: but yet they did
not fully comprehend it until they saw it. This is evident by the expression in
the text. "That now might be known unto the principalities -- the manifold
wisdom of God, i. e. Now the work is actually accomplished by Jesus Christ.
Which implies that it was now new to them. If they understood no more of it
now, than they had all along, the Apostle would never have expressed himself
so; for he is speaking of it as a mystery, in a measure kept hid until now.

They doubtless understood much of it before: but they did not understand all.
They had a new discovery when Christ came and performed the work.

Now it is to be considered, that the angels had had four thousand years time
to contemplate and look into this affair. And they did spend that time in
studying of it; for they did not want inclination and desire to understand it
and look into it, as the scripture teaches us. And they had a great deal to put
them upon an attentive contemplation of it. For when it was made known that God
had such a design, it must appear a wonderful thing to them. It was a new
thing. They had seen their fellow Angels destroyed without mercy. And this
redeeming of the fallen sinful creature, was quite a new thing. It must needs
be astonishing to them, when God had revealed this design of mercy to them
presently after the fall; and had given an intimation of it, in saying, "The
seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head. They knew that God had such
a design; for they were from the beginning ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister to those that were the heirs of salvation. They were sent forth to
minister to them, that were redeemed by Christ ever since the fall. They were
present at the institution of the typical dispensation, that was so full of
shadows of gospel things; as is evident by Psalm. 69.17.

The angels contemplating the contrivance of our redemption was typified by the
posture of the cherubims over the mercy seat, over the ark. They were made
bending down toward the ark and mercy seat This is what the apostle Peter is
thought to have some reference to, 1 Pet. 1.12.

So that they for four thousand years had been studying this contrivance, and
yet they did not fully comprehend it till they saw it accomplished.

This shows that the wisdom of it was far above their wisdom; for if they could
not fully comprehend it after it had been revealed that there was such a
design; and after much of it had already been made known, as it was in the old
testament: -- If they not withstanding could not fully understand it, after
they had studied four thousand years together upon it; how much less could they
have found it out of themselves without any thing being ever made known to them
of it. They that have four th^usand years time to study a thing, have
sufficient trial whether it be above their understanding or not.

2. It will appear if we consider for what end this wisdom of God was made
known unto them, viz. that they might admire and prize it. It was made known to
them, that they might see how manifold it is; how great and glorious it is;
that they might see the unspeakable depths of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 11.33.

It was manifested to them that they might see the glory of God in it. It was
shown unto the angels that they might see how great and wonderful the mystery
was. 1 Timothy 3.16. "Great is the mystery of godliness: Godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels --

Now if the wisdom of it were not far above their own understandings, this
would not be shown them, for them to admire and praise.

3. It appears in that they are still contemplating of it; and endeavoring to
see more and more of it. There is so much wisdom in this way of salvation, that
there is room for the faculties of Angels to employ themselves to all eternity.
It is evident that the Angels are still employing themselves in endeavoring to
see more and more of God's wisdom appearing in the work of redemption, by 1
Pet. 1.12. "Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which
was in them -- did signify, when it testified before hand of the sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not
unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which are now
reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you, with the
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.
It is not said, that they desire to look into it before Christ came; but they
still desire to look into it, after they have seen it accomplished. Now they
don't so perfectly comprehend all the wisdom that is to be seen in it: but they
are contemplating, looking into it, that they may see more and more; and never
will have fully exhausted to all eternity: But here will still in this work be
room enough to employ the angelical understandings.

APPLICATION.
1. Hence we may learn the blindness of the world, that the wisdom appearing in
the work of redemption is no more admired in it. God has revealed this his
glorious design and contrivance to the world. He has sent forth his gospel, and
causes it to be preached abroad in the world, to declare to the world his
infinite wisdom has been set on work for man's salvation. But how little is it
regarded! There are some that do see; that have there eyes opened to behold the
wondrous things of the gospel, to see the glory of God in, and to admire the
wisdom of it. But the greater part are wholly blind to it. They see nothing in
all this that is any way glorious and wonderful. Though the Angels are so
surprised at, and so attentively behold and consider, and account it worthy of
their most engaged and deep contemplation; yet the greater part of them that
have the Gospel here on earth, take little notice of it. It is all a dull
story, and dead letter to them. They see no such wisdom in it, as characterizes
it to be of diving original. They are so far from seeing any wisdom in it, that
it is above the wisdom of the Angels, that they cannot see any thing in it above
the wisdom of men. They can discover nothing in it above what is human, that
should make them conclude that it is any thing more than the invention of men.
Yea the gospel to many seems foolishness; so that they question whether it be
of divine original or not. And there are many that do openly deny it.

Though the light that shines in the world be so exceeding glorious, yet how few
are there that do see it. The glory of God's wisdom in this work is surpassing
the brightness of the sun: but so blind is the world that it sees nothing. It
don't know that the sun of righteousness shines.

Thus it has been in all ages, and wherever the gospel has been preached.
Ministers of the word of God, in all ages have had occasion to say, Who has
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

Thus it was of old, under the preaching of the prophets. They were sent to
many with that errand, Isai. 6.9.10. "Go and tell this people, hear ye indeed,
but understand not; and see ye indeed, but (...) not. Make the heart of this
people fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert and be healed.

And so it was in Christ's time, when that glorious prophet came, and more
fully revealed the counsels of God concerning our redemption. How many were
there that were blind! How much did Christ complain of them! How blind were the
scribes and pharisees, the most noted sect of men among the jews for wisdom;
they beheld no glory in that gospel which Christ preached unto them; -- which
gave occasion to Christ to call them fools and blind, Mat. 23.17.

So it was again in the Apostles times. In all places where they preached, some
believed, and some believed not, Acts 28.24. "As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed, Chap. 13.4^. "The election obtained, but the rest were
blinded, Romans 11.7.

And so it is still in those places where the gospel is preached. There are a
few that have their eyes open to see the glory of the gospel. God has a small
number whose eyes he opens, who are called out of darkness into mavelous
light. Who have an understanding given them of the way of life, to see the
wisdom and fitness of that way.

But how many are there that sit under the preaching of the gospel, all their
days, that never see any divine wisdom or glory in it! To their dying day they
are unaffected with it. When they hear it, they see nothing to attract their
attention, and excite any admiration. To preach the gospel to them will serve
very well to lull them asleep: but very little other effect upon them. This
shows the exceeding wickedness of the heart of man, -- That infinite wisdom
should be so set on work, as to surprise the Angels, and to entertain them from
age to age; -- and that this wisdom should be so plainly set before men, and
after all it should appear foolishness 1 Cor. 1.18. "The preaching of the cross
is to them that perish foolishness.

Infer. II. This is a great confirmation of the truth of the gospel. Thy gospel
stands in no need of external evidences of its truth and divinity. It carries
its own light and evidence with it. There is that in the nature of it that
sufficiently distinguishes it to those who are spiritually enlightened, from
all the effects of human invention. There are the evident appearances of the
divine perfections; the stamp of divine glory, of which this of the divine
wisdom is not the least part.

There is as much in the gospel to show that it is no work of men, as there is
in the sun in the firmament. Persons that are come to the mature exercise of
their reason and look upon the sun, and consider the nature of it, its
wonderful height, it is course, it is brightness and heat, may know that it is no
work of man. so if the nature of the gospel be duly considered, if the true
nature of it is seen, it may be known that it is no work of man, and that it
must be from God.

If the wisdom appearing in the gospel be duly considered and understood, it
will be seen as much to excel all human wisdom, as the sun's light excells the
light of fires of our own inkindling.

The contrivance of our salvation is of such a nature, as that no one that duly
considers it can rationally conclude that man had any hand in it. The nature of
the contrivance is such, so out of the way of all human thoughts, of a nature
so different from all human inventions; so much more sublime, excellent and
worthy, that it don't savor at all of the craft or subtilty of man: it savours
of God.

If any are ready to think man might have found out such a way of the salvation
of sinners; so honorable to God, to his holiness and authority, they don't
well consider the scantiness of human understanding. Mankind were of a poor
capacity for any such Undertaking; for 'till the gospel inlighten'd the world
they had but miserable notions of what was honorable to God. They could have
but poor notions of what way would be suitable to the divine perfections; for
they were woefully in the dark about these divine perfections themselves, till
the gospel came abroad in the world. They were ignorant of the nature and
perfections of God. They had strange notions about a Deity. Most of them
thought there were many Gods. "They chang^d the glory of the incorruptible God
into an image like to corruptible man, and to birds and four footed beasts and
creeping things, Romans 1.23. They attributed vices to God. Even the
philosophers, their wisest men entertained but imperfect notions of the supreme
Being.

How then should man find out a way so glorious and honorable to God, and
agreeable to his perfections, who had not wisdom enough to get any tolerable
notions of God, till the gospel was revealed to them. They groped in the dark.
Their notions showed the infinite insufficiency of man's blind understanding,
for any such undertaking, as the contriving a way of salvation, every way
honorable to God, and suitable to the needs of a fallen creature.

But since the gospel has told what God's counsels are, and how he has
contrived a way for our salvation, men are ready to despise it, and foolishly
to exalt their own understanding; and to imagine they could have found out as
good a way themselves. When, alas! men of themselves had no notion of what was
honorable to God, and suitable for a divine being. They did not so much as
think of the necessity of God's law being answered, and justice satisfied. And
if they had, how dreadfully would they have been puzzled to have found out the
way how. Who would have thought of a trinity of persons in the godhead; and
that one should sustain the rights of the Godhead; and another should be the
Mediator; and another should make application of redemption!

Who would have thought of such a thing as three distinct persons, and yet but
one God! all the same Being, and yet three persons! Who would have though it of
this, in order to have found out a way for the satisfying justice.

Who would have thought of a way for the answering the law that threatened
eternal death, without the sinner's suffering eternal death.

And who would have thought of any such thing as a Person that was God, a
divine Person suffering the wroth of God! And if they had; who would have
contrived a way how he should suffer, when he was God, since the divine nature
cannot suffer!

Who would have thought of any such thing as Gods becoming man; two natures and
but one person! These things are exceedingly out of the way of human though it and
contrivance. It is most unreasonable to think that the world, who till the
gospel enlightened them, were so blind about the nature of God, and divine
things, should contrive such a way that should prove thus to answer all ends;
every way to suit with what the case required; every way most glorious to God;
every way answerable to all man's necessities: wherein every thing is so fully
provided for, and no absurdity to be found in the whole affair, but all
speaking forth the most perfect wisdom. That there should be no infringement
upon the holiness of God, or on the justice of God; nothing dishonorable to
the majesty of God; no encouragement to sin, all possible motives to holiness:
-- all manner of happiness provided; satan so confounded and entirely
overthrown.

And if we suppose that all this notwithstanding was the invention of men,
whose invention should it be! Who should be pitched upon as the most likely to
invent it. It was not the invention of the jews; for they were the most bitter
enemies to it. The wise men among them, when they first heard of it, they
conceived a virulent malice against it, and persecuted all that held this
doctrine: And so they do to this day entertain a great hatred of the whole
doctrine of the contrivance of our salvation by Jesus Christ.

It was not the invention of the heathen; for the heathen knew nothing about
it, till the apostles preached it to them. It was a new doctrine to them; and
appeared a very foolish doctrine to the wise men among them. The doctrine of
Christ crucified was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness. 1 Cor. 1.23.

And besides, it was contrary to all their notions about a deity, they knew
nothing about the true God the fall of man, and the like, till the gospel
revea^'d it to them.

It was not the invention of the apostles; for the apostles of themse^ves, were
no way capable of any such learned contrivance. They were nothing but a parcel
of poor fishermen and publicans, an obscure and illiterate sort of men, 'till
they were extraordinarily taught. And besides it could not be their invention;
for they were all surpised when they first heard of it. When they heard that
Christ must die for sinners, they were offended at it: It looked strange to
them: And it was a long while before they were brought fully to receive it.

It could not be the invention of any other christians; for there were no other
christians, but only those that were converted by the preaching and the
writings of the apostles, and other disciples of Christ that were under them.

There is but one Way left, and that is, to suppose, That Christ was a mere
man, and a very subtle crafty man, and that he invented it all: But this is as
unreasonable as the rest; for if Christ had been a mere man, it would have been
all against himself, to invent a way of salvation, by his own crucifixion,
which he knew he could get nothing by, but a most tormenting and ignominious
death.

SERMON, XVI.
EPHESIANS iii. 10. To the Intent that now unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God.


INF. III. HOW great a sin they are guilty of who despise and reject this way
of salvation. When God has thus as it were set wisdom on work, and has
manifested such unsearchable riches of wisdom, When all the persons of the
trinity have as it were held a consultation from all eternity, in contriving
for the providing a way of salvation for us sinful miserable worms. To contrive
a way that should be sufficient for us, and every way suitable for us. To
contrive a way that should be such a way as we want, so as to answer all our
needs. To contrive a way that should be in all things complete, whereby we
might have complete salvation, not only full pardon of all our sins, and
deliverance from hell; but have full blessedness in heaven forever. When he has
been so gracious to us as to magnify his wisdom, more in this work of grace
toward men, than in any other work of his. -- How must God needs be provoked,
when after all, men reject this way of salvation!

When it comes to be preached to them, and salvation is offered to them, and
salvation is offered to them in this way; and they are invited to accept of the
benefits of it, they despise it, and refuse salvation in that way. They cast
contempt upon all this rich and glorious wisdom of God. They do practically
deny it to be a wise way. And call this wisdom of God foolishness.

How provoking must it be when -- such a poor creature as man shall rise up and
find fault with that wisdom which is so far above the wisdom of the angels of
heaven, as though the way that God had found out was an unsuitable, an
insufficient way.

This is one thing wherein consists the heinousness of the sin of unbelief,
that it implies a rejecting and despising the wisdom of God in the way of
salvation by Jesus Christ. It charges God with folly in this contrivance.

Unbelief finds fault with the wisdom of God in the choice of the person, as
though God had made an unwise choice of the person for the performing this work*
It dislikes the Person of Christ. It sees no form or comeliness in him, or
beauty wherefore he should desire him. Accounts him insufficient for the work
that he has been chosen and appointed to.

That person that the wisdom of God looked upon as the fittest person of any
whatsoever, and the only fit person, is despised and rejected by unbelief.

Men through unbelief find fault with the Salvation itself that Christ has
purchased: They don't like to be saved as Christ would save. They don't like to
be made holy, and to have such a happiness as is to be had in God for a portion.

It may not be amiss here to mention two or three ways whereby persons are
guilty of a provoking contempt of the wisdom of God in the way of salvation.

1. They are guilty of a provoking contempt, who live in a careless neglect of
their salvation: They that are secure in their sins, and are not much concerned
about salvation or damnation. Are not so much as earnestly seeking salvation.
This is a practical charging God with folly in this affair.

The language of it is, that it is all in vain, and to no purpose that God has
contrived and consulted for the obtaining salvation, when there was no need of
it. That he has laid out himself, and been at great cost to procure salvation
for them when they don't want salvation. They are well enough as they are. They
don't see any great necessity they are in of a savior. They like that state
they are in, and do not much desire to be delivered out of it.

They don't thank him for all his consultation and contrivance. They think he
might have spared his cost. They do as much as say, that God greatly cared for
the finding out and accomplishing a way of salvation; whereas they don't think
it worth their caring about. God has greatly minded that, which they don't
think worth a minding. God has contrived abundantly for that which they don't
trouble their heads about.

2. They are guilty of a provoking contempt of the wisdom of this way of
salvation, who go about to contrive ways of their own. They that are not
content with that way of salvation by the righteousness of Christ, which God
has provided, are for contriving some way of being saved by their own
righteousness.

These find fault with the wisdom of God's way that is so much above the wisdom
of the angels, and set up their own wisdom in opposition to it. They set up
their own wisdom above God's, as though they could find out a better way.

How greatly must God be provoked when persons thus set up their own wisdom
above that infinite wisdom manifested in the way of salvation by Jesus Christ.

3. Those that entertain discouraged and dispairing apprehensions about their
salvation, cast contempt on the wisdom of God. They that entertain such
thoughts as that, because they have been such great sinners, God will not be
willing to pardon them: Christ will not be willing to accept of them. They fear
Christ, in the invitations of the gospel don't mean such wicked creatures as
they are. They fear they have committed so much sin, that they have sinned
beyond the reach of the mercy of God. They think it is in vain for them to seek
for salvation.

These cast contempt on the wisdom of God in the way of salvation, as though the
way was not an alsufficient way. As though the wisdom of God had not found out a
way that was sufficient for the salvation of great sinners: -- As though God had
not found out a way to make satisfaction for so many and so great sins. --

As though the wisdom of God had not pitched upon a person worthy enough to be a
mediator for such great sinners.

INF. IV. Hence the misery of unbelievers who have no portion or lot in this
matter. There is a most glorious way of salvation, but you have no interest in
it. The wisdom of God has been gloriously employed for the deliverance of men
from a miserable, doleful state; and procure happiness for them; but you are
never the better for it, because you reject it: You don't fall in with it: You
don't comply with God's counsels and designs in this affair. This way of
salvation is preached to you in vain. If you continue in that state that you
are in, you will not be the better for its being such a wise way. This wisdom
will do you no good.

The wisdom of God has pitched upon a most fit and suitable Person for the
accomplishing this work; but you have no interest in him. Christ is a glorious
Person; every way fit to be a savior of sinners; a person that has power
sufficient, and wisdom sufficient, and merit sufficient, and love sufficient
for the perfecting this work. And he is the only fit person for the perfecting
of it; but you have no right in him; you can lay claim to no benefit by his
power, wisdom, love or merits

This wisdom of God has found out a way whereby this savior might satisfy
justice, and fulfill the law for us. He has found our a way whereby he might be
capable of suffering for us, viz. That he should become man, and be both God
and man: But you have no lot in this matter of the incarnation, death and
sufferings of Jesus Christ.

The wisdom of God has contrived a way of salvation that there should be
procured for us perfect and everlasting happiness. The wisdom of God has
contrived that there should be procured for fallen man all the good that he
stands in need of. Here is purchased peace with God and the favor of God. Here
is that happiness procured that is most suitable to our nature, and answerable
to the salvation of our souls. Here is a most glorious portion purchased for
us, viz. The divine Being himself, with his glorious perfections. Here it is
purchased that we should see God face to face; -- That we should converse with
God; and dwell with God in his own glorious habitation. It Is purchased that we
should be the children of God; -- and be conformed to him.

Here is procured for worms every sort of good that human nature craves the
highest honors, -- the most abundant riches, -- the most substantial
satisfying pleasures forevermore.

Here God has contrived a way for the meriting all needed good both for the
souls and bodies of sinner: All needed earthly good things, while here; and
glory for both body and soul hereafter, forever.

But you are never the better for all this* You have no lot, or portion in any
of it. Notwithstanding all this rich provision, you remain in the same
miserable state and condition, in which you came i^ to the world. Though the
provision of the Gospel be so full, yet your poor soul remains in a famishing,
perishing state and condition. You remain dead in trespasse^ and sin. You
remain in a lost condition; your soul under the dominion of satan: In a
condemned state, having the wrath of God abiding on you, and being daily
exposed to the dreadful effects of it, in hell; notwithstanding all this
provision, you yet remain wretched and miserable, poor and blind and naked. O
that you might turn to God through Jesus Christ, be numbered among his
disciples and faithful followers, and so be entitled to their privileges!
They have an interest in this glorious savior, and are entitled to all the
ineffable blessedness of his kingdom, so far as their capacities will admit:
But you remain without Christ, being aliens from the common wealth of Israel,
strangers to the covenant of promise, having no well-grounded hope, and without
God in the world.

Consider several things,

First. It argues the greatness of the misery of sinners, that the wisdom of
God should be exercised to such a degree to find out a way to deliver them from
it. It shows that their misery was very great. Their case surely was most
deplorable: It required infinite wisdom to find out a way for their deliverance.

It shows how far they were sunk into misery, that there could be no
contrivance for their deliverance, but the contrivance of the wisdom of the
great God. The wisdom of the angels was not sufficient: Nothing but divine
wisdom could reach and remedy their case. And that God should so lay out
himself, that all the persons of the Trinity should enter into such a
consultation about it. And that the greatest wisdom; that should appear most
wonderful in the sight of the Angels, should be exercised about this affair. It
is not likely it should be so, unless the affair be very great. If man's misery
was not very great, divine wisdom would not have been exercised for his
deliverance from it. God would not contrive and do things so wonderful in a
trivial Affair. If the salvation of a sinner was not a great salvation, from an
exceeding great misery, it is not to be supposed, that God's wisdom should be
more signalized in this affair than in any other whatever.

But so it is; this contrivance seems to be spoken of in scripture as the
master piece of divine wisdom. This work of redemption is represented as most
wonderful, spoken of in scripture in the most exalted manner of any work of
God. Doubtless therefore salvation is a great thing: And consequently the
misery that sinners are saved from is a great and unspeakable misery.

This is the misery that all you are in, who remain in a natural condition.
This is the condemnation you lie under. This is the wrath of God that abides
upon you. The wisdom of God knew it to be a very doleful thing for a person to
be in a natural state, and therefore did so exercise itself to deliver
miserable sinners out of it. But this is the state that many among us do yet
remain in.

Secondly. Consider that if you continue in the state you are in, you will be
so far from being the better for this contrivance, that you will be a great
deal the more miserable for it. You will be a great deal the more miserable for
there being such a wise way, such an excellent way of salvation found out. It
would have been better for you, if the way of salvation had been an imperfect
way, an insufficient way: Or, if there had been no way at all. The justice and
wisdom of the way of salvation will be your condemnation. "This is the
condemnation that, light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
than light". Joh. 3. 19.

That will be your condemnation, that God contrived an infinitely wise way of
salvation, wherein complete salvation was procured for sinners, and you refused
to accept of it, but still went on in your trespasses.

If you continue in the state that you are now in, it would have been better
for you, if Christ had never died for sinners: If God had left all mankind to
perish, as he did the fallen Angel. Your punishment then would have been light
in comparison of what it will be now.

You will have greater sins by far to answer for; and all your sins will he
abundantly the more aggravated.

I have since I have been upon this subject, observed that the work of
redemption is an occasion of the elect's being brought to greater happiness
than man could have had if he had not fallen. But this is a so true as to
reprobates. It will be an occasion of their having greater misery than they
would have had, if there had been no redemption, ^ Cor 2.15. "For we are unto
God, a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them that perish.
To the one we are a savor of death unto death; and to the other we are a
savor of life unto life". If you perish at last you will be the more miserable
for the benefits of the gospel being so glorious, and that because your crime
in rejecting and despising them will be the more heinous. If Christ had
purchased comparatively small happiness for sinners: -- If he had purchased a
happiness that was imperfect, unsatisfactory, and but of finite duration, it
would have been better for you, Heb. 2.3. "How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation".

Thirdly. Whilst you continue an unbeliever, the more you hear of this way of
salvation, your condition will become the more miserable. The longer you sit
under the preaching of the gospel, the more doleful does your case grow. Your
guilt continually increases. For your refusals of the calls of the gospel, and
your rejections of this way of salvation, are so much the oftener repeated.
Every time you hear the gospel preached, you are guilty of a renewed rejection
of it, the guilt of which therefore you will have lying upon you.

And the more you hear of the suitableness and gloriousness of this way, the
greater is your guilt who still continue to reject it. Every new illustration
of the wisdom of God, and grace of God in redemption, adds to your guilt, Mat.
23.37 "O Jerusalem Jerusalem -- how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but ye would
not!"

And that which adds to the misery you are under, is, that as long as it
continues, it is a growing evil.

Fourthly. Consider the danger there is, that you will never have any lot or
portion in this matter. You must consider that there are but few that have.
Christ has told us that strait is the gate and na^row is the way that leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. There have been but few in all ages
of the world. Man^ seek; and many hop^ that they shall obtain. There are but
few that intend to be damned. There are many that hope that they shall some way
or other find means to escape eternal misery But after all, there are but few
saved. But few obtain the benefits of redemption.

I conclude with a

USE of EXHORTATION to come to Christ, and accept of salvation in this way. You
are invited to come to Christ, heartily to close with him, and trust in him for
salvation: And if you do so, you shall be one that shall have the benefit of
this glorious contrivance. You shall have the benefit of all as much as if the
whole end had been contrived for you alone.

God has already contrived and done every thing that is needful to your
salvation; and there is nothing wanting but your consent. Since God has taken
this matter of the redemption of sinners into his own hand, he has made
thorough work of it; he has not left it for you to finish. Satisfaction is
already made, righteousness is already wrought out; there is nothing for you to
do. Death and hell are already conquered. The redeemer has already taken
possession of glory, and keeps it in his hands to bestow on them that come to
him. There were many difficulties in the way, but they are all removed. The
savior has already triumphed over all, and is already in heaven at the right
hand of God, to give eternal life to his people.

Salvation is ready brought to your door; and the savior stands and knocks and
calls that you would open to him, that he might bring it in to you. There
remains nothing but your consent. All the difficulty now remaining is with your
own heart. If you perish now, it must be wholly at your door. It must be
because you would not come to Christ that you might have life: And because you
virtually choose death rather than life, Prove. 8.36. "He that sins against
me wrongeth his own soul: All they that hate me love death".

All that is now required of you, is, that your heart should close with Christ
as a savior. Here consider,

1. That the wisdom of God has so contrived that he has forestalled all our
objections. If you make objections against Christ and the way of salvation,
they must be all unreasonable. You cannot reasonably object that your sins are
of such a nature, that God's honor will not allow of your pardon. It Is true God
insists upon his own honor. He is a God that will be honored, and his majesty
shall be vindicated: And when sinners cast contempt upon him, his honor
requires vengeance: But God has so contrived this way, that his honor may be
repaired by the punishment of sin without the sinners suffering, how great
soever the sin be. Herein the wisdom of this way appears, that there is a
sufficiency for the greatest and most heinous transgressors.

You cannot ob^ect that God the father will not be willing to accept you, for
the mediator's sake; for he has chosen such a person as his own son, a person
so near and dear to him to be a mediator, to cut off any such objections. So
you may be sure that God will receive you if you go to him through Christ.

You cannot object that God the father has not given sufficient assurance of
salvation to believers; for God has not only promised, but the principal
things; those which would have been most difficult to believe, are already
fulfilled; God has already given his son to die for us. This, before it was
accomplished, was a thing a great deal more strange, and difficult to believe,
than that he should give eternal life to sinners after Christ died for them.
That the son of God should die, was a much greater thing, than to give eternal
life upon the account of it. Romans 8.32. "He that spared not his own son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us a^l
things."

And then there is no room to doubt but that if we accept of Christ, God will
give eternal life; for he has given it already into the hands of our savior
for us. He has betrusted him with the whole affair. He has given all things
into his hands, that he might give eternal life to as many as should come to
him. The father has appointed him that died for believers, to be their judge,
to have the whole determination of the matter and disposal of the reward, in
his own hand. And you cannot doubt but that Christ will be willing to bestow
eternal life on them that he purchased it for. For if he is not willing to
bestow it, surely he never would have died to purchase it. Who can think that
Christ would be so desirous of sinners being saved, as to undergo so much for
it; and not be willing to let them have it, when he had obtained it for them.

Consider,

2. The wisdom of God has contrived that there should be in the person of the
savior all manner of attractives to draw us to him. He has not chosen a mean
person, a person of but indifferent loveliness, lest sinners should say, that
there was not excellency enough in Christ to draw them to him. He did not pitch
upon one of the Angels; for though they are excellent creatures, yet their
excellency is but finite. But he has pitched upon his own son, that there
might be no want of excellency in the person. He is not a person whose
excellency is but finite. He has in him all possible excellency. He is
possessed of all the beauty and glory of the Godhead.

So that there can be no manner of excellency, nor degree of excellency that we
can devise, but what is in the person of the savior. By this, it appears,
Christ has excellency enough. For to say, that excellency which is infinite is
not enough, is a contradiction.

But yet so redundant has the wisdom of God been in providing attractives to us
to come to Christ, it has so ordered that there should also be all human
excellencies in him. If there be any thing attractive in this consideration,
that Christ is one in our own nature, one of us; this is true of Christ. He is
not only in the divine, but in the human nature. He is a man like ourselves;
and has all possible human excellencies. He was of a most excellent spirit. He
was wise and holy. He was of a condescending, meek and lowly, a benign and
benevolent disposition.

And again: The wisdom of God has chosen such a person who should be a person
of a great love to sinners, and should show that love in the most endearing
manner possible. What more condescending love can there be, than the love of a
divine person to such worms of the dust! And what freer love can there be than
love to enemies! And what greater love can there be, than dying love! And what
more endearing expression of love, than dying for the beloved! So that here is
not only the excellency of Christ, but his love to mankind to draw us.

Again, the wisdom of God has so contrived that Christ shall sustain that
office that should most tend to endear him to us, and draw us to him: The
office of a redeemer, a redeemer from eternal misery, and the purchaser of all
happiness.

And if all this be not enough to draw us, the wisdom of God has ordered more:
It has provided us a savior that should offer himself to us in the most
endearing relation. He offers to receive us as friends. To receive us to an
union to himself, to become our spiritual husband and portion forever.

And if all this is not enough to draw, there is more yet. The wisdom of God
has provided us a savior that woos us in a manner that has the greatest
tendency to win our hearts. His word is most attractive. He stands at our door
and knocks. He don't merely command us to receive him; but he condescends to
apply himself to us in a more endearing manner. He entreats and beseeches us in
his word and by his messengers.

3. The wisdom of God has contrived that there should be all manner of
attractives in the benefits that Christ offers you. There are not only the
excellencies of the Person of Christ to draw you to him, but the desirable
benefits he offers. Here is what is most suitable to the cravings of the human
nature: Needed relief for all our distresses. -- Men when distressed and
burdened, long for ease and rest. Here it is offered to us in Christ. Come unto
me, says he, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Men when in fear of danger, long for safety. Here it is provided for us in
Christ. God promises that he will become the shield and buckler, strong rock
and high tower to those that trust in him. -- Those that mourn need comfort:
Christ tells us that he came to comfort those that mourn, Isai. 61.2.

The blind need to have their eyes opened. The light is sweet to men: Christ
offers to anoint our eyes with eye salve that we may see glorious light. He
will be our sun, and the light of God's countenance.

What is more dear to men than life? Christ has purchased for men, that they
should live forever, Psalm. 21.4. "He asked life of thee and thou gave it him,
even length of days forever and ever".

How greatly is a crown prized and admired by the children of men? And Christ
offers this, -- not a corruptable crown, but an incorruptable and far more
glorious crown than any worn by earthly kings. A crown of glory, the luster of
which shall never fade or decay -- an everlasting kingdom.

Men love pleasures. Here are pleasures forevermore. What could there be more
to draw our hearts to Jesus Christ, to make us willing to accept of him for our
savior; and to accept of his benefits, in that glorious and wise way that he
has provided for us!

The true Christian's Life, a Journey toward Heaven.
SERMON, XVII. [ Sept. 1733.]
HEBREWS xi. 13, 14. And confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth. For they that say such Things, declare plainly that they seek a Country.


THE apostle is here setting forth the excellencies of the grace of faith, by
the glorious effects and happy issue of it in the saints of the old testament.
He had spoken in the proceeding part of the chapter perticularly, of Abel,
Enoch, Noah, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Jacob. Having enumerated those
instances, he takes notice that "these all died in faith, not having received
the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers" etc.

In these words the apostle seems to have a more particular respect to Abraham
and Sarah, and their kindred that came with them from Haran, and from Ur of the
chaldees, by the 15. ver. where the apostle says, "And truly if they had been
mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had
opportunity to have returned". It was they that upon God's call left their own
country.

Two things may be observed in the text.

1. What these saints confessed of themselves, viz. "that they were strangers
and pilgrims on the earth".

Thus we have a particular account concerning Abraham, "I am a stranger and a
sojourner with you". Genesis 23.4.
And it seems to have been the general sense of the patriarchs, by what Jacob
says to Pharaoh. "And Jacob said to Pharaoh, the days of the years of my
pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: Few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been, and have not attained to the days of the years of the
life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage". Genesis 47.9.
"I am a stranger and a sojourner with thee, as all my fathers were." Psalm*
39.12.


2. The inference that the apostle draws from hence, (viz.) that they sought
another country as their home. "For they that say such things, declare plainly
that they seek a country." In confessing that they were strangers, they plainly
declared that this is not their country; that this is not the country where
they are at home. And in confessing themselves to be pilgrims, they declared
plainly that this is not their settled abode; but that they have respect to
some other country, that they seek and are traveling to as their home.

DOCTRINE. This life ought so to be spent by us, as to be only a journey
toward heaven.
Here I would observe.

I. That we ought not to rest in the world and it is enjoyments, but should
desire heaven.
This our hearts should be chiefly upon and engaged about. We should "seek
first the kingdom of God." Mat. 6.33.
He that is on a journey, seeks the place that he is journeying to. We ought
above all things to desire a heavenly happiness: To go to heaven and there be
with God; and dwell with Jesus Christ. If we are surrounded with many outward
enjoyments, and things that are very comfortable to us: If we are settled in
families, and have those good friends and relations that are very desirable:
If we have companions whose society is delightful to us: If we have children
that are pleasant and hopeful, and in whom we see many promising
qualifications: If we live by good neighbors; have much of the respect of
others; have a good name; are generally beloved where we are known: And have
comfortable and pleasant accommodations: Yet we ought not to take our rest in
these things. We should not be willing to have these things for our portion,
but should seek a higher happiness in another world. We should not merely seek
something else in addition to these things; but should be so far from resting
in them, that we should choose and desire to leave these things for heaven; to
go to God and Christ there. We should not be willing to live here always, if we
could, in the same strength and vigor of body and mind as when in youth, or in
the midst of our days; and always enjoy the same pleasure, and dear friends,
and other earthly comforts. We should choose and desire to leave them all in
God's due time, that we might go to heaven, and there have the enjoyment of
God. We ought to possess them, enjoy and make use of them, with no other view
or aim, but readily to quit them, whenever we are called to it, and to change
them for heaven. And when we are called a way from them, we should go
cheerfully and willingly.

He that is going a journey, is not wont to rest in what he meets with that is
comfortable and pleasing on the road. If he passes along through pleasant places,
flowery meadows or shady groves; he don't take up his content in these things.
He is content only to take a trancient view of these pleasant objects as he
goes along. He is not enticed by these fine appearances to put an end to his
journey, and leave off the thought of proceed^ng. No, but his journey's end is
in his mind; that is the great thing that he aims at. So if he meets with
comfortable and pleasant accommodations on the road, at an inn; yet he don't
rest there; he entertains no tho'ts of settling there. He considers that these
things are not his own, and that he is but a stranger; that, that is not
allotted for his home. And when he has refreshed himself, or tarried but for a
night, he is for leaving these accommodations, and going forward, and getting
onward toward his journey's end. And the thoughts of coming to his journey's
end, are not at all grievious to him. He don't desire to be traveling always
and never come to his journey's end: The thoughts of that would be discouraging
to him. But it is pleasant to him to think that so much of the way is gone, that
he is now nearer home; and that he shall presently be there; and the toil and
fatigue of his journey will be over.

So should we thus desire heaven so much more than the comforts and enjoyments
of this life, that we should long to change these things for heaven. We should
wait with earnest desire for the time, when we shall arrive to our journey's
end. The apostle mentions it as an encouraging, comfortable consideration to
christians, when they draw nigh their happiness. "Now is our salvation nearer
than when we believed."

Our hearts ought to be loose to these things, as it is with a man that is on a
journey. However comfortable enjoyments are, yet we ought to keep our hearts so
loose from them, as cheerfully to part with them, whenever God calls. "But this
I say, brethren, the time is short, it remains, that both they that have
wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and
they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion
of this world passes away". 1 Cor. 7.29, 30.


We ought to look upon these things, as only lent to us for a little while, to
serve a present turn; but we should set our hearts on heaven as our inheritance
forever.

II. We ought to seek heaven, by traveling in the way that leads thither.
The way that leads to heaven, is a way of holiness. We should choose and desire
to travel thither in this way and in no other. We should part with all those
sins, those carnal appetites that are as weights, that will tend to hinder us
in our traveling toward heaven -- "Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin
which does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race set before
us". Heb. 12.1.
However pleasant any practice or the gratification of any appetite may be, we
must lay it aside, cast it away; if it be any hindrance, and stumbling block in
the way to heaven.

We should travel on in a way of obedience to all God's commands, even the
difficult as well as the easy commands. We should travel on in a away of
self-denial; denying all our sinful inclinations and interests. The way to
heaven is ascending; we must be content to travel up hill, though it be hard and
tiresome, though i^ be contrary to the natural tendency and bias of our flesh,
that tends downward to the earth. We should follow Christ in the path that he
has gone. The way that he traveled in, was the right way to heaven. We should
take up our cross and follow him. We should travel along in the same way of
meekness and lowliness of heart; in the same way of obedience and charity, and
diligence to do good; and patience under afflictions. The way to heaven is an
heavenly life; we must be traveling toward heaven in a way of imitation of
those that are in heaven. In imitation of the saints and angels there, in their
holy employments, in their way of spending their time in loving, adoring,
serving, and praising God and the Lamb. This is the path that we ought to
prefer before all others, if we could have any other that we might choose. If we
could go to heaven in a way of carnal living, in the way of the enjoyment and
gratification of our lusts, we should rather prefer a way of holiness and
conformity to the spiritual self-denying rules of the gospel.

III. We should travel on in this way in a laborious manner.
The going of long journeys is attended with toil and fatigue; especially if
the journey be through a wilderness. Persons in such a case expect no other than
to suffer hardships and weariness, in traveling over mountains and through bad
places.

So we should travel in this way of holiness, in a laborious manner, improving
our time and strength, to surmount the difficulties and obstacles that are in
the way. The land that we have to travel through, is a wilderness; there are many
mountains, rocks, and rough places that we must go over in the way; and there
is a necessity that we should lay out our strength.

IV. Our whole lives ought to be spent in traveling this road.
1. We ought to begin early. This should be the first concern, and business
that persons engage in, when they come to be capable of acting in the world in
doing any business. When they first set out in the world, they should set out
on this journey.

And,

2. We ought to travel on in this way with assiduity. It ought to be the work
of every day, to travel on toward heaven. We should often be thinking of our
journey's end; and not only thinking of it, but it should be our daily work to
travel on in the way that leads to it.

As he that is on a jouney, is often thinking of the place that he is going to;
and it is his care and business every day to get along; to improve his time, to
get toward his journey's end. He spends the day in it; it is the work of the
day, whilst the sun serves him. And when he has rested in the night, he gets up
in the morning, and sets out again on his journey; and so from day to day,
'till he has got to his journey's end. Thus should heaven be continually in our
thought; and the immediate entrance or passage to it, viz. death, should be
present with us. And it should be a thing that we familiarize to ourselves; and
so it should be our work every day, to be preparing for death, and traveling
heavenward.

3. We ought to persevere in this way as long as we live; we should hold out in
it to the end.

"Let us run with patience the race that is set before us". Heb. 12.1.
Though the road be difficult, and it be a toilsome thing to travel it, we must
hold out with patience, and be content to endure the hardships of it. If the
journey be long, yet we must not stop short; we should not give out in
discouragement, but hold on 'till we are arrived to the place we seek. We ought
not to be discouraged with the length and difficulties of the way, as the
children of Israel were, and be for turning back again. All our thought and
design should be to get along. We should be engaged and resolved to press
forward 'till we arrive.

V. We ought to be continually growing in holiness; and in that respect coming
nearer and nearer to heaven.
He that is traveling toward a place, comes nearer and nearer to it
continually. So we should be endeavoring to come nearer to heaven, in being
more heavenly; becoming more and more like the inhabitants of heaven, and more
and more as we shall be when we have arrived there, if ever that be.

We should endeavor continually to be more and more as we hope to be in
heaven, in respect of holiness and conformity to God. And with respect to light
and knowledge, we should labor to be growing continually in the knowledge of
God and Christ, and clear views of the glory of God, the beauty of Christ, and
the excellency of divine things, as we come nearer and nearer to the beatific
vision.

We should labor to be continually growing in divine love; that this may be an
increasing flame in our hearts, 'till our hearts ascend wholly in this flame.
We should be growing in obedience and an heavenly conversation; that we may do
the will of God on earth as the angels do in heaven.

We ought to be continually growing in comfort and spiritual joy; in sensib^e
communion with God and Jesus Christ. Our path should be as "the shining light,
that shines more and more to the perfect day. Prove. 4.18.


We ought to be hungering and thirsting after righteousness; after an increase
in righteousness. "As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that
ye may grow thereby'. 1 Pet. 2.2.
And we should make the perfection of heaven our mark. We should rest in
nothing short of this; but be pressing toward this mark; and laboring
continua^ly to be coming nearer and nearer to it. -- "This one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
that are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus". Phil. 3.13, 14.


VI. All other concerns of life ought to be entirely subordinate to this.
As when a man is on a journey, all the steps that he takes are in order to
further him in his journey; and subordinated to that aim of getting to his
journey's end. And if he carries money or provision with him, it is to supply
him in his journey. So we ought wholly to subordinate all our other business,
and all our temporal enjoyments to this affair of traveling to heaven.
Journeying toward heaven ought to be our only work and business, so that all
that we have and do, should be in order to that. When we have worldly
enjoyments, we should be ready to part with them, whenever they are in the way
of our going toward heaven. We should sell all this world for heaven. When once
any thing we have, becomes a clog and hindrance to us, in the way heavenward,
we should quit it immediately. When we use our world^y enjoyments and
possessions, it should be with such a view and in such a manner, as to further
us in our way heavenward. Thus we should eat and drink and cloth ourselves.
And thus should we improve the conversation and enjoyment of friends.

And whatever business we are setting about; whatever design we are engaging
in, we should enquire with ourselves, whether this business or undertaking will
forward us in our way to heaven? And if not, we should quit our design.

We ought to make use of worldly enjoyments, and pursue worldly business in
such a degree and manner as shall have the best tendency to forward our journey
heavenward, and no otherwise.

I shall offer some reasons of the doctrine.

I. This world is not our abiding place.
Our continuance in this world is but very short. Man's days on the earth, are
as a shadow. It was never designed by God this world should be our home We were
not born into this world for that end. Neither did God give us these temporal
things, that we are accommodated with, for that end. If God has given us good
estates; if we are sett^ed in families, and God has given us children, or other
friends that are very pleasant to us; it is with no such view or design, that we
should be furnished and provided for here, as for a settled abode; but with a
design that we should use them for the present, and then leave them again in a
very little time.

If we are called to any secular business; or if we are charged with the care
of a family; with the instruction and education of children, we are called to
these things with a design that we shall be called from them again, and not to
be our everlasting employment. So that if we improve our lives to any other
purpose, than as a journey toward heaven, all our labor will be lost. If we
spend our lives in the pursuit of a temporal happiness: If we set our hearts on
riches, and seek happiness in them: If we seek to be happy in sensual
p^easures: If we spend our lives in seeking the credit and esteem of men; the
good will and respect of others: If we set our hearts on our children, and look
to be happy in the enjoyment of them, in seeing them well brought up, and well
settled, etc. -- All these things will be of little significancy to us. Death
will blow up all our hopes and expectations, and will put an end to our
enjoyment of these things. "The places that have known us, will know us no
more": And the eye that has seen us, shall see us no more. We must be taken
away forever from all these things: And it is uncertain when; it may be soon
after we have received them, and are put into the possession of them. It may be
in the midst of our days, and from the midst of our enjoyments. And then where
will be all our worldly employments and enjoyments, when we are laid in the
silent grave! "So man lies down and rises not again, till the heavens be no
more" --. Job 14.12.


II. The future world was designed to be our settled and everlasting abode.
Here it was intended that we should be fixed; and here alone is a lasting
habitation, and a lasting inheritance and enjoyments to be had. We are designed
for this future world. We are to be in two states, the one in this world, which
is an imperfect state; the other in the world to come. The present state is
short and transitory; but our state in the other world, is everlasting. When we
go into another world, there we must be to all eternity. And as we are there at
first, so we must be without change.

Our state in the future world therefore being eternal, is of so exceedingly
greater importance than our state in this world that it is worthy that our
state here, and all our concerns in this world should be wholly subordinated to
it.

III. Heaven is that place alone where our highest end, and highest good is to
be obtained.
God has made us for himself. "Of God, and through God, and to God are all
things". Therefore then do we attain to our highest end, when we are brought to
God: But that is by being brought to heaven; for that is God's throne; that is
the place of his special presence, and of his residence. There is but a very
imperfect union with God to be had in this world, a very imperfect knowledge of
God in the midst of abundance of darkness; a very imperfect conformity to God,
mingled with abundance of enmity and estrangement. Here we can serve and
glorify God, but in an exceeding imperfect manner; our service being mingled
with much sin and dishonor to God.

But when we get to heaven, (if ever that be) there we shall be brought to a
perfect union with God. There we shall have the clear views of God. We shall
see face to face, and know as we are known. There we shall be fully conformed
to God, without any remainder of sin. We shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is. There we shall serve God perfectly. We shall glorify him in an
exalted manner, and to the utmost of the powers and capacity of our nature.
Then we shall perfectly give up ourselves to God. Then will our hearts be pure
and holy offerings to God; offered all in a flame of divine love.

In heaven alone is the attainment of our highest good. God is the highest good
of the reasonable creature. The enjoyment of him is our proper happiness; and
is the only happiness with which our souls can be satisfied.

To go to heaven, fully to enjoy God, is infinitely better than the most
pleasant accommodations here. Better than fathers and mothers, husbands, wives
or children, or the company of any, or all earthly friends These are but
shadows; but the enjoyment of God is the substance. These are but scattered
beams; but God is the sun. These are but streams; but God is the fountain.
These are but drops; but God is the ocean.

Therefore it becomes us to spend this life only as a journey toward haaven,
as it becomes us to make the seeking our highest end, and proper good the whole
work of our lives: And we should subordinate all other concerns of life to it.
Why should we labor for any thing else; or set our hearts on any thing else
but that which is our proper end, and true happiness?

IV. Our present state, and all that belongs to it, is designed by him that
made all things, to be wholly in order to another world.
This world was made for a place of preparation for another world. Man's mortal
life was given him only here, that he might here be prepared for his fixed
state. And all that God has here given us, is given to this purpose. The sun
shines upon us; the rain falls upon us; the earth yields her increase to us:
Civil and ecclesiastical affairs; family affairs, and all our personal concerns
are designed and ordered in a subordination to a future world, by the maker and
disposer of all things. They ought therefore to be subordinated to this by us.

SERMON, XVIII.
HEBREWS xi. 13, 14. And confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth. For they that say such Things, declare plainly that they seek a Country.


DOCTRINE. This life ought to be spent by us, so as to be only a journey
toward heaven.
HAving shown how this is to be done, and given the reasons of it, in the
preceding discourse, I now proceed to the

APPLICATION.
I. In a use of instruction.

1. This doctrine may teach us moderation in our mourning for the loss of such
dear friends, who while they lived, improved their lives to right purposes.

If they lived a holy life, then their lives were a journey toward heaven. And
why should we be immoderate in mourning, when they are got to their journey's
end? Death to them, though it appears to us with a frightful aspect, is a great
blessing. Their end is happy, and better than their beginning. "The day of
their death, is better to them than the day of their birth". Ecles. 7.1.
While they lived they desired heaven, and chose it above this world, or any of
the enjoyments of it. They earnestly sought and longed for heaven; and why
should we grieve that they have obtained it.

Now they have got to heaven, they have got home. They never were at home
before. They have got to their father's house. They find more comfort a
thousand times, now they are got home, than they did in their journey. While
they were on their journey, they underwent much labor and toil. It was a
wilderness that they passed through: A difficult road. There were abundance of
difficulties in the way; mountains and rough places. It was a laborious,
fatigueing thing to travel the road. They were forced to lay out themselves to
get along; and had many wearisome days and nights; but now they have got
through; they have got to the place they sought; they are got home; got to
their everlasting rest. They need to travel no more; nor labor any more; nor
endure any more toil and difficulty; but enjoy perfect rest and peace; and will
enjoy them forever. "And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write,
blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them".
Rev. 14.13.
They don't mourn that they are got home, but greatly rejoice. They look back
upon the difficulties, and sorrows, and dangers of life, rejoicing that they
have got through them all.

We are ready to look upon death as though it was a calamity to them: We are
ready to mourn over them with tears of pity; to think that those that were so
dear to us, should be in the dark rotting grave; that they should there turn to
corruption and worms: that they should be taken away from their dear children,
and other pleasant enjoyments; and that they never should have any part more in
any thing under the sun. Our bowels are ready to yearn over them, and we are
ready to look upon it, as though some sorrowful thing had befallen them; and as
though they were in awful circumstances. But this is owing to our infirmity that
we are ready thus to look upon it. They are in a happy condition. They are
inconceivably blessed. They don't mourn, but rejoice with exceeding joy. Their
mouths are filled with joyful songs: They drink at rivers of pleasure. They
find no mixture of grief at all, that they have changed their earthly houses
and enjoyments, and their earthly friends, and the company of mortal mankind,
for heaven. They think of it without any degree of regret.

This is an evil world, in comparison of that they are now in. Their life here,
if attended with the best circumstances that any earthly life ever was; was
attended with abundance that was adverse and afflictive; but now there is an
end to all adversity. "They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more; neither
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the lamb which is in the midst
of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes". Rev. 7.16, 17.


It Is true we shall see them no more while here in this world, yet we ought not
immoderately to mourn for that; though it used to be pleasant to us to see them;
and though their company was sweet. For we should consider ourselves as but on a
journey too; we should be traveling toward the same place, that they are gone
to; and why should we break our hearts with that, that they are got there
before us; when we are following after them as fast as we can; and hope, as
soon as ever we get to our journey's end, to be with them again; to be with
them in better circumstances than ever we were with them while here? A degree
of mourning for near relations when departed, is not inconsistant with
christianity, but very agreeable to it: For as long as we are flesh and blood,
no other can be expected, than that we shall have animal propensities and
affections. But we have not just reason to be overborn and sunk in spirit. When
the death of near friends is attended with these circumstances, we should be
glad they are got to heaven, our mourning should be mingled with joy. "But I
would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are asleep,
that ye sorrow not, even as others that have no hope": These. 4.13.
(i. e.) that they should not sorrow as the heathen, that had no knowledge of a
future happiness, nor any certain hope of any thing for themselves or their
friends, after they were dead. This appears by the following verse; "For if we
believed that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him".

2. If it be so, that our lives ought to be only a journey toward heaven; how
ill do they improve their lives, that spend them in traveling toward hell?

Some men spend their whole lives from their infancy to their dying day, in
going down the broad way to destruction. They don't only draw nearer to hell in
length of time, but they every day grow more ripe for destruction; they are
more assimilated to the inhabitants of the infernal world. While others press
forward in the strait and narrow way to life, and laboriously travel up the
hill toward Zion, against the inclinations and tendency of the flesh; these run
with a swift career down toward the valley of eternal death; toward the lake
of fire; toward the bottomless pit. This is the employment of every day, with
all wicked men; the whole day is spent in it. As soon as ever they awake in the
morning, they set out anew toward hell, and spend every waking moment in it.
They begin in early days, before they begin to speak. "The wicked are estranged
from the womb, they go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies". Psalm.
48.4.
They hold on in it with perseverance. Many of them that live to be old, are
never weary in it, if they live to be an hundred years old, they will not give
out traveling in the way to hell, 'till they arrive there. And all the
concerns of life are subordinated to this employment. A wicked man is a servant
of sin; his powers and faculties are all employed in the service of sin, and in
fiting for hell. And all his possessions are so used by him, as to be
subservient to the same purpose. Some men spend their time in treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath. Thus do all unclean persons, that live in
lascivious practices in secret. Thus do all malicious persons -- Thus do all
profane persons, that neglect duties of religion. Thus do all unjust persons;
and those that are fraudulent and oppressive in their dealings. Thus do all
backbiters and revilers. Thus do all covetous persons, that set their hearts
chiefly on the riches of this world. Thus do tavern-haunters, and frequenters
of evil company; and many other kinds of persons that might be mentioned. Thus
do far the greater part of men; the bulk of mankind are hasting onward in the
broad way to destruction. The way, as broad as it is, is, as it were, filled up
with the multitude that are going with one accord this way. And they are every
day going into hell out of this broad way by thousands. Multitudes are
continually flowing down into the great lake of fire and brimstone, out of this
broad way, as some mighty river constantly disembogues its waters into the
ocean.

3. Hence when persons are converted, they do but begin their work, and set out
in the way they have to go.

They never 'till then do any thing at that work which their whole lives ought
to be spent in; which we have now shown to be traveling toward heaven.
Persons before conversion, never take a step that way. Then does a man first
set out on this journey, when he is brought home to Christ; and he is but just
set out in it. So far is he from having done his work, that he then only begins
to set his face toward heaven. His journey is not finished; he is then only
first brought to be willing to go it, and begins to look that way; so that his
care and labor in his christian work and business, is then but begun, which he
must spend the remaining part of his life in.

Those persons do ill, who when they are converted, and have obtained a hope of
their being in a good condition, don't strive as earnestly as they did before,
while they were under awakenings. They ought henceforward, as long as they
live, to be as earnest and laborious as ever; as watchful and careful as ever;
yea, they should increase more and more. It is no just objection or excuse from
this, that now they have not the same to strive for as before; before they
strove that they might be convered; but that they have obtained. Is there
nothing else that persons have as much reason to strive, and lay out their
strength for, as their own safety? Should we not be as willing to be diligent
that we may serve and glorify God, as that we ourselves may be happy? And if we
have obtained grace, yet there is not all obtained that may be. It Is but a very
little grace that we have obtained; we ought to strive that we may obtain more.
We ought to strive as much that we may obtain the other degrees that are
before, as we did to obtain that small degree that is behind. The apostle tells
us, that he forgot what was behind, and reached forth toward what was before.
Phil. 3.13.


Yea those that are converted, have now a further reason to strive for grace
than they had before; for now they have tasted, and seen something of the
sweetness and excellency of it. A man that has once tasted the blessings of
Canaan, has more reason to press forward toward it, than he had before. And
then, they that are converted, should strive that they may make their calling
and election sure. All those that are converted, are not sure of it; and those
that are sure of it, don't know that they shall be always so; and still seeking
and serving God with the utmost diligence, is the way to have assurance, and to
have it maintained.

II. Use may be of exhortation; so to spend the present life that it may only
be a journey toward heaven.

Labor to be converted and sanctified, and to obtain such a disposition of
mind that you may choose heaven for your inheritance and home; and may earnestly
long for it, and be willing and desirou^ to change this world, and all the
enjoyments of it for heaven. Labor to have your heart taken up so much about
heaven; and heavenly enjoyments, as that you may rejoice at any time when God
calls you to have your best earthly friends, and those things that are most
comfortable to you here, to go to heaven, there to enjoy God and Christ.

Be persuaded to travel in the way that leads to heaven; viz. in a way of
holiness, self-denial, mortification, in a way of obedience to all the commands
of God, in a way of following Christ's example, in a way of a heavenly life, or
imitation of the saints and angels that live in heaven. Be content to travel on
in this way, in a laborious manner, to endure all the fatigues of it. Begin to
travel it without delay, if you have not already begun it; and travel in it
with assiduity. Let it be your daily work, from morning to night, and hold out
in it to the end; let there be nothing that shall stop or discourage you, or
turn you aside from this road. Labor to be growing in holiness, to be coming
nearer and nearer to heaven, in that you are more and more as you shall be when
you get there; (if ever that be). And let all other concerns be subordinated to
this great concern of getting forwards toward heaven. Consider the reasons
that have been mentioned why you should thus spend your life. Consider that the
world is not your abiding place, and was never so intended by God. Consider how
little a while you are to be here, and how little worth your while it is to
spend your life to any other purpose. Consider that the future world is to be
your everlasting abode; and that the enjoyments and concerns of this world,
have their being only and entirely in order to another world. And consider
further for motive.

1. How worthy is heaven that your life should be wholly spent as a journey
toward it.

To what better purpose can you spend your life, whether you respect your duty
or your interest? What better end can you propose to your journey, than to
obtain heaven? Here you are placed in this world; in this wilderness, and have
your choice given you, that you may travel which way you please. And there is
one way that leads to heaven. Now can you direct your course better than this
way? What can you choose better for your journey's end? All men have some aim or
other in living. Some mainly seek wor^dly things; they spend their days in the
pursuit of these things. But is not heaven, where is fullness of joy forever
and ever, much more worthy to be sought by you? How can you better employ your
strength, and use your means, and spend your days, than in traveling the road
that leads to the everlasting enjoyment of God; to his glorious presence, to
the city of the new Jerusalem; to the heavenly mount Zion; where all your
desires will be filled, and no danger of ever loosing your happiness?

No man is at home in this world, whether he choose heaven or no; yet here he is
but a transcient person. Where can you choose your home better than in heaven?
The rest and glory of heaven is so great, that it is worthy we should desire it
above riches; above our father's houses, or our own; above husband or wife, or
children, or all earthly friends. It is worthy that we should subordinate these
things to it, and that we should be ready cheerfully to part with them for
heaven, whenever God calls.

2. This is the way to have death comfortable to us.

If we spend our lives ^o as to be only a journeying toward heaven, this will
be the way to have death, that is the end of the journey, and entrance into
heaven not terrible, but comfortable.

This is the way to be free from bodage, through the fear of death. and to have
the prospect and forethought of death ^^mfortable. Do^^ the traveller think of
his j^u^^ey's (...) with fear and terror, especially when he ^as b^een many
days traveling, and it be a long and tiresome journey? Is it terrible to him
to think that he has almost got to his journey's end? Are not men rather wont
to rejoice at it? Were the children of Israel sorry after forty years travel in
the wllderness, when they had almost got to Canaan? This is the way to have
death not terrible when it comes. It Is the way to be able to part with the
world without grief. Does it grieve the traveller when he has got home, to quit
his staff and load of provisions that he had to sustain him by the way?

3. No more of your life will be pleasant to think of when you come to die,
than has been spent after this manner.

All of your past life that has been spent as a journey toward heaven, will be
comfortable to think of on a death bed, and no more. If you have spent none of
your life this way, your whole life will be terrible to you to think of, unless
you die under some great delusion. You will see then, how that all of your life
that has been spent otherwise, is lost. You will then see the vanity of other
aims, that you may have proposed to yourself. The thought of what you here
possessed and enjoyed in the world, will not be pleasant to you; unless you can
think withal that you have subordinated them to this purpose.

4. Consider that those that are willing thus to spend their lives as a journey
toward heaven, may have heaven.

Heaven, as high as it is, and glorious as it is, is attainable for such poor
worthless creatures as we are. We, even such worms, may attain to have for our
home, that glorious region that is the habitation of the glorious angels; yea,
the dwelling place of the glorious Son of God; and where is the glorious
presence of the great Jehovah. And we may have it freely; there is no high
price that is demanded of us for this privilege. We may have it without money
and without price; if we are but willing to set out and go on toward it; are
but willing to travel the road that leads to it, and bend our course that way
as long as we live; we may and shall have heaven for our eternal resting place.

5. Let it be considered that if our lives be not a journey towvrds heaven,
they will be a journey to hell.

We cannot continue here always, but we must go some where else. All mankind
after they have been in this world a little while, they go out of it, and there
is but two places that they go to; the two great recepticles of all that depart
out of this world; the one is heaven; whether a few, a small number in
comparison, travel: The way that leads hither, is but thinly occupied with
travelers. And the other is hell, whether the bulk of mankind do throng. And
one or the other of these must be our journey's end; the issue of our course in
this world.

I shall conclude by giving some directions.

1. Labor to get a sense of the vanity of this world; or the vanity of it on
account of the little satisfaction that is to be enjoyed here; and on account
of its short continuance, and unserviceableness when we most stand in need of
help, viz. on a death bed.

All men that live any considerable time in the world, see abundance that might
convince them of the vanity of the world, if they would but consider.

Be persuaded to exercise consideration, when you see and hear from time to
time of the death of others. Labor to turn your thoughts this way. See if you
cannot see the vanity of the world in such a Glass. If you were sensible how
vain a thing this world is, you would see that it is not worthy that your life
should be spent to the purposes thereof; and all is lost that is not some way
aimed at heaven.

2. Labor to be much acquainted with heaven.

If you are not acquainted with it, you will not be likely to spend your life
as a journey thither. You will not be sensible of the worth of it; nor will you
long for it. Unless you are much conversant in your mind with a better good, it
will be exceeding difficult to you to have your hearts loose from these things,
and to use them only in subordination to something else, and to be ready to
part with them for the sake of that better good.

Labor therefore to obtain a realizing sense of a heavenly world, to get a
firm belief of the reality of it, and to be very much conversant with it in
your thoughts.

3. Seek heaven only by Jesus Christ.

Christ tells us that he is the way, and the truth, and the life. Joh. 14.6.
He tells us that he is the door of the sheep. "I am the door, by me if any man
enter in, he shall be saved; and go in and out and find pasture". Joh. 10.9.
If we therefore would improve our lives as a journey toward heaven, we must
seek it by him, and not by our own righteousness; as expecting to obtain only
for his sake, looking to him, having our dependence on him only for the
purchase of heaven, and procuring it for us ^y his merit. And expect strength
to walk in a way of holiness, the way that leads to heaven, only from him.

4. Let christians help one another in going this journey.

There are many ways that christians might greatly help and forward one another
in their way to heaven by religious conference, and otherwise. And persons
greatly need help in this way, which is, as I have observed, a difficult way.

Let christians be exhorted to go this journey as it were, in company,
conversing together while their journey shall end, and assisting one another.
Company is very desirable in a journey, but in none so much as in this.

Let christians go united, and not fall out by the way, which would be the way
to hinder one another; but use all means they can to help one another up the
hill.

This is the way to be more successful in traveling, and to have the more
joyful meeting at their father's house in glory.

FINIS.

