CONSIDERATIONS ON THE PROPRIETY OF IMPOSING TAXES IN THE BRITISH COLONES, For
the Purpose of raising a REVENUE, by Act of Parliament.

-- Haud Totum Verba resignent
Quod latet arcana, non enarrabile, fibra.
( -- Let not my Words show all;
The hidden Mischief cannot be expressed.)
North America: Printed by a NORTH-AMERICAN.

NEW YORK: Reprinted by JOHN HOLT, in the Year 1765.

PREFACE.
IT would now, be an unfashionable doctrine, whatever the ancient opinion might
be, to affirm that the constituent can bind his representative by instructions;
but though the obligatory force of these instructions is not insisted upon, yet
their persuasive influence, in most c^^es, may be; for a representative, who
should act against the explicit recommendation of his constituents, would most
deservedly forfeit their regard, and all pretension to their future confidence.

When it is under deliberation, whether a new law shall be enacted, in which
the electors of England are interested, THEY have notice of it, and an
opportunity of declaring their sense -- THEY may point out every dangerous
tendency, and are not restrained in their representations, from showing in the
plainest language, the injustice or oppression of it.

When a law in its execution is found to be repugnant to the genius of liberty,
or productive of hardships or inconvenience, THEY may also instruct their
deputies to exert themselves in procuring a repeal of it, and in the exercise
of this right are not constrained to whine in the style of humble petitioners.
-- THEY are exposed to no danger in explaining their reasons -- THEIR situation
does not become so delicate as to make it prudent, to weaken, by not urging
them, with their full force, and to their utmost extent. But who are the
representatives of the colonies? To whom shall THEY send their instructions,
when desirous to obtain the repeal of a law striking at the root and foundation
of every civil right, should such an one take place? Instructions to all the
members who compose the house of commons would not be proper. To them the
application must be by petition, in which ^n unreserved style would, probably,
be deemed indecency, and strong expressions insolence, in which a claim of
rights may not, perhaps, be explained, or ^ven insinuated, if to impugn, or
glance at their authority whose relief is supplicated. To soften and deprecate
must be the hope and endeavor, though guiltless freeman would, probably, be
awkward in ringing all the changes (...) parce, precor. [O spare, I beseech
you.]

Under these circumstances, the liberly of the press is of the most momentous
consequence, for if truth is not allowed to speak thence, in its genuine
language of plainness and simplicity, nor freedom to vindicate its privileges
with decent firmness, we shall have too much reason to acknowledge his
foresight who predicted, that, "The constitution of the British government was
too excellent to be permanent." The train for the accomplishment of that
prophecy has not yet catched in America* nor, I trust, been laid.

That there have been laws extremely unjust and oppressive, the declarations of
subsequent parliaments, fixing this stigma upon them evince; but whilst the
power which introduced them prevailed, it was not prudent to give them their
deserved characters. The parliament of Henry III, or that of Henry VI, need not
to be cited; there are many other instances, though not branded with epithets so
remarkably opprobrious.

In the opinion of a great lawyer, "an act of parliament may be void," and of a
great divine, all men have natural, and freemen legal rights, which they may
justly maintain, and no legislative power can deprive them of.

Cases may be imagined in which the truth of these positions might, in theory,
be admitted; but in practice, unless there should be very peculiar
circumstances, such as cannot be supposed to exist during the prevalence of the
power that introduced it, who would rely upon the authority of opinions, or the
principle of them, for his protection against the penalties of any positive law?

When the judges were asked by Henry VIII. Whether a man might b^ attainted of
high treason by parliament, though not called to answer, they declare^ that it
was a dangerous question, and gave the evasive answer that, the high court of
parliament ought to give examples of justice to the inferio^ courts, none of
which could do the like. But though it might be dangerou^ to declare against the
authority of parliament, we are not bound to acknowledge its inerrability, nor
precluded from examining the principles and consequences of laws, or from
pointing out their improprieties, and defect* Upon this ground I have proceeded
in the following considerations, and sha^^ not be disappointed if they should
appear to be too free, or too reserved, readers of different complexions.

VIRGINIA, AUGUST, 12, 1766.
CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
IN the constitution of England, the three principal forms of government,
monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, are blended together in certain
proportions; but each of these orders, in the exercise of the legislative
authority, has its peculiar department, from which the others are excluded. In
this division, the granting of supplies. or laying taxes, is deemed to be the
province of the house of commons, as the representative of the people......All
supplies are supposed to slow from their gift; and the other orders are
permitted only to assent, or reject generally, not to propose any modification,
amendment, or partia^ alteration of it.

This observation being considered, it will undeniably appear, that in framing
the late Stamp Act, the commons acted in the character o^ representative of the
colonies. They assumed it as the principle of tha^ measure, and the propriety
of it must therefore stand, or fall, as the principle is true, or false: For
the preamble sets forth, that the com^mons of Great Britain had resolved to
give and grant the several rat^ and duties imposed by the act; but what right
had the commons (...) Great Britain to be thus munificent at the expense of the
commons America?........To give property not belonging to the giver, and wit^
out the consent of the owner, is such evident and flagrant injustice, ordinary
cases, that few are hardy enough to avow it; and therefo^^ when it really
happens, the fact is disguised and varnished over by (...) m^st plausible
pretenses the ingenuity of the giver can suggest......(...) it is alleged that
there is a virtual, or implied representation of the co^^^nies springing out of
the constitution of the British government: (...) it must be confessed on all
hands, that, as the representation is (...) actual, it is virtual, or it does
not exist at all; for no third kind of presentation can be imagined. The
colonies claim the privilege, (...) is common to all British subjects, of being
taxed only with their (...) consent given by their representatives, and all the
advocates for Stamp Act admit this claim. Whether, therefore, upon the (...)
matter, the imposition of the Stamp Duties is a proper exercise of
constitutional authority, or not, depends upon the single question, Whether the
commons of Great Britain are virtually the representatives of the commons of
America, or not.

The advocates for the Stamp Act admit, in express terms, that the colonies do
not choose members of parliament, but they assert that the colonies are
virtually represented in the same manner with the non-electors resident in
Great Britain,

How have they proved this position? Where have they defined, or precisely
explained what they mean by the expression, virtual representation? As it is
the very hinge upon which the rectitude of the taxation turns, something more
satisfactory than mere assertion, more solid than a form of expression, is
necessary: for how can it be seriously expected, that men, who think themselves
injuriously affected in their properties and privileges, will be convinced and
reconciled by a fanciful phrase, the meaning of which cannot be precisely
ascertained by those who use it, or properly applied to the purpose for which
it has been advanced?

They argue, that the right of election being annexed to certain species of
property, to franchises, and inhabitancy in some particular places, a very
small part of the land, the property, and the people of England are
comprehended in those descriptions. All landed property, not freehold, and all
monied property, are excluded. The merchants of London, the proprietors of the
public funds, the inhabitants of Leeds, Halifax, Birmingham, and Manchester,
and that great corporation of the East India company, none of them choose their
representatives, and yet are they all represented in parliament, and the
colonies being exactly in their situation, are represented in the same manner.

Now, this argument, which is all that their invention has been ^ble to
supply, is totally defective; for, it consists of facts not true, and ^
conclusions inadmissible.

It is so far from being true, that all the persons enumerated under ^e
character of non-electors, are in that predicament, that it is indu^tably
certain there is no species of property, landed, or monied, which is not
possessed by very many of the British electors.

I shall undertake to disprove the supposed similarity of situation, ^ence the
same kind of representation is deduced, of the inhabitants (...) the colonies,
and of the British non-electors; and, if I succeed, (...) notion of a virtual
representation of the colonies must fail, which, truth, is a mere cob web,
spread to catch the unwary, and entangle (...) weak. I wou^d be understood: I
am upon a question of propriety, not of power; and, though some may be inclined
to think it is to little purpose to discuss the one, when the other is
irresistible, yet are they different considerations; and, at the same time that
I invalidate the claim upon which it is founded, I may very consistently
recommend a submission to the law, whilst it endures. I shall say nothing of
the use I intend by the discussion; for if it should not be perceived by the
sequel, there is no use in it, and, if it should appear then, it need not be
premised.

Lessees for years, copyholders, proprietors of the public fund^* inhabitants
of Birmingham, Leeds, Halifax, and Manchester, merchants of the city of London,
or members of the corporation of the East India company, are, as such, under no
personal incapacity to be electors; for they may acquire the right of election,
and there are actually not only a considerable number of electors in each of
the classes of lessees for years, etc. but in many of them, if not all, even
members of parliament. The interests therefore of the non-electors, the
electors, and the representatives, are individually the same; to say nothing of
the connection among neighbors, friends, and relations. The security of the
non-electors against oppression, is, that their oppression will fall also upon
the electors and the representatives. The one cannot be injured, and the other
indemnified.

Further, if the non-electors should not be taxed by the British parliament,
they would not be taxed at all; and it would be iniquitous as well as a
solecism, in the political system, that they should partake of all the benefits
resulting from the imposition, and application of taxes, and derive an immunity
from the circumstance of not being qualified to vote. Under this constitution
then, a double or virtual representation may be reasonably supposed. The
electors, who are inseparably connected in their interests with the
non-electors, may be justly deemed to be the representatives of the
non-electors, at the same time they exercise their personal privilege in the
right of election; and the members chosen, therefore, the representatives of
both. This is the only rational explanation of the expression, virtual
representation. None has been advanced by the assertors of it, and their
meaning can only be inferred from the instances, by which they endeavor to
elucidate it, and no other meaning can be stated, to which the instances apply.

It is an essential principle of the English constitution, that the subject
shall not be taxed without his consent, which has not been introduced by any
particular law, but necessarily results from the nature of that mixed
government; for, without it, the order of democracy could not exist.

See Tre^t. Peerage.
Parliaments were not formerly so regular in point of form as they now are.
Even the number or knights for each shire were not ascertained. The first writs
now ex^ant for their choice, are 22d Edward I. by which, two, as at th^s day,
were directed to be chosen for each county; but the king not being satisfied
with that number, other writs were issued for choosing two more. This
discretionary power being thought inconvenient, was afterward restrained by
the statutes of Richard II, Henry IV, and subsequent acts.

In earlier times there was more simplicity in the rules of government, and men
were more solicitous about the essentials, than the forms of it. When the
consent of those who were to perform, or pay any thing extrafeudal, was fairly
applied for and obtained, the manner was little regarded; but, as the people
had reason to be jealous of designs to impose contributions upon them without
their consent, it was thought expedient to have formalities regulated, and
fixed, to prevent this injury to their rights, not to destroy a principle,
without which, they could not be said to have any rights at all.

Before the introduction of those formalities, which were framed with a view to
restrain the excu^sions of power, and to secure the privileges of the subject,
as the mode of proceeding was more simple, so perhaps this foundation of
consent was more visible than it is at present, wherefore it may be of use to
adduce some instances, which directly point out this necessary and essential
principle of British liberty.

The lords and commons have separately given aids and subsidies to the crown.
In 13th Edward III, the lords granted the tenth of all the corn, etc. growing
upon their demesnes, the commons then granting nothing, nor concerning
themselves with what the lords thought fit to grant out of their own estates.
At other times, the knights of shires, separating from the rest of the commons,
and joining with the lord, have granted a subsidy, and the representatives of
cities and boroughs have likewise granted subsidies to the crown separately, as
appears by a writ in 24th Edward I, which runs in these words, Rex, etc. cum
comites, barons, milites nobis, etc. fecerunt undecimam de omnibus bonis suis
mobilibus, et cives et burgenses, etc. sep^imam de omnibus bonis suis
mobilibus, etc. nobis curialiter concesserint, etc. The earls, barons, and
knights, having given unto us in parliament, the eleventh part, and the
citizens and burgesses the seventh part of their goods and chattels, etc. When
an affair happened, which affected only some individuals, and called for an aid
to the crown, it was common for those individuals alone to be summoned; to
which purpose several writs are extant. In 35th Edward III, there is a writ
(which Dugdale ha^ printed in his collection of writs of summons to parliament)
directed to the earl of Northampton, which, after reciting the confusion the
affairs of Ireland were in, and that he, and some other English lords had
possessions in that kingdom, and were therefore more particularly obliged to
the defense of it, follows in these words: Volumus vobiscum, et cum aliis de
eodem regno (Angliae scilicet) terras in dicta terra habentibus colloquium
habere, etc. We will confer with you, and others of the same kingdom (viz.
England) possessed of lands in the said country.

But, that the reader may perceive how strictly the principle, of no person's
being taxed without their consent, has been regarded, it is proper to take
notice, that, upon the same occasion, writs were likewise directed even to
women, who were proprietors of land in Ireland, to send their deputies to
consult, and consent to what should be judged necessary to be done on the
occasion* e. g. Rex, etc. marioe, etc. salutem, etc. vobis, etc. mandamus quod
aliquem, vel aliquos de quibus confidati^ apud Westmon. mit^atis ad loquendum
nobiscum super dictis negotiis, et ad faciendum et consentiendum nomine vestro,
super hoc quod ibidem ordinari contigerit. We command you to send to
Westminster, some person or persons, whom you may confide in, to confer with
us, on the abovesaid affair, and to do and assent, in your name, to whatever
shall be there decreed.

A reflection naturally arises from the instances cited: -- When, on a
particular occasion, some individuals only were to be taxed, and not the whole
community, their consent only was called for, and in the last instance it
appears, that they, who upon an occasion of a general tax, would have been
bound by the consent of their virtual representatives (for in that case they
would have had no actual representatives) were in an affair calling for a
particular aid from them, separate from the rest of the community, required to
send their particular deputies: But how different would be the principle of a
statute, imposing duties without their consent who are to pay them, upon the
authority of their Gift, who should undertake to give, what does not belong to
them.

That great king, Edward I, inserted in his writs of summons, as a first
principle of law, that quod omnes tangat ab omnibus app^obetur, what concerns
all, must be approved by all, which by no torture can be made to signify that
their approbation or consent only is to be requi^ed in the imposition of a tax,
who a^e to pay no part of it.

The situation of the non electors in England -- their capacity to become
electors -- their inseparable connection with those who are electors, and their
representatives -- their security against oppression resulting from this
connection, and the necessity of imagining a double or virtual representation,
to avoid iniquity and absurdity, have been explained -- the inhabitants of the
colonies are, as such, incapable of being electors, the privilege of election
being exerciseable only in person, and therefore if every inhabitant of America
had the requisite freehold, not one could vote, but upon the supposition of his
ceasing to be an inhabitant of America, and becoming a resident of
Great Britain, a supposition which would be impertinent, because it shifts the
question -- should the colonies not be taxed by Parliamentary impositions,
their respective legislatures have a regular, adequate, and constitutional
authority to tax them, and therefore there would not necessarily be an
iniquitous and absurd exemption, from their not being represented by the house
of commons.

There is not that intimate and inseparable relation between the electors of
Great Britain, and the Inhabitants of the colonies, which must inevitably
involve both in the same taxation; on the contrary, not a single actual elector
in England, might be immediately affected by a taxation in America, imposed by
a statute which would have a general operation and effect, upon the properties
of the inhabitants of the colonies. The latter might be oppressed in a thousand
shapes, without any Sympathy, or exciting any alarm in the former, Moreover,
even acts, oppressive and injurious to the colonies in an extreme degree, might
become popular in England, from the promise or expectation, that the very
measures which depressed the colonies, would give ease to the Inhabitants of
Great Britain. It is indeed true, that the interests of England and the
colonies are allied, and an injury to the colonies produced into all it is
consequences, will eventually affect the mother country; yet these consequences
being generally remote, are not at once foreseen; they do not immediately alarm
the fears, and engage the passions of the English electors; the connection
between a freeholder of Great Britain, and a British American being deducible
only through a train of reasoning, which few will take the trouble, or can have
opportunity, if they have capacity* to investigate; wherefore the relation
between the British Americans, and the English electors, is a knot too infirm
to be relied on as a competent security, especially against the force of a
present, counteracting expectation of relief.

If it would have been a just conclusion, that the colonies being exactly in
the same situation with the non-electors of England, are therefore represented
in the same manner; it ought to be allowed, that the reasoning is solid, which,
after having evinced a total dissimilarity of situation, infers, that their
representation is different.

If the commons of Great Britain have no right by the constitution, to GIVE AND
GRANT property not belonging to themselves or others, without their consent
actually or virtually given; If the claim of the colonies not to be taxed
without their consent, signified by their representatives, is well founded; if
it appears that the colonies are not actually represented by the commons of
Great Britain, and that the notion of a double or virtual representation, does
not with any propriety apply to the people of America; then the principle of
the stamp act, must be given up as indefensible on the point of representation,
and the validity of it rested upon the power which they who framed it, have to
carry it into execution.

Should the parliament devise a tax, to be paid only by those of the people in
Great Britain, who are neither members of either house of parliament, nor their
electors; such an act would be unjust and partial, says the author of the
claim of the colonies, etc. who yet allows that the Non-electors would have a
security against the weight of such a tax, should it be imposed, which the
colonies have not; viz. that the members of parliament and the electors, must
be relatively affected by it; but the industrious North-American, and the
opulent West-Indian may have their properties taxed, and no individual in
Great Britain participate with them in the burden: On the contrary, the
members of parliament would make their court to their constituents must
effectually, by multiplying Taxes upon the subjects of the colonies.

Is it not amazing that the above author, with these sentiments, should
undertake the defense of the stamp duties, which, by his own concession,
appears to be more unjust, and more partial than the tax he supposes, and upon
which he bestows, very properly, the epithets of unjust and partial. -- Diluit
helleborum, certo compescere puncto
Nescius examen.
He infuses a dangerous drug, without skill to know the proper point between
its good and ill effects.

But it has been objected, that if the inhabitants of America, because
represented in their respective assemblies, are therefore exempted from a
parliamentary tax, then the citizens of London, who are represented in their
common council, may plead the same immunity. If it were not for the authority
upon which this objection is urged, it might be safely passed over without a
particular answer; but since it has been introduced with an appearance of
reliance, and the opinion which it retails, is said to have been delivered with
great gravity, and pronounced with decisive confidence, I would not be so
wanting in respect to an eminent character, as to neglect the ceremony of a
direct refutation.

But I must observe, that when the opinion of a lawyer is taken in a matter of
private concern, in which he is under no bias to deceive, a concise declaration
of it may generally suffice; he who applies for it being generally obliged to
depend upon his council's character of integrity and knowledge; not only
because the expense of a methodical and minute discussion would be too
bu^thensome, but because the force of legal reasoning is not generally
understood. But in a question of public concernment, the opinion of no court
lawyer, however respectable for his ^candour and abilities, ought to weigh more
than the reasons adduced in support of it. They ought to be explained, they may
be examined. Considering his temptations, credit ought to be cautiously and
diffidently given, to his assertion of what is his opinion. -- Considering the
consequence of a decision, not to one man only, but to millions that exist and
myriads that may exist, and ^he exceeding fallibility of legal knowledge,
nothing short of clear conviction, after the fullest explication of the reasons
of the opinion, and the most accurate and intense consideration of their
validity, can justify an acquiescence under it.

On the present occasion, so immensely important, nullius addictus jurare in
verba magistri; unused to swear on any master's word; I shall pin my faith upon
the dictum of no lawyer in the universe; and when his ipse dixit is
authoritatively urged, I shall be (...) no pains to repress my suspicions that
his reasons are concealed, because, if fairly produced and held up to the
light, many flaws in them would be discovered by a careful examiner. I have
lived long enough to remember many opinions of court lawyers upon American
affairs; they have been all strongly marked with the same character; they have
been generally very sententious, and the same observation may be applied to
them all. They have all declared that to be legal, which the minister for the
time being has deemed to be expedient. The opinion given by a general of the
law, in the late war, on the question, whether soldiers might be quartered on
private houses in America, must be pretty generally remembered.

The very learned gentlemen has, it seems, declared that, upon mature
deliberation, he has formed his opinion, that the colonies are in their nature,
no more than common corporations; and that the inhabitants of a colony are no
more entitled to an exemption from parliamentary taxations, because represented
in an American assembly, than the citizens of London.

This opinion may be incontestably just in the judgment of that accomplished
politician, and elegant writer, who chooses to distinguish himself by the
titles of late G...rn..r of the J-^s-ys, of the M^ss-ch s-ts B --, and of S --
th C^r-l-a; and who does not choose to be distinguished by the title of late
Maitre d' Hotel of the late Sir D -- v -- s O-b -- e; or that exactly fitting,
and characteristical See the Hist. of TOM BRAZEN.
appellation conferred on him, by an incensed culprit in an American court of
star chamber, an appellation rather adapted to signify those powers, which are
useful in intrigue, and that lead to promotion, than expressive of respect and
dignity; but having considered the subject in the best manner my very slender
and limited capacity will allow, neither does the opinion of the one, nor the
approbation of it by the other, influence my judgment.

Let a great man declare a similitude, and he will soon find a Polonius to
acknowledge, that, " yonder cloud is, by the mass, like a camel
indeed"......or, black like an ouzle,"....or, very like a whale."

The objection having been stated, the answer is obvious and clear.

The colonies have a complete and adequate legislative authority, and are not
only represented in their assemblies, but in no other manner. The power of
making bye-laws vested in the common council is inadequate and incomplete,
being bounded by a few particular subjects; and the common council are actually
represented too, by having a choice of members to serve in parliament. How then
can the reason of the exemption from internal parliamentary taxations, claimed
by the colonies, apply to the citizens of London?

The power described in the provincial charters, is to make laws, and in the
exercise of that power, the colonies are bounded by no other limitations than
what result from their subordination to, and dependence upon Great Britain. The
term bye laws is as novel, and improper, when applied to the assemblies, as the
expression, acts of assembly, would be, if applied to the parliament of Great
Britain; and it is as absurd and insensible, to call a colony a common
corporation, because not an independent kingdom, and the powers of each to make
laws and bye-laws, are limited, though not comparable in their extent, and the
variety of their obj^ct^, as it would be to call lake Erie, a Duck-puddle,
because not the atlantic ocean.

Should the analogy between the colonies and corporations be even admitted for
a moment, in order to see what would be the consequence of the postulatum, it
would only amount to this, The colonies are vested with as complete authority
to all intents and purposes to tax themselves, as any English corporation is to
make a bye-law, in any imaginable instance for any local purpose whatever, and
the parliament does not make laws for corporations upon subjects, in every
respect proper for bye-laws.

But I don't rest the matter upon this, or any other circumstance, however
considerable, to prove the impropriety of a taxation by the British parliament.
I rely upon the fact, that not one inhabitant in any colony is, or can be
actually or virtually represented by the British house of commons, and
therefore, that the Stamp duties are severely imposed.

But it has been alleged, that if the right to give and grant the property of
the colonies by an internal taxation is denied by the house of commons, the
subordination and dependence of the colonies, and the superintendence of the
British parliament cannot be consistently established.....That any supposed line
of distinction between the two cases, is but a whimsical imagination, a
chimerical speculation against fact and experience.......Now, under favor, I
conceive there is more confidence, than solidity in this assertion; and it may
be satisfactorily and easily proved, that the subordination and dependence of
the colonies may be preserved, and the supreme authority of the mother country
be firmly supported, and yet the principle of representation, and the right of
the British house of commons flowing from it, to give and grant the property of
the commons of America, be denied.

The colonies are dependent upon Great Britain, and the supreme authority
vested in the king, lords, and commons, may justly be exercised to secure, or
preserve their dependence, whenever necessary for that purpose. This authority
results from, and is implied in the idea of the relation subsisting between
England and her colonies; for, considering the nature of human affections, the
inferior is not to be trusted with providing regulations to prevent his rising
to an equality with his superior. But, though the right of the superior to use
the proper means for preserving the subordination of his inferior is admitted,
yet it does not necessarily follow, that he has a right to seize the property
of his inferior when he pleases, or to command him in every thing; since, in
the degrees of it, there may very well exist a dependence and inferiority,
without absolute vassalage and slavery. In what the superior may rightfully
control, or compel, and in what the inferior ought to be at liberty to act
without control or compulsion, depends upon the nature of the dependence, and
the degree of the subordination; and, these being ascertained, the measure of
obedience, and submission, and the extent of the authority and superintendence
will be settled. When powers, compatible with the relation between the superior
and inferior, have, by express compact, been granted to, and accepted by, the
latter, and have been, after that compact, repeatedly recognized by the former
-- When they may be exercised effectually upon every occasion without any
injury to that relation, the authority of the superior cannot properly
interpose; for, by the powers vested in the inferior, is the superior limited.

By their constitutions of government, the colonies are empowered to impose
internal taxes. This power is compatible with their dependence, and has been
expressly recognized by British ministers and the British parliament, upon many
occasions; and it may be exercised effectually without striking at, or
impeaching, in any respect, the superintendence of the British parliament. May
not then the line be distinctly and justly drawn between such acts as are
necessary, or proper, for preserving or securing the dependence of the
colonies, and such as are not necessary or proper for that very important
purpose?

When the powers were conferred upon the colonies, they were conferred too as
privileges and immunities, and accepted as such; or, to speak more properly,
the privileges belonging necessarily to them as British subjects, were solemnly
declared and confirmed by their charters, and they who settled in America under
the encouragement and faith of these charters, understood, not only that They
might, but that it was their right to exercise those powers without control,
or prevention. In some of the charters the distinction is expressed, and the
strongest declarations made, and the most solemn assurances given, that the
^ettlers should not have their property taxed without their own consent by
their representatives; though their legislative authority is limited at the
same time, by the subordination implied in their relation, and They are
therefore restrained for making acts of assembly repugnan^ to the laws of
England; and, had the distinction not been expressed, the powers given would
have implied it, for, if the parliament may in any case interpose, when the
authority of the colonies is adequate to the occasion, and not limited by their
subordina^ion to the mother country, it may in every case, which would make
another appellation more proper to describe their condition, than the name by
which their inhabitants have been usually called, and have gloried in.

Because the parliament may, when the relation between Great Britain and her
colonies calls for an exertion of her superintendence, bind the colonies by
statute, therefore a parliamentary interposition in every other instance, is
justifiable, is an inference that may be denied.

On some emergencies, the king, by the constitution, has an absolute power to
provide for the safety of the state; to take care, like a Roman dictator, ne
quid detrimenti capiat respublica, [That the common wealth may not suffer.] and
this power, is not specifically annexed to the monarchy by any express law; it
necessarily results from the end and nature of government; but who would infer
from this, that the king, in every instance, or upon every occasion, can, upon
the principles of the constitution, exercise this supreme power.

The British ministers have, in the most effectual terms, at different periods,
from the reign of Charles II, to that of the present king, recognized this
distinction in their requisitions, transmitted to the colonies to raise and
levy men and money, by acts of assembly; and recently, in the course of the
last war, they were so far from thinking that it was proper for the British
house of commons to give and grant the property of the colonies to support the
military operations in America, upon which not only the immediate protection of
that part of the British dominions, but the most important interests, perhaps
the ultimate preservation of Great Britain from destruction, essentially
depended; I say, on this great occasion of the most important, and national
concernment, the British ministers were so far from calling upon the house of
commons, in their peculiar department, to give and grant property, belonging
neither to themselves, nor their constituents, that they directly applied to
the colonies to tax themselves, in virtue of the authority and privilege
conferred by their charters, and promised to recommend it to the British
Parliament to reimburse the expense they should incur in providing for the
general service.......They made good their promise; and if all the money raised
in the colonies, by acts of assembly, in pursuance of the requisitions of the
British ministers, has not been repaid by parliament, a very considerable part
of it has.

Could they, who made the requisitions I have mentioned, or the assemblies that
complied with them, intend, or imagine the faith of the English government was
to be preserved by a retribution, at one time, of the money disbursed at the
instance, and upon the credit of the British ministry, enforced and supported
by ^oyal assurances, and by taking it back again at another time? is this
method of keeping the faith of government to be ranked among the improvements
which have been made beyond the idea of former administrations, conducted by
ministers ignorant of the importance of the colonies, or who impotently
neglected their concerns, or were diverted by mean pursuits, from attending to
them? Is it absolutely certain, that there never can, at any future period,
arise a crisis, in which the exertion of the colonies may be necessary; or, if
there should, that it will bring with it an oblivion of all former indirection?
-- But this is a subject fitter for silent meditation, than public discussion.

There was a time when measures of prevention might have been taken by the
colonies. -- There may be a Time when redress may be obtained........Till then,
prudence, as well as duty, requires submission.

It is presumed that it was a notable service done by New England, when the
militia of that colony reduced Cape-Breton, since it enabled the British
ministers to make a peace less disadvantageous and inglorious than they
otherwise must have been constrained to submit to, in the humble state to which
they were then reduced. -- That the general exertion of the colonies in
North America, during the last war, not only faciliated, but was indispensably
requisite to the success of those operations by which so many glorious
conquests were achieved, and that those conquests have put it in the power of
the present illustrious ministers to make a peace upon terms of so much glory
and adv^ntage, as to afford an inexhaustible subject during their
administration, and the triumph of toryism, at least, for their ingenious
panegyrists to celebrate.

An American, without justly incurring the imputation of ingratitude, may
doubt, whether some other motive, besides pure generosity, did not prompt the
British Nation to engage in the defense of the colonies. He may be induced to
think that the measures taken for the protection of the plantations, were not
only connected with the interests, but even necessary to the defense of
Great Britain herself, because he may have reason to imagine that
Great Britain, could not long subsist as an independent kingdom after the loss
of her colonies. -- He may, without arrogance, be inclined to claim some merit
from the exertion of colonies, since it enabled Great Britain ultimately to
defend herself; I mean that kind of merit which arises from benefits done to
others, by the operation of measures taken for our own sakes......a merit most
illustriously displayed in the generosity of Great Britain, when, with their
cooperation, she protected the colonies to preserve herself.

When an house is in flames, and the next neighbor is extremely active, and
exerts his endeavors to extinguish the fire, which, if not conquered, would
catch, and consume his own dwelling, I don' say, that if the owner of the house
which had been in flames, should, after the fire subdued, complaisantly thank
his neighbor generally for his services, he would be absurdly ceremonious;
but, if the assistant should afterward boast of his great generosity, and
claim a right to the furniture of the house which he had assisted in saving,
upon the merit of his zeal and activity, he would deserve to be put in mind of
the motive of his service.

If the advantages gained by the late most glorious and successful war have
been secured by an adequate peace......if the successes that attended the
military operations of the British arms, were the effect of the conjunct
efforts of the British Nation and her Colonies, roused by the spirit, excited
by the virtue, animated by the vigor, and conducted by the wisdom of the
ablest minister that ever served his country, has there been no compensation
received for the charges of the war? are the colonies entitled to no credit for
it?

When the design is to oppress the colonies with taxes, or calumniate the late
patriotic minister, the expenses of the war, and the enormity of the national
debt are proclaimed: When the present all accomplished administration is to be
celebrated, then is the immense value of the new acquisitions displayed in the
brightest colors, acquisitions vast in extent, richly productive of the
valuable commodities belonging to their several climates. The possession of
those in North America, ensures the safety of the other colonies there,
insomuch that our only dangerous neighbors, the French, do not think the
pittance left worth retaining, having, by the cession of Louisiana to the
Spaniards, avowedly given up for ever those great objects, for which alone they
began the war.....The ceded islands are almost of equal advantage, for
protecting our own, and annoying the settlements of the French and Spaniards,
if they should be again our enemies. Part of Nova Scotia, since the removal of
the neutral French, has been already settled by 10,000 inhabitants, within the
compass of six or seven years, a province lately considered as no more than a
proper situation for a fortress, whose ^^rrison it could not subsist: Even
Cape-Breton, that barren appendage to the province of Nova Scotia, is known now
to contain treasures so worthy of attention, as to be reserved to the crown.
The mines there are not veins; they are mountains of coal; vast clifts of
nothing else, stand open, and accessible; no boring necessary to find it; no
pit necessary to come at it; no fire engines requisite for carrying on the
works. This island, and all the neighboring shores in the gulf of St.
Laurence, have another fund of wealth in their fisheries. Canada is already a
very flourishing colony, inhabited by 90,000 people, and their demand on Great
Britain for a supply of manufactures, must be immediately considerable. The
peltry will be another great branch of commerce. West-Florida is surprisingly
fertile, and luxuriantly productive in its natural state, of every thing, and
not only promising, but actually producing wines and silk, and indigo, etc. etc.

Is no part of this description the ebullition of an exuberant fancy, and shall
we not cast one glance of retrospection toward the man, who, when his country
was despised, and insulted, and sunk into the most abject condition of
despondence, by inspi^ing her sons with that invincible vigor of patriotism,
with which himself was animated, not only dispelled her fears, secured her
safety, and retrieved her honor, but humbled her enemies, and tore from them
the resources of their strength, and the supports of their insolence?

Are the acquisitions of the war retained by the peace, so inestimably
valuable, and ought not the colonies to have some consideration that were
instrumental in the successes whence those acquisitions flowed, and strained
every nerve in the general service, to that degree of exertion, that without
it, all the power of Great Britain, all the amazing abilities of her minister,
and all the discipline, and unparallelled bravery of her national troops and
seamen, could not have availed beyond mere defense, if happily so far? if the
war was expensive beyond all former example, so were the successes of it
beneficial. If the expenses attending the military operations in America, are
justly to be charged to the sole defense of the colonies, and no part of it to
the security of Great Britain, or to the views of extending her dominions by
conquest, if all the successes of the war have been achieved by the national
arms of Great Britain ALONE, without any assistance, or co^operation of the
plantations, still ought not the claim against the colonies in equity, to be
mitigated upon reflection of the advantages deri^^d from them, and of their
contribution to the national revenue for^^ong course of years, during which,
their protection put the British nation to very little, if any particular
expense?

If moreover, Great Britain has an equitable claim to the contribution of the
colonies, it ought to be proportioned to their circumstances, and they might,
surely, be indulged with discharging it in the most easy, and satisfactory
manner to themselves. If ways and means convenient, and conciliating would
produce their contribution, as well as oppressive and disgusting exactions, it
is neither consistent with humanity or policy, to pursue the latter.....A power
may even exist without an actual exercise of it, and it indicates as little
good sense as good nature to exercise it, only that the subjects of it may feel
the rod that rules them. Moderation may be observed, and equity maintained, at
the same time that superiority is asserted, and authority vindicated, whatever
the apprehensions of pusillanimity, or the insolence of usurpation may suggest.

What is the annual sum expected from the colonies -- what proportion from each
-- how far do their abilities extend? These matters have been, without doubt,
precisely ascertained, or easily may be, at a time when the real, the
substantial, the commercial interests of Great Britain, are preferred to every
other consideration, and it is so well known, that the trade whence it is
greatest wealth is derived, and upon which it is maritime power is principally
founded, depends upon a wise and proper use of the colonies, which implies, at
least, such an understanding of their circumstances, as must render it
extremely easy, to form a reasonable estimate of their comparative wealth, and
the extent of their abilities. The proportion of each colony, being so easily
ascertainable at this period of uncommon knowledge of their affairs, why has
the course observed by former ministers, when supplies have been expected from
America, been neglected by the present? Why was there not the usual requisition
communicated to the provincial assemblies, instead of exacting an uncertain and
unequal sum from each colony, by a law abruptly passed, without any previous
default of those who are affected by it? -- I shall not call it a law repugnant
to their genius, cancelling their charters, infringing the most valuable rights
and privileges of British subjects, derogatory from the faith and honor of
government, unjust and cruel in its principles, rigorous and oppressive in the
means provided for its execution, and as pernicious in its consequences to the
mother country, as injurious to the colonies in its immediate operation; but I
may call it a rigorous and severe law. It is in vain to attempt a palliation of
this useless severity, (useless I mean to the purpose of raising a revenue) by
fallaciously ^^etending that, as all the colonies were to be taxed, and the
authority of each is limited, the interposition of the parliament became
necessary, since nothing can be less disputable, than that each colony has a
competent authority to raise it is proportion, and consequently nothing is more
evident, than that all the colonies might raise the whole. It is asserted in
the pamphlet entitled, the claim of the colonies, etc. that Maryland availing
herself of the protection of Virginia and Pennsylvania, contributed nothing to
the common defense. This writer from a view of some map of North America,
imagined, it should seem, that Virginia and Pennsylvania were settled so as to
encompass Maryland; but the truth is, that the frontiers of Maryland were as
much exposed, as those of the next colonies, and the fact is moreover false,
for I have been well informed that Maryland contributed near 50,000 l. and
incurred besides a considerable expense, which is now a debt upon the public
journal of that colony, by putting her militia into actual service, and that an
unhappy dispute, attended with a very heavy provincial charge, on some topic of
privilege, was the real cause, why the grants of Maryland were not more
liberal. After all* there have been instances, I speak not of more modern
times, in which the parsimony of the parliament has been complained of, and
the notion of privilege carried to a great length by the house of commons; but
these have not been thought solid reasons for stripping their consti^uents of
their rights.
The assertion that the colonies would have paid no regard to any requisitions,
is rash and unauthorized, and had the event actually happened, the trouble and
loss of time to the ministers in making the experiment, would not have been
considerable or detrimental to the nation, and after its failure, an act of
parliament might still have been made to compel the contribution, if the power
which has been exercised is defensible upon the principles of the British
constitution.

A measure so extreme, could hardly be at once pursued, because the ministers
did not know what to demand, who have made so many regulations in regard to the
colonies, founded upon knowledge, formed with judgment, and executed with
vigor. Had the requisitions been communicated, I make no doubt but they would
have been entertained with respect, and productive of all the effects that
could reasonably have been expected from them. A petty American assembly would
not, in answer to such requisitions, have impertinently recommended the
reduction of exorbitant salaries, the abatement of extravagant, and the
abolition of illegal perquisites, the extinction of useless places, or the
disbanding of undeserving, or ill deserving pensioners, as a more proper and
beneficial method of relieving the public burdens, than a new and heavy
imposition upon useful and industrious subjects.

Have great things been promised for the ease of the people of England, and
has a measure been fallen upon, that, by putting the accomplishment of them at
a distance, and keeping expectation alive, it may contribute to the
prolongation of a power, which, in the interim, will find sufficient
opportunities to gratify the views of ministerial avarice or ambition?

If a sum had been liquidated, and a precise demand made, it might perhaps have
been shown, if proportioned to the circumstances of the colonies, to be of no
real consequence to the nation; and, if above their circumstances, that it
would, with the oppression of the plantations, prove ruinous to the British
manufactures; but, whilst matters are thus vague, and indeterminate, any
attempt to show that the stamp duties will be inadequate to the promised
relief, distress the colonies, and consequently beggar the British
manufacturers, may be obviated by saying, that the act is in the nature of an
experiment; if inadequate, other methods may be superadded; if inconvenient, it
may be repealed, as soon as discovered; and hints may be thrown out at the same
time, to cherish the hopes of the nation, that there are the best grounds to
expect It is asserted by the author of the claim of the colonies, etc, that the
merchants trading to the several colonies gave in an estimate of the debt due
to them from the colonies, amounting to 4,000,000 l. It would have been a real
public service if he had pointed out how this debt is to be paid under the
oppression of new and heavy impositions, or what will be the proper remedy if
there should be a stoppage in the payment of 4,000,000 l, a stagnation of
commerce, and want of employment to the British manufacturers.
the measure will be productive of all that can be desired or wished.

The frugal Republicans of North America, (if the British inhabitants there are
to be distinguished by a nickname, because it implies that they are enemies to
the government of England, and ought therefore to be regarded with a jealous
eye) may be allowed, without derogating from the vast and prodigious knowledge
of a minister, to be acquainted with their own internal circumstances better
than a stranger, who must depend upon information: and that too, most
frequently, of men not the most eminent for their candor, distinguished by
their sagacity, or respectable for their integrity. Had requisitions been made,
and the sum demanded been equitable, and proportioned to their circumstances,
they could have fallen upon ways and means less oppressive than the stamp
duties. They have frequently taxed themselves: They have tried various methods
of taxation: They know, by experience, the easiest and least expensive. The
meaning, or construction of their levy-act is settled: They can be carried into
execution, not only at a small expense, without exhausting a considerable part
of their produce by the multiplication of officers, and their support; but
without heavy pains and grievous penalties, without oppression of the innocent,
giving countenance to vexation, and encouragement to profligate informers,
without the establishment of arbitrary and distant courts of It was formerly
held to be a grievous oppression, that, instead of having justice at home, the
English subject was drawn to Rome by APPEALS, but an American is to be drawn
from home, in the FIRST INSTANCE, as well as by appeals.
admiralty.

The national debt is heavy, and it is a popular scheme to draw from colonies a
contribution toward the relief of the mother country. The manner of effecting
it is not carefully attended to, or nicely regarded by those who expect to
receive the benefit. The end is so ardently desired, that, whether the means
might not be more moderate, is not scrupulously examined by men, who think
themselves in no danger of injury or oppression from their severity. It is
affirmed to those who cannot detect the falacy of the assertion, that millions
have been expended solely in the defense of America. They believe it, and
thence are easily persuaded that the claim of a contribution from the colonies
is just and equitable, and that any measure necessary to secure it, is right
and laudable. It is represented, that unless the colonies are stripped of the
trial by jury, and courts of admiralty are established, in which judges from
England, strangers, without connection or interest in America, removeable at
pleasure, and supported by liberal salaries, are to preside; unless informers
are encouraged and favored, and the accused most rigorously dealt by, that the
tax will be eluded......and these severities are excused on account of their
supposed necessity. The colonies are described to be a numerous, flourishing,
and opulent people: It is alleged that they contribute to the national
expense, by taxes there only the pitiful sum of 1900 l. per year, for the
collection of which, an establishment of officers, attended with the expense of
7600 l. per annum, is necessary. Upon these premises, the uneasiness of the
colonies, at being forced to bring more into the common stock, appears to be
unreasonable, if not rebellious; and they seem rather to deserve reprehension
and correction, than favor and indulgence.

The successes of the war were obtained as well by the vigorous efforts of the
Colonies, as the exertion of Great Britain......The faith of Great Britain has
been engaged in the most solemn manner, to repay the colonies the moneys levied
by internal taxations for the support of the war. Is it consistent with that
faith to tax them toward sinking the debt in part incurred by that re-payment?
The immense accession of territory, and value of the acquisitions obtained by
the peace, is the consequence of the successes of the war.....The charge of the
war is lessened by the advantages resulting from the peace. The colonies, for a
long course of time, have largely contributed to the public revenue, and put
Great Britain to little or no expense for their protection. If it were
equitable to draw from them a further contribution, it does not therefore
follow, that it is proper to force it from them, by the harsh and rigorous
methods established by the stamp act; an act unequal and disproportioned to
their circumstances whom it affects; exempting opulence, crushing indigence;
and tearing from a numerous, loyal, and useful people, the privileges they had,
in their opinion, earned and merited, and justly held most dear. If they are
really in debt, the payment of it has not been refused, it has not been
demanded. If one subject, grown giddy with sudden elevation, should, at any
future period, rashly declare, that the colonies should be taxed, at all
events, in the most rigorous manner; and that millions of industrious and
useful subjects should be grievously oppressed, rather than himself depart from
his character of perti^acity and wilfulness, check the impulse of a tyrannical
disposition, or forego the gratification of his vanity, in a wanton display of
power; submission would be an admirable virtue indeed, if not the effect of
impotence.

That the contribution arising from the stamp duties is disproportioned to
their circumstances from whom it is exacted, is manifest; for they will produce
in each colony, a greater or less sum, not in proportion to its wealth, but to
the multiplicity of juridical forms, the quantity of vacant land, the frequency
of transferring landed property, the extent of paper negociations, the scarcity
of money, and the number of debtors. A larger sum will be exacted from a
tobacco colony tha^ from Jamaica; and it will not only be higher in one of the
poorest colonies, and the least able to bear it, than in the richest; but the
principal part of the revenue will be drawn from the poorest individuals in the
poorest colonies, from mortgagors, obligors, and defendants. If this be true,
does the act deserve the encomium of being a mode of taxation the easiest, and
the most equal, a duty upon property spread lightly over a great variety of
subjects, and heavy upon none?

The commons of Great Britain, moreover, in their capacity of representative,
not only give and grant the property of the colonies; but in my construction of
the stamp act, (however every reader may examine and judge for himself,) give
and grant also to certain officers of the crown, a power to tax them higher
still; for these officers will not, I presume, be called virtual
representatives too; and what they think fit to ^evy, by an ingenious extent of
the fiction, will not be considered as levied with the consent of the
colonies....The instances, I believe, are rare, in which the representatives of
the people of England have delegated to officers of the crown, the power of
taxing their constituents, nor has any distinction yet been advanced to prove,
that in their capacity of virtual representatives of the colonies, the house of
commons not having the same confidence reposed in them, ought to proceed upon
peculiar rules. There was a statute of Henry VIII, by which, I think, the
king's proclamations, with the consent of the privy council, were to operate as
laws; and another statute of Richard II, that the power of the two houses
should be vested in twelve lords; but these acts bear no resemblance to the
stamp act.

The stamping instruments are to be retained in England. Vellum, parchment, and
paper, are to be sent to America, ready stamped........ The first commissioner
of the treasury, or the commissioners, or any three or more of them, are, by
the act, empowered to set any price upon the vellum, parchment and paper, and
the payment of that price is secured and enforced by the same pains and
penalties that the stamp-duties are.

If the substitution of an arbitrary civil law court, in the place of the legal
judicatories, and that deserved favorite, the common-law-trial by jury, would
not justify the assertion, that the stamp act has stripped the colonies of the
guards and securities provided by the constitution against oppression in the
execution of laws, I would much less presume to say, the vesting in the
commissioners of the treasury a power to tax the colonies, will amply justify
the assertion, that the stamp act has not left them even the shadow of a
privilege. It is indeed something difficult to imagine how the order of
democracy, which is as much a part of the constitution, as monarchy or
aristocracy, can exist when the people are excluded from a share in the
executing, and a share in the making of laws; but that is not the present case;
and, though I may not be able to answer a specious objection, formed upon
general principles, I am not obliged to adopt it, 'till I am convinced of its
solidity.

A little examination will find how unfair and deceptive the representation is,
that the colonies in North America, two millions of British subjects, an
opulent, thriving and commercial people, contribute to the national expense, no
more than 7 or 800 l. per annum by taxes raised there; for though it should be
acknowledged, (which I neither acknowledge nor deny, because I do not know, no^
have an opportunity of coming at the fact) that the impositions upon the
inhabitants of the colonies do not raise there, a greater sum than has been
stated, it does not follow that the inhabitants of the colonies are indulged at
the expense of Great Britain, and that the neediest British cottager, who out
of his scanty pittance hardly earned, pays the high duties of customs and
excise in the price of his consumptions, has reason to complain, if immense
sums are raised upon the inhabitants of the colonies elsewhere.

By such artifices and sophistry, i^ ignorance misled, credulity deceived, and
prejudices excited. Thus oppression gains the credit of equity, cruelty passes
for moderation, and tyranny for justice, and the man who
deserves........reproach, is celebrated by adulation* and applauded by delusion
for his wisdom and patriotic virtues.

The truth is, that a vast revenue arises to the British nation from taxes paid
by the colonies in Great Britain, and even the most ignorant British cottager,
not imposed upon by infamous misrepresentation, must perceive, that it is of no
consequence to his ease and relief, whether the duties raised upon America are
paid there, and thence afterward remitted to Great Britain, or paid at first
upon the produce of the colonies in Great Britain.

In the article of tobacco, for instance, the planter pays a tax upon that
produce of his land and labor consumed in Great Britain, more than six times
the clear sum received by him for it, besides the expenses of freight,
commission and other charges, and double freight, commission and charges upon
the tobacco re-exported, by which the British merchants, mariners and other
British subjects, are supported -- a tax, at least, equal to what is paid by
any farmer of Great Britain, possessed of the same degree of property; and
moreover the planter must contribute to the support of the expensive internal
government of the colony, in which he See the appendix*
resides.

Is it objected, that the duties charged upon tobacco, fall ultimately upon the
consumers of this commodity in the consequential price set upon it? Be it so,
and let the principle be established that all taxes upon a commodity, are paid
by the consumers of it, and the consesequence of this principle be fairly
drawn, and equally applied.

The British consumers therefore, ultimately pay the high duties laid upon
tobacco, in proportion to the quantity of that commodity which they
consume....The colonies therefore, in proportion to their consumption of
British Manufactures, pay also the high duties of customs and excise, with
which the manufacturers are charged in the consequential pri^^ set upon their
consumptions....In their passage moreover, from the British manufacturers to
the American importers, the commodities go through a great many hands, by which
their costs are enhanced; the factors, the carriers, the shopkeepers, the
merchants, the brokers, the porters, the watermen, the mariners, and others,
have their respective profits, from which they derive their subsistence, and
the support of their families, and are enabled to pay the high duties of
customs and excise, in the price of their See the Appendix.
consumptions.

The policy of the la^e regulations of the colonies is of the same character
with their justice and lenity. The produce of their lands, the earnings of
their industry, and the gains of their commerce center in Great Britain,
support the ar^cifiers, the manufactories, and navigation of the nation, and
with them the British land holders too.

Great Britain had ALL before, and therefore can have no more from the
colonies; but the minister, in the pursuit of a well digested, consistent, wise
and salutary plan of colonization and government, a plan founded upon the
principles of policy, commerce and finances, chooses to demolish at one blow,
all their privileges as they have understood them, that he may raise in
America, a part of what was before paid in Great Britain. But if the execution
of it, instead of improving the advantages already possessed, confirming the
blessings already enjoyed, and promoting the public welfare, should happen to
distress the trade, reduce the navigation, impoverish the manufacturers, and
diminish the value of the lands in Great Britain; should it drive the British
mechanics and manufacturers to America, by depriving them of their best
customers at home, and force the colonies upon manufactures, they are disabled
from purchasing, other topics of eulogy must be discovered by his ingenious
encomiasts, than his wisdom or his political achievements. Upon such an event,
an American will have very little reason to exclaim O! me infelicem, qui nunc
demum intellego
Ut illa mihi profuerint quae despexe^a^,
Et illa, quae laudaram, quantum luctus habuerint*
O! unhappy I, who now at length am sensible
How the things I had despised were of advantage to me,
And how much mourning they caused, which I had so much approved*


The right of exemption from all taxes without their consent, the colonies
claim as British subjects. They derive this right from the common law, which
their charters have declared and confirmed, and they conceive that when
stripped of this right, whether by prerogative or by any other power, they are
at the same time deprived of every privilege distinguishing freemen from
slaves.

On the other hand, they acknowledge themselves to be subordinate to the mother
country, and that the authority vested in the supreme council of the nation,
may be justly exercised to support and preserve that subordination.

Great and just encomiums have been bestowed upon the constitution of England,
and their representative is deservedly the favorite of the inhabitants in
Britain. But it is not because the supreme council is called parliament, that
they boast of their constitution of government; for there is no particular
magical influence from the combination of the letters which form the word; it
is because they have a share in that council, that they appoint the members who
constitute one branch of it, whose duty and interest it is to consult their
benefit, and to assert their rights, and who are vested with an authority, to
prevent any measures taking effect dangerous to their liberties, or injurious
to their properties.

But the inhabitants in the colonies have no share in this great council. None
of the members of it are* or can be of their appointment, or in any respect
dependant upon (...). There is no immediate connection* on the contrary, there
may be an opposition of interest; how puerile then is the declamation, what
will become of the colonies birthright, and the glorious securities which their
forefathers handed down to them, if the authority of the British parliament to
impose taxes upon them should be given up? To deny the authority of the British
legislature, is to surrender all claim to a share in its councils, and if this
were the tenor of their charters, a grant more insidious or replete with
mischief, could not be imagined, a forfeiture of their rights would be couched
under the appearance of privilege, etc.

We claim an exemption from all parliamentary impositions, that we may enjoy
those securities of our rights and properties, which we are entitled to by the
constitution. For those securities are derived to the subject from the
principle that he is not be taxed without his own consent, and an inhabitant in
America can give his consent in no other manner than in assembly. It is in the
councils that exist there, and there only, that he has a share, and whilst he
enjoys it, his rights and privileges are as well secured as any elector's in
England, who has a share in the national councils there; for the words
parliament and assembly are in this respect, only different terms to express
the same thing.

But it is argued, that if the common law of England, is to be brought, as
justifying a claim of exemption in any subject of Great Britain from a
parliamentary tax, it will plead against a tax imposed by a provincial
assembly; for as all the colony assemblies derive their authority from the mere
grant of the crown only, it might be urged that any tax imposed by them, is
imposed by authority of the prerogative of the crown, and not by full consent
of parliament. That if this right in the crown, is acknowledged to exempt the
subject from the jurisdiction of parliament in the case of taxation, its power
to dispense with acts of parliament, or to deprive the same subject of the
benefit of the common law, cannot be denied.

One would be inclined to suspect that it is supposed, something else than
reason, may on this occasion conduce to persuasion.

The English subjects, who left their native country to settle in the
wilderness of America, had the privileges of other Englishmen. They knew their
value, and were desirous of having them perpetuated to their posterity. They
were aware that, as their consent whilst they should reside in America, could
neither be asked nor regularly given in the national legislature, and that if
they were to be bound by laws without restriction, affecting the property they
should earn by the utmost hazard and fatigue, they would lose every other
privilege which they had enjoyed in their native country, and become mere
tenants at will, dependant upon the moderation of their lords and masters,
without any other security....that as their settlement was to be made under the
protection of the English government, they knew, that in consequence of their
relation to the mother country, they and their posterity would be subordinate
to the supreme national council, and expected that obedience and protection
would be considered as reciprocal duties.

Considering themselves, and being considered in this light, they entered into
a compact with the crown, the basis of which was, that their privileges as
English subjects, should be effectually secured to themselves, and transmitted
to their posterity. As for this purpose, precise declarations and provisions
formed upon the principles, and according to the spirit of the English
constitution were necessary; CHARTERS were accordingly framed and conferred by
the crown, and accepted by the settlers, by which all the doubts and
inconveniences which might have arisen from the application of general
principles to a new subject, were prevented.

By these charters, founded upon the unalienable rights of the subject, and
upon the most sacred compact, the colonies claim a right of exemption from
taxes not imposed with their consent. -- They claim it upon the principles of
the constitution, as once English, and now British subjects, upon principles on
which their compact with the crown was originally founded.

The origin of other governments is covered by the veil of antiquity, and is
differently traced by the fancies of different men; but, of the colonies, the
evidence of it is as clear and unequivocal as of any other fact.

By these declaratory charters the inhabitants of the colonies claim an
exemption from all taxes not imposed by their own consent, and to infer from
their objection to a taxation, to which their consent is not, nor can be given,
that they are setting up a right in the crown to dispense with acts of
parliament, and to deprive the British subjects in America of the benefits of
the common law, is so extremely absurd, that I should be at a loss to account
for the appearance of so strange an argument, were I not apprized of the
unworthy arts employed by the enemies of the colonies to excite strong
prejudices against them in the minds of their brethren at home, and what gross
incongruities prejudiced men are wont to adopt.

Though I am persuaded that this reasoning has already been sufficiently
refuted, and that no sensible and dispassionate man can perceive any force in
it, yet I cannot help remarking, that it is grounded upon a principle, which, if
it were possible for the examiner to establish it, would entitle him to the
applause of the inhabitants in Great Britain, as little as to the thanks of the
colonies.

From what source do the peers of England derive their dignity, and the share
they have in the British legislature? are there no places in England that
derive their power of choosing members of parliament from royal charters? will
this writer argue, that the crown may, by prerogative, tax the inhabitants of
Great Britain, because the peers of England, and some representatives of the
people, exercise a legislative authority under royal patents and charters? it
must be admitted that all the members of the house of commons are freely chosen
by the people, and are not afterward subject to any influence of the crown or
the ministry: And are not the members of the lower houses of assembly as freely
chosen also by the people; and, in fact, as independent, as the members of the
house of commons? if the truth were confessed, the objection would not be, that
the colonies are too dependent upon the crown, or that their claim of exemption
from all taxes, not imposed by their own consent, is founded upon a principle
leading to slavery. At one time, the North-Americans are called republicans; at
another, the assertors of despotism. What a strange animal must a North
American appear to be from these representations to the generality of English
readers, who have never had an opportunity to admire, that he may be neither
black, nor tawny, may speak the English language, and, in other respects, seem,
for all the world, like one of them!

"The common law, the great charter, the bill of rights," are so far from
declaring, with one voice, that the inhabitants of the colonies shall be taxed
by no other authority than that of the British parliament, that they prove the
contrary; for the principle of the common law is, that no part of their
property shall be drawn from British subjects, without their consent, given by
those whom they depute to represent them; and this principle is enforced by the
declaration of the GREAT CHARTER, and the bill of rights, neither the one nor
the other, introducing any new privilege. In Great Britain, the consent of the
people is given by the house of commons; and, as money had been levied there
for the use of the crown by pretense of prerogative, without their consent, it
was properly declared at the revolution, in support of the constitution, and in
vindication of the people's rights, that the levying of money, by pretense of
prerogative, without grant of parliament, i. e. without their consent who are
to pay it, is illegal, which declaration was most suitable to the occasion, and
effectually establishes the very principle contended for by the colonies.

The word parliament, having been made use of, the letter of the declaration is
adhered to, and the consequence drawn, that no British subject can be legally
taxed, but by the authority of the British parliament, against the spirit and
principle of the declaration, which was aimed only to check and restrain the
prerogative, and to establish the necessity of obtaining the consent of those
on whom taxes were to be levied. Is not this a new kind of logic, to infer from
declarations and claims, founded upon the necessary and essential principle of
a free government, that the people ought not to be taxed without their consent,
that therefore the colonies ought to be taxed by an authority, in which their
consent is not, nor can be concerned; or, in other words, to draw an inference
from a declaration or claim of privilege, subversive of the very principle upon
which the privilege is founded? How aukwardly are the principles of the
revolution applied by some men! What astonishment would the promoters of that
glorious measure, those patrons and friends of liberty, did they now tread the
stage of this world, express, that a word, by which they meant to assert the
privileges of the subject, and restrain despotic power, should be relied upon
to demolish the very principle by which themselves were anima^ted, and after
all their pains and hazards to establish the generous sentiments of liberty,
that those who feel and enjoy the blessings of their successful struggles,
should not be able to raise a thought beyond the ideas affixed to systematic
terms.

It was declared also by the bill of rights, that the elections of members of
parliament ought to be free, and the common law laid down the same rule before,
which is as applicable to the election of the representatives of the colonies,
as of the commons of Great Britain. But with the help of the examiner's logic,
it might be proved from the letter of the bill of rights, that the elections
only of members of parliament ought to be free; for the freedom expressed in
the bill of rights, is as much attached to elections of members of parliament,
as the authority to grant money is to the British parliament, and if the
declaration in the one case implies a negative, there is the like implication
in the other. If, moreover, the common law, the great charter, and the bill of
rights, do really, as the examiner asserts, with one voice declare, that the
inhabitants of the colonies ought to be taxed only by the British parliament,
it is not consistent with that character of vigilance, and jealousy of their
power, commonly ascribed to the British parliament, that, from their first
regular settlement to the reign of George III, the American assemblies should
not only have been suffered, without any animadversion, without one resolve, or
even a single motion to restrain them, to encroach upon the jurisdiction and
authority of the British parliament; but that the parliament should never
before the late stamp act, in one instance, have imposed an internal tax upon
the colonies for the single purpose of revenue, and that, even when acts of
assembly passed in consequence of ministerial enforced by royal requisitions
have been laid before them, they should be so far from objecting to their
validity, as actually to recognize the authority of the provincial
legislatures, and upon that foundation superstruct their own resolves and acts.

But though it has been admitted, that the stamp act is the first statute that
has imposed an internal tax upon the colonies for the single purpose of
revenue, yet the advocates for that law contend, that there are many instances
of the parliament's exercising a supreme legislative authority over the
colonies, and actually imposing internal taxes upon their properties -- that
the duties upon any exports or imports are internal taxes -- that an impost on
a foreign commodity is as much an internal tax, as a duty upon any production
of the plantations,......that no distinction can be supported between one kind
of tax and another, an authority to impose the one extending to the other.

If these things are really as represented by the advocates for the stamp act,
why did I have presumed to mention this fact upon the authority of private
intelligence, as well as of the news papers, and other publications; and though
the chancellor of the exchequer is not named, yet the fact seems in general to
be referred to in the postscript to the excellent letter concerning libels,
warrants, seizure of papers, and security of the peace, etc. in the following
words: Otherwise ( i. e. if it were not right for the parliament to resolve
general warrants to be illegal) let me ask how that momentous resolution
touching an English parliament's right of taxing the colonies could be
justified? it was an independent substantive resolution, followed by nothing, (
i. e. that session) and yet was a resolution not only of extreme magnitude, but
of the most general and highest legal nature, involving in it a decision of the
first and most fundamental principles of liberty, property, and government, and
well worthy also, as to the temporary policy of it, the most serious of all
consideration. This was resolved too, if I am informed right, at the close of
the night, and the rising of the house; so that every body must have taken it
as a clear thing, that they could at any time come to a resolution upon any
general point of law, whenever they should see it expedient so to do, sed
verbum sapienti sat est; but a word is enough to the wise.
the chancellor of the exchequer make it a question for the consideration of
the house of commons, whether the parliament could impose an internal tax in
the colonies or not, for the single purpose of revenue?

It appears to me, that there is a clear and necessary distinction between an
act imposing a tax for the single purpose of revenue, and those acts which have
been made for the regulation of trade, and have produced some revenue in
consequence of their effect and operation as regulations of trade.

The colonies claim the privileges of British subjects......it has been proved
to be inconsistent with those privileges, to tax them without their own
consent, and it has been demonstrated that a tax imposed by parliament, is a
tax without their consent.

The subordination of the colonies, and the authority of the parliament to
preserve it, have been fully acknowledged. Not only the welfare, but perhaps
the existence of the mother country, as an independent kingdom, may depend upon
her trade and navigation, and these so far upon her intercourse with the
colonies, that, if this should be neglected, there would soon be an end to that
commerce, whence her greatest wealth is derived, and upon which her maritime
power is principally founded. From these considerations, the right of the
British parliament to regulate the trade of the colonies, may be justly
deduced; a denial of it would contradict the admission of the subordination,
and of the authority to preserve it, resulting from the nature of the relation
between the mother country and her colonies. It is a common, and frequently the
most proper method to regulate trade by duties on imports and exports. The
authority of the mother country to regulate the trade of the colonies, being
unquestionable, what regulations are the most proper, are to be of course
submitted to the determination of the parliament; and, if an incidental
revenue, should be produced by such regulations; these are not therefore
unwarrantable.

A right to impose an internal tax on the colonies, without their consent for
the single purpose of revenue, is denied, a right to regulate their trade
without their consent is admitted. The imposition of a duty, may, in some
instances, be the proper regulation. If the claims of the mother country and
the colonies should seem on such an occasion to interfere, and the point of
right to be doubtful, (which I take to be otherwise) it is easy to guess that
the determination will be on the side of power, and that the inferior will be
constrained to submit In the reign of our great deliverer, when the English and
the Dutch were at war with France* they joined in preventing the northern
powers from carrying on a trade with the enemy. M. Gro^ing having formed a
design, to prove the right of the northern powers to a ^ree trade and
navigation, communicated his plan to, and desi^ed the opinion of baron
Puffendorf upon it, who obs^rved that as the question had not been settl^d upon
clear and undeniable princip^es, and there was a mixture of fact and right, the
confederates might contend that they have a right to distress the enemy, and as
the means to ^ttain that purpose, to restrain the trade of the northern powers,
an argugument that with superior force would be conclusive.
.

The writer on the regulations lately made with respect to the colonies, who is
said to have been well informed, asserts a fact, which indisputably proves,
that the impositions mentioned, were only regulations of trade, and can, with
no kind of propriety, be considered in any other light. The fact he asserts,
is, that the whole remittance from all the taxes in the colonies, at an average
of thirty years, has not amounted to 1900 l. a year, and in that sum, 7 or 800
l. per annum only, have been remitted from North America; and that the
establishment of officers, necessary to collect that revenue, amounts to 7600
l. per annum.

It would be ridiculous indeed to suppose, that the parliament would raise a
revenue by taxes in the colonies to defray part of the national expense, the
collection of which taxes would increase that expense to a sum more than three
times the amount of the revenue; but, the impositions being considered in their
true light, as regulations of trade, the expense arising from an establishment
necessary to carry them into execution, is so far from being ridiculous, that
it may be wisely incurred.

The author of the claim of the colonies, etc. gives (as has been observed)
the epithets of unjust and partial, to a tax which should be imposed upon the
non-electors, only in Britain, and in that very instance, proves, that a tax
upon the non-electors in the colonies, is more unjust and partial, and yet
undertakes to defend the justice of it; and the writer on the regulations of
the colonies declares, that it is in vain to call the acts he has cited as
precedents, by the name of mere regulations, notwithstanding he has
irrefragably proved, that they are ridiculous, if considered in any other
light. See the regulation of the colonies, etc. A grave answer to a little p^rt
pamphlet, called the objections to the taxation* etc. would be too ^udic^ous.
When the author of it talks of order^ to be observed under pains and penalties,
he ^ses the awful style of a L -- d of T -- but it was too constrained for him
to support, and he therefore very naturally relapsed into the character of a
jack-pudding. He had very little reas^n to apprehend that Lo^k, Sidney, or
Seldom, would be called upon to pull off his -- cap.
page 105 -- 57, and the claim of the colonies, etc. page 28, 29, 30.)

Though I conceive that the distinction which has been suggested* is
sufficiently evident, and that the argument from precedents has been refuted,
yet, as there have been two or three instances particularly enforced and relied
upon, I must beg the reader's patience whilst I examine them separately,
without undertaking the task to remove every incongruity to be found in the
writings of the enemies of America on this occasion; for it would require an
Hercules to cleanse the stable.

The 5th Geo. II, it is alleged, abrogates so much of the common law as
relates to descents of freeholds in America, takes from the son the right of
inheritance in the lands the crown had granted to the father, and his heirs in
absolute fee, makes them assets, and applies them to the payment of debts and
accounts contracted by the father without the participation of the son; it sets
aside the sort of evidence required by the common law, and established by every
court of justice in America, in proof of a debt, and enjoins the admission of
an ex part affidavit. The power of parliament having been exercised to take
away the lands of the people in America, the most sacred part of any man's
property, and disposing of them for the use of private persons inhabitants of
Great Britain, who can question, says the examiner, the parliament's right to
take away a small part of the products of those lands, and apply it to the
public service?

It is very observable, that in applying this statute, a language is made use
of, which gives the idea of violence; and it must be confessed, that great
aggravation of features, and strong coloring, were necessary to make it in any
d^gree resemble the impositions of the stamp act.

It would be useless, as well as tedious, to point out every misrepresentation
in this application, since that will be effectually done, by briefly showing
the effect of the 5th Geo. II, and suggesting the occasion of making that
statute.

Lands, negroes, etc. in the plantations, are made assets for the satisfaction
of all debts owing to his majesty, or any of his subjects, in like manner as
real estates are, by the law of England liable to the satisfaction of debts due
by specialty.

If the creditor resides in Great Britain, the affidavits of his witnesses
taken there, are to be allowed as evidence, and to have the same force their
testimony would have, if given, viva voce, in open court.

The evidence mentioned in the statute, prevailed in most, if not all the
colonies, before the statute, and lands were also liable to the satisfaction of
all debts in most instances, by the method practiced also in the court of
chancery in England, of marshalling assets. In some of the colonies, without
this circuity, lands were immediately liable to simple contract debts.

Independent of the statute, when the creditor obtains a judgment against his
debtor, all his lands, etc. over which he has a disposing power, are liable,
and, since the statute, only such lands, etc. are assets, as the debtor had a
power to dispose of. It appears then, that all the effects of the statute on
this head, is to subject real estates to the payment of debts after the death
of the debtor, (for the most part the case before the statute) which might have
been made subject before his death.

In many of the colonies, the provincial creditors of deceased debtors, were
preferred to the British, in the same degree, by acts of assembly which carried
the appearance of partiality; though in fact, the effect of the laws of England
gave rise to them; for, upon bankruptcies in Great Britain, the steps required
by the statutes to entitle creditors to a satisfaction, effectually exclude
colony creditors in most cases, and their distance, when their debtors die in
Great Britain, where colony creditors have not standing agents as the merchants
have in the plantations, and there happens a deficiency of assets, shuts them
out likewise from all chance of satisfaction in the usual scramble among
creditors for the debtor's estate on such events.

In some of the colonies they changed, by acts of assembly, certain species of
personal property, e. g. negroes, into the nature of real estates, by making
them descendible; and, by this alteration of the common law, and confusion of
the former distinction of property, very considerably diminished the personal
fund liable to all debts.

As these circumstances were represented and believed to be great
discouragements to the trade of the mother country, after repeated requisitions
to provide a remedy in the colonies, in which the grievance was most sensibly
felt, had been disregarded, the statute was finally made.

This was, without doubt, a subject upon which the superintendence of the
mother country might be justly exercised; it being relative to her trade and
navigation, upon which her wealth and her power depend, and the preservation of
her superiority, and the subordination of the colonies, are secured, and
therefore is comprehended in the distinction.

After citing, and applying this statute, the examiner takes occasion to insult
a gentleman of a most amiable and respectable character, because he presumed it
seems, to question the universality of parliamentary power, and appears to be
so totally occupied in the business of defamation, as not to be aware of his
running into the most egregious inconsistencies. If the examiner is a lawyer,
he has betrayed the most shameful ignorance; if an agent, the most infamous
unfaithfulness. Had the American Chief Justice acted in England, as too many of
his countrymen have done -- had he paid his court to power, by mean
compliances, and endeavored to recommend himself, by inventing accusations
against the colonies, by representing the inhabitants in them, as a refractory,
disloyal, and rebellious people, and by proposing schemes for their depression
-- had he not firmly maintained his character of honor and probity, we should
not have seen this impeachment of his understanding; but he left the task of
prostitution to the man of sordid views, Ille superbos aditus regum,
Durasque fores, expers somni
Colat --
Let such a one, without taking sleep,
Attend ^he proud levees, and haughty gates
Of kings --


"Had the colonies," says the examiner, agreed to the imposition of the
stamp-duties, a precedent would have been established for their being
consulted, before any imposition upon them by parliament would hereafter take
place. He intimates that they were advised by some of their agents to take this
course: If such advice has been given, it was weak or insidious, and the
agents, who recommended the measure, ought to be removed for their incapacity
or their treachery.

How would the precedent have been established, or, if it had, what would have
been the advantage? This conduct would have admitted, that the colonies might
be taxed at any time, and in any manner, without their consent; and
consequently, would at once have been an effectual surrender of all their
privileges as British subjects.

If precedents were to be regarded, when a tax in America, for the single
purpose of revenue is required, they are not wanting. Upon such occasions, the
course has always, and uniformly been, 'till the imposition of the stamp
duties, to transmit requisitions to the colonies; and, if the instance cited by
the examiner, is, in any degree pertinent, he has shown in his appendix, that
the method of requisition was in that pursued; for, the lords of trade, in
their report, expressly mention the refusal of the colonies to comply with the
requisitions transmitted to them, to remove the grievance complained of.

The clause in the mutiny act during the late war is also relied upon, but with
how much propriety, few words will evince.

The acts of assembly of each colony, could have no obligatory force beyond the
limits of each; but the service of the colony troops, was not confined within
the same colony in which they were raised; it is therefore evident that the
provincial legislatures, had not an authority adequate to the great object of
the military operations in America, which was not merely the defense of the
plantations, by measures executed within their boundaries, but the enemy was
attacked in his own country, and for this purpose the British and American
troops acted conjunctly. On this occasion it was not only convenient, that the
troops employed in the same service, should be subject to the same discipline,
but it was indispensably necessary that this discipline should be established
by act of parliament, the authority of the provincial legislatures being deemed
incompetent. And it is to be remarked, moreover, that the provincial troops
were raised and paid by the colonies, and that it was in the power of their
assemblies, a power exercised by some of them, to disband or reduce them when
they pleased, and therefore their supporting and keeping them up, was an
effectual consent to the act of parliament; but as has been shown, an internal
tax may be as completely and adequately laid in every colony, by the authority
of the respective assemblies, as by the British parliament, and therefore there
is not the same necessity for the interposition of the mother country in this,
as in the other instance, and the colonies with reference to the stamp act, are
not called upon to do any act expressive of their assent to it, nor is it in
their power to hinder its taking effect in the fullest exent.

The act for the establishment of a post office in the colonies (9 Anne, ^.
10,) comes the nearest to the subject of any regulation that has been
mentioned; but yet it is materially distinguishable from the stamp act. For the
same reason that an act of parliament was necessary to secure the discipline of
the provincial troops, acting in conjunction with the British forces during the
late war, the authority of parliament might be proper for the general
establishment of a regular post office, for as the laws of each colony are in
their operation confined within the limits of each, prohibitory and compulsive
clauses to enforce a general observance, without which the establishment would
fail, might be eluded. If a man should maliciously give a wound in one colony,
and the wounded person die in another, the offender could not be convicted of
murder, because the whole fact constituting that crime, would not be cognizable
in the colony where the wound was given, or the death happened; and the same
principle is applicable to every other inferior offense, and intimates in what
manner prohibitory clauses might be evaded. This matter therefore of the
post office, may be referred to the general superintending authority of the
mother country, the power of the provincial legislatures being too stinted to
reach it. In this view, and upon the consideration of the general convenience
and accommodation arising from the establishment, the people of America, have
not complained of it, but if this instance were more pertinent than it is, it
would only prove what has been too often proved before.......when men do not
suspect any designs to invade their rights, and subdolous steps taken to that
end, are productive of immediate convenience without pointing out their
destructive tendency, they are frequently involved in ruin before they are
aware of danger, or that the conduct flowing from the negligence of innocent
intentions, may afford a handle to men of different dispositions, for the
commission of oppression......of the truth of these observations the histories
of all people who have once been blessed with freedom, and have lost it,
exhibit abundant examples.

When instances are urged as an authoritative reason for adopting a new
measure, they are proved to be more important from this use of them, and ought
therefore to be reviewed with accuracy, and canvassed with strictness. What is
proposed ought to be incorporated with what has been done, and the result of
both stated and considered as a substantive original question, and if the
measure proposed is incompatible with the constitutional rights of the subject,
it is so far from being a rational argument, that consistency requires an
adoption of the proposed measure, that, on the contrary, it suggests the
strongest motive for abolishing the precedent; when therefore an instance of
deviation from the constitution is pressed as a reason for the establishment of
a measure striking at the very root of all liberty; though the argument is
inconclusive, it ought to be useful.

Wherefore if a sufficient answer were not given to the argument drawn from
precedents, by showing that none of the instances adduced are applicable, I
should have very little difficulty in denying the justice of the principle, on
which it is founded. What has been done, if wrongful, confers no right to
repeat it. To justify oppression and outrage, by instances of their commission,
is a kind of argument which never can produce conviction, though it may their
acquiescence, whom the terror of greater evils may restrain from resisting, and
thus the despotism of the east may be supported, and the natural rights of
mankind be trampled under feet. The question of right, therefore, does not
depend upon precedents, but on the principles of the constitution, and has
been put upon its proper point already discussed, whether the colonies are
represented or not, in parliament.

As the name of Hambden occurred to the examiner in his design of casting an
oblique reflection upon the colonies, it is surprising he did not recollect,
that very numerous precedents have been applied in the defense of an arbitrary
and oppressive proceeding, destructive of the essential principle of English
liberty. But though mere acts of power prove no right, yet the real opinion
entertained of it, may be inferred from forbearance; for mankind are generally
so fond of power, that they are oftener tempted to exercise it beyond the
limits of justice, than induced to set bounds to it from the pure consideration
of the rectitude of forbearance. Wherefore if I had denied the principle of
this kind of reasoning, without showing the defects of the artificial painted
precedents which have been produced, I might still very consistently urge,
that, the repeated and uniform requisitions of the English ministers, as often
as occasions for the single purpose of revenue have happened, transmitted to
the colonies to tax themselves by provincial acts, and the acts of parliament
regulating the trade of the plantations, as well as of Ireland, without one
instance, before the stamp act, of a tax imposed by parliament upon either, for
the unmixed purpose of revenue prove, that the imposition of a tax upon them
without their consent, has constantly been held to be inconsistent with their
constitutional rights and privileges. I have joined Ireland with the colonies,
and presume it will hardly be contended that Ireland, over which the courts of
justice in England have a superintendant power, is not, at least, as subject to
Great Britain as the colonies are.

A most extraordinary reason has been given, why the method of requisition
would have been improper, viz. that the sums raised must be paid into the
exchequer, and if levied by the provincial assemblies, the parliament would
have no right to enquire into the expenditure of them. This is so extremely
futile, that it would be almost absurd to bestow a serious refutation upon it.

Why must the sums raised be paid into the exchequer? If the intention is to
apply them in the colonies to any internal purpose, why must they be remitted
to Great Britain? if armies are to be kept up in America, to defend the
colonies against themselves, (for it can hardly be imagined that troops are
necessary for their protection against any foreign enemy) or are to be employed
in the national service of cropping the ears, and slitting the nostrils of the
civil magistrates, as marks of distinction See the narrative of the outrages
committed by the soldiery, on Mr. justice Walker in Canada.
, why must the money be paid into the exchequer? or, if it should be paid into
the exchequer, in order to be applied toward sinking the national debt, why
might not the parliament enquire into the application of it? does the examiner,
in his idea of the parliament, figure to himself a monster with an hand that
can reach to the utmost verge of the British dominions, and clutch and crush
millions of subjects at a gripe; but, when the object is near, apt to be
rendered by some magical influence, so short, and so ^eeble, as not to be able
to reach the exchequer, or to squeeze the chancellor of it?

We are assured that there never can be any irregular attempts of the
prerogative upon our rights, whilst we are blessed with a prince of the
glorious line of Brunswick upon the throne of Great Britain. I have all the
confidence in the excellent dispositions of our present most gracious sovereign
that an Englishman ought to have, but I cannot penetrate into futurity; and, as
the examiner has not yet established the character of a prophet, I must
consider this assertion rather as a curious specimen of lip-loyalty, I will not
call it extravagant adulation, than as a sober recommendation, to surrender all
those guards and securities of liberty, which the constitution of a free
government has provided; but, if the British Americans should ever be reduced
to the unhappy necessity of giving up their natural rights, and their civil
privileges, I believe they would as soon make the surrender to a prince of the
line of Brunswick, as to any other mortal, or number of mortals, in the
universe.

We have seen too a piece in some of our late newspapers, all bedawbed with
the lace of compliment.....there is no end to human ambition* it is perpetually
restless, and pushing forward. If a little P -- ct -- r A late notable speech
puts me in mind of the ingenuity of the female dis^utant, who used to silence
debate, by crying out, God bless the king, and what have you to say to that?
is raised to the title of excellency, and the rank of a kind of viceroy, there
is still a summit beyond the eminence to which he has been elevated, that he
is sollicitous to gain.

It has been truly said, that it will be no easy task to persuade the
Americans to forsake the culture of their lands, to leave the ways their
fathers trod, and in which themselves were trained, to drop a business they
al^^ady understand, in which they have had long experience, and by which their
families have thriven, to change all their habits of thinking, and their manner
of life, in order to apply to arts which they do not know, or know but
imperfectly, and that where estates may be easily raised by mere tillage, the
temptations to manufacture are wanting, and men, who can depend upon their
industry alone, will not have recourse to arts for subsistence. But that which
persuasion might not effect, and to which peculiar cirstances might be adverse,
necessity, and an alteration of those circumstances, may accomplish. When the
alternative is proposed, and the one part of it assures success, and a
comfortable support by a moderate application of industry, familiarized by use,
and rendered easy by practice; and the other affording only an experiment of
precarious issue, calling for an application unexperienced and dreaded,
attended with perplexity, and productive of irksome anxiety, the generality of
mankind would not hesitate in choosing the former. But, though it would gain
the preference of choice, yet, if the alternative is taken away, and choice
yields to necessity, the enterprizing will form projects, the judicious
improve, the industrious execute them. Success, in one instance, will animate
the timid to make trial of the means which have succeeded under the direction
of others, stimulate the phlegmatic, and rouse the indolent -- should the
necessity after a little time, cease, new habits may become as strong as the
old, and the alternative would therefore be altered, the choice be an act of
deliberation, rather than of blind impulse; old prejudices would be greatly
abated, if not extinguished, new attachments, perhaps, be formed. From this
change, different consequences may be conjectured or foretold, and perhaps the
most confident might be disappointed by the event. It is not so difficult for
men to strike into new employments and methods of life, when impelled by the
urgency of distress, nor so easy to call them back to their old manner of life,
and divert them from new pursuits experienced to be profitable, and productive
of the best security against oppression, as some seem to apprehend.

It is not contended that the colonies ought to be indulged in a general
liberty of exporting and importing every thing in what manner they please, but,
since they are hindered from making all the advantages they might do, and what
advantages might they not make, if under no checks? they have a good plea
against all rigor and severity, not absolutely necessary. That British
manufactures come dearer, and not so good in quality to America, as formerly,
is a very general complaint, and what effect it may have, should they still
grow dearer and worse in quality, or the colonies be rendered less able to
consume them, is a consideration which concerns Great Britain, at least as much
as the colonies. An increase of price, and falling in the goodness of quality,
is the usual effect of monopolies; there is no danger of foreigners taking
advantage of this circumstance in America, whatever they may do in other
countries, but the industry it may give rise to in America, when other
circumstances concur, is not difficult to be foreseen.

It must be acknowledged, that the balance of trade between Great Britain and
her colonies, is considerably against the latter, and that no gold or silver
mines have yet been discovered in the old American settlements, or among the
treasures of the new acquisitions. How then is this balance to be discharged?
The former trade of the colonies, which enabled them to keep up their credit
with Great Britain, by applying the balance they had gained against foreigners,
is now so fettered with difficulties, as to be almost prohibited. In order
therefore to reduce the balance against them upon the trade between the
colonies and Great Britain, this trade must be contracted, so as to bring the
scales to an equilibrium, or a debt will be incurred that cannot be paid off,
which will distress the creditor as well as the debtor, by the insolvency of
the latter. The income also of the colonies, which was before invested in their
trade, will be diminished in proportion to the produce of the stamp act, and
therefore the amount of that produce must be drawn out, which will create a
further reduction of the trade.

I confess that I am one of those who do not perceive the policy in laying
difficulties and obstructions upon (...) gainful trade of the colonies with
foreigners, or that it even makes any real difference to the English nation,
whether the merchants who carry it on with commodities Great Britain will not
purchase* reside in Philadelphia, New York or Boston, London, Bristol, or
Liverpool, when the balance gained by the American merchant in the pursuit of
that trade centers in Great Britain, and is applied to the discharge of a debt
contracted by the consumption of British manufactures in the colonies, and in
this to the support of the national expense.

If in consequence of the obstructions, or regulations as they are called, of
their commerce, and the imposition of taxes upon their properties, the colonies
should only be driven to observe the strictest maxims of frugality, the
consequence would rather be disagreeable than hurtful -- should they be forced
to use new methods of industry, and to have recourse to arts for a supply of
necessaries, the difficulty in succeeding would prove less than the
apprehension of miscarrying, and the benefit greater than the hope of it. There
are few people of the highest, and even of the middle rank, but would upon a
strict scrutiny into their ordinary disbursements, discover some articles that
would admit of defalcation.

A prudent man, constrained to abridge his outgoings, will consider what
articles of expense may be retrenched or given up without distress or
discomfort, and if, after this saving, he still finds that his expenses exceed
his income, he will then consider of what articles he can provide a supply by
the application of domestic industry, or whether some tolerable substitute may
not be fallen upon to answer the purpose of what he can neither buy, nor has
skill or ability to fabricate. He will reflect that the expedient which is at
first but an indifferent shift, use and experience will improve into
convenience, that practice will confer knowledge and skill, and these facility
and satisfaction, and though the progress should be slow and gradual, habit will
grow with it, and produce reconcilement and content.

What are called in North America, luxuries, ought for the most part to be
ranked among the comforts and decencies of life, but these will not be
relinquished, if a supply of necessaries may be provided by domestic
industry.......for food, thank GOD, they do not, and for raiment they need not,
depend upon Great Britain.

Any thin covering in the summer to preserve dece^cy, and substantial clothing
in the winter to repel the cold, are sufficient for domestic servants and
laborers, and these may be provided without any remora to the business of
tillage, for there are many intervals in which it is suspended. There are times
too, when the employment is so slight as to be rather a moderate exercise, than
a laborious task, when the work that is done might be performed by hal^ the
number of laborers without excessive exertion, or exhausting fatigue. There
are besides in most families those, whom the feebleness of immature years, or
their sex, at particular periods* or the decripitude of old age, discharge from
the duties of tillage. Leather, and wool, and cotton, and flax, are at hand:
How easy then is the necessary clothing provided for those whose station does
not require any attention or regard to fashion, or elegance; so easy that many
have already gone into this manufacture without any other impulse, than the
spirit of industry, which cannot bear inaction, though the savings on this head
have afterward been neglected. In this very considerable branch so little
difficulty is there, that a beginning is half the work. The path is beaten,
there is no danger of losing the way, there are directors to guide every step.
But why should they stop at the point of clothing laborers, why not proceed,
when vigor and strength will increase with the progression, to cloth the
planters? When the first stage is arrived at, the spirits will be recruited,
and the second should be undertaken with alacrity, since it may be performed
with ease. In this too, the experiment has been made and has succeeded* Let
the manufacture of America be the symbol of dignity, the badge of virtue, and
it will soon break the setters of distress. A garment of linsey-wolsey, when
made the distinction of real pa^^^tism, is more honou^^ble and attractive of
respect and veneration, than all the pageantry, and the robes, and the plumes,
and the diadem of an emperor without it. Let the emulation be not in the
richness and variety of foreign productions, but in the improvement and
perfection of our own -- Let it be demonstrated that the subjects of the
British empire in Europe and America are the same, that the hardships of the
latter will ever recoil upon the Upon a surmise that a certain noble ^ -- ^,
wa^ the author of some hardships inflicted upon the colonies, a reproachful and
mischievous distinction has been made by some people, between the natives of S
-- t -- d, and of E -- g -- d and America, which every judicious friend of the
colonies must wish to see abolished and an Union rather established than
divisions promoted. Every man who has his all, and the welfare of his posterity
at stake, upon the prosperity of America, as he has an interest in common with
the natives of it, ought to be considered as an American -- It is an effectual
way to make men adversaries, to call and treat them as such -- Besides, laying
aside this consideration, the distinction is extremely unjust; for though there
(...) too much reason to believe that some natives of America, and of E -- g --
d, who have resided in the colonies, have been instrumental in bringing upon us
the severities we deplore, yet has it never been even surmised, I speak it to
their honor, that any native of S -- t -- d residing, or that ever did reside
in America, had in any degree a hand in them. It is much to be feared, if the
breach which a too eager prosecution of the little views of party has made
among the inhabitants of a colony heretofore the most distinguished for
prudence and unanimity, should not be closed, in consideration of the general
calamity, that America as well as Denmark, will furnish an instance of the
excessive temerity of political an^mosity.
former.

In theory it is supposed that each is equally important to the other, that all
partake of the adversity and depression of any. The theory is just, and time
will certainly establish it; but if another principle should be ever hereafter
adopted in practice, and a violation deliberate, cruel, ungrateful, and
attended with every circumstance of provocation, be offered to our fundamental
rights, why should we leave it to the slow advances of time (which may be the
great hope and reliance, probably, of the authors of the injury, whose view it
may be to accomplish their selfish purposes in the interval) to prove what
might be demonstrated immediately -- Instead of moping, and puling, and whining
to excite compassion; in such a situation we ought with spirit, and vigor, and
alacrity, to bid defiance to tyranny, by exposing it is impotence, by making it
as contemptible, as it would be detestable. By a vigorous application to
manufactures, the consequence of oppression in the colonies to the inhabitants
of Great Britain, would strike home, and immediately. None would mistake it.
Craft and subtilty would not be able to impose on the most ignorant and
credulous; for if any should be so weak of sight as not to see, they would not
be so callous as not to feel it. -- Such conduct would be the most dutiful and
beneficial to the mother country. It would point out the distemper when the
remedy might be easy, and a cure at once effected by a simple alteration of
regimen.

Of this measure should there be apprehensions, and ministerial orators and
panegyrists endeavor to obviate them by observing, that, it would always be
easy to reinstate things where they were, and that by easing the colonies of
their burdens, and giving encouragement to their produce; the establishment of
any manufacture in America might be prevented. We should mark well this
reasoning, and avail ourselves of the instruction given by our enemies, which
would point out to us the remedy, and the more speedy the application of it the
better, and that would depend upon ourselves.

Besides the urgency of such an occasion (should it happen) there would be
another powerful inducement to this simple, natural, easy method.......the good
or bad success of one attempt to oppress, generally produces or prevents future
impositions. In common life a tameness in bearing a deprivation of part of a
man's property, encourages ^apacity to seize the rest.

Any oppression of the colonies, would intimate an opinion of them I am
persuaded they do not deserve, and their security as well as honor ought to
engage them to confute. When contempt is mixed with injustice, and insult with
violence, which is the case when an injury is done to him who has the means of
redress in his power; if the injured has one inflammable grain of honor in
his breast, his resentment will invigorate his pursuit of reparation, and
animate his efforts to obtain an effectual security against a repetition of the
outrage.

If the case supposed should really happen, the resentment I should recommend
would be a legal, orderly, and prudent resentment, to be expressed in a zealous
and vigorous The ingenious Mr. Hume, observes in his history of James I* that
the English fine cloth was in so little credit even at home, that the king was
obliged to seek expedients by which he might engage the people of fashion to
wear it, and the manufacture of fine linen was totally unknown in the kingdom
-- what an encouragement to industry! This very pene^rating gentleman also
recommends a mild government, as a proper measure for preserving the dominion
of England over her colonies.
industry, in an immediate use and unabating application of the advantages we
derive from our situation......a resen^ment which could not fail to produce
effects as beneficial to the mother country as to the colonies, and which a
regard to her welfare as well as our own, ought to inspire us with on such an
occasion.

The general assemblies would not, I suppose, have it in their power to
encourage by laws, the prosecution of this beneficial, this necessary measure;
but they might promote it almost as effectually by their example. I have in my
younger days seen fine sights, and been captivated by their dazzling pomp and
glittering splendour; but the sight of our representa^ives, all adorned in
complete dresses of their own leather, and flax, and wool, manufactured by the
art and industry of the inhabitants of Virginia, would excite, not the gaze of
admiration, the flutter of an agitated imagination, or the momentary amusement
of a transient scene, but a calm, solid, heart felt delight. Such a sight would
give me more pleasure than the most splendid and magni^^cent spectacle the most
exquisite taste ever painted, the richest fancy ever imagined, realized to the
view....as much more pleasure as a good mind would receive from the
contemplation of virtue, than of elegance; of the spirit of patriotism, than
the ostentation of opulence.

Not only, "as a friend to the colonies," but as an inhabitant having my all at
stake upon their welfare See the regulations, etc. page 111.
I desire an exemption from taxes imposed without my consent, and I have
reflected longer than "a moment upon the consequences:" I value it as one of
the dearest privileges I enjoy: I acknowledge dependence on Great Britain, but
I can perceive a degree of it without slavery, and I disown all other. I do not
expect that the ^nterests of the colonies will be considered by some men, but
in subserviency to other regards. The effects of luxury, and venality, and
oppression, posterity may perhaps experience, and SUFFICIENT FOR THE DAY WILL
BE THE EVIL THEREOF.

APPENDIX.
BY the 12th Charles II* the colonies are restrained from sending the products
enumerated in the act to any foreign ports......By the 15th of the same king,
they are prohibited from importing commodities of the growth or manufacture of
Europe, except from Great Britain, saving a few articles mentioned in this act.

A law, which restrains one part of the society, from exporting its products to
the most profitable market, in favor of another; or obliges it to import the
manufactures of one country that are dear, instead of those of another that are
cheap, is effectually a tax. For if the profitable exportation, and the
importation of the cheaper commodities were permitted, a tax equal such gain in
the former case, and to the saving in the latter, would leave that part of the
society, in the same state and cond^^^on, as if under the prohibition and
restriction above mentioned. As for instance in the case of
importation.......Suppose a country which I will distinguish by the name of A,
can purchase commodities of the same kind, and equal goodness, 20 per cent
cheaper of B, than she can of C;..........Then it is clear, if A is prohibited
from taking these commodities of B, and obliged to purchase them of C, that A
is just in the same state and condition, as if she were allowed to purchase the
commodities of B, on paying thereon a duty of 20 per cent to C........This
instance, mutatis mutandis, is equally applicable to the case of exportation.
Hence it appears, that the country favored by the prohibition and restriction,
gains as much thereby, as it would do, if the proportionate tax were paid to
it, upon taking off the prohibition and restriction; or, in other words, the
profit which the one is hindered from making, in consequence of the prohibition
and restriction, is made by the other, in whose favor they have been
introduced.

It has been observed by a well-received writer on the subject of trade, that
a prohibition acknowledges the commodities it is laid on, to be good and cheap,
otherwise it were needless, and a prohibition on the goods of any one nation,
gives a monopoly to other nations, that raise the like....Again.... a
prohibition against any one nation, makes other nations, having the like
commodities, take the advantage and raise their price, and is therefore a tax.
(...)


If a prohibition, extending to one nation only in favor of many, (...), and
is therefore a tax; a pro^ibition extending to (...) in favor of one, is
indub^^ably ^o.

From Virginia and Maryland are exported, communibus annis, 90,000 h^g^heads of
^ob^cco to Great Britain, of which it is supposed 60,0^0 are ^hence
re-exported. But these colonies not being permited to send their tobacco
immediately to foreign markets distributively, in proportion to their demands,
the re-exported tobacco pays double freight, double insurance, commission and
other shipping charges. -- The whole quantity is, moreover, of course much
depreciated, for going all to Great Britain, the home-market is overdone, by
which circumstance, the quantity required for home-consumption is without doubt
purchased cheaper than it would be, if no more than that were imported into
Great Britain, and of this glut foreigners, and purchasers on speculation also,
avail themselves. Besides, a great deal of the tobacco getting home late, the
rigorous season hinders its being re-shipped for some months, during which, it
is dead on hand, and moreover gives advantage to buyers.......a loss to the
planter, which would be avoided, if the tobacco could be immediately sent to
its proper market.

The above quoted author has computed the duties, excises, etc. on leather, at
50 per cent; and the artificial value of a bale of English cloth arising from
taxes, monopolies, and ill-judged laws, at 51 per cent, by which, he means that
every hundred pounds worth of that species of manufacture, includes in tha^ sum
51 l. of taxes. His computation is, without doubt, too low now, taxes having
been increased very considerably since the time, in which he wrote.

In the gross sum of the artificial value, he computed the amount of the taxes
to be full 31 per cent. Monopolies and ill-judg'd laws, therefore stand at 20
per cent. 51 per cent. A bale of English cloth costing L. 100 Includes an
artificial value of 51 per cent. The artificial value subtracted, leaves the
natural value 49 per cent.
But lest the estimate should be objected to on account of its including 20 per
cent for monopolies, etc. I will state the artificial value arising from taxes
only to be 33l. 6s. 8d. which will hardly be objected to, for being too high.

The colonies, it is supposed, take annually, manufactures from Great Britain,
to the amount of L. 2,000,000 Therefore they pay an ANNUAL TAX of L. 666,666 13
4 To which must be added freight, insurance, commission and shipping charges,
amounting at least to 10 per cent, the half of which, as it might be saved by
back-freight, etc. were the colonies permitted to import directly the
manufactures of foreign countries, is computed at 100,000 00 0 What may be the
amount from the restrictions, on all the enumerated commodities (except
tobacco) exported from all the colonie^, with subsidies retained and duties
laid, upon the most moderate computation, may, I suppose be be stated at
150,000 00 0 L.916,666 13 4

Part of the commodities sent from Great Britain to the colonies, is first
imported into Great Britain from foreign countries; but the estimate is not
exceptionable on that account, for the general calculation on the advanced
price of British manufactures, is extremely low. -- Several of the foreign
commodities receive their perfection in Britain....All of them are enhanced by
the articles of double freight, insurance, shipping, charges, the merchant
importer's commission, the English tradesman's profit, the merchant expo^ter's
commission, and subsidies retained. If the colonies were not restrained from
directly importing foreign commodities, they would it is presumed, pay less for
them, even by 50 per cent, than they do at present.

It has been already observed, that there are shipped from Virginia and
Maryland, annually, at an average about 90,000 hogsheads of tobacco, 60 000 of
which, or upwards, are re exported from Great Britain, to foreign markets; but
they pay to Great Britain, for the reasons above explained, 3l. per hogshead,
i. e. the sum of 3l. upon each hogshead might be saved if the tobacco might be
immediately and distributively sent to the respective markets, in proportion to
their demands; and an equal sum is paid also to Great^Britain, upon the same
rule of computation, i. e. that these colonies pa^ what they might save if not
restrained. For though the English manufacturer ^ets the tobacco he wants,
without the double freight, etc. ye^ (...) a^vantage of the glut, and an
opportunity of buying it as cheap, (...) sold in Gerat Britain for the foreign
markets, before the (...) double freight, etc. are incurred, and therefore the
planter (...) more for his toba^co sold for hom^, than that which is sold ^or
foreign consumption, and consequently pays as much for it. For there is great
reason to imagine, that if these colonies were at liberty to send their tobacco
immediately where they pleased, the market in England would be as profitable as
those of France, Holland, etc.....But when the tobacco, under the present
regulation, is purchased for re-exportation, the purchaser undoubtedly
considers the expense he is to be at, before it gets to the foreign market, as
part of the price of the commodity, and therefore lowers his price to the
merchant in proportion.

The above sum of 3l. for each hogshead, makes L. 270,000 00 0 The amount of
the sundry impositions and restrictions before mentioned brought forward,
916,666 13 4 Total amount of taxes to Great Britain 1,186,666 13 4 Besides the
above amount of taxes paid to the mother country, the colonies in North America
support their own civil establishments, and pay quit-rents to the crown and
proprietaries, to the amount (supposing 600,000 taxables, at the moderate rate
of 15s each) of 450,000 00 0 Total amount of taxes paid to our mother country,
and the support of our civil establishment, annually, 1,636,666 13 4 Supposing
the clear annual rents of the lands in North America, (unrestrained by acts of
parliament) would amount to L. 2,500,000

It appears then, that the whole tax is upwards of 65 per cent; and if,
therefore, the artificial value of one hundred pounds worth of British
manufacture, (cloth for instance) is, according to the above computation, 33 l.
6 s. 8 d. there was, before the stamp act, a tax paid by the North-Americans,
near double of that which is paid by the inhabitants of England. If the above
sum of 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. is too low, and ought to be increased, then the tax on
North America, on the article of manufactures imported from Britain, must also
be increased.

It should seem that the maxim of every tax upon labor falling ultimately upon
the consumer of its product, cannot be strictly applied to the product of the
North-American colonies. For, as they are obliged to send their commodities to
some port in the British dominions, or (where indulgence is granted to send
some of them to other places) deprived in great measure of the benefit of
returns, they are by these means subjected to dead freight; and moreover, being
confined in their consumption to a particular manufacture, and the commodities
they export, being chiefly raw materials, they have not the means generally in
the power of other people, by raising the price of labor, to throw their
burdens upon others; but are, for the most part, obliged, both in their
exports and imports, to submit to an arbitrary determination of their value.

The sanguine genius of one of the Anti-American writers, brings to my mind the
fable of the boy and the hen that laid golden eggs. He is not content to wait
for the increase of the public revenue, by that gradual process and circulation
of property, which an attention to the commercial interests of the nation has
established, but is a^ ^nce for tearing away the embryo, which, in due time
might be matured into fullness of size and vigor; without ever reflecting,
that when the hen is destroyed by his violence, there will be no more GOLDEN
EGGS.......The following passage justifies this observation........

If we have from the colonies their ALL already, we only have it (says he) by
trade, and not by taxes; and surely it is not the same thing, whether the
wealth be brought into the public coffers by taxes, or coming in by trade,
flows into the pockets of individuals, and, by augmenting his influence with
his wealth, enables the merchant to plunge us into new wars and new debts for
his advantage The objections to the taxations, etc. considered.
.

The man who thinks the gains of the merchant are dangerous, and that the
welfare of the manufacturers, the landholders, etc. does not depend upon the
trade and navigation of Great Britain, is very consistently an advocate for a
measure which has a direct tendency to check them; but whether this opinion,
and very consistent conduct, might not be more serviceable in some other
employment than in that of a L -- of T --, is submitted to their consideration,
who are the judges of merit, and the dispensers of its rewards.

For a reason, which the above opinion suggests, I shall subjoin an estimate of
the duties upon tobacco consumed in Great Britain, and of the profit to the
planter on that tobacco.......The intelligent reader will not apprehend it to
be my meaning, that the planter pays out of his pocket all the duties laid on
tobacco, or be at a loss to infer, that the estimate has been made with no
other view, than to obviate the principle others by their writings seem to
adopt.

The old subsidy is one penny per pound, 25 per cent deducted.

All the other duties are seven pence, and one third per pound, 15 per cent
deducted.

An hogshead of tobacco, at an average, contains 952lb.

The whole duties therefore, L. 27 14 0 The amount of the whole duties on
30,000 hogsheads, is L. 831,000 00 0

The full clear proceeds of an hogshead of tobacco, reckoning 952lb. in each
hogshead, has not, on an average for some years past, exceeded 4l. See before,
p. 52. The attentive reader will observe* that the net proceeds of a hogshead
of tobacco, at an average, are 4l. and the taxes 3l..... together 7l. -- Quere,
how much per cent does the tax amount to, which takes from the two wretched
tobacco colonies, 3l. out of every 7l.? And how deplorable must their
circumstances appear, when their vast debt to the mother country, and the
annual burden of their civil establishments are added to the estimate? In
these two colonies there are upwards of 180,000 taxables.
wherefore, on 30,000 hogsheads, the planters get 120,000l. How much of the
above sum of 831,000l. is net to the revenue, I shall not undertake to say; but
I presume it may be safely asserted, that no part of this, or any other public
money, is touched by any Americans, whether they have great po^ers of speech or
not; though any gentleman who might be affected by it, is not to be blamed for
his apprehension, that a sudden importation of a certain commodity, might hurt
the home market.

The sum of the taxes, paid in North America, will appear enormous to those,
who, having been told that these colonies pay only 7 or 800 l. per annum, in
consequence of taxes laid there, might be led, in their dependence upon
ministerial candor, to believe, that they paid no more elsewhere;......but to
others, who are better acquainted with the subject, the computation will appear
too low. -- From these observations it may be inferred what vast wealth, in
taxes only, the mother country has, in the course of a hundred years, drawn
from her colonies; and how profoundly well-informed the writer is, who, with
equal pertinency and modesty, pronounces, that it is now high time for England
to draw some little profit from her colonies, after the vast treasure she has
expended on their settlement.

I confess that the above computations are conjectural, but I believe ^hey are
probable. I mean that those, who are best acquanited with the subject, will
think the charge upon North America is not exaggerated, and which I think very
naturally accounts for the eno^mous debt she at present labors under to the
mother country.

Dr. Davenant observes, that, if ever any thing great or good be done for the
English colonies, industry must have its due recompense, and that cannot he
without encouragement to it, which, perhaps is only to be brought about by
confirming their liberties, and establishing good discipline among them; that,
as they see they are a free people, in point of government, so they may, by
discipline, be kept free of the mischiefs that follow vice and idleness. And,
as great care should be taken in this respect, so without doubt, it is
advisable, that no little emulation of private interests of neighbor
governors, nor that the petitions of hungry courtiers at home, should prevail
to discourage those particular colonies, who, in a few years, have raised
themselves by their own charge, prudence and industry, to the wealth and
greatness they are now arrived at, without any expense to the crown; upon which
account, any innovations, or breach of their original charters, (besides that
it seems a breach of the public faith) may, peradventure, not tend to the
king's profit. Excellent observation! but how little it has been regarded, the
prseent deeply-afflicting distress of the inhabitants of North America
demonstrates; -- a distress sufficient to drive men into despair, who are not
animated by the hope, that -- DEUS DABIT HIS QUOQUE FINEM. God shall also put
an End to these.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 11, line 2, for, or others; read, but to others.

Page 15, line 27, for, for; read, from.

Ibid -- line 31, for, subordinarion; read, subordination.

Page 17, line 36, for, don'; read, don't.

Page 27, line 29, for, intellego; read, intelligo.

Page 45, line 1, for, arricles; read, articles.


