Mr. Eliot's ELECTION-SERMON, May 29, 1765.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY FRANCIS BERNARD, ESQUIRE; GOVERNOR, THE
HONORABLE His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Of
the PROVINCE of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, MAY 29th 1765. BEING the
Anniversary for the ELECTION of HIS MAJESTY's COUNCIL for the PROVINCE.

BY ANDREW ELIOT, A. M. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY GREEN AND RUSSELL, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.

MDCCLXV.

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, May 30, 1765.
RESOLVED, That Mr. Cushing of Boston, Mr. Gray, and Judge Russell, be a
Committee to return the Thanks of this House to the Rev'd Mr. Andrew Eliot, for
his Sermon preached Yesterday before the General Court, being the Anniversary
Election of Counselors, and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. Roland Cotton, Cl. Dom. Rep.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
1 CHRONICLES. XII.32. And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them
were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their commandment.


ACCORDING to the original constitution of the Hebrew polity, "each tribe was
under it is own proper and distinct government; and ordered it is affairs by it is
own princes, heads of families, elders and courts". At the same time, there was
a union of all the tribes, the whole congregation had a right to meet together,
either personally or by their representatives, to consult the common good and
the prosperity of the whole.

After the death of Saul there seems to have been a breach in this general
union. The tribe of Judah set up David to be king, the other tribes adhered to
Ishbosheth the son of Saul. Ishbosheth being dead, the other tribes, sensible
how prejudicial such a disunion was to their common interest, by mutual consent
made David king over all Israel. This was done, it is like, by a convention of
the states from each province, or an assembly of the heads of each tribe.

David had long before I been anointed, by a special commission from God, to be
king of Israel. This was only an intimation from heaven of what would certainly
take place. Neither David nor Saul before him claimed any authority in virtue
of this divine appointment, until they were elected by the people, and solemnly
inaugurated in their high office.

Among others, who came to Hebron to make David king, were the children of
Issachar, who appeared by the heads of the tribe; of these it is particularly
said, they "were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel
ought to do, they were in number two hundred, and all their brethren were at
their commandment."

It is an excellent character that is given of the heads of Issachar, and it
was a singular favor to this tribe, that they had such a number who were able
to guide them at this critical season. -- You are told the good effect of their
wisdom and prudence, there was an entire union between them and the rest of the
community. They who were in government were possessed of talents which
qualified them for their trust, and their brethren were so satisfied of their
prudence and integrity, that they reposed an entire confidence in them, and
submitted to their authority without murmuring or opposition.

You have here the model of a happy, state: What a prospect of peace and
lasting prosperity, where rulers are wise and good, and the people are quiet
and submissive!

What I propose in the following discourse is,

First, To consider the character of a good ruler as it is drawn in the text.
And then,

Secondly, To point out the duty of subjects to their rulers.

The first thing that presents itself to our consideration, is the character of
a good ruler. And in order to determine when men are qualified to govern, it is
necessary to take a general view of the great end of government.

It is not to be supposed that mankind would resign their natural freedom only
for the sake of pomp and appearance, much less to gratify the pride and avarice
of those they place in authority over them. The only rational view they can
have is the common good. If men could subsist as well in a state of
independency and absolute liberty, there is nothing in reason or conscience to
oblige them to subjection. The necessity of government arises wholly from the
disadvantages, which, in the present imperfect state of human nature, would be
the natural consequence of unlimited freedom. This necessity is so apparent
that the most savage and barbarous of mankind have been convinced of it; and
wherever they have formed themselves into society, have erected some kind of
government. In this sense all power is from God, as that constitution, which
makes government necessary, originates with him who is the author of nature;
and such a constitution is as certain an intimation of the divine will, as an
express revelation. There is no positive appointment or command; we argue the
design of heaven that there should be civil government, because it is
apparently for the advantage of mankind. "He is the minister of God to thee for
good".

If the public good is the great, the only end of magistracy; it follows that
they only are worthy to be entrusted with the powers of government, who know
what the public interest is, and are capable of advancing it. The heads of
every community should, like the heads of Issachar, "have understanding of the
times, to know what Israel ought to do".

This character supposes, that rulers have a good degree of wisdom and knowledge
-- That they are particularly acquainted with the constitution of the country
they are called to govern -- That they are men of virtue and religion -- And
that they have prudence to conduct affairs in seasons that are critical and
alarming.

First. Wisdom and knowledge are very necessary qualifications of a public
ruler. The ends of government will not be answered by committing the
administration of affairs to one or more men, but by committing it to those who
are capable of discharging the trust reposed in them. The meanest office
requires talents suited to that office, but when men are put in places of
extensive authority, they ought to have extensive abilities.

Wisdom and knowledge are so necessary for every one who has a share in
government, that nothing can supply their place. The experience of all ages
evidences the justice of that exclamation of king Solomon. "Woe to thee, O land,
when thy king is a child!" If weak or ignorant men are entrusted with power,
what can you expect but universal confusion! If men were not wise before, they
are not like to become wise by being placed in a station of eminence. Such
exaltation will rather make them giddy and vain, and deprive them of the little
understanding they had before.

If such magistrates mean ever so well, yet they know not how to execute their
good purposes, and their administration is like to be a series of the most
fatal errors. If they depend on others to manage the affairs of government, the
event will not be better. Men of weak minds can seldom bear the checks and
counsels of plain honest men, who know not how to disguise the truth, or to
speak that which they do not think in their hearts. Parasites and flatterers
easily gain their favor, who will sooth their vanity, and accommodate
themselves to their foibles. And the state of such a people is often worse than
where rulers are men of capacity, even though they are very deficient in their
principles of action.

Bad men who can look to consequences are often under the restraint of fear,
where they have no other. They are aware of danger from the resentment of an
injured people, if they abuse their power. But men without knowledge are devoid
of such fears; and they who have the management of them endeavor artfully to
conceal their own share in the public misconduct, and make use of the power
with which they are vested to gratify their base and sordid passions, to the
ruin of the community, and often of those who vested them with it.

It is not every kind of genius or of knowledge that qualifies a man to govern.
Many a one has made a shining figure as a philosopher or mathematician, who has
had no turn for politics, and been entirely ignorant of the art of governing.
It is frequently the case, that great scholars have no acquaintance with men,
than which no branch of knowledge is of greater importance in a public ruler. It
is necessary to know the various tempers of those he has to govern, to
penetrate their particular views and interests, and even their foibles and
passions, that he may make them all subservient to the public good. It is
necessary to discern their different talents and cacities, that he may know
whom to put into places of profit and trust, and may employ those who are fit
to be employed.

Is a ruler called to act the part of a legislator? What need of a sound and
exact judgment, that the laws he makes may be good and wholesome, accommodated
to the temper and circumstances of the people for whom they are made; and that
while he endeavors to restrain vice and licentiousness, he may not unreasonably
infringe the liberties of the community?

When laws are made, it requires no small degree of understanding and of study
to enter into their true spirit, to know how to apply them in every case that
occurs, and to execute them with prudence and impartiality.

Where government subsists, there must necessarily be burdens laid on the
people to defray the charges of it. There is nothing that affects men more than
when you touch their interest; people in general find it hard to procure the
conveniences of life; nothing will sooner alienate their minds from
government, than when rulers needlessly deprive them of that which they have
dearly earned, and wantonly dissipate the public treasures. Rulers ought ever
to proceed in this part of their duty with caution and prudence, that people
may see the taxes they impose are not to gratify their pride, their avarice, or
any other passion; not to carry on any private design; but that they are
necessary for the support of government and the exigencies of the state.

Every large community is constituted of a number of little societies, in which
there will be different branches of business. These, whatever pains are taken
to prevent it, will have their different connections, and form separate
interests; it is vastly difficult for those who govern, to keep the balance so
exactly poised that neither part may be injured; but much more, to prevent
jealousies and suspicions that things are carried by favor and affection.

The rulers of a people are seldom so happy as to please all who are under
their authority: They have often personal enemies; or crafty and ambitious men
find fault with government because they are not in place: They had need be wise
as serpents as well as harmless as doves to counterwork the machinations of
such men, to give no occasion of offense to those who seek occasion, or to
prevent the bad effect of the misrepresentations they will industriously spread.

Almost every state has it is neighbors, who watch for a favorable opportunity
to encroach on it is territories, or to gain some other advantage. A ruler ought
to keep a watchful eye over them, to get knowledge of their motions and designs;
to prevent insult, or to resent it when offered. In these cases there is need
of a thoro' acquaintance both with their strength and our own; that we may not
by an ill-timed opposition expose ourselves to greater injuries, or by mean
submissions encourage them to despise and abuse us.

A ruler who suitably attends to the great end of government must look beyond
present circumstances, and carefully consider the tendency and conference of
every measure. He cannot but be sensible how much the present times are
affected by the transactions that are past, and the precedents that have been
established. He will doubtless see that the community has received hurt from
the mistakes, as well as advantage from the prudence of those who have gone
before. He bears on his mind, that his administration is like equally to affect
those that follow, and endeavors to take the whole interest of his country in
view, the future as well as the present. He consults the good of distant
generations, leaves as little as possible for them to correct, and as far as
human wisdom can, lays his plans, not merely to keep things quiet while he is
on the stage, but that the happiness of his country may be of long duration,
may be perpetual.

You easily see by these hints of the business and duty of rulers, that every
man is not fit to govern; there must be a genius for government, and there must
be constant study and application.

I have hitherto considered the wisdom and knowledge which are necessary for
rulers in general, and under almost every constitution. Besides this,

Secondly, It is necessary they should have a particular acquaintance with the
constitution of the country they are called to govern.

Reason we say dictates that there should be government; and the voice of
reason is the voice of God. But what form of government they will be under is
left to the choice of those who are to be governed. God has never determined
this. It becomes those who claim a divine indefeasible right, to make out their
claim in a better manner than they have ever yet done, or it is absurd to
suppose any, who have common understanding, or a tolerable sense of liberty,
will submit to it.

All power has it is foundation in compact and mutual consent, or else it
proceeds from fraud or violence. Where the latter take place, the dominion
which men claim is no better than usurpation; and they, who by these methods
raise themselves above their brethren, are so far from having a right to
govern, that they ought to be punished as public disturbers and the enemies of
mankind.

When government is founded in mutual consent, it is the undoubted right of the
community to say who shall govern them; and to make what limitations or
conditions they think proper. Perhaps the same constitution is not best for all
societies, or for the same society at all times. Be this as it may; it is very
certain that mankind have established different forms of government, according
to their own will and inclination: "Some have set up one or a few men to govern
them, others have seen fit to retain the power themselves: -- In some the
supreme magistrates have been annually elected; in others the power is for
life. In some they are merely elective, in others hereditary under certain
rules or limitations". In GREAT BRITAIN there is a happy mixture of monarchy,
aristocracy, and democracy. This is perhaps the most perfect form of civil
government. It is the glory of Britons and the envy of foreigners. Is not
England at present a proof of the goodness of mixed governments and temperate
monarchies? Is there a nation, every thing considered, which enjoys more
prosperity at home, or more renown abroad?

BURLEMAQUI. We hope the great MONTESQUIEU is mistaken, at least that he speaks
of a very distant day, when he says of our happy nation.

"As all human things have an end, the state we are speaking of will lose it is
liberty, will perish. Have not Rome, Sparta, and Carthage perished? It will
perish when the legislative power shall be more corrupt than the executive."

Spirit of Laws.


But whatever form of civil government men have chose, there are certain
constitutions, which are the basis and foundation of the state, and which are
obligatory on those who govern, as well as those who are governed. These
constitutions are a sort of fundamental laws, which cannot be violated without
the greatest danger to a community. When either part attempts to invade the
rights of the other, it usually produces convulsions, which sooner or later
overturn the state.

It is necessary they who are in authority should be well acquainted with these
fundamental laws; they ought to make them one main part of their study; and
should not without the utmost necessity depart from them. If such a strict
adherence to the constitution is sometimes attended with inconveniences; yet a
departure from it will be attended with much greater. Magistrates ought to know
their own power, and not tamely give up those prerogatives with which the
constitution has vested them. Such mean condescension will only expose them to
contempt and further encroachments, till not even a shadow of authority is
left. On the other hand, they ought to be tender of the privileges of those
they govern. Even in absolute monarchies, the people may by oppression and
tyranny come to know that they have rights, and to assert them in a way not
very pleasing to those, who have insolently and unjustly invaded them.

In free governments people are apt to feel much quicker. To touch their
liberties is to touch the apple of their eye; every attempt alarms them, makes
them jealous of further designs, and often throws them into the hands of
factious demagogues, who hate government, and are ever watching for
opportunities to embarrass public measures, and to introduce anarchy and
confusion.

Where so much depends, and the danger of acting wrong is like to have such
consequences to the community, and perhaps to themselves; rulers ought to know
very well what it is to act right, where power ends and liberty begins. The
more difficult it is to settle this point, so much the more wisdom and prudence
do rulers need, and so much the more cautious should they be in acting; and
where people observe such caution and tenderness in their rulers, they will
make allowances for mistakes, and even for faults.

I will not say, that they who are in government may not propose an alteration
in the constitution, when they see manifest inconveniences; every member of
the state may do this; and there may be extraordinary cases wherein it may be
necessary to deviate from common rules; in such cases the safety of the people
is to be preferred to every other consideration. But no wise ruler would desire
a general power of dispensing with the laws; nor is it possible to proceed with
too much caution in making any great alteration in the civil constitution of a
state; especially when it has been long established, and the wisdom of ages has
been employed to confirm it. Where there seem to be defects, there medy may
often prove worse than the disease; and by attempting to guard against one
inconvenience, we may open the way to a great many which we do not now foresee.
When a constitution is essentially bad, rulers and every one else ought to run
every risque to make it better. But where the constitution is tolerably good,
it is generally the wisdom of those in power, to maintain a sacred regard to it
themselves; and to endeavor that it may not be violated by others. This is
their safety, and very often the safety of those they govern. When a humor of
changing once begins, no mortal can tell where it will end. One can scarce
conceive of an alteration more just, more necessary, and that could tend more
to secure the public liberty, than the establishment of tribunes at Rome; and
yet this very regulation, seemingly so wise and good, laid the foundation of
the destruction of their liberties, and the ruin of the commonwealth. "The
people by means of the tribunes, gradually usurped the authority of the senate.
From that time discipline was relaxed and gave place to licenciousness. At last
the republic was, by the hands of the people, reduced to the greatest slavery.
BURLEMAQUI.


Thirdly, Rulers cannot come up to the character of the text, unless they are
men of religion and virtue. Every condition has its temptations, none are
exposed to more or greater, than those who are advanced to stations of power
and eminence; none have greater need of a settled principle of action, and the
assistance of divine grace. If there is no regard to God or the rules of
virtue, wisdom degenerates into cunning, and rulers instead of endeavoring to
know what Israel ought to do, only consider what they have to do themselves;
instead of aiming at the public good, they consult only what is like to promote
their own private interest, support their administration, and continue them in
power. The selfish passions will have the dominion; and men will sacrifice
conscience, and fell their country, to carry a favorite point, or gratify
their vicious inclinations. The interest of such rulers, or what they imagine
to be their interest, presently becomes separate from that of the community; of
consequence they are obliged to make use of every art, to keep the people
quiet; to make them insensible of their infelicity, or to compel them to bear
it; to put a false gloss on their flagitious actions, or to secure a powerful
party, who will support their measures, and be the instruments of their
iniquity. They will choose those for their companions and counselors, who will
flatter their vanity, feed their avarice, or provide for their pleasures. These
are the men they will endeavor to promote; whilst they disregard persons of a
different character, who feel for their country, and have courage to oppose
those measures which tend to destroy it. Vice contracts the mind, and quenches
every spark of public spirit; it fills the soul with criminal prejudices, and
the higher it is exalted, the mischief is so much the more extensive.

The case is quite different when power is in the hands of men of virtue and
religion.

By religion I intend something more than an external show, or a mere
appearance of goodness. Hypocrisy is not only a character most detestable to
God, but it makes a man more extensively mischievous to society. His
sanctimonious pretenses procure him the esteem and confidence of his brethren,
by which means he has it in his power to deceive them, and to betray their
interests. No consideration can be of force sufficient to bind him, who dares
to prevaricate with heaven, and to trifle with the Lord his maker. The greatest
prodigies of wickedness have been those who have put on the guise of religion:
For a pretense they have made long prayers, that they might, with the greater
ease, accomplish their detestable designs. Nor do I call it religion to contend
for a few little rites and ceremonies, which are of no importance in
themselves, and will not make men either wiser or better. It does not consist
in nice metaphysical distinctions, and in loud and cruel anathemas against all
who will not profess to believe them. Much less is it religion to invade the
rights of conscience, and to inflict pains and penalties on those who are not
of the magistrates sentiments, or presume to dissent from the principles
established by law. On the other hand, no one can imagine there is any religion
in a careless indifference about all principles; or in clamors for charity and
forbearance, while malice reigns in the heart, and we can censure, revile and
persecute those whom we esteem less catholic than ourselves.

I call that religion which Jesus Christ taught, and which is made known to us
in the sacred oracles. It is a belief of the truth, and a temper of mind
correspondent to it.

A religious man, or which is now the same thing, a sincere christian, is
purified in some measure from those corrupt principles, which too easily find a
place in the human heart, and is deeply penetrated with the things of God. He
has a supreme affection to this greatest and best of beings, and maintains a
constant regard to him in all his actions. He remembers the divine presence and
the account every one must give to this Lord and judge of all. He heartily
submits to Christ as his prince and savior: He has some degree of that mind
which was in Christ Jesus: He desires to approve himself to him, and is
animated by those glorious prospects which the gospel opens to our view.

The religion of Jesus enlarges the mind; it divests us, so far as it prevails,
of every criminal prejudice; it makes us willing to deny ourselves, to
sacrifice our worldly ease, our temporal interest* to the honor of God and the
good of men. It fortifies against temptation, it curbs our passions, it
regulates our desires, it produces noble and generous sentiments, it inspires
love and universal benevolence; it teaches us to look not every one on his own
things, but on the things of others; not to confine our charity to ourselves,
but to do good to all with whom we are connected, and especially to aim at the
public advantage, in which the comfort and happiness of multitudes are involved.

This christian temper, which is produced by the Spirit of God, will more than
any thing help us to distinguish between right and wrong; when private
interests and private views are removed, "the public good appears naked and
open, free from all difficulties and embarrassments". When rulers have such a
happy disposition, they will study the true interest of those they govern,
which is the way to understand it; they will watch against a little party
spirit and every selfish sinister view; they will suppress the dictates of
pride, covetousness, and ambition; and while with a manly firmness they support
their own dignity. they will not invade the privileges of those who are subject
to them; they will not hearken to the insinuations of flattery, nor meanly
court the favor of the populace; they will not have respect to persons, nor
take a gift; and will severely frown on those, who have the insolence to
affront their virtue, or attempt to pervert their judgment. No motive, no
temptation will allure them to join in making bad laws, or to wrest the true
intention of those that are in force. Their whole ambition will be to discharge
their trust with fidelity, and to make the people happy who are under their
care.

I own there are other principles which may have very salutary effects. There
is in some men a certain benevolence and greatness of mind, which leads them to
do many worthy deeds, that others perform from a principle of religion. There
are remains of conscience in men, who cannot be denominated sincere disciples
of Jesus Christ. Even their ambition and self-interest may prompt men to
actions which are greatly beneficial to the community, and to discharge the
trust reposed in them with honor and fortitude. But the better the principle,
so much the greater, at least so much the more certain will be the effect. When
the love and fear of God reign in the heart, men will rise to nobler heights,
and to more distinguished acts of virtue, than from any other motive. When they
consider the whole community as brethren, they will naturally seek the common
good. When they set before them the example of our blessed Savior, when they
contemplate his ardent love to mankind and disinterested benevolence, their
minds will be inflamed with a holy ambition, to emulate the virtues of this
amiable, this excellent person. When the greatest men carry their thoughts to
that important hour, when they must leave these transitory scenes, and their
honors will be laid in the dust, how sollicitous will they be that they may
finish well, and have the approbation of their own minds, when they have
nothing else to support them! When they look forward to that illustrious day,
in which the Lord will be revealed from heaven, and the great as well as the
small must stand before his tribunal; what a check is this to every sinister
view and every iniquitous practice! What an incentive to justice, to integrity
and universal virtue! If other qualities may render a ruler useful to society,
yet surely nothing but religion, a regard to God in his public conduct, will
ensure him the acceptance of heaven, and the plaudit of the great ruler and
judge of all.

I am far from supposing that religion is the only thing to be regarded in a
ruler. The most religious character will appear contemptible in a public
station, if there are not other accomplishments: But whatever qualities a man
has, it can by no means be safe, to entrust our lives, our estates, our
liberties, every thing that is dear and valuable, to one who evidences by his
conversation, that he has no regard to God, and is destitute of virtue and
goodness. What can we expect, but that he, who will sacrifice his own most
important interest, will sacrifice the interests of others, if at any time they
are opposite to his vicious inclinations?

Fourthly, Another accomplishment very necessary for a good ruler, is prudence
to conduct affairs in seasons that are critical and alarming. Such a season it
was in Israel when Ishbosheth was slain. And then it was that the heads of
Issachar discovered their understanding and address, by conducting with such
prudence as to still every opposite faction, and bring their brethren quietly
to submit to king David, which was the only expedient to save the kingdom from
ruin. Affairs in a kingdom or in a province are sometimes brought to a
dangerous and important crisis, from foreign enemies or internal tumults; from
the mistakes of those who wish them well, or the intrigues of designing men;
from their own vices and follies, or the wickedness of others. In such a
critical situation, the friends of a people are called to arise, and to exert
themselves to save them from impending ruin. This matter especially belongs to
those who are in authority, the eyes of others are naturally to them, under
that God who has the hearts of all men in his hand; from them they expect
relief; and happy the people, whose rulers have at such time wisdom to discern,
and virtue to pursue those measures, that tend to promote their welfare, and to
prolong their tranquillity.

A state cannot be sunk so low as to exclude all possibility of emerging and
again flourishing. There have been so many instances of the interposition of
heaven, in times of the greatest extremity, that it is unreasonable to despair,
when there are the most threatening aspects. Rome was scarce ever in so
dangerous a situation as after the battle of Cannae. Their army was
annihilated, their allies forsook them, and they every moment expected the
victorious Hannibal at their gates. But at this very time, when there seemed to
be no resource, these noble republicans were so far from giving up all as lost,
that, says the historian, no one dared so much as to mention peace: They even
returned thanks to the consul whose temerity had reduced them to the brink of
ruin, that he had not despaired of the commonwealth. Nec tamen hae clades
defectionesque sociorum moverunt, ut pacis unquam mentio apud Romanos fieret;
neque ante consulis Romam adventum, nec postquam is rediit renovavitque
memoriam acceptae cladis. Quo in tempore ipso, adeo magno animo civitas fuit,
ut cousuli ex tanta clade, ^^jus ipse causa maxima fuit, redeunti, et obviam
itum frequenter ab omnibus ordinibus sit, et gratiae actae, quod de republica
non desperasset; cui, si Carthaginiensium ductor fuisset, nihil recusandum
supplicii foret. LIVE. Lib. xxii. cap. lxi.
By such magnanimity they rose out of adversity Dixitque tandem perfidus
Annibal --
Gens quae cremata fortis ab Ilio,
Jactata Tuscis aequoribus sacra,
Natosque maturosque patres
Pertulit Ausonias ad urbes;
Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus
Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido,
Per damna, per coedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes animumque ferro.
HOR.
, retrieved their losses, made themselves terrible to their neighbors, and
laid a foundation for that astonishing grandeur to which they afterward arrived.

Nothing is so like to make our case desperate as to conclude it is so: This
stops the springs of action, prevents all attempts to extricate ourselves out
of difficulties, and to recover the community. Those of superior character
ought to have superior steadiness, instead of determining that nothing can be
done, they ought to enquire what is to be done; what they can do themselves,
and what Israel ought to do. Some men are very happy in finding out expedients
in the most difficult cases; they know how to steer in the most tempestuous
times; are able to counterwork those who secretly endeavor to undermine the
state, or to give them a just view of things, who are in danger of doing hurt
for want of better information; to remove every unreasonable prejudice in the
mind of those, who have power to injure us; or to govern our tempers, and
regulate our passions, that we may not destroy ourselves. This is a talent very
different from that wisdom which is profitable to direct in a common state of
things. A man may be a good pilot in a moderate gale, who can do nothing in a
storm. Some men who would make very good rulers in a time of prosperity, are
quite unfit to lead in times that are intricate and perplexed. They lose the
possession of themselves; they are timorous and irresolute, and so neglect to
do what ought to be done; or they are rash and violent, and by their imprudence
precipitate the ruin they intend to prevent. It is of the greatest importance
that rulers have understanding of the times in such critical seasons. While
others are hurried by their fears and passions, and know not what to do, they
ought sedately to consider the tendency and consequences of present events, and
should endeavor to guide into measures, that will be most likely to prevent the
evils that are feared, or to make them tolerable if they must come.

There is one course, which if it will not be a certain cure, will yet be a
great relief in the most dangerous state we can be in; and that is the practice
of piety and universal virtue. Virtue does in itself tend to promote public
happiness. Frugality, temperance, industry will extricate us out of most
difficulties that can arise; and if we are actuated by religion, God will be
our God, our protector, and friend; "it will be well with us and our children
for ever." Whatever he does else, if a ruler has understanding in the times, he
will promote the fear of God and obedience to his laws.

I have now considered some of the distinguishing qualities of a good ruler. It
is not to be expected, in the present imperfect state, that rulers will be free
from mistakes or faults; whoever looks for such a behavior from any man or
from any set of men, will undoubtedly be disappointed. But though you may not
expect a perfect character, yet the great author of nature, whose tender
mercies are over all his works, "has thought fit to mingle from time to time
among the societies of men, a few of those on whom he is graciously pleased to
bestow a larger proportion of understanding and integrity, than is given in the
ordinary course of his providence to the sons of men. There are superior
spirits, men who are born to guide, to instruct, and to preserve"; their
abilities and their virtues denote that they were formed for the public good,
and it would be a fault not to improve those talents, with which the great Lord
of all has entrusted them. They ought not to let slip any opportunity that
presents to serve their country, or to do good to mankind.

There are indeed arts and intrigues, by which some men intrude themselves into
stations of dignity, which are below one of a great and generous mind, and
which no consideration will persuade him to make use of. But to say that men
ought always to avoid such stations through a modest diffidence of their own
abilities; or that a people ought to reject those, who discover a willingness
to be employed, is to carry the matter much too far; and a correspondent
practice might have very bad effects. It might deprive societies of the best
heads and hearts, and leave them a prey to crafty and ambitious men, whose only
care would be to aggrandize and enrich themselves. A true patriot cannot do his
country a more important service, than by taking it out of the hands of such
devouring harpies. Conscious of his own superiority, and a generous regard to
the public good, he ought to despise the little reflections of those who are
only uneasy because they are not in place, and cannot accomplish their base
designs. The history of Rome scarce affords a more illustrious character than
that of Fabius Maximus. This great man, having finished the year of his
consulate, when Rome was engaged in dangerous wars, found that the suffrages
for a new consul were like to be in favor of one, who was quite raw and
inexperienced. He stopped their proceedings, set before the electors the danger
of such a choice at such a time, and drew a character of the person they ought
to choose, which they could apply to none but himself; the assembly was
convinced, recalled their votes, and unanimously elected him. Such was the
exigency of affairs, says the historian, Tempos ac necessitas belli, ac
discrimen summae rerum faciebant, nequis aut in exemplum exquireret, aut
suspectum cupiditatis imperii consulem haberet, quin laudabant potius
magnitudinem animi, quod quum summo imperatore esse opus republicae sciret,
seque eum haud dubie esse; minoris invidiam suam, siqua ex re oriretur, quam
utilitatem reipublicae fecisset. LIVE. Lib. xxiv. cap. ix.
that no one attended to the danger of the precedent, or had the least
suspicion that the consul was actuated by a lust of dominion, but all rather
extolled his greatness of mind, that when he knew the commonwealth stood in
need of it is greatest commander, and that he was without exception the man, he
would rather run the hazard of the most invidious reflections, than miss an
opportunity of serving his country.

It is however much more agreeable to a generous mind, to be called out by
others to public service, than in any sort to offer himself: And a people who
have any regard to their own safety, will endeavor to find out merit where ever
it is hid, and to confer their honors on those who know how to improve them.

So far indeed, as government is by the constitution hereditary, a people are
obliged to submit to the disposals of providence, and to pay homage to the
lawful heir, whether his abilities are great or small: And in large
communities, the advantage of hereditary monarchy is generally sufficient to
balance every inconvenience; and where it is not, it is in their own power to
do themselves justice, as they have generally done sooner or later. Witness
among other instances, the glorious revolution in BRITAIN, to which noble
exertion of national virtue, we owe the preservation of our liberty, and the
present happy establishment of the house of HANOVER.

When a people immediately appoint their own rulers, they are to the last
degree infatuated, if they fix on those, who are not capable of seeing with
their own eyes, but are obliged to move by the direction of others, or who get
into power to gratify their vanity, their luxury, or their avarice; and it
requires no spirit of prophecy to foresee, that a community who are so lost to
public virtue, are nigh to destruction. A people may be deceived, they may be
betrayed, by men in whom they put confidence. But they deserve to be abandoned
by providence, if they trust their interest with men, whom they know to be
either weak or wicked.

I am in the second place to speak of the duty of subjects to their rulers; and
the illustrating this will show, at the same time, the happy influence which
good government is like to have on the communinity. "The heads of Issachar were
men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, and
all their brethren were at their commandment."

The duty of rulers and subjects is mutual; rulers ought to love their people
and to seek their welfare; and the people on their part, ought to be subject;
to the higher powers, to obey magistrates, and to submit to their lawful
commands, both are necessary to the public happiness. If people will not submit
to those who are placed over them, there is an end of government, and to all
the happy purposes for which it was instituted; the whole is thrown into a
state of anarchy and confusion, which will soon terminate in the other extreme,
tyranny and oppression. Submission to authority is supposed in the very nature
of government, it is founded in the highest reason; without it, the most
perfect virtue in rulers will not answer any valuable end.

Obedience to rulers is a matter of so much importance, that our Savior and
his apostles, who meddled very little with the kingdoms of this world, thought
it necessary to enjoin it on christians. Render says our Lord, to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's Matt. xxii.21.
Let every soul, says St. Paul, Romans xiii.1.2.
be subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the power, resists
the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. St. Peter directs, 1 Pet. ii.13, 14, 15.
submit yourselves to every human constitution for the Lord's sake; whether it
be to the king as supreme; or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well;
for so is the will of God. From such passages as these, some have argued the
doctrine of passive obedience and nonresistance in all cases whatsoever; or
that we are not to oppose those who are in authority, although they evidently
act contrary to the design of their institution, and are bent to ruin the
society, which it is their duty to defend and promote. A doctrine so big with
absurdity, that one would think no one of common understanding could embrace
it; certainly he must have the temper of a slave that can practice upon it. St.
Paul very plainly teaches us how far subjection is due to a civil magistrate,
when he gives it as a reason for this subjection, for he is the minister of God
to thee for good Romans xiii.4.
. The end for which God has placed men in authority is, that they may promote
the public happiness: When they improve their power to contrary purposes, when
they endeavor to subvert the constitution, and to enslave a free people, they
are no longer the ministers of God; they do not act by his authority; if we are
obliged to be subject, it is only for wrath and not for conscience sake, and
they who support such rulers betray their country, and deserve the misery they
bring on themselves. Happy would it be if it was confined to them!

I am sensible, it is difficult to state this point with precision; to
determine where submission ends and resistance may lawfully take place, so as
not to leave room for men of bad minds unreasonably to oppose government, and
to destroy the peace of society. Most certainly people ought to bear much,
before they engage in any attempts against those who are in authority; they
ought to consider their rulers as frail and fallible men, who are liable to
mistakes and faults, when their general aim is good and right; they should
overlook their errors, and even their vices, if they are not such as tend
directly to overturn the state, and to bring distress and ruin on the whole
community. Better a particular person, yea many individuals should suffer, than
to encourage civil broils and a public disturbance.

When rulers are wise and good, opposition is an high crime; men ought not to
make their own jealousies, resentments, or private interest, a pretense for
resisting authority, or to stir up factions and seditions against their rulers.
Such men will be the faulty causes of the evils that follow, and will have an
awful account to give at the bar of God; whosoever resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

Men of such perverse and turbulent minds may possibly, by dark intrigues and
false insinuations, raise suspicions of evil designs, and of schemes that never
entered into any one's head but their own; and as rulers are imperfect, they
may find opportunities from, their mistakes, to fill the minds of people with
prejudices and uneasiness; they may possibly prevail to raise tumults and
disturbances; but very often they fall into the pit they dug for others; God
in his providence brings to light their dark designs, and they become the
objects of universal contempt and abhorrence.

People are generally capable of knowing when they are well used. Public
happiness is easily felt. Men cannot but perceive, when they enjoy their rights
and privileges; when they sit at quiet under their own vines and fig trees, and
there is none to make them afraid; when the laws of the land have their course,
and justice is impartially administered; when no unreasonable burdens are laid
upon them; when their rulers are ready to hear their complaints and to redress
their wrongs; when they treat them with condescension, tenderness and
affection; when they sympathise with them under their difficulties, and like
their great master are afflicted in all their afflictions. Such a temper and
conduct in rulers are easily perceived without any extraordinary penetration.

It is not without design, that the sacred historian speaks of the heads of
Issachar and the rest of the tribe as brethren; and this suggests a good reason
for their so ready subjection, and all their brethren were at their
commandment. When a people perceive, that they who have power in their hands
still treat them as brethren, as partaking of the same common nature, and as
having a right to their liberty and property; they will have a reciprocal
affection to their rulers, they will be loath to grieve and offend them, they
will be quiet and peaceable, and will do what they can, to render their
administration easy, who improve their power only to make them happy. If at any
time the people clamor and find fault, as they sometimes do under the best
government, in consequence of real or imaginary misconduct, or when heavy
burdens are laid upon them, they soon recover their temper, they forget the
faults of their rulers, they remember only their good deeds, and there is
danger that to make amends for their past mistakes, they will run mad with
loyalty and submission.

Rulers have so many ways of keeping up their influence, that it is not easy to
effect a general opposition, even where they have the most pernicious designs.
A good ruler is almost sure of love and esteem, of submission and obedience.
"Men love their happiness too well to destroy and ruin it, by opposing those
from whom they know it is derived to them." Experience shows, that if they, who
are vested with power, have but a moderate share of public virtue, they are
admired and honored while they live, and their memory is blessed long after
they are dead. Rulers therefore always have it in their power, to secure the
people in their interest, and to gain a place in their hearts. By attending to
their duty, they will promote the happiness of the people, and at the same time
fix their own authority. If the heads of a community have understanding of the
times to know what Israel ought to do, they will be like to have all their
brethren at their commandment. But where men are grossly of a contrary
character, and pervert their power to tyrannical purposes; submission, if it
can be avoided, is so far from being a duty, that it is a crime. It is an
offense against the state of which we are members, and whose happiness we ought
to prefer to our chief joy. It is an offense against mankind, whose rights we
meanly betray. It is an offense against God, who is good to all, and who has
appointed government for the welfare and happiness, and not the destruction of
his creatures.

How happy is GREAT BRITAIN in a Prince, who accounts it his glory to reign
over a free people, and who, we trust, will always make the laws of the land
the rule of his administration! How still more happy, in a constitution that
scarce admits of tyranny, unless the people themselves become corrupt and
venal; and when that is the case, nothing but omnipotence can save them!

It is the safety of the British nation that it is monarchy is hereditary, as
that right is now understood. It is a favor of heaven, that our lawful
Sovereign is possessed of virtues, which ensure him the love and obedience of
his subjects. Because the Lord has loved his people he has made thee king
over them. May that kind providence, which has so often appeared for our
nation, still watch over it for good; disappoint every attempt to subvert their
liberties, and preserve them from those internal vices and corruptions, which
they have more reason to fear than any foreign enemy, or open violence!

The form of government in this province is a little model of the British
constitation. Our commander in chief, who represents the King, is not elected
by ourselves. We do not complain of this as an infringement of our liberties,
it rather frees us from many inconveniences, which would attend frequent
popular elections. Especially may we esteem it a privilege, while we have a
Gentleman at our head, who so well understands our civil constitution, and who,
we persuade ourselves, sincerely aims at the happiness of the people he is
appointed to govern. May his Excellency's services for the public always find
acceptance with an obliged and grateful people! and may he have the approbation
of his great Lord, when he gives an account of the talents committed to him!

The other branches of our legislature are chose by ourselves. It refreshes our
hearts to see the return of this anniversary, and we hope fills them with
thankfulness to God. The presence of our General Assembly, and the business of
this day, put us in mind of the liberties we enjoy, while more than nine-tenths
of mankind are in the most abject slavery, and multitudes of them, to the
basest and worst of the human race. We conclude it is from the experience their
constituents have had of their wisdom and integrity, that so many are returned
to serve in the present assembly, who have formerly had a seat there. We cannot
think this people are yet so corrupt, as generally to be influenced in their
elections by other considerations. We trust that they, whom they have honored
with this mark of their confidence, will have a sacred regard to their
interest, and will not suffer any sinister views to bias or govern them.

One of our valuable charter privileges is this day to be exercised. A
privilege, to which it is owing, that the province has of her sons at the
council board; men who naturally care for our state, and who are deeply
interested in the consequences of every public measure. God grant that this
privilege may never be wrested from us! One way to prevent so fatal an event,
is to make a wise use of this important trust, to choose out of all the people
able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; who understand
our interest, and have virtue to pursue it. If our present Counselors are such
men, their experience in public business will doubtless give them a great
advantage.

Wisdom and integrity are always necessary to constitute a good ruler; but when
the state of a people is perplexed and difficult, it requires more attention,
and a greater exertion of abilities; and by their prudence and steadiness at
such times, rulers make it evident, that they are qualified for the trust
reposed in them. Such a critical season, if I mistake not, is the present; and
I cannot easily be mistaken, when all orders of men are so generally alarmed,
in this and the other colonies, and apprehend their most valuable privileges in
danger.

I am far from impeaching the justice of the British Parliament. If any acts
have passed that seem hard on the colonies, we ought to suppose, they are not
owing to any design formed against them, but to mistakes and
misrepresentations. -- To you, our honored rulers, it belongs to rectify such
mistakes, in such ways as you shall think decent and proper.

Our fathers dearly bought the privileges we enjoy. It is evident, when they
left their native land, they thought the rights of Englishmen would follow them
wherever they sat down, and be transmitted to their posterity; and we hope
their posterity have done nothing to forfeit them. It was kindly and justly
said by Bishop Burnet to a New England agent, as I find it delivered before his
excellent Son and the General Assembly of this province Mr. Prince's Sermon
preached before Governor Burnet and the General Assembly, July 25, 1728.
. "That he would openly stand up for us, and notwithstanding all the obloquy
that would be cast upon him for it, he would plead our cause; and when our
charter should come to be considered in the house of Lords, he would there
publicly declare, that there was a greater sacredness in the charter of
New England, than in those of the corporations in England; for those were only
acts of grace, whereas the charter of New England was a contract between the
King and the first patentees; wherein they had promised to enlarge the king's
dominions on their own charges, provided that they and their posterity might
enjoy such and such privileges: and now they had performed their part, for the
king to deprive their posterity of the privileges granted to them, would carry
a face of injustice in it." Thus that great and good man.

We highly value our connection with Great Britain, there is perhaps not a man
to be found among us, who would wish to be independent on our mother country,
we should regret the most distant thought of such an event; we are grieved that
there is any thing to create the least suspicion of want of tenderness on their
part, or of duty on our's. We hope there is no ground for either. We trust our
King and his Parliament will yet hear us and confirm our liberties and
immunities to us. And we earnestly pray that a happy union may subsist between
Great Britain and her colonies to the latest posterity.

Our rulers are a part of ourselves, they look on the whole community as their
brethren, they have one common interest with us. We doubt not they feel for
their people in this difficult day, and will exert all their abilities in the
present exigency. Time has been, when even darker clouds hung over the British
colonies than those which now threaten us; and the God of heaven has appeared
and dissipated them. His arm is not shortened that he cannot save, his ear is
not heavy that he cannot hear. The friends of Zion will not cease to pray, that
our rulers may be lead in a safe and plain path; and we trust they will
themselves implore the direction and assistance of him, who gives wisdom to
the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding. Happy will it be for
you, our honored fathers, if you are the instruments of prolonging our
tranquillity. It will be an honor put upon you by the God of heaven: It will
render you accepted of the multitude of your brethren: You will be esteemed and
blessed while you live; and your names will be had in grateful remembrance long
after you have entered the world of spirits.

But whatever aspect this important affair may have on our present or future
prosperity, it is not all that calls for the attention of our rulers. He must
have but little understanding of the times, who does not see that we are in
more danger from our internal vices, than from any external impositions. Our
luxury, extravagance and intemperance threaten our ruin. We live above
ourselves, we have forsaken the simplicity of our fathers in our dress, our
furniture and our tables. We import much that is absolutely superfluous, that
tends only to feed our pride and vanity. Some little private efforts have been
made to reform these evils, possibly the legislature may find out some more
effectual method to suppress our vices, and to encourage industry, frugality
and sobriety.

There was much enquiry, I am informed, in the last assembly, how they might
raise a revenue from the spirituous liquors that are expended among us. Can
nothing be done to prevent the so free use of them? if not, the glory is
departed, we need nothing else to make us a poor miserable people. "Of all the
miseries and plagues" says the late excellent Dr. Stephen Hales, "that unhappy
man has been incident to, none was ever so effectually destructive as this not
even those three sore judgments of war, pestilence and famine; which after
having raged for some time, cease. But this evil spirit is an unrelenting
merciless enemy, that threatens destruction from generation to generation. --
And yet, has not this calamity made a surprising advance within twenty or
thirty years? And is it not daily spreading far and wide, both at home, and in
our colonies abroad? What then must be the end thereof (avert it good God!) but
the final ruin of this great and trading nation."

The Dr. adds the following note. The terrible destruction of human lives by
the prevailing use of Spirituous Liquors, appears from the following accounts.

In the year 1680, the christenings, within the bills of mortality, were no
more than 12747 From which number, in 1700, they rose to 14639 And, more
remarkably, in the year 1712, (notwithstanding Queen ANN 's long war) they were
advanced to 15660 From that time they continually increased till the year 1724,
when they amounted to no less than 19370 But from that year, when the use of
Spirituous Liquors became so common, as to occasion a public representation
from the college of physicians the year following, instead of increasing as
formerly, they have continually decreased, till they are now reduced, at a
medium for the three last years, to 14320
So that the year 1750 produced fewer christenings than the year 1700.

The Children likewise that are born come into the world, with such bad
Constitutions, that being sickly and feeble, they die in prodigious numbers
under five years old. And many children, in stead of being nourished by
wholesome food, are soon consumed by these inflammatory Spirits, which must
necessarily destroy a fabric so very slight and tender.

In London, the christenings for the last ten years, were at a medium, 14457
The children who died every year under five in the same Period, were at a
medium, 10590 Whereas, according to Dr. Halley's Calculation, the deaths under
six should have been no more than 6317 The annual loss by premature deaths of
weakly children 4273 By fewer births 5050 This loss, in one district of the
kingdom only, viz. not all the city and suburbs of London, is every year 9323
N. B. The above account of the destruction of the human species, relating only
to children under five years of age, is exclusive, of ALL that prodigious
number of English subjects above that age, who continually die by the same
cause.




Our fathers in the civil government can scarce be sensible how far and wide
intemperance has spread, especially among the lower sort of people. I doubt not
their readiness to apply a remedy, if it is in their power; whether any can be
found, is not for me to say.

While our rulers are consulting the public good, and enquiring what this
people ought to do, it becomes us to submit to their authority, and to lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; we ought to be subject
to these ministers of God, not only for wrath but for conscience sake.
Obedience to rulers enters into religion; by an unreasonable opposition to
them, we displease God by whose providence they are placed over us.

The business of rulers is difficult enough in itself, we ought not to increase
their difficulties by a factious turbulent behavior. No good ruler will be
averse to have his public conduct: examined, or find fault with decent
remonstrances when they act contrary to the sense of the community. But it is
hard, when they have done their best, to be censured and reviled, and to have
government made uneasy by the jealousies and intrigues of discontented men, who
think nothing right but what they do themselves; and delight to raise
suspicions of designs which are the product of their own vain imaginations. We
should remember that rulers are men of like passions, and are in a state of
peculiar temptation. We ought not to magnify their faults, but to bear with
their infirmities and overlook their mistakes, when we have reason to think
they do not proceed from a bad heart. When God has honored them by making them
instruments of good, we ought not only to reverence, but to esteem and love
them for their works sake.

It would be well, if both rulers and people would consider the brevity and
uncertainty of human life, and that account which they must all give of the
things done in the body. What a happy influence would this have on their temper
and conduct! It would lead rulers to improve every talent to the honor of God
and the good of men. It would lead subjects so far as is possible, and as much
as in them lies, to promote peace and union. It would make us all sollicitous
to approve ourselves to God, and to get that spiritual understanding, which
only can make us meet for the inheritance of the saints in light.

PAGE 20. at the bottom, read, where so much depends, and the consequence of
acting wrong is like to be so fatal to etc.


