TWO DISSERTATIONS,

I. Concerning the END for which GOD created the WORLD.

II. The Nature of TRUE VIRTUE.

By the late REVEREND, LEARNED and PIOUS JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. PRESIDENT of
the COLLEGE in NEW JERSEY.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite to the Probate-Office in
Queen Street.

M,DCC,LXV.

THE PREFACE
THE author had designed these dissertations for the public view; and wrote
them out as they now appear: though it is probable, that if his life had been
spared, he would have revised them and rendered them in some respects more
complete. Some new sentiments, here and there, might probably have been added;
and some passages brightened with farther illustrations. This may be
conjectured from some brief hints, or sentiments minuted down, on loose papers,
found in the manuscripts.

BUT those sentiments concisely sketch'd out, which, it is thought, the author
intended to enlarge, and digest into the body of the work, -- cannot be so
amplified by any other hand, as to do justice to the author: it is therefore
probably best that nothing of this kind should be attempted.

AS these dissertations were more especially designed for the learned and
inquisitive, it is expected that the judicious and candid will not be disposed
to object that the manner in which these subjects are treated, is something
above the level of common readers. For though a superficial way of discourse
and loose harrangues may well enough suit some subjects, and answer some
valuable purposes; yet other subjects demand more closeness and accuracy. And
if an author should neglect to do justice to a subject, for fear that the
simpler sort should not fully understand him, he might expect to be deemed a
trifler by the more intelligent.

OUR author had a rare talent to penetrate deep in search of truth; to take an
extensive survey of a subject, and look through it into remote consequences.
Hence many theorems, that appeared hard and barren to others, were to him
pleasant and fruitful fields, where his mind would expatiate with peculiar
case, profit and entertainment. Those studies, which to some were too fatiguing
to the mind, and wearing to the constitution, were to him but a natural play of
genius; and which his mind without labor would freely and spontaneously
perform. A close and conclusive way of reasoning upon a controversial point was
easy and natural to him.

THIS may serve, it is conceived, to account for his usual manner of treating
abstruse and controverted subjects, which some have thought has been too
metaphysical. But the truth is, that his critical method of looking through the
nature of his subject; his accuracy and precision in convassing truth,
comparing ideas, drawing consequences, pointing out and exposing absurdities,
-- naturally led him to reduce the evidence in favor of truth into the form of
demonstration. Which doubtless, where it can be obtained, is the most eligible,
and by far the most satisfying to great and noble minds. And though some
readers may find the labor hard to keep pace with the writer, in the advances
he makes, where the ascent is arduous; yet in general all was easy to him: such
was his peculiar love and discernment of truth and natural propensity to search
after it. His own ideas were clear to him, where some readers have thought them
obscure. Thus many things in the works of Newton and Lock, which appear either
quite unintelligible, or very obscure to the illiterate, were clear and bright
to those illustrious authors, and their learned readers.

THE subjects here handled are sublime and important. The end which God had in
view in creating the world, was doubtless worthy of him; and consequently the
most excellent and glorious possible. This therefore must be worthy to be known
by all the intelligent creation, as excellent in itself, and worthy of their
pursuit. And as true virtue distinguishes the inhabitants of heaven and all the
happy candidates for that world of glory, from all others; -- there cannot
surely be a more interesting subject.

THE notions which some men entertain concerning God's end in creating the
world, and concerning true virtue, in our late author's opinion, have a natural
tendency to corrupt christianity, and to destroy the gospel of our divine
redeemer. It was therefore, no doubt, in the exercise of a pious concern for
the honor and glory of God, and a tender respect to the best interests of his
fellow men, that this devout and learned writer undertook the following work.

MAY the father of lights, smile upon the pious and benevolent aims and labors
of his servant and crown them with his blessing!

July 12. 1765. The Editor.

ERRATA
PAge 16 line 24. before notice add no. p. 42. 1. 23. F. loveliness, r. love.
p. 43. 1. 29 after upon. r. as to. p 47 l. 3. f. but, r. than. p. 122. l. 24.
r. understand p. 128. l. 22. r. nature p. 132. l. 27. r. heart.

The CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION, containing explanations of terms and general positions. p. 1.
CHAP. I. Wherein is considered what reason teaches concerning this affair.
SECT. I. Some things observed in general, which reason dictates. p. 11. SECT.
II. Some further observations concerning those things which reason leads us to
suppose God aimed at in the creation of the world -- p. 19. SECT. III. Wherein
it is considered how, on the supposition of God's making the forementioned
things his last end, he manifests a supreme and ultimate regard to himself in
all his works. p. 24. SECT. IV. Some objections considered which may be made
against the reasonableness of what has been said of God's making himself his
last end. P. 32 CHAP. II. Wherein it is enquired what is to be learned from
holy scriptures, concerning God's last end in the creation of the world. SECT.
I. The scriptures represent God as making himself his own last end in the
creation of the world. p. 50. SECT. II. Wherein some positions are advanced
concerning a just method of arguing in this affair, from what we find in holy
scriptures. p. 51. SECT. III. Particular texts of scripture, which show that
God's glory is an ultimate end of the creation. p. 57. SECT. IV. Places of
scripture that lead us to suppose that God created the world for his NAME, to
make his perfections known, and that he made it for his praise. p. 75. SECT. V.
Places of scripture from whence it may be argued, that communication of good to
the creature, was one thing which God had in view as an ultimate end of the
creation of the world. p. 86. SECT VI. Wherein is considered what is meant by
the glory of God, and the name of God in scripture, when spoken of as God's end
in his works. p. 93. SECT. VII. Showing that the ultimate end in the creation
of the world, is BUT ONE, and what THAT ONE END IS. p. 106.
CONTENTS of the II. Dissertation.
CHAP. I. Showing wherein the essence of true virtue consists. p. 116. CHAP.
II. Showing how that love wherein true virtue consists, respects the divine
Being and created Beings. p. 125. CHAP. III. Concerning the secondary and
inferior kind of beauty. p. 134. CHAP. IV. Of self-love and its various
influence, to cause love to others, or the contrary. p. 145. CHAP. V. Of
natural conscience, and the moral sense. p. 158. CHAP. VI. Of particular
instincts of nature, which in some respects resemble virtue. p. 168. CHAP. VII.
The reason why those things which have been mentioned, which have not the
essence of virtue have yet by many been mistaken for true virtue. p. 175. CHAP.
VIII. In what respects virtue or moral good is founded in sentiment, and how
far it is founded in the reason and nature of things. p. 184.
Concerning the END for which GOD created the WORLD.
INTRODUCTION
Containing Explanations of Terms, and general Positions.
TO avoid all confusion in our inquiries and reasonings, concerning the end for
which God created the world, a distinction should be observed between the chief
end for which an agent or efficient exerts any act and performs any work, and
the ultimate end. These two phrases are not always precisely of the same
signification: And though the chief end be always an ultimate end, yet every
ultimate end is not always a chief end.

A chief end is opposite to an inferior end: An ultimate end, is opposite to a
subordinate end. A subordinate end is something that an agent seeks and aims at
in what he does; but yet don't seek it, or regard it at all upon it is own
account, but wholly on the account of a further end, or in order to some other
thing, which it is considered as a means of. Thus when a man that goes a
journey to obtain a medicine to cure him of some disease, and restore his
health, -- the obtaining that medicine is his subordinate end; because it is not
an end that he seeks for itself, or values at all upon its own account; but
wholly as a means of a further end, viz. his health: Separate the medicine from
that further end, and it is esteemed good for nothing; nor is it at all desired.

AN ultimate end is that which the agent seeks in what he does, for it is own
sake: That he has respect to, as what he loves, values and takes pleasure in on
it is own account, and not merely as a means of a further end: As when a man
loves the taste of some particular sort of fruit, and is at pains and cost to
obtain it, for the sake of the pleasure of that taste, which he values upon
it is own account, as he loves his own pleasure; and not merely for the sake of
any other good, which he supposes his enjoying that pleasure will be the means
of.

SOME ends are subordinate ends, not only as they are subordinated to an
ultimate end; but also to another end that is itself but a subordinate end:
Yea, there may be a succession or chain of many subordinate ends, one dependent
on another, -- one sought for another: The first for the next; and that for the
sake of the next to that, -- and so on in a long series before you come to any
thing, that the agent aims at and seeks for it is own sake: -- As when a man
sells a garment to get money -- to buy tools -- to till his land -- to obtain a
crop -- to supply him with food -- to gratify the appetite. And he seeks to
gratify his appetite, on it is own account, as what is grateful in itself. Here
the end of his selling his garment, is to get money; but getting money is only
a subordinate end: It Is not only subordinate to the last end, his gratifying his
appetite; but to a nearer end, viz. his buying husbandry tools: And his
obtaining these, is only a subordinate end, being only for the sake of tilling
land: And the tillage of land, is an end not sought on it is own account, but
for the sake of the crop to be produced: And the crop produced, is not an
ultimate end, or an end sought for itself, but only for the sake of making
bread: And the having bread, is not sought on it is own account, but for the
sake of gratifying the appetite.

HERE the gratifying the appetite, is called the ultimate end; because it is the
last in the chain, where a man's aim and pursuit stops and rests, obtaining in
that, the thing finally aimed at. So whenever a man comes to that in which his
desire terminates and rests, it being something valued on it is own account,
then he comes to an ultimate end, let the chain be longer or shorter; yea, if
there be but one link or one step that he takes before he comes to this end. As
when a man that loves honey puts it into his mouth, for the sake of the
pleasure of the taste, without aiming at any thing further. So that an end
which an agent has in view, may be both his immediate and his ultimate end; his
next and his last end. That end which is sought for the sake of itself, and not
for the sake of a further end, is an ultimate end; it is ultimate or last, as
it has no other beyond it, for whose sake it is, it being for the sake of
itself: So that here, the aim of the agent stops and rests (without going
further) being come to the good which he esteems a recompense of it is pursuit
for it is own value.

HERE it is to be noted, that a thing sought, may have the nature of an
ultimate, and also of a subordinate end, as it may be sought partly on it is own
account, and partly for the sake of a further end. Thus a man in what he does,
may seek the love and respect of a particular person, partly on it is own
account, because it is in itself agreeable to men to be the objects of other's
esteem and love: And partly, because he hopes, through the friendship of that
person to have his assistance in other affairs; and so to be put under
advantage for the obtaining further ends.

A chief end or highest end, which is opposite not properly to a subordinate
end, but to an inferior end, is something diverse from an ultimate end. The
chief end is an end that is most valued; and therefore most sought after by the
agent in what he does. It Is evident, that to be an end more valued than another
end, is not exactly the same thing as to be an end valued ultimately, or for
it is own sake. This will appear, if it be considered.

1. THAT two different ends may be both ultimate ends, and yet not be chief
ends. They may be both valued for their own sake, and both sought in the same
work or acts, and yet one valued more highly and sought more than another: Thus
a man may go a journey to obtain two different benefits or enjoyments, both
which may be agreeable to him in themselves considered, and so both may be what
he values on their own account and seeks for their own sake; And yet one may be
much more agreeable than the other: And so be what he sets his heart chiefly
upon, and seeks most after in his going a journey. Thus a man may go a journey
partly to obtain the possession and enjoyment of a bride that is very dear to
him, and partly to gratify his curiosity in looking in a telescope, or some
new-invented and extraordinary optic glass: Both may be ends he seeks in his
journey, and the one not properly subordinate or in order to another. One may
not depend on another; and therefore both may be ultimate ends: But yet the
obtaining his beloved bride may be his chief end, and the benefit of the optic
glass, his inferior end. The former may be what he sets his heart vastly most
upon; and so be properly the chief end of his journey.

2. AN ultimate end is not always the chief end, because some subordinate ends
may be more valued and sought after than some ultimate ends. Thus for instance,
a man may aim at these two things in his going a journey; one may be to visit
his friends, and another to receive a great estate, or a large sum of money
that lies ready for him, at the place to which he is going. The latter, viz.
his receiving the sum of money may be but a subordinate end: He may not value
the silver and gold on their own account, but only for the pleasure,
gratifications and honor; that is the ultimate end, and not the money which is
valued only as a means of the other. But yet the obtaining the money, may be
what is more valued, and so an higher end of his journey, than the pleasure of
seeing his friends; though the latter is what is valued on its own account, and
so is an ultimate end.

BUT here several things may be noted:

FIRST, That when it is said, that some subordinate ends may be more valued
than some ultimate ends, it is not supposed that ever a subordinate end is more
valued than that ultimate end or ends to which it is subordinate; because a
subordinate end has no value, but what it derives from its ultimate end: For
that reason it is called a subordinate end, because it is valued and sought,
not for it is own sake, or it is own value, but only in subordination to a
further end, or for the sake of the ultimate end, that it is in order to. But
yet a subordinate end may be valued more than some other ultimate end that it
is not subordinate to, but is independent of it, and don't belong to that
series, or chain of ends. Thus for instance: If a man goes a journey to receive
a sum of money, not at all as an ultimate end, or because he has any value for
the silver and gold for their own sake, but only for the value of the pleasure
and honor that the money may be a means of. In this case it is impossible that
the subordinate end, viz. his having the money should be more valued by him
than the pleasure and honor, for which he values it. It would be absurd to
suppose that he values the means more than the end, when he has no value for
the means but for the sake of the end, of which it is the means: But yet he may
value the money, though but a subordinate end, more than some other ultimate end,
to which it is not subordinate, and with which it has no connection. For
instance, more than the comfort of a friendly visit; which was one end of his
journey.

SECONDLY, Not only is a subordinate end never superior to that ultimate end,
to which it is subordinate; but the ultimate end is always (not only equal but)
superior to it is subordinate end, and more valued by the agent; unless it be
when the ultimate end entirely depends on the subordinate: So that he has no
other means by which to obtain his last end, and also is looked upon as
certainly connected with it, -- then the subordinate end may be as much valued
as the last end; because the last end, in such a case, does altogether depend
upon, and is wholly and certainly conveyed by it. As for instance, if a
pregnant woman has a peculiar appetite to a certain rare fruit that is to be
found only in the garden of a particular friend of here is, at a distance; and
she goes a journey to go to her friend's house or garden, to obtain that fruit
-- the ultimate end of her journey, is to gratify that strong appetite: The
obtaining that fruit, is the subordinate end of it. If she looks upon it, that
the appetite can be gratified by no other means than the obtaining that fruit;
and that it will certainly be gratified if she obtains it, then she will value
the fruit as much as she values the gratification of her appetite. But
otherwise, it will not be so: If she be doubtful whether that fruit will
satisfy her craving, then she will not value it equally with the gratification
of her appetite itself; or if there be some other fruit that she knows of, that
will gratify her desire, at least in part; which she can obtain without such
inconvenience or trouble as shall countervail the gratification; which is in
effect, frustrating her of her last end, because her last end is the pleasure
of gratifying her appetite, without any trouble that shall countervail, and in
effect destroy it. Or if it be so, that her appetite cannot be gratified
without this fruit, nor yet with it alone, without something else to be
compounded with it, -- then her value for her last end will be divided between
these several ingredients as so many subordinate, and no one alone will be
equally valued with the last end.

HENCE it rarely happens among mankind, that a subordinate end is equally
valued with it is last end; because the obtaining of a last end rarely depends
on one single, uncompounded means, and is infallibly connected with that means:
Therefore, men's last ends are commonly their highest ends.

THIRDLY, If any being has but one ultimate end, in all that he does, and there
be a great variety of operations, his last end may justly be looked upon as his
supreme end: For in such a case, every other end but that one, is an end to
that end; and therefore no other end can be superior to it. Because, as was
observed before, a subordinate end is never more valued, than the end to which
it is subordinate.

MOREOVER, the subordinate effects, events or things brought to pass, which all
are means of this end, all uniting to contribute their share toward the
obtaining the one last end, are very various; and therefore, by what has been
now observed, the ultimate end of all must be valued, more than any one of the
particular means. This seems to be the case with the works of God, as may more
fully appear in the sequel.

FROM what has been said, to explain what is intended by an ultimate end, the
following things may be observed concerning ultimate ends in the sense
explained.

FOURTHLY, Whatsoever any agent has in view in any thing he does, which he
loves, or which is an immediate gratification of any appetite or inclination of
nature; and is agreeable to him in itself, and not merely for the sake of
something else, is regarded by that agent as his last end. The same may be
said, of avoiding of that which is in itself painful or disagreable: For the
avoiding of what is disagreable is agreeable. This will be evident to any
bearing in mind the meaning of the terms. By last end being meant, that which
is regarded and sought by an agent, as agreeable or desirable for it is own
sake; a subordinate that which is sought only for the sake of something else.

FIFTHLY, From hence it will follow, that, if an agent in his works has in view
more things than one that will be brought to pass by what he does, that are
agreeable to him, considered in themselves, or what he loves and delights in on
their own account, -- then he must have more things than one that he regards as
his last ends in what he does. But if there be but one thing that an agent
seeks, as the consequence of what he does that is agreeable to him, on it is own
account, then there can be but one last end which he has in all his actions and
operations.

BUT only here a distinction must be observed of things which may be said to be
agreeable to an agent, in themselves considered in two senses. (1.) What is in
itself grateful to an agent, and valued and loved on its own account, simply
and absolutely considered, and is so universally and originally, antecedent to,
and independent of all conditions, or any supposition of particular cases and
circumstances. And (2.) What may be said to be in itself agreeable to an agent,
hypothetically and consequentially: Or, on supposition or condition of such and
such circumstances or on the happening of such a particular case. Thus, for
instance: A man may originally love society. An inclination to society may be
implanted in his very nature: And society may be agreeable to him antecedent to
all presupposed cases and circumstances: And this may cause him to seek a
family. And the comfort of society may be originally his last end, in seeking a
family. But after he has a family, peace, good order and mutual justice and
friendship in his family, may be agreeable to him, and what he delights in for
their own sake: and therefore these things may be his last end in many things
he does in the government and regulation of his family. But they were not his
original end with respect to his family. The justice and peace of a family was
not properly his last end before he had a family, that induced him to seek a
family, but consequentially. And the case being put of his having a family,
then these things wherein the good order and beauty of a family consist, become
his last end in many things he does in such circumstances. In like manner we
must suppose that God before he created the world, had some good in view, as a
consequence of the world's existence that was originally agreeable to him in
itself considered, that inclined him to create the world, or bring the
universe, with various intelligent creatures into existence in such a manner as
he created it. But after the world was created, and such and such intelligent
creatures actually had existence, in such and such circumstances, then a wise,
just regulation of them was agreeable to God, in itself considered. And God's
love of justice, and hatred of injustice, would be sufficient in such a case to
induce God to deal justly with his creatures, and to prevent all injustice in
him toward them. But yet there is no necessity of supposing, that God's love
of doing justly to intelligent beings, and hatred of the contrary, was what
originally induced God to create the world, and make intelligent beings; and so
to order the occasion of doing either justly or unjustly. The justice of God's
nature makes a just regulation agreeable, and the contrary disagreable, as there
is occasion, the subject being supposed, and the occasion given: But we must
suppose something else that should incline him to create the subjects or order
the occasion.

So that perfection of God which we call his faithfulness, or his inclination
to fulfill his promises to his creatures, could not properly be what moved him
to create the world; nor could such a fulfillment of his promises to his
creatures, be his last end, in giving the creatures being. But yet after the
world is created, after intelligent creatures are made, and God has bound
himself by promise to them, then that disposition which is called his
faithfulness may move him in his providential disposals toward them: And this
may be the end of many of God's works of providence, even the exercise of his
faithfulness in fulfilling his promises. And may be in the lower sense his last
end. Because faithfulness and truth must be supposed to be what is in itself
amiable to God, and what he delights in for its own sake. Thus God may have
ends of particular works of providence, which are ultimate ends in a lower
sense, which were not ultimate ends of the creation.

So that here we have two sorts of ultimate ends; one of which may be called an
original, and independent ultimate end; the other consequential and dependent.
For it is evident, the latter sort are truly of the nature of ultimate ends:
Because, though their being agreeable to the agent, or the agent's desire of them,
be consequential on the existence, or supposition of proper subjects and
occasion; yet the subject and occasion being supposed, they are agreeable and
amiable in themselves. We may suppose that to a righteous Being, the doing
justice between two parties, with whom he is concerned, is agreeable in itself,
and is loved for it is own sake, and not merely for the sake of some other end:
And yet we may suppose, that a desire of doing justice between two parties, may
be consequential on the being of those parties, and the occasion given.

THEREFORE I make a distinction between an end that in this manner is
consequential, and a subordinate end.

IT may be observed, that when I speak of God's ultimate end in the creation of
the world, in the following discourse, I commonly mean in that highest sense,
viz. the original ultimate end.

SIXTHLY, It may be further observed, that the original ultimate end or ends of
the creation of the world is alone, that which induces God to give the occasion
for consequential ends, by the first creation of the world, and the original
disposal of it. And the more original the end is, the more extensive and
universal it is. That which God had primarily in view in creating, and the
original ordination of the world, must be constantly kept in view, and have a
governing influence in all God's works, or with respect to every thing that he
does toward his creatures.

AND therefore,

SEVENTHLY, If we use the phrase ultimate end in this highest sense, then the
same that is God's ultimate end in creating the world, if we suppose but one
such end, must be what he makes his ultimate aim in all his works, in every
thing he does either in creation or providence. But we must suppose that in the
use, which God puts the creatures to that he has made, he must evermore have a
regard to the end, for which he has made them. But if we take ultimate end in
the other lower sense, God may sometimes have regard to those things as
ultimate ends, in particular works of providence, which could not in any proper
sense be his last end in creating the world.

EIGHTHLY, On the other hand, whatever appears to be God's ultimate end in any
sense, of his works of providence in general, that must be the ultimate end of
the work of creation itself. For though it be so that God may act for an end,
that is an ultimate end in a lower sense, in some of his works of providence,
which is not the ultimate end of the creation of the world: Yet this does not
take place with regard to the works of providence in general. But we may justly
look upon whatsoever has the nature of an ultimate end of God's works of
providence in general, that the same is also an ultimate end of the creation of
the world; for God's works of providence in general, are the same with the
general use that he puts the world to that he has made. And we may well argue
from what we see of the general use which God makes of the world, to the
general end for which he designed the world. Though there may be some things that
are ends of particular works of providence, that were not the last end of the
creation, which are in themselves grateful to God in such particular emergent
circumstances; and so are last ends in an inferior sense: Yet this is only in
certain cases, or particular occasions. But if they are last ends of God's
proceedings in the use of the world in general, this shows that his making them
last ends don't depend on particular cases and circumstances, but the nature of
things in general, and his general design in the being and constitution of the
universe.

NINETHLY, If there be but one thing that is originally, and independent on any
future, supposed cases, agreeable to God, to be obtained by the creation of the
world, then there can be but one last end of God's work, in this highest sense:
But if there are various things, properly diverse one from another, that are,
absolutely and independently on the supposition of any future given cases,
agreeable to the divine being, which are actually obtained by the creation of
the world, then there were several ultimate ends of the creation, in that
highest sense.

CHAPTER I.
Wherein is considered, what Reason teaches concerning this Affair.
SECTION I.
Some Things observed in general, which Reason dictates.
HAving observed these things, which are proper to be taken notice of, to
prevent confusion in discourses on this subject, I now proceed to consider what
may, and what may not be supposed to be God's ultimate end in the creation of
the world.

AND in the first place, I would observe some things which reason seems to
dictate in this matter. Indeed this affair, seems properly to be an affair of
divine revelation. In order to be determined what was aimed at, or designed in
the creating of the astonishing fabric of the universe which we behold, it
becomes us to attend to and rely on what he has told us, who was the architect
that built it. He best knows his own heart, and what his own ends and designs
were in the wonderful works which he has wrought. Nor is it to be supposed that
mankind, who, while destitute of revelation, by the utmost improvements of
their own reason, and advances in science and philosophy, could come to no
clear and established determination who the author of the world was, would ever
have obtained any tolerable settled judgment of the end which the author of it
proposed to himself in ^o vast, complicated and wonderful a work of his hands.
And though it be true, that the revelation which God has given to men, which has
been in the world as a light shining in a dark place, has been the occasion of
great improvement of their faculties, has taught men how to use their reason;
(in which regard, notwithstanding the nobleness and excellency of the faculties
which God had given them, they seemed to be in themselves almost helpless.) And
though mankind now, through the long continual assistance they have had by this
divine light, have come to seize in the habitual exercise of reason,
which are far beyond what otherwise they would have arrived to; yet I confess
it would be relying too much on reason, to determine the affair of God's last
end in the creation of the world, only by our own reason, or without being
herein principally guided by divine revelation, since God has given a
revelation containing instructions concerning this matter. Nevertheless, as in
the disputes and wranglings which have been about this matter, those
objections, which have chiefly been made use of against what I think the
scriptures have truly revealed, have been from the pretended dictates of
reason, -- I would in the first place soberly consider in a few things, what
seems rational to be supposed concerning this affair; -- and then proceed to
consider what light divine revelation gives us in it.

As to the first of these, viz. what seems in itself rational to be supposed
concerning this matter, I think the following things appear to be the dictates
of reason:

1. THAT no notion of God's last end in the creation of the world is agreeable
to reason, which would truly imply or infer any indigence, insufficiency and
mutability in God; or any dependence of the Creator on the creature, for any
part of his perfection or happiness. Because it is evident, by both scripture
and reason, that God is infinitely, eternally, unchangeably, and independently
glorious and happy; that he stands in no need of, cannot be profited by, or
receive any thing from the creature; or be truly hurt, or be the subject of any
sufferings or impair of his glory and felicity from any other being. I need not
stand to produce the proofs of God's being such a one, it being so universally
allowed and maintained by such as call themselves christians. -- The notion of
God's creating the world in order to receive any thing properly from the
creature, is not only contrary to the nature of God, but inconsistent with the
notion of creation; which implies a being's receiving it is existence, and all
that belongs to it is being, out of nothing. And this implies the most perfect,
absolute and universal derivation and dependence. Now, if the creature receives
it is all from God entirely and perfectly, how is it possible that it should
have any thing to add to God, to make him in any respect more than he was
before, and so the Creator become dependent on the creature?

2. WHATSOEVER is good and valuable in itself, is worthy that God should value
for itself, and on it is own account; or which is the same thing, value it with
an ultimate value or respect. It is therefore worthy to be ultimately sought by
God, or made the last end of his action and operation; if it be a thing of such
a nature as to be properly capable of being attained in any divine operation.
For it may be supposed that some things, which are valuable and excellent in
themselves, are not properly capable of being attained in any divine operation;
because they do not remain to be attained; but their existence in all possible
respects, must be conceived of as prior to any divine operation. Thus God's
existence and infinite perfection, though infinitely valuable in themselves, and
infinitely valued by God, yet cannot be supposed to be the end of any divine
operation. For we cannot conceive of them as in any respect consequent on any
works of God: -- But whatever is in itself valuable, absolutely so, and that is
capable of being sought and attained, is worthy to be made a last end of the
divine operation. -- Therefore,

3. WHATEVER that be which is in itself most valuable, and was so originally,
prior to the creation of the world* and which is attainable by the creation, if
there be any thing which was superior in value to all others, that must be
worthy to be God's last end in the creation; and also worthy to be his highest
end. -- In consequence of this, it will follow,

4. THAT if God himself be in any respect properly capable of being his own end
in the creation of the world, then it is reasonable to suppose that he had
respect to himself as his last and highest end in this work; because he is
worthy in himself to be so, being infinitely the greatest and best of Beings.
All things else, with regard to worthiness, importance and excellence, are
perfectly as nothing in comparison of him. And therefore if God esteems,
values, and has respect to things according to their nature and proportions, he
must necessarily have the greatest respect to himself. It would be against the
perfection of his nature, his wisdom, holiness, and perfect rectitude, whereby
he is disposed to do every thing that is fit to be done, to suppose otherwise.
At least a great part of the moral rectitude of the heart of God, whereby he is
disposed to every thing that is fit, suitable and amiable in itself, consists
in his having infinitely the highest regard to that which is in itself
infinitely highest and best: Yea it is in this that it seems chiefly to
consist. -- The moral rectitude of God's heart must consist in a proper and due
respect of his heart to things that are objects of moral respect: That is, to
intelligent beings capable of moral actions and relations. And therefore it
must chiefly consist in giving due respect to that Being to whom most is due;
yea infinitely most, and in effect all. For God is infinitely the most worthy
of regard. The worthiness of others is as nothing to his: So that to him
belongs all possible respect. To him belongs the whole of the respect that any
moral agent, either God, or any intelligent Being is capable of. To him belongs
all the heart -- Therefore if moral rectitude of heart consists in paying the
respect or regard of the heart which is due, or which fitness and suitableness
requires, fitness requires infinitely the greatest regard to be paid to God;
and the denying supreme regard here, would be a conduct infinitely the most
unfit. Therefore a proper regard to this Being, is what the fitness of regard
does infinitely most consist in. -- Hence it will follow -- that the moral
rectitude and fitness of the disposition, inclination or affection of God's
heart, does chiefly consist in a respect or regard to himself infinitely above
his regard to all other beings: Or in other words, his holiness consists in
this.

AND if it be thus fit that God should have a supreme regard to himself, then
it is fit that this supreme regard should appear, in those things by which he
makes himself known, or by his word and works; i. e. in what he says, and in
what he does. If it be an infinitely amiable thing in God, that he should have
a supreme regard to himself, then it is an amiable thing that he should act as
having a chief regard to himself; or act in such a manner, as to show that he
has such a regard; that what is highest in God's heart, may be highest in his
actions and conduct. And if it was God's intention, as there is great reason to
think it was, that his works should exhibit an image of himself their author,
that it might brightly appear by his works what manner of being he is, and
afford a proper representation of his divine excellencies, and especially his
moral excellence, consisting in the disposition of his heart; then it is
reasonable to suppose that his works are so wrought as to show this supreme
respect to himself, wherein his moral excellency does primarily consist.

WHEN we are considering with ourselves, what would be most fit and proper for
God to have a chief respect to, in his proceedings in general, with regard to
the universality of things, it may help us to judge of the matter with the
greater ease and satisfaction to consider, what we can suppose would be judged
and determined by some third being of perfect wisdom and rectitude, neither the
creator nor one of the creatures, that should be perfectly indifferent and
disinterested. Or if we make the supposition, that wisdom itself, or infinitely
wise justice and rectitude were a distinct disinterested person, whose office
it was to determine how things shall be most fitly and properly ordered in the
whole system, or kingdom of existence, including king and subjects, God and his
creatures; and upon a view of the whole, to decide what regard should prevail
and govern in all proceedings. Now such a judge in adjusting the proper
measures and kinds of regard that every part of existence is to have, would
weigh things in an even balance; taking care, that greater, or more existence
should have a greater share than less, that a greater part of the whole should
be more looked at and respected, than the lesser in proportion (other things
being equal) to the measure of existence, -- that the more excellent should be
more regarded than the less excellent: -- So that the degree of regard should
always be in a proportion, compounded of the proportion of existence, and
proportion of excellence, or according to the degree of greatness and goodness,
considered conjunctly. -- Such an arbiter, in considering the system of created
intelligent beings by itself, would determine, that the system in general,
consisting of many millions, was of greater importance, and worthy of a greater
share of regard, than only one individual. For however considerable some of the
individuals might be so that they might be much greater and better, and have a
greater share of the sum total of existence and excellence than another
individual, yet no one exceeds others so much (...) to countervail all the rest
of the system. And if this judge consider not only the system of created
beings, but the system of being in general, comprehending the sum total of
universal existence, both creator and creature; still every part must be
considered according to it is weight and importance, or the measure it has of
existence and excellence. To determine then, what proportion of regard is to be
allotted to the creator, and all his creatures taken together, both must be as
it were put in the balance; -- the supreme Being, with all in him, that is
great, considerable, and excellent, is to be estimated and compared with all
that is to be found in the whole creation: And according as the former is found
to outweigh, in such proportion is he to have a greater share of regard. --
And in this case, as the whole system of created beings in comparison of the
creator, would be found as the light dust of the balance (which is taken notice
of by him that weighs) and as nothing and vanity; so the arbiter must determine
accordingly with respect to the degree in which God should be regarded by all
intelligent existence, and the degree in which he should be regarded in all
that is done through the whole universal system; in all actions and proceedings,
determinations and effects whatever, whether creating, preserving, using,
disposing, changing, or destroying. And as the creator is infinite, and has all
possible existence, perfection and excellence, so he must have all possible
regard. As he is every way the first and supreme, and as his excellency is in
all respects the supreme beauty and glory, the original good, and fountain of
all good; so he must have in all respects the supreme regard. And as he is God
over all, to whom all are properly subordinate, and on whom all depend, worthy
to reign as supreme head with absolute and universal dominion; so it is fit
that he should be so regarded by all and in all proceedings and effects through
the whole system: that this universality of things in their whole compass and
series should look to him and respect him in such a manner as that respect to
him should reign over all respect to other things and that regard to creatures
should universally be subordinate and subject.

WHEN I speak of regard to be thus adjusted in the universal system, or sum
total of existence, I mean the regard of the sum total; not only the regard of
individual creatures, or all creatures, but of all intelligent existence,
created, and uncreated. For it is fit, that the regard of the creator should be
proportioned to the worthiness of objects, as well as the regard of creatures.
Thus we must conclude such an arbiter, as I have supposed, would determine in
this business, being about to decide how matters should proceed most fitly,
properly, and according to the nature of things. He would therefore determine,
that the whole universe, including all creatures animate and inanimate, in all
it is actings, proceedings, revolutions, and entire series of events, should
proceed from a regard and with a view, to God, as the supreme and last end of
all: That every wheel, both great and small, in all it is rotations, should move
with a constant invariable regard to him as the ultimate end of all; as
perfectly and uniformly, as if the whole system were animated and directed by
one common soul: Or, as if such an arbiter as I have before supposed, one
possessed of perfect wisdom and rectitude, became the common soul of the
universe, and actuated and governed it in all it is motions.

THUS I have gone upon the supposition of a third person, neither creator nor
creature, but a disinterested person stepping in to judge of the concerns of
both, and state what is most fit and proper between them. The thing supposed is
impossible; but the case is nevertheless just the same as to what is most fit
and suitable in itself. For it is most certainly proper for God to act,
according to the greatest fitness, in his proceedings, and he knows what the
greatest fitness is, as much as if perfect rectitude were a distinct person to
direct him. As therefore there is no third being, beside God and the created
system, nor can be, so there is no need of any, seeing God himself is possessed
of that perfect discernment and rectitude which have been supposed. It belongs
to him as supreme arbiter, and to his infinite wisdom and rectitude, to state
all rules and measures of proceedings. And seeing these attributes of God are
infinite, and most absolutely perfect, they are not the less fit to order and
dispose, because they are in him, who is a being concerned, and not a third
person that is disinterested. -- For being interested unfits a person to be an
arbiter or judge, no otherwise than as interest tends to blind and mislead his
judgment, or incline him to act contrary to it. But that God should be in
danger of either, is contrary to the supposition of his being possessed of
discerning and justice absolutely perfect. And as there must be some supreme
judge of fitness and propriety in the universality of things, as otherwise
there could be no order nor regularity, it therefore belongs to God whose are
all things, who is perfectly fit for this office, and who alone is so to state
all things according to the most perfect fitness and rectitude, as much as if
perfect rectitude were a distinct person. We may therefore be sure it is and
will be done.

I SHOULD think that these things might incline us to suppose, that God has not
forgot himself, in the ends which he proposed in the creation of the world; but
that he has so stated these ends (however he is self-sufficient, immutable, and
independent) as therein plainly to show a supreme regard to himself. Whether
this can be, or whether God has done thus, must be considered afterward, as
also what may be objected against this view of things.

5. WHATSOEVER is good, amiable and valuable in itself, absolutely and
originally, which facts and events show that God aimed at in the creation of
the world, must be supposed to be regarded, or aimed at by God ultimately, or
as an ultimate end of creation. -- For we must suppose from the perfection of
God's nature, that whatsoever is valuable and amiable in itself, simply and
absolutely considered, God values simply for itself; it is agreeable to him
absolutely on it is own account; because God's judgment and esteem are according
to truth. He values and loves things accordingly, as they are worthy to be
valued and loved. But if God values a thing simply, and absolutely, for itself,
and on it is own account, then it is the ultimate object of his value; he don't
value it merely for the sake of a further end to be attained by it. For to
suppose that he values it only for some farther end, is in direct contradiction
to the present supposition, which is, that he values it absolutely, and for
itself. -- Hence it most clearly follows, that if that which God values
ultimately, and for itself, appears in fact and experience, to be what he seeks
by any thing he does, he must regard it as an ultimate end. And therefore if he
seeks it in creating the world, or any part of the world, it is an ultimate end
of the work of creation. -- Having got thus far, we may now proceed a step
farther, and assert.

6. WHATSOEVER thing is actually the effect or consequence of the creation of
the world, which is simply and absolutely good and valuable in itself, that
thing is an ultimate end of God's creating the world. -- We see that it is a
good that God aimed at by the creation of the world; because he has actually
attained it by that means. This is an evidence that he intended to attain, or
aimed at it. For we may justly infer what God intends, by what he actually
does; because he does nothing inadvertently, or without design. But whatever
God intends to attain from a value for it; or in other words, whatever he aims
at in his actions and works, that he values; he seeks that thing in those acts
and works. Because, for an agent to intend to attain something he values by
means he uses, is the same thing as to seek it by those means. And this is the
same as to make that thing his end in those means. Now it being by the
supposition what God values ultimately, it must therefore by the preceding
position, be aimed at by God as an ultimate end of creating the world.

SECT. II.
Some farther observations concerning those things which reason leads us to
suppose God aimed at in the creation of the world, showing particularly what
things that are absolutely good, are actually the consequence of the creation
of the world.

FROM what was last observed it seems to be the most proper and just way of
proceeding, as we would see what light reason will give us respecting the
particular end or ends God had ultimately in view in the creation of the world,
to consider what thing or things, are actually the effect or consequence of the
creation of the world, that are simply and originally valuable in themselves.
And this is what I would directly proceed to, without entering on any tedious
metaphysical enquiries wherein fitness, amiableness, or valuableness consists;
or what that is in the nature of some things, which is properly the foundation
of a worthiness of being loved and esteemed on their own account. In this I
must at present refer what I say to the sense and dictates of the reader's
mind, on sedate and calm reflection. -- I proceed to observe,

1. IT seems a thing in itself fit, proper and desirable, that the glorious
attributes of God, which consist in a sufficiency to certain acts and effects,
should be exerted in the production of such effects, as might manifest the
infinite power, wisdom, righteousness, goodness, etc. which are in God. If the
world had not been created, these attributes never would have had any exercise.
The power of God, which is a sufficiency in him to produce great effects, must
for ever have been dormant and useless as to any effect. The divine wisdom and
prudence would have had no exercise in any wise contrivance, any prudent
proceeding or disposal of things; for there would have been no objects of
contrivance or disposal. The same might be observed of God's justice, goodness
and truth. -- Indeed God might have known as perfectly that he possessed these
attributes, if they had never been exerted or expressed in any effect. But then
if the attributes which consist in a sufficiency for correspondent effects, are
in themselves excellent, the exercises of them must likewise be excellent. If
it be an excellent thing that there should be a sufficiency for a certain kind
of action or operation, the excellency of such a sufficiency must consist in
it is relation to this kind of operation or effect; but that could not be,
unless the operation itself were excellent. A sufficiency for any act or work
is no farther valuable, than the work or effect is valuable. As we must
conceive of things, the end and perfection of these attributes does as it were
consist in their exercise: (...) The end of wisdom (says Mr. (...) in his
Sermon (...) the opening of the presbyterian church of Philadelphia) is design;
the end of power is action; the end of goodness is doing good. To suppose these
perfections not to be exerted, would be to represent them as insignificant. Of
what use would God's wisdom be, if (...) had nothing to design o^ direct? To
what purpose his almightiness, if it never bro't any thing to pass? And of what
avail his goodness, if it never did any good?"
As God therefore esteems these attributes themselves valuable, and delights in
them; so it is natural to suppose that he delights in their proper exercise and
expression. For the same reason that he esteems his own sufficiency wisely to
contrive and dispose effects, he also will esteem the wise contrivance and
disposition itself. And for the same reason as he delights in his own
disposition, to do justly, and to dispose of things according to truth and just
proportion; so he must delight in such a righteous disposal itself.

2. IT seems to be a thing in itself fit and desirable, that the glorious
perfections of God should be known, and the operations and expressions of them
seen by other beings besides himself. If it be fit, that God's power and
wisdom, etc. should be exercised and expressed in some effects, and not lie
eternally dormant, then it seems proper that these exercises should appear, and
not be totally hidden and unknown. For if they are, it will be just the same as
to the above purpose, as if they were not. God as perfectly knew himself and
his perfections, had as perfect an idea of the exercises and effects they were
sufficient for, antecedently to any such actual operations of them, as since.
If therefore it be nevertheless a thing in itself valuable, and worthy to be
desired, that these glorious perfections be actually expressed and exhibited in
their correspondent effects; then it seems also, that the knowledge of these
perfections, and the expressions and discoveries that are made of them, is a
thing valuable in itself absolutely considered; and that it is desirable that
this knowledge should exist. As God's perfections are things in themselves
excellent, so the expression of them in their proper acts and fruits is
excellent; and the knowledge of these excellent perfections, and of these
glorious expressions of them, is an excellent thing, the existence of which is
in itself valuable and desirable. -- It Is a thing infinitely good in itself
that God's glory should be known by a glorious society of created beings. And
that there should be in them an increasing knowledge of God to all eternity, is
an existence, a reality infinitely worthy to be, and worthy to be valued and
regarded by him, to whom it belongs to order that to be, which, of all things
possible, is fittest and best. If existence is more worthy than defect and
nonentity, and if any created existence is in itself worthy to be, then
knowledge or understanding is a thing worthy to be; and if any knowledge, then
the most excellent sort of knowledge, viz. that of God and his glory. The
existence of the created universe consists as much in it as in any thing: Yea
this knowledge, is one of the highest, most real and substantial parts, of all
created existence, most remote from nonentity and defect.

3. As it is a thing valuable and desirable in itself that God's glory should
be seen and known, so when known, it seems equally reasonable and fit, it
should be valued and esteemed, loved and delighted in, answerably to it is
dignity. There is no more reason to esteem it a fit and suitable thing that
God's glory should be known, or that there should be an idea in the
understanding corresponding unto the glorious object, than that there should be
a corresponding disposition or affection in the will. If the perfection itself
be excellent, the knowledge of it is excellent, and so is the esteem and love
of it excellent. And as it is fit that God should love and esteem his own
excellence, it is also fit that he should value and esteem the love of his
excellency. For if it becomes any being greatly to value another, then it
becomes him to love to have him valued and esteemed: And if it becomes a being
highly to value himself, it is fit that he should love to have himself valued
and esteemed. If the idea of God's perfection in the understanding be valuable,
then the love of the heart seems to be more especially valuable, as moral
beauty especially consists in the disposition and affection of the heart.

4. As there is an infinite fullness of all possible good in God, a fullness of
every perfection, of all excellency and beauty, and of infinite happiness. And
as this fullness is capable of communication or emanation ad extra; so it seems
a thing amiable and valuable in itself that it should be communicated or flow
forth, that this infinite fountain of good should send forth abundant streams,
that this infinite fountain of light should, diffusing it is excellent fullness,
pour forth light all around. -- And as this is in itself excellent, so a
disposition to this, in the divine being, must be looked upon as a perfection
or an excellent disposition, such an emanation of good is, in some sense, a
multiplication of it; so far as the communication or external stream may be
looked upon as any thing besides the fountain, so far it may be looked on as an
increase of good. And if the fullness of good that is in the fountain, is in
itself excellent and worthy to exist, then the emanation, or that which is as
it were an increase, repetition or multiplication of it, is excellent and
worthy to exist. Thus it is fit, since there is an infinite fountain of light
and knowledge, that this light should shine forth in beams of communicated
knowledge and understanding: And as there is an infinite fountain of holiness,
moral excellence and beauty, so it should flow out in communicated holiness. --
And that as there is an infinite fullness of joy and happiness, so these should
have an emanation, and become a fountain flowing out in abundant streams, as
beams from the sun.

FROM this view it appears another way to be a thing in itself valuable, that
there should be such things as the knowledge of God's glory in other beings,
and an high esteem of it, love to it, and delight and complacence in it: This
appears I say in another way, viz. as these things are but the emanations of
God's own knowledge, holiness and joy.

THUS it appears reasonable to suppose, that it was what God had respect to as
an ultimate end of his creating the world, to communicate of his own infinite
fullness of good; or rather it was his last end, that there might be a glorious
and abundant emanation of his infinite fullness of Good ad extra, or without
himself, and the disposition to communicate himself, or diffuse his own
FULLNESS, I shall often use the phrase God's fullness, as signifying and
comprehending all the good which is in God natural and moral, either excellence
or happiness: partly because I know of no better phrase to be used in this
general meaning; and partly because I am led hereto by some of the inspired
writers, particularly the apostle Paul, who often uses the phrase in this
sense.
which we must conceive of as being originally in God as a perfection of his
nature, was what moved him to create the world. But here as much as possible to
avoid confusion, I observe, that there is some impropriety in saying that a
disposition in God to communicate himself to the creature, moved him to create
the world. For though the diffusive disposition in the nature of God, that moved
him to create the world, doubtless inclines him to communicate himself to the
creature, when the creature exists; yet this cannot be all: Because an
inclination in God to communicate himself to an object, seems to presuppose the
existence of the object, at least in idea. But the diffusive disposition that
excited God to give creatures existence, was rather a communicative disposition
in general, or a disposition in the fullness of the divinity to flow out and
diffuse itself. Thus the disposition there is in the root and stock of a tree
to diffuse and send forth it is sap and life, is doubtless the reason of the
communication of it is sap and life to it is buds, leaves and fruits, after these
exist. But a disposition to communicate of it is life and sap to it is fruits, is
not so properly the cause of it is producing those fruits, as it is disposition
to communicate itself, or diffuse it is sap and life in general. Therefore to
speak more strictly according to truth, we may suppose, that a disposition in
God, as an original property of his nature, to an emanation of his own infinite
fullness, was what excited him to create the world; and so that the emanation
itself was aimed at by him as a last end of the creation.

SECT. III.
WHerein it is considered how, on the supposition of God's making the
forementioned things his last end, he manifests a supreme and ultimate regard
to himself in all his works.

IN the last section I observed some things, which are actually the consequence
of the creation of the world, which seem absolutely valuable in themselves, and
so worthy to be made God's last end in this work. I now proceed to enquire, how
God's making such things as these his last end is consistent with his making
himself his last end, or his manifesting an ultimate respect to himself in his
acts and works. Because this is a thing I have observed as agreeable to the
dictates of reason, that in all his proceedings he should set himself highest.
-- Therefore I would endeavor to show with respect to each of the
forementioned things, 'that God, in making them his end, makes himself his end,
so as in all to show a supreme and ultimate respect to himself; and how his
infinite love to himself and delight in himself, will naturally cause him to
value and delight in these things: Or rather how a value to these things is
implied in his love to himself, or value of that infinite fullness of good that
is in himself.

Now with regard to the first of the particulars mentioned above, viz. God's
regard to the exercise and expression of those attributes of his nature, in
their proper operations and effects, which consist in a sufficiency for these
operations, it is not hard to conceive that God's regard to himself, and value
for his own perfections, should cause him to value these exercises and
expressions of his perfections; and that a love to them will dispose him to
love their exhibition and exertment: Inasmuch as their excellency consists in
their relation to use, exercise and operation; as the excellency of wisdom
consists in it is relation to, and sufficiency for, wise designs and effects.
God's love to himself, and his own attributes, will therefore make him delight
in that, which is the use, end and operation of these attributes. If one highly
esteem and delight in the virtues of a friend, as wisdom, justice, etc. that
have relation to action, this will make him delight in the exercise and genuine
effects of these virtues: So if God both esteem, and delight in his own
perfections and virtues, he cannot but value and delight in the expressions and
genuine effects of them. So that in delighting in the expressions of his
perfections, he manifests a delight in his own perfections themselves: Or in
other words, he manifests a delight in himself; and in making these expressions
of his own perfections his end, he makes himself his end.

AND with respect to the second and third particulars, the matter is no less
plain. For he that loves any being, and has a disposition highly to prize, and
greatly to delight in his virtues and perfections, must from the same
disposition be well pleased to have his excellencies known, acknowledged,
esteemed and prized by others. He that loves and approves any being or thing,
he naturally loves and approves the love and approbation of that thing, and is
opposite to the disapprobation and contempt of it. Thus it is when one loves
another, and highly prizes the virtues of a friend. And thus it is fit it
should be, if it be fit that the other should be beloved, and his qualification
prized. And therefore thus it will necessarily be, if a being loves himself and
highly prizes his own excellencies: And thus it is fit it should be, if it be
fit he should thus love himself, and prize his own valuable qualities. That is,
it is fit that he should take delight in his own excellencies being seen,
acknowledged, esteemed, and delighted in. This is implied in a love to himself
and his own perfections. And in seeking this, and making this his end, he seeks
himself, and makes himself his end.

AND with respect to the fourth and last particular, viz. God's being disposed
to an abundant communication, and glorious emanation of that infinite fullness
of good which he possesses in himself; as of his own knowledge, excellency, and
happiness, in the manner which he does; if we thoro'ly and properly consider
the matter, it will appear, that herein also God makes himself his end, in such
a sense, as plainly to manifest and testify a supreme and ultimate regard to
himself.

MERELY in this disposition to diffuse himself, or to cause an emanation of his
glory and fullness, which is prior to the existence of any other being, and is
to be considered as the inciting cause of creation, or giving existence to
other beings, God cannot so properly be said to make the creature his end, as
himself. -- For the creature is not as yet considered as existing. This
disposition or desire in God, must be prior to the existence of the creature,
even in intention and foresight. For it is a disposition that is the original
ground of the existence of the creature; and even of the future intended and
foreseen existence of the creature. -- God's love, or benevolence, as it
respects the creature, may be taken either in a larger, or stricter sense. In a
larger sense it may signify nothing diverse from that good disposition in his
nature to communicate of his own fullness in general; as his knowledge, his
holiness, and happiness; and to give creatures existence in order to it. This
may be called benevolence or love, because it is the same good disposition that
is exercised in love: It Is the very fountain from whence love originally
proceeds, when taken in the most proper sense; and it has the same general
tendency and effect in the creature's well-being. -- But yet this cannot have
any particular present or future created existence for its object; because it
is prior to any such object, and the very source of the futurition of the
existence of it. Nor is it really diverse from God's love to himself; as will
more clearly appear afterward.

BUT God's love may be taken more strictly, for this general disposition to
communicate good, as directed to particular objects: Love in the most strict
and proper sense, presupposes the existence of the object beloved, at least in
idea and expectation, and represented to the mind as future. God did not love
angels in the strictest sense, but in consequence of his intending to create
them, and so having an idea of future existing angels. Therefore his love to
them was not properly what excited him to intend to create them. Love or
benevolence strictly taken, presupposes an existing object, as much as pity, a
miserable suffering object.

THIS propensity in God to diffuse himself, may be considered as a propensity
to himself diffused; or to his own glory existing in its emanation. A respect
to himself, or an infinite propensity to, and delight in his own glory, is that
which causes him to incline to its being abundantly diffused, and to delight in
the emanation of it. Thus that nature in a tree, by which it puts forth buds,
shoots out branches, and brings forth leaves and fruit, is a disposition that
terminates in its own complete self. And so the disposition in the sun to
shine, or abundantly to diffuse its fullness, warmth and brightness, is only a
tendency to its own most glorious and complete state. So God looks on the
communication of himself, and the emanation of the infinite glory and good that
are in himself to belong to the fullness and compleatness of himself; as though he
were not in his most complete and glorious state without it. Thus the church of
Christ (toward whom, and in whom are the emanations of his glory and
communications of his fullness) is called the fullness of Christ: As though he were
not in his complete state without her; as Adam was in a defective state without
Eve. And the church is called the glory of Christ, as the woman is the glory of
the man, I Cor. xi. 7. -- Isai. xlvi. 13. I will place salvation in Zion, for
Israel my glory. Very remarkable is that place, Joh. xii. 23, 24. "And Jesus
answered them saying: the hour is come that the son of man should be glorified.
Verily I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it
abides alone; but if it die it brings forth much fruit." He had respect
herein, to the blessed fruits of Christ's death, in the conversion, salvation,
and eternal happiness and holiness of those that should be redeemed by him.
This consequence of his death, he calls his glory; and his obtaining this fruit
he calls his being glorified: As the flourishing beautiful produce of a corn of
wheat sown in the ground is its glory. Without this he is alone as Adam was
before Eve was created: But from him by his death proceeds a glorious
offspring; in which he is communicated, that is his fullness and glory: As from
Adam in his deep sleep proceeds the woman a beautiful companion to fill his
emptiness, and relieve his solitariness. By Christ's death, his fullness is
abundantly diffused in many streams; and expressed in the beauty and glory of a
great multitude of his spiritual offspring.
-- Indeed after the creatures are intended to be created, God may be conceived
of as being moved by benevolence to these creatures, in the strictest sense, in
his dealings with, and works about them. His exercising his goodness, and
gratifying his benevolence to them in particular, may be the spring of all
God's proceedings through the universe; as being now the determined way of
gratifying his general inclination to diffuse himself. Here God's acting for
himself, or making himself his last end, and his acting for their sake, are not
to be set in opposition; or to be considered as the opposite parts of a
disjunction: They are rather to be considered as coinciding one with the other,
and implied one in the other. But yet God is to be considered as first and
original in his regard; and the creature is the object of God's regard
consequentially and by implication as being as it were comprehended in God; as
shall be more particularly observed presently.

BUT how God's value for and delight in the emanations of his fullness in the
work of creation, argues his delight in the infinite fullness of good there is
in himself, and the supreme respect and regard he has for himself; and that in
making these emanations of himself his end, he does ultimately make himself his
end in creation, will more clearly appear by considering more particularly the
nature and circumstances of these communications of God's fullness which are
made, and which we have reason either from the nature of things, or the word of
God to suppose shall be made.

ONE part of that divine fullness which is communicated, is the-divine
knowledge. That communicated knowledge which must be supposed to pertain to
God's last end in creating the world, is the creatures knowledge of him. For
this is the end of all other knowledge: And even the faculty of understanding
would be vain without this. And this knowledge is most properly a communication
of God's infinite knowledge which primarily consists in the knowledge of
himself. God in making this his end, makes himself his end. This knowledge in
the creature, is but a conformity to God. It Is the image of God's own knowledge
of himself. It Is a participation of the same: It Is as much the same as it is
possible for that to be, which is infinitely less in degree: As particular
beams of the sun communicated, are the light and glory of the sun in part.

BESIDES God's perfections, or his glory, is the object of this knowledge, or
the thing known; so that God is glorified in it, as hereby his excellency is
seen. As therefore God values himself, as he delights in his own knowledge; he
must delight in every thing of that nature: As he delights in his own light, he
must delight in every beam of that light: And as he highly values his own
excellency, he must be well pleased in having it manifested, and so glorified.

ANOTHER thing wherein the emanation of divine fullness that is, and will be
made in consequence of the creation of the world, is the communication of
virtue and holiness to the creature. This is a communication of God's holiness;
so that hereby the creature partakes of God's own moral excellency; which is
properly the beauty of the divine nature. And as God delights in his own
beauty, he must necessarily delight in the creatures holiness; which is a
conformity to, and participation of it, as truly as the brightness of a jewel,
held in the sun's beams, is a participation, or derivation of the sun's
brightness, though immensly less in degree. -- And then it must be considered
wherein this holiness in the creature consists; viz. in love, which is the
comprehension of all true virtue; and primarily in love to God, which is
exercised in an high esteem of God, admiration of his perfections, complacency
in them, and praise of them. All which things are nothing else but the hearts
exalting, magnifying, or glorifying God; which as I showed before, God
necessarily approves of, and is pleased with, as he loves himself, and values
the glory of his own nature.

ANOTHER part of God's fullness which he communicates, is his happiness. This
happiness consists in enjoying and rejoicing in himself: And so does also the
creatures happiness. It Is, as has been observed of the other, a participation
of what is in God; and God and his glory are the objective ground of it. The
happiness of the creature consists in rejoicing in God; by which also God is
magnified and exalted: Joy, or the exulting of the heart in God's glory, is one
thing that belongs to praise. -- So that God is all in all, with respect to
each part of that communication of the divine fullness which is made to the
creature. What is communicated is divine, or something of God: And each
communication is of that nature, that the creature to whom it is made, is
thereby conformed to God, and united to him; and that in proportion as the
communication is greater or less. And the communication itself, is no other, in
the very nature of it, than that wherein the very honor, exaltation and praise
of God consists.

AND it is farther to be considered, that the thing which God aimed at in the
creation of the world, as the end which he had ultimately in view, was that
communication of himself, which he intended throughout all eternity. And if we
attend to the nature and circumstances of this eternal emanation of divine
good, it will more clearly show how in making this his end, God testifies a
supreme respect to himself, and makes himself his end. There are many reasons
to think that what God has in view, in an increasing communication of himself
throughout eternity, is an increasing knowledge of God, love to him, and joy in
him. -- And it is to be considered that the more those divine communications
increase in the creature, the more it becomes one with God: For so much the
more is it united to God in love, the heart is drawn nearer and nearer to God,
and the union with him becomes more firm and close: and at the same time the
creature becomes more and more conformed to God. The image is more and more
perfect, and so the good that is in the creature comes forever nearer and
nearer to an identity with that which is in God. In the view therefore of God,
who has a comprehensive prospect of the increasing union and conformity through
eternity, it must be an infinitely strict and perfect nearness, conformity, and
oneness. For it will for ever come nearer and nearer to that strictness and
perfection of union which there is between the Father and the Son: So that in
the eyes of God, who perfectly sees the whole of it, in its infinite progress
and increase, it must come to an eminent fulfillment of Christ's request, in
Joh. xvii. 21, 23. -- "That they all may be one, as thou father art in me, and
I in thee, that they also may be one in us, I in them and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one." In this view, those elect creatures which must be
looked upon as the end of all the rest of the creation, considered with respect
to the whole of their eternal duration, and as such made God's end, must be
viewed as being, as it were, one with God. They were respected as brought home
to him, united with him, centering most perfectly in him, and as it were
swallowed up in him: so that his respect to them finally coincides and becomes
one and the same with respect to himself. -- The interest of the creature, is,
as it were, God's own interest, in proportion to the degree of their relation
and union to God. Thus the interest of a man's family is looked upon as the
same with his own interest; because of the relation they stand in to him; his
propriety in them, and their strict union with him. But consider God's elect
creatures with respect to their eternal duration, so they are infinitely dearer
to God, than a man's family is to him. -- What has been said, shows that as all
things are from God as their first cause and fountain; so all things tend to
him, and in their progress come nearer and nearer to him through all eternity:
which argues that he who is their first cause is their last end.

SECT. IV.
Some objections considered which may be made against the reasonableness of
what has been said of God's making himself his last end.

Object. 1. Some may object against what has been said, as inconsistent with
God's absolute independence and immutability: particularly the representation
that has been made, as though God were inclined to a communication of his fullness
and emanations of his own glory, as being his own most glorious and complete
state. It may be though it that this don't well consist with God's being
self-existent from all eternity; absolutely perfect in himself, in the
possession of infinite and independent good. And that in general, to suppose
that God makes himself his end, in the creation of the world, seems to suppose
that he aims at some interest or happiness of his own, not easily reconcilable
with his being happy, perfectly and infinitely happy in himself. If it could be
supposed that God needed any thing; or that the goodness of his creatures could
extend to him; or that they could be profitable to him; it might be fit, that
God should make himself, and his own interest, his highest and last end in
creating the world: and there would be some reason and ground for the
preceding discourse. But seeing that God is above all need and all capacity of
being added to and advanced, made better or happier in any respect; to what
purpose should God make himself his end; or seek to advance himself in any
respect by any of his works? How absurd is it to suppose that God should do
such great things with a view to obtain, what he is already most perfectly
possessed of, and was so from all eternity; and therefore cannot now possibly
need, nor with any color of reason be supposed to seek?

Answer 1. MANY have wrong notions of God's happiness, as resulting from his
absolute self-sufficience, independence, and immutability. Though it be true,
that God's glory and happiness are in and of himself, are infinite and cannot be
added to, unchangeable for the whole and every part of which he is perfectly
independent of the creature; yet it don't hence follow, nor is it true, that
God has no real and proper delight, pleasure or happiness, in any of his acts
or communications relative to the creature; or effects he produces in them; or
in any thing he sees in the creatures qualifications, dispositions, actions and
state. God may have a real and proper pleasure or happiness in seeing the happy
state of the creature: yet this may not be different from his delight in
himself; being a delight in his own infinite goodness; or the exercise of that
glorious propensity of his nature to diffuse and communicate himself, and so
gratifying this inclination of his own heart. -- This delight which God has in
his creature's happiness, cannot properly be said to be what God receives from
the creature. For it is only the effect of his own work in, and communications
to the creature; in making it, and admiting it to a participation of his
fullness. As the sun receives nothing from the jewel that receives its light,
and shines only by a participation of its brightness.

WITH respect also to the creature's holiness; God may have a proper delight
and joy in imparting this to the creature, as gratifying hereby his
inclination, to communicate of his own excellent fullness. God may delight with
true and great pleasure in beholding that beauty which is an image and
communication of his own beauty, an expression and manifestation of his own
loveliness. And this is so far from being an instance of his happiness not
being in and ^^om himself, that it is an evidence that he is happy in himself,
or delights and has pleasure in his own beauty. If he did not take pleasure in
the expression of his own beauty, it would rather be an evidence that he don't
delight in his own beauty; that he has not his happiness and enjoyment in his
own beauty and perfection. -- So that if we suppose God has real pleasure and
happiness in the holy love and praise of his saints, as the image and
communication of his own holiness, it is not properly any pleasure distinct
from the pleasure he has in himself; but is truly an instance of it.

AND with respect to God's being glorified in this respect, that those
perfections wherein his glory consists, are exercised and expressed in their
proper and corresponding effects; as his wisdom in wise designs and
well-contrived works, -- his power in great effects -- his justice in acts of
righteousness -- his goodness in communicating happiness; and so his showing
forth the glory of his own nature, in its being exercised, exhibited,
communicated, known, and esteemed: his having delight herein does not argu^
that his pleasure or happiness is not in himself, and his own glory; but the
contrary. This is the necessary consequence of his delighting in the glory of
his nature, that he delights in the emanation and effulgence of it.

NOR do any of these things argue any dependence in God on the creature for
happiness. Though he has real pleasure in the creature's holiness and happiness;
yet this is not properly any pleasure which he receives from the creature. For
these things are what he gives the creature. They are wholly and entirely from
him. Therefore they are nothing that they give to God by which they add to him.
His rejoicing therein, is rather a rejoicing in his own acts, and his own glory
expressed in those acts, than a joy derived from the creature. God's joy is
dependent on nothing besides his own act, which he exerts with an absolute and
independent power. And yet, in some sense it can be truly said that God has the
more delight and pleasure for the holiness and happiness of his creatures.
Because God would be less happy, if he was less good: or if he had not that
perfection of nature which consists in a propensity of nature to diffuse of his
own fullness. And he would be less happy, if it were possible for him to be
hindered in the exercise of his goodness, and his other perfections in their
proper effects. But he has complete happiness, because he has these
perfections, and cannot be hindered in exercising and displaying them in their
proper effects. And this surely is not thus, because he is dependent; but
because he is independent on any other that should hinder him.

FROM this view it appears, that nothing that has been said is in the least
inconsistent with those expressions in the Scripture that signify that man
cannot be profitable to God; that he receives nothing of us by any of our wisdom
and righteousness. For these expressions plainly mean no more than that God is
absolutely independent of us; that we have nothing of our own, no stock from
whence we can give to God; and that no part of his happiness originates from
man.

FROM what has been said it appears, that the pleasure that God has in those
things which have been mentioned, is rather a pleasure in diffusing and
communicating to the creature, than in receiving from the creature. Surely,
it is no argument of indigence in God, that he is inclined to communicate of his
infinite fullness. It Is no argument of the emptiness or deficiency of a
fountain, that it is inclined to overflow. -- Another thing signified by these
expressions of scripture is, that nothing that is from the creature, adds to or
alters God's happiness, as though it were changeable either by increase or
diminution. Nor does any thing that has been advanced in the least suppose or
infer that it does, or is it in the least inconsistent with the eternity, and
most absolute immutability of God's pleasure and happiness. -- For though these
communications of God, these exercises, operations, effects and expressions of
his glorious perfections, which God rejoices in, are in time; yet his joy in
them is without beginning or change. They were always equally present in the
divine mind. He beheld them with equal clearness certainty and fullness in every
respect, as he does now. They were always equally present; as with him there is
no variableness or succession. He ever beheld and enjoyed them perfectly in his
own independent and immutable power and will. And his view of, and joy in them
is eternally, absolutely perfect unchangeable and independent. It cannot be
added to or diminished by the power or will of any creature: nor is in the
least dependent on any thing mutable or contingent.

2. IF any are not satisfied with the preceding answer, but still insist on
the objection: let them consider whether they can devise any other scheme of
God's last end in creating the world, but what will be equally obnoxious to
this objection in its full force, if there be any force in it. For if God had
any last end in creating the world, then there was something, in some respect
future, that he aimed at, and designed to bring to pass by creating the world:
something that was agreeable to his inclination or will: let that be his own
glory, or the happiness of his creatures, or what it will. Now if there be
something that God seeks as agreeable, or grateful to him, then in the
accomplishment of it he is gratifyed. If the last end which he seeks in the
creation of the world, be truly a thing grateful to him, (as certainly it is if
it be truly his end and truly the object of his will) then it is what he takes
a real delight and pleasure in. But then according to the argument of the
objection, how he can have any thing future to desire or seek, who is already
perfectly, eternally and immutably satisfied in himself? What can remain for
him to take any delight in or to be further gratifyed by, whose eternal and
unchangeable delight is in himself as his own complete object of enjoyment.
Thus the objector will be pressed with his own objection; let him embrace what
notion he will of God's end in the creation. And I think he has no way left to
answer but that which has been taken above.

IT may therefore be proper here to observe, that let what will be God's last
end, that, he must have a real and proper pleasure in: Whatever be the proper
object of his will, he is gratified in. And the thing is either grateful to him
in itself; or for something else for which he wills it: And so is his further
end. But whatever is God's last end, that he wills for it is own sake; as
grateful to him in it self: or which is the same thing; it is that which he
truly delights in; or in which he has some degree of true and proper pleasure.
Otherwise we must deny any such thing as will in God with respect to any thing
brought to pass in time; and so must deny his work of creation, or any work of
his providence to be truly voluntary. But we have as much reason to suppose
that God's works in creating and governing the world, are properly the fruits
of his will, as of his understanding. And if there be any such thing at all, as
what we mean by acts of will in God; then he is not indifferent whether his
will be fulfilled or not. And if he is not indifferent, then he is truly
gratified and pleased in the fulfillment of his will: or which is the same
thing, he has a pleasure in it. And if he has a real pleasure in attaining his
end, then the attainment of it belongs to his happiness. That in which God's
delight or pleasure in any measure consists, his happiness in some measure
consists. To suppose that God has pleasure in things, that are brought to pass
in time, only figuratively and metaphorically; is to suppose that he exercises
will about these things, and makes them his end only metaphorically.

3. THE doctrine that makes God's creatures and not himself, to be his last
end, is a doctrine the farthest from having a favorable aspect on God's
absolute self-sufficience and independence. It far less agrees therewith than
the doctrine against which this is objected. For we must conceive of the
efficient as depending on his ultimate end. He depends on this end, in his
desires, aims, actions and pursuits; so that he fails in all his desires
actions and pursuits, if he fails of his end. -- Now if God himself be his last
end, then in his dependence on his end, he depends on nothing but himself. If
all things be of him, and to him, and he the first and the last, this shows him
to be all in all: He is all to himself. He goes not out of himself in what he
seeks; but his desires and pursuits as they originate from, so they terminate
in himself; and he is dependent on none but himself in the beginning or end of
any of his exercises or operations. But if not himself, but the creature, be
his last end, then as he depends on his last end, he is in some sort dependent
on the creature.

Object. 2. SOME may object, that to suppose that God makes himself his highest
and last end, is dishonorable to him; as it in effect supposes, that God does
every thing from a selfish spirit. Selfishness is looked upon as mean and
sordid in the creature! unbecoming and even hateful in such a worm of the dust
as man. We should look upon a man as of a base and contemptible character, that
should in every thing he did, be governed by selfish principles; should make
his private interest his governing aim in all his conduct in life. How far then
should we be from attributing any such thing to the supreme Being, the blessed
and only potentate! Does it not become us to ascribe to him, the most noble and
generous dispositions; and those qualities that are the most remote from every
thing that is private, narrow and sordid?

Ans. 1. SUCH an objection must arise from a very ignorant or inconsiderate
notion of the vice of selfishness, and the virtue of generosity. It by
selfishness be meant, a disposition in any being to regard himself; this is no
otherwise vicious or unbecoming, than as one is less than a multitude; and so
the public weal is of greater value than his particular interest. Among created
beings one single person must be looked upon as inconsiderable in comparison of
the generality; and so his interest as of little importance compared with the
interest of the whole system: Therefore in them, a disposition to prefer self,
as if it were more than all is exceeding vicious. But it is vicious on no other
account, than as it is a disposition that don't agree with the nature of
things; and that which is indeed the greatest good. And a disposition in any
one to forego his own interest for the sake of others, is no further excellent,
no further worthy the name of generosity than it is a treating things according
to their true value; a prosecuting something most worthy to be prosecuted; an
expression of a disposition to prefer something to self-interest, that is
indeed preferable in it self. -- But if God be indeed so great, and so
excellent, that all other beings are as nothing to him, and all other
excellency be as nothing and less than nothing, and vanity in comparison of
his; and God be omniscient and infallible and perfectly knows that he is
infinitely the most valuable being; then it is fit that his heart should be
agreeable to this, which is indeed the true nature and proportion of things and
agreeable to this infallible and all-comprehending understanding which he has of
them, and that perfectly clear light in which he views them: and so it is fit
and suitable that he should value himself infinitely more than his creatures.

2. IN created beings, a regard to self-interest may properly be set in
opposition to the public welfare; because the private interest of one person
may be inconsistent with the public good: at least it may be so in the
apprehension of that person. That, which this person looks upon as his interest
may interfere with, or oppose the general good -- Hence his private interest
may be regarded and pursued in opposition to the public -- But this cannot be
with respect to the supreme Being, the author and head of the whole system; on
whom all absolutely depend; who is the fountain of being and good to the whole.
It is more absurd, to suppose that his interest should be opposite to the
interest of the universal system, than that the welfare of the head, heart and
vitals of the natural body, should be opposite to the welfare of the body. And
it is impossible that God who is omniscient should apprehend the matter thus;
viz. his interest, as being inconsistent with the good and interest of the
whole.

3. GOD's seeking himself in the creation of the world, in the manner which has
been supposed, is so far from being inconsistent with the good of his
creatures, or any possibility of being so; that it is a kind of regard to
himself that inclines him to seek the good of his creature. It is a regard to
himself that disposes him to diffuse and communicate himself. It is such a
delight in his own internal fullness and glory, that disposes him to an abundant
effusion and emanation of that glory. The same disposition, that inclines him
to delight in his glory, causes him to delight in the exhibitions, expressions
and communications of it. This is a natural conclusion -- If there were any
person of such a taste and disposition of mind, that the brightness and light
of the sun seemed unlovely to him, he would be willing that the sun's
brightness and light should be retained within itself: But they, that delight
in it, to whom it appears lovely and glorious, will esteem it an amiable and
glorious thing to have it diffused and communicated through the world.

HERE by the way it may be properly considered, whether some writers are not
chargeable with inconsistence in this respect, viz. that whereas they speak
against the doctrine of God's making himself his own highest and last end, as
though this were an ignoble selfishness in God: when indeed he only is fit to be
made the highest end, by himself and all other beings; in as much as he is the
highest Being, and infinitely greater and more worthy than all others. -- Yet
with regard to creatures, who are infinitely less worthy of supreme and
ultimate regard, they (in effect at least) suppose that they necessarily at all
times seek their own happiness, and make it their ultimate end in all, even
their most virtuous actions: And that this principle, regulated by wisdom and
prudence, as leading to that which is their true and highest happiness is the
foundation of all virtue and every thing that is morally good and excellent in
them.

Object. 3. To what has been has been supposed, that God makes himself his end
in this way, viz. in seeking that his glory and excellent perfection should be
known, esteemed, loved and delighted in by his creatures, it may be objected,
that this seems unworthy of God. It is considered as below a truly great man,
to be much influenced in his conduct, by a desire of popular applause. The
notice and admiration of a gazing multitude, would be esteemed but a low end,
to be aimed at by a prince or philosopher, in any great and noble enterprise.
How much more is it unworthy the great God, to perform his magnificent works,
e. g. the creation of the vast universe, out of regard to the notice and
admiration of worms of the dust: That the displays of his magnificence may be
gazed at, and applauded by those who are infinitely more beneath him, than the
meanest rabble are beneath the greatest prince or philosopher.

THIS objection is specious. It has a show of argument; but it will appear to
be nothing but a show, if we consider,

1. WHETHER or no it be not worthy of God, to regard and value what is
excellent and valuable in itself; and so to take pleasure in its existence.

IT seems not liable to any doubt, that there could be nothing future, or no
future existence worthy to be desired or sought by God, and so worthy to be
made his end, if no future existence was valuable and worthy to be brought to
effect. If when the world was not, there was any possible future thing fit and
valuable in itself, I think the knowledge of God's glory, and the esteem and
love of it must be so. Understanding and will are the highest kind of created
existence. And if they be valuable, it must be in their exercise. But the
highest and most excellent kind of their exercise, is in some actual knowledge
and exercise of will. And certainly the most excellent actual knowledge and
will, that can be in the creature, is the knowledge and the love of God. And
the most true excellent knowledge of God is the knowledge of his glory or moral
excellence: and the most excellent exercise of the will consists in esteem and
love and a delight in his glory. -- If any created existence is in itself
worthy to be, or any thing that ever was future is worthy of existence, such a
communication of divine fullness, such an emanation and expression of the divine
glory is worthy of existence. But if nothing that ever was future was worthy to
exist, then no future thing was worthy to be aimed at by God in creating the
world. And if nothing was worthy to be aimed at in creation, then nothing was
worthy to be God's end in creation.

IF God's own excellency and glory is worthy to be highly valued and delighted
in by him, then the value and esteem hereof by others, is worthy to be regarded
by him: for this is a necessary consequence. To make this plain, let it be
considered how it is with regard to the excellent qualities of another. If we
highly value the virtues and excellencies of a friend, in proportion as we do
so, we shall approve of and like others esteem of them; and shall disapprove
and dislike the contempt of them. If these virtues are truly valuable, they are
worthy that we should thus approve others esteem, and disapprove their contempt
of them. -- And the case is the same with respect to any Being's own qualities
or attributes. If he highly esteems them, and greatly delights in them, he will
naturally and necessarily love to see esteem of them in others, and dislike
their disesteem. And if the attributes are worthy to be highly esteemed by the
Being who has them, so is the esteem of them in others worthy to be
proportionably approved and regarded. -- I desire it may be considered, whether
it be unfit that God should be displeased with contempt of himself? If not, but
on the contrary it be fit and suitable that he should be displeased with this,
there is the same reason that he should be pleased with the proper love esteem
and honor of himself.

THE matter may be also cleared, by considering what it would become us to
approve of and value with respect to any public society we belong to, e. g. our
nation or country. It becomes us to love our country; and therefore it becomes
us to value the just honor of our country. But the same that it becomes us to
value and desire for a friend, and the same that it becomes us to desire and
seek for the community, the same does it become God to value and seek for
himself; that is on supposition it becomes God to love himself as well as it
does men to love a friend or the public; which I think has been before proved.
--

Here are two things that ought particularly to be adverted to -- 1. That in
God the love of himself, and the love of the public are not to be
distinguished, as in man. Because God's Being as it were comprehends all. His
existence, being infinite, must be equivalent to universal existence. And for
the same reason that public affection in the creature is fit and beautiful,
God's regard to himself must be ^o likewise. -- 2. In God, the love of what is
fit and decent, or the love of virtue, cannot be a distinct thing from the love
of himself. Because the love of God is that wherein all virtue and holiness
does primarily and chiefly consist, and God's own holiness must primarily
consist in the love of himself; as was before observed. And if God's holiness
consists in love to himself, then it will imply an approbation of and
pleasedness with the esteem and loveliness of him in others. For a Being that
loves himself, necessarily loves* Love to himself. If holiness in God consist
chiefly in love to himself, holiness in the creature must chiefly consist in
love to him. And if God loves holiness in himself, he must love it in the
creature.

VIRTUE by such of the late philosophers as seem to be in chief repute, is
placed in public affection or general benevolence. And if the essence of virtue
lies primarily in this, then the love of virtue it self is virtuous, no
otherwise, than as it is implied in or arises from this public affection, or
extensive benevolence of mind. Because if a man truly loves the public, he
necessarily loves Love to the public.

Now therefore, for the same reason, if universal benevolence in the highest
sense, be the same thing with benevolence to the divine Being, who is in effect
universal Being, it will follow, that love to virtue itself is no otherwise
virtuous, than as it is implied in or arises from love to the divine Being.
Consequently God's own love to virtue is implied in love to himself: and is
virtuous no otherwise than as it arises from love to himself. So that God's
virtuous disposition, appearing in love to holiness in the creature, is to be
resolved into the same thing with love to himself. And consequently
whereinsoever he makes virtue his end he makes himself his end. -- In fine, God
being as it were an all comprehending being, all his moral perfections, as his
holiness, justice, grace and benevolence are some way or other to be resolved
into a supreme and infinite regard to himself: and if so it will be easy to
suppose that it becomes him to make himself his supreme and last end in his
works.

I WOULD here observe by the way, that if any insist that it becomes God to
love and take delight in the virtue of his creatures for its own sake, in such
a manner as not to love it from regard to himself; and that it supposes too
much selfishn^ss to suppose that all God's delight in virtue is to be resolved
into delight in himself: This will contradict a former objection against God's
taking pleasure in communications of himself; viz. that inasmuch as God is
perfectly independent and self-sufficient therefore all his happiness and
pleasure consists in the enjoyment of himself. For in the present objection it
is insisted that it becomes God to have some pleasure, love or delight in
virtue distinct from his delight in himself. So that if the same persons make
both objections they must be inconsistent with themselves.

2. IN answer to the objection we are upon; as to God's creatures whose esteem
and love he seeks, being infinitely inferior to God as nothing and vanity. -- I
would observe that it is not unworthy of God to take pleasure in that which in
itself is fit and amiable, even in those that are infinitely below him. If
there be infinite grace and condescension in it, yet these are not unworthy of
God; but infinitely to his honor and glory.

THEY who insist that God's own glory was not an ultimate end of his creation
of the world; but that all that he had any ultimate regard to wa^ the happiness
of his creatures; and suppose that he made his creatures, and not himself his
last end; do it under a color of exalting and magnifying God's benevolence and
love to his creatures. -- But if his love to them be so great, and he so highly
values them as to look upon them worthy to be his end in all his great works as
they suppose; they are not consistent with themselves, in supposing that God
has so little value for their love and esteem. For as the nature of love,
especially great love causes him that loves to value the esteem of the person
beloved: so that God should take pleasure in the creatures just love and esteem
will follow both from God's love to himself and his love to his creatures. If
he esteem and love himself, he must approve of esteem and love to himself; and
disapprove the contrary. And if he loves and values the creature, he must value
and take delight in their mutual love and esteem: because he loves not because
he needs them.

3. As to what is alleged of its being unworthy of great men to be governed in
their conduct and achievements by a regard to the applause of the populace: I
would observe, what makes their applause to be worthy of so little regard, is
their ignorance, giddiness and injustice. The applause of the multitude very
frequently is not founded on any just view and understanding of things, but on
humor, mistake, folly and unreasonable affections. Such applause is truly
worthy to be disregarded -- But it is not beneath a man of the greatest dignity
and wisdom, to value the wise and just esteem of others, however inferior to
him. The contrary, instead of being an expression of greatness of mind, would
show an haughty and mean spirit. It Is such an esteem in his creatures only,
that God has any regard to: for it is such an esteem only that is fit and
amiable in itself.

Object. 4. To suppose that God makes himself his ultimate end in the creation
of the world derogates from the freeness of his goodness, in his beneficence to
his creatures: and from their obligations to gratitude for the good
communicated. For if God, in communicating his fullness, makes himself, and not
the creatures, his end; then what good he does, he does for himself, and not
for them; for his own sake, and not theirs.

Ans. God and the creature in this affair of the emanation of the divine
fullness, are not properly set in opposition; or made the opposite parts of a
disjunction. Nor ought God's glory and the creatures good, to be spoken of as
if they were properly and entirely distinct, as they are in the objection. This
supposes, that God's having respect to his glory and the communication of good
to his creatures, are things altogether different: that God's communicating his
fullness for himself, and his doing it for them, are things standing in a proper
disjunction and opposition. -- Whereas if we were capable of having more full
and perfect views of God and divine things, which are so much above us, it is
probable it would appear very clear to us, that the matter is quite otherwise:
and that these things, instead of appearing entirely distinct, are implied one
in the other. That God in seeking his glory, therein seeks the good of his
creatures. Because the emanation of his glory (which he seeks and delights in,
as he delights in himself and his own eternal glory) implies the communicated
excellency and happiness of his creature. And that in communicating his fullness
for them, he does it for himself. Because their good, which he seeks, is so
much in union and communion with himself. God is their good. Their excellency
and happiness is nothing, but the emanation and expression of God's glory: God
in seeking their glory and happiness, seeks himself: and in seeking himself, i.
e. himself diffused and expressed, (which he delights in, as he delights in his
own beauty and fullness) he seeks their glory and happiness.

THIS will the better appear, if we consider the degree and manner in which he
aimed at the creatures excellency and happiness in his creating the world; viz.
the degree and manner of the creatures glory and happiness during the whole of
the designed eternal duration of the world, he was about to create: which is in
greater and greater nearness and strictness of union with himself, and greater
and greater communion and participation with him in his own glory and
happiness, in constant progression, throughout all eternity. As the creature's
good was viewed in this manner when God made the world for it, viz. with
respect to the whole of the eternal duration of it, and the eternally
progressive union and communion with him; so the creature must be viewed as in
infinite strict union with himself. In this view it appears that God's respect
to the creature, in the whole, unites with his respect to himself. Both regards
are like two lines which seem at the beginning to be separate, but aim finally
to meet in one, both being directed to the same center. -- And as to the good
of the creature itself, if viewed in its whole duration, and infinite
progression, it must be viewed as infinite; and so not only being some
communication of God's glory, but as coming nearer and nearer to the same thing
in its infinite fullness. The nearer any thing comes to infinite, the nearer it
comes to an identity with God. And if any good, as viewed by God, is beheld as
infinite, it cannot be viewed as a distinct thing from God's own infinite glory.

THE apostle's discourse of the great love of Christ to men, Ephesians. 5. 25. to the
end, leads us thus to think of the love of Christ to his church; as coinciding
with his love to himself, by virtue of the strict union of the church with him.
Thus "husbands love your wives, as Christ also loved the church, and gave
himself for it -- that he might present it to himself a glorious church. So
ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that loves his wife
loves himself -- even as the Lord the church; for we are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones."

Now I apprehend that there is nothing in this manner of God's seeking the good
of the creatures, or in his disposition to communicate of his own fullness to
them, that at all derogates from the excellence of it, or the creature's
obligation.

GOD'S disposition to communicate good, or to cause his own infinite fullness to
flow forth, is not the less properly called God's goodness, because the good
that he communicates, is something of himself; a communication of his own
glory, and what he delights in as he delights in his own glory. The creature
has no less benefit by it; neither has such a disposition less of a direct
tendency to the creature's benefit; or the less of a tendency to love to the
creature, when the creature comes to exist. Nor is this disposition in God to
communicate of and diffuse his own good, the less excellent, because it is
implied in his love and regard to himself. For his love to himself don't imply
it any otherwise, but as it implies a love to whatever is worthy and excellent.
The emanation of God's glory, is in itself worthy and excellent, and so God
delights in it: and his delight in this excellent thing, is implied in his love
to himself, or his own fullness; because that is the fountain, and so the sum
and comprehension of every thing that is excellent. And the matter standing
thus, it is evident, that these things cannot derogate from the excellency of
this disposition in God, to an emanation of his own fullness, or communication
of good to the creature.

NOR does God's inclination to communicate good in this manner, i. e. from
regard to himself, or delight in his own glory, at all diminish the freeness of
his beneficence in this communication. This will appear, if we consider
particularly, in what ways, doing good to others from self-love, may be
inconsistent with the freeness of beneficence. And I conceive there are only
these two ways,

1. WHEN any does good to another from confined self-love, that is opposite to
a general benevolence. This kind of self love is properly called selfishness.
In some sense, the most benevolent generous person in the world, seeks his own
happiness in doing good to others; because he places his happiness in their
good. His mind is so enlarged as to take them, as it were, into himself. Thus
when they are happy he feels it, he partakes with them, and is happy in their
happiness. This is so far from being inconsistent with the freeness of
beneficence, that on the contrary, free benevolence and kindness consists in
it. The most free beneficence that can be in men, is doing good, not from a
confined selfishness, but from a disposition to general benevolence, or love to
beings in general.

BUT now, with respect to the divine being, there is no such thing as such
confined selfishness in him, or a love to himself, opposite to general
benevolence. It is impossible, because he comprehends all entity, and all
excellence in his own essence. The first Being, the eternal and infinite Being,
is in effect, Being in general; and comprehends universal existence, as was
observed before. God in his benevolence to his creatures, cannot have his heart
enlarged in such a manner as to take in beings that he finds, who are
originally out of himself, distinct and independent. This cannot be in an
infinite being, who exists alone from eternity. But he, from his goodness, as
it were enlarges himself in a more excellent and divine manner. This is by
communicating and diffusing himself; and so instead of finding, making objects
of his benevolence: not by taking into himself what he finds distinct from
himself, and so partaking of their good, and being happy in them; but by
flowing forth, and expressing himself in them, and making them to partake of
him, and rejoicing in himself expressed in them, and communicated to them.

2. ANOTHER thing, in doing good to others from self-love, that derogates from
the freeness of the goodness; is doing good to others from dependence on them
for the good we need, or desire: which dependence obliges. So that in our
beneficence we are not self-moved, but as it were, constrained by something
without ourselves. But it has been particularly shown already, that God's
making himself his end, in the manner that has been spoken of, argues no
dependence; but is consistent with absolute independence and self-sufficience.

AND I would here observe, that there is something in that disposition in God
to communicate goodness, which shows him to be independent and self-moved in
it, in a manner that is peculiar, and above what is in the beneficence of
creatures. Creatures, even the most gracious of them, are not so independent
and self-moved in their goodness; but that in all the exercises of it, they are
excited by some object that they find: something appearing good, or in some
respect worthy of regard, presents itself, and moves their kindness. But God
being all and alone is absolutely self-moved. The exercises of his
communicative disposition are absolutely from within himself, not finding any
thing, or any object to excite them or draw them forth: but all that is good
and worthy in the object, and the very being of the object, proceeding from the
over flowing of his fullness.

THESE things show that the supposition of God's making himself his last end,
in the manner spoken of, don't at all diminish the creature's obligation to
gratitude, for communications of good it receives. For if it lessen it is
obligation, it must be on one of the following accounts. Either, that the
creature has not so much benefit by it; or, that the disposition it flows from
is not proper goodness, not having so direct a tendency to the creatures
benefit; or that the disposition is not so virtuous and excellent in it is kind;
or that the beneficence is not so free. But it has been observed, that none of
these things take place, with regard to that disposition, which has been
supposed to have excited God to create the world.

I CONFESS there is a degree of indistinctness and obscurity in the close
consideration of such subjects, and a great imperfection in the expressions we
use concerning them; arising unavoidably from the infinite sublimity of the
subject, and the incomprehensibleness of those things that are divine. Hence
revelation is the surest guide in these matters; and what that teaches shall in
the next place be considered. Nevertheless, the endeavors used to discover
what the voice of reason is, so far as it can go, may serve to prepare the way,
by obviating cavils insisted on by many; and to satisfy us, that what the word
of God says of the matter, is not unreasonable; and thus prepare our minds for
a more full acquiescence in the instructions it gives, according to the more
natural and genuine sense of words and expressions, we find often used there
concerning this subject.

CHAP. II.
Wherein it is enquired, what is to be learned from holy scriptures, concerning
God's last end in the creation of the world.
SECT. I.
The scriptures represent God as making himself his own last end in the
creation of the world.
IT is manifest, that the scriptures speak, on all occasions, as though God made
himself his end in all his works: and as though the same being, who is the first
cause of all things, were the supreme and last end of all things. Thus in Isai.
44. 6. "Thus says the Lord, the king of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of
hosts, I am the first, I also am the last, and besides me there is no God".
Cap. 48. 12. "I am the first, and I am the last". Rev. 1. 8. I am alpha and
omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and was, and
which is to come, the almighty. ver. 11. I am alpha and omega, the first and
the last. ver. 17. I am the first and the last". Cap. 21. 6. "And he said unto
me, it is done, I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end". Cap. 22. 13.
"I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last".

AND when God is so often spoken of as the last as well as the first, and the
end as well as the beginning, what is meant (or at least implied) is, that as
he is the first efficient cause and fountain from whence all things originate;
so he is the last final cause for which they are made; the final term to which
they all tend in their ultimate issue. This seems to be the most natural import
of these expressions; and is confirmed by other parallel passages; as Romans 11.
36. "For of him and through and to him are all things". Col. 1. 16. "For by him
were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions, principalities and powers, all
things were created by him, and for him". Heb. 2. 10. "For it became him, by
whom are all things, and for whom are all things". In Prove. 16. 4. it is said
expressly, "The Lord has made all things for himself".

AND the manner is observable, in which God is said to be the last, to whom,
and for whom are all things. It Is evidently spoken of as a meet and suitable
thing, a branch of his glory; a meet prerogative of the great, infinite and
eternal being; a thing becoming the dignity of him who is infinitely above all
other beings; from whom all things are, and by whom they consist, and in
comparison with whom, all other things are as nothing.

SECT. II.
WHerein some positions are advanced concerning a just method of arguing in
this affair, from what we find in holy scriptures.

WE have seen that the scriptures speak of the creation of the world as being
for God, as its end. What remains therefore to be enquired into, is, which way
do the scriptures represent God as making himself his end?

IT is evident that God don't make his existence or being the end of the
creation; nor can he be supposed to do so without great absurdity. His being
and existence cannot be conceived of but as prior to any of God's acts or
designs: they must be presupposed as the ground of them. Therefore it cannot be
in this way that God makes himself the end of his creating the world. He cannot
create the world to the end that he may have existence; or may have such
attributes and perfections, and such an essence. Nor do the scriptures give the
least intimation of any such thing. Therefore, what divine effect, or what is
it in relation to God, that is the thing which the scripture teaches us to be
the end he aimed at in his works of creation, in designing of which, he makes
himself his end?

IN order to a right understanding of the scripture doctrine, and drawing just
inferences from what we find said in the word of God relative to this matter;
so to open the way to a true and definitive answer to the above enquiry, I
would lay down the following positions,

Position, 1. THAT which appears to be spoken of as God's ultimate end in his
works of providence in general, we may justly suppose to be his last end in the
work of creation -- This appears from what was observed before (under the fifth
particular of the introduction) which I need not now repeat.

Pos. 2. WHEN any thing appears by the scripture to be the last end of some of
the works of God, which thing appears in fact, to be the result, not only of
this work, but of God's works in general. And although it be not mentioned as the
end of those works, but only or some of them, yet being actually the result of
other works as well as that, and nothing appears peculiar, in the nature of the
case, that renders it a fit, and beautiful and valuable result of those
particular works, more than of the rest; but it appears with equal reason
desirable and valuable in the case of all works, of which it is spoken of in
the word of God as (and seen in fact to be) the effect; we may justly infer,
that thing to be the last end of those other works also. For we must suppose it
to be on account of the valuableness of the effect, that it is made the end of
those works of which it is expressly spoken of as the end: and this effect, by
the supposition, being equally, and in like manner the result of the work, and
of the same value, it is but reasonable to suppose, that it is the end of the
work, of which it is naturally the consequence, in one case as well as in
another.

Pos. 3. THE ultimate end of God's creating the world, being also (as was
before observed) the last end of all God's works of providence, and that in the
highest sense, and being above all other things important, we may well presume
that this end will be chiefly insisted on in the word of God, in the account it
gives of God's designs and ends in his works of providence -- and therefore, if
there be any particular thing, that we find more frequently mentioned in
scripture as God's ultimate aim in his works of providence, than any thing
else, this is a presumption that this is the supreme and ultimate end of God's
works in general, and so the end of the work of creation.

Pos. 4. THAT which appears from the word of God to be his last end with
respect to the moral world, or God's last end in the creation and disposal of
the intelligent part of the system, and in the moral government of the world,
that is God's last end in the work of creation in general. Because it is
evident, from the constitution of the world itself, as well as from the word of
God, that the moral part is the end of all the rest of the creation. The
inanimate unintelligent part is made for the rational as much as a house is
prepared for the inhabitant. And it is evident also from reason and the word of
God, that it is with regard to what is moral in them, or for the sake of some
moral good in them, that moral agents are made and the world made for them. --
But it is further evident that whatsoever is the last end of that part of
creation that is the end of all the rest, and for which all the rest of the
world was made, must be the last end of the whole. If all the other parts of a
watch are made for the hand of the watch, to move that aright, and for a due
and proper regulation of that, then it will follow, that the last end of the
hand, is the last end of the whole machine.

Pos. 5. THAT, which appears from the scripture to be God's last end in the
chief work or works of his providence, we may well determine is God's last end
in creating the world. For as was observed, we may justly infer the end of a
thing from the use of it. We may justly infer the end of a clock, a chariot, a
ship, or water-engine from the main use to which it is applied. But God's
providence is his use of the world he has made. And if there be any work or
works of providence that are evidently God's main work or works, herein appears
and consists the main use that God makes of the creation. -- From these two
last positions we may infer the next, viz.

Pos. 6. WHATEVER appears by the scriptures to be God's last end in his main
work or works of providence toward the moral world, that we justly infer to be
the last end of the creation of the world. Because as was just now observed,
the moral world is the chief part of the creation and the end of the rest; and
God's last end in creating that part of the world, must be his last end in the
creation of the whole. And it appears by the last position, that the end of
God's main work or works of providence toward them, or the main use he puts
them to, shows the last end for which he has made them; and consequently the
main end for which he has made the whole world.

Pos. 7. THAT which divine revelation shows to be God's last end with respect
to that part of the moral world which are good, or which are according to his
mind, or such as he would have them be; I say that which is God's last end with
respect to these (i. e. his last end in their being, and in their being good)
this we must suppose to be the last end of God's creating the world. For it has
been already shown that God's last end in the moral part of creation must be
the end of the whole. But his end in that part of the moral world that are
good, must be the last end for which he has made the moral world in general.
For therein consists the goodness of a thing, viz. in its fitness to answer its
end: or at least this must be goodness in the eyes of the author of that thing.
For goodness in his eyes is its agreableness to his mind. But an agreableness
to his mind in what he makes for some end or use, must be an agreableness or
fitness to that end. For his end in this case is his mind. That which he
chiefly aims at in that thing, is chiefly his mind with respect to that thing.
And therefore they are good moral agents, who are fitted for the end for which
God has made moral agents: as they are good machines, instruments and utensils
that are fitted to the end they are designed for. And consequently that which
is the chief end to which in being good they are fitted that is the chief end
of utensils. So that which is the chief end to which good created moral agents
in being good are fitted, this is the chief end of moral agents, or the moral
part of the creation; and consequently of the creation in general.

Pos. 8. THAT, which the word of God requires the intelligent and moral part of
the world to seek as their main end, or to have respect to in that they do, and
regulate all their conduct by, as their ultimate and highest end, that we have
reason to suppose is the last end for which God has made them; and consequently
by position fourth, the last end for which he has made the whole world. A main
difference between the intelligent and moral parts, and the rest of the world,
lies in this, that the former are capable of knowing their creator, and the end
for which he made them, and capable of actively complying with his design in
their creation and promoting it; while other creatures cannot promote the design
of their creation, only passively and eventually. And seeing they are capable
of knowing the end for which their author has made them, it is doubtless their
duty to fall in with it. Their wills ought to comply with the will of the
creator in this respect, in mainly seeking the same as their last end which God
mainly seeks as their last end. This must be the law of nature and reason with
respect to them. And we must suppose that God's revealed law, and the law of
nature agree; and that his will, as a lawgiver, must agree with his will as a
creator. Therefore we justly infer, that the same thing which God's revealed
law requires intelligent creatures to seek as their last and greatest end, that
God their creator has made their last end, and so the end of the creation of
the world.

Pos. 9. WE may well suppose that what seems in holy scripture from time to
time to be spoken of as the main end of the goodness of the good part of the
moral world, so that the respect and relation their virtue or goodness has to
that end, is what chiefly makes it valuable and desirable; I say, we may well
suppose that to be the thing which is God's last end in the creation of the
moral world; and so by position fourth, of the whole world. For the end of the
goodness of a thing, is the end of the thing. Herein, it was observed before,
must consist the goodness or valuableness of any thing in the eyes of him that
made it for his use. viz. its being good for that use, or good with respect to
the end for which he made it.

Pos. 10. THAT which persons who are described in scripture as approved saints,
and set forth as examples of piety, sought as their last and highest end in the
things which they did, and which are mentioned as parts of their holy
conversation, or instances of their good and approved behavior; that we must
suppose, was what they ought to seek as their last end; and consequently by the
preceding position, was the same with God's last end in the creation of the
world.

Pos. 11. THAT which appears by the word of God to be that end or event, in the
desire of which, the souls of the good parts of the moral world, especially of
the best, and in their best frames, do most naturally and directly exercise
their goodness in, and in expressing of their desire of this event or end, they
do most properly and directly express their respect to God; we may, I say, well
suppose, that event or end to be the chief and ultimate end of a spirit of
piety and goodness, and God's chief end in making the moral world, and so the
whole world. For doubtless the most direct and natural desire and tendency of a
spirit of true goodness in the good and best part of the moral world is to the
chief end of goodness, and so the chief end of the creation of the moral world.
And in what else can the spirit of true respect and friendship to God be
expressed by way of desire, than desires of the same end, which God himself
chiefly and ultimately desires and seeks in making them and all other things.

Pos. 12. SINCE the holy scriptures teach us that Jesus Christ is the head of
the moral world, and especially of all the good part of it; the chief of God's
servants, appointed to be the head of his saints and angels, and set forth as
the chief and most perfect pattern and example of goodness; we may well suppose
by the foregoing positions, that what he sought as his last end, was God's last
end in the creation of the world.

SECT. III.
PArticular texts of scripture, that show that God's glory is an ultimate end
of the creation.

WHAT God says in Isai. 48. 11. naturally leads us to suppose, that the way in
which God makes himself his end in his work or works which he does for his own
sake, is in making his glory his end. "For my own sake, even for my own sake
will I do it. For how should my name be polluted: and I will not give my glory
to another". Which is as much as to say, I will obtain my end, I will not
forego my glory: another shall not take this prize from me. It Is pretty evident
here, that God's name and his glory, which seems to intend the same thing (as
shall be observed more particularly afterward) are spoken of as his last end
in the great work mentioned, not as an inferior subordinate end, subservient to
the interest of others. The words are emphatical. The emphasis and repetition
constrain us to understand that what God does, is ultimately for his own sake:
"For my own sake, even for my own sake will I do it."

So the words of the apostle, in Romans 11. 36. naturally lead us to suppose that
the way in which all things are to God, is in being for his glory. "For of him,
and through him, and to him are all things. to whom be glory forever and ever.
Amen". In the preceding context the apostle observes the mavelous disposals
of divine wisdom, for causing all things to be to him in their final issue and
result, as they are from him at first, and governed by him. His discourse shows
how God contrived and brought this to pass in his disposition of things, viz.
by setting up the kingdom of Christ in the world; leaving the jews, and calling
the gentiles; and in what he would hereafter do in bringing in the jews with
the fullness of the gentiles; with the circumstances of these wonderful works,
so as greatly to show his justice and his goodness, magnify his grace, and
manifest the sovereignty and freeness of it, and the absolute dependence of all
on him -- And then in the four last verses, breaks out into a most pathetic
rapturous exclamation, expressing his great admiration of the depth of divine
wisdom in the steps he takes for the attaining his end, and causing all things
to be to him: and finally, he expresses a joyful consent to God's excellent
design in all to glorify himself, in saying, "to him be glory forever"; as much
as to say, as all things are so wonderfully ordered for his glory, so let him
have the glory of all, forevermore.

2. THE glory of God is spoken of in holy scripture as the last end for which
that part of the moral world that are good were made. Thus in Isai. 43. 6, 7.
"I will say to the north give up, and to the south keep not back, bring my sons
from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, even every one that is
called by my name; for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea
I have made him". Isai. 60. 21. "Thy people also shall be all righteous. They
shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hand,
that I may be glorified". chap. 61. 3. "That they may be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified".

IN these places we see that the glory of God is spoken of as the end of God's
saints, the end for which he makes them, i. e. either gives them being, or
gives them a being as saints, or both. It is said that God has made and formed
them to be his sons and daughters, for his own glory: That they are trees of
his planting, the work of his hands, as trees of righteousness, that he might
be glorified. -- And if we consider the words, especially as taken with the
context in each of the places, it will appear quite unnatural, to suppose that
God's glory is here spoken of only as an end inferior and subordinate to the
happiness of God's people; or as a prediction that God would create, form and
plant them that he might be glorified, that so God's people might be happy. On
the contrary, if we take the places with the context, they will appear rather
as promises of making God's people happy, that God therein might be glorified.
So is that in the 43d chap. as we shall see plainly, if we take the whole that
is said from the beginning of the chapter. It Is wholly a promise of a future,
great and wonderful work of God's power and grace, delivering his people from
all misery, and making them exceeding happy; and then the end of all, or the
sum of God's design in all, is declared to be God's own glory. "I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. -- I will be with thee. --
When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, nor the flame kindle
upon thee, -- thou art precious and honorable in my sight. I will give men for
thee, and people for thy life. Fear not, I am with thee. -- I will bring my
sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth; every one that is
called by my name: for I have created him for my glory."

So it plainly is chap. 60. ver. 21. the whole chapter is made up of nothing
but promises of future, exceeding happiness to God's church. But for brevity's
sake, let us take only the two preceding verses. "The sun shall be no more thy
light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but
the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy
sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.
Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever,
the branch of my planting, the work of my hands," and then the end of all is
added, " that I might be glorified." All the preceding promises are plainly
mentioned as so many parts or constituents of the great and exceeding happiness
of God's people; and God's glory is mentioned rather as God's end, or the sum
of his design in this happiness, than this happiness as the end of this glory.
Just in like manner is the promise in the third verse of the next chapter. To
appoint to them that mourn in Zion, to give to them beauty for ashes, the oil
of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that
they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he
might be glorified". The work of God promised to be effected, is plainly an
accomplishment of the joy, gladness and happiness of God's people, instead of
their mourning and sorrow; and the end in which the work issues, or that in
which God's design in this work is obtained and summed up, is his glory. This
proves by the seventh position, that God's glory is the end of the creation.

THE same thing may be argued from Jer 13. 11. "For as a girdle cleaves to the
loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel,
and the whole house of Judah, says the Lord: that they might be unto me for a
people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not
hear". That is, God sought to make them to be his own holy people; or, as the
apostle expresses it, his peculiar people, zealous of good works; that so they
might be a glory to him, as girdles were used in those days for ornament and
beauty, and as badges of dignity and honor. See ver. 9. and also Isai. 3. 24,
and 22. 21, and 23. 10. 2 Samuel 18. 11. Exodus 28. 8.
Which is agreeable to the places observed before, that speak of the church as
the glory of Christ.

Now when God speaks of himself, as seeking a peculiar and holy people for
himself, to be for his glory and honor, (...) a man that seeks an ornament and
badge of honor for his glory, it is not natural to understand it merely of a
subordinate end, as though God had no respect to himself in it; but only the good
of others. If so, the comparison would not be natural; for men are commonly
wont to seek their own glory and honor in adorning themselves, and dignifying
themselves with badges of honor, out of respect to themselves.

THE same doctrine seems to be taught, Ephesians. 44. 23. "Having predestined us to
the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace".

THE same may be argued from Isai. 44. 23. "For the Lord has redeemed Jacob,
he has glorified himself in Israel". And chap. 49. 3. "Thou art my servant
Jacob, in whom I will be glorified". Joh. 17. 10. "And all mine are thine, and
thine are mine, and I am glorified in them". 2 These. 1. 10. "When he shall come
to be glorified in his saints". ver. 11. 12. "Wherefore also we pray always for
you, that our God would count you worthy of his calling, and fulfill all the
good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power: that the name
of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the
grace of God and our Lord Jesus Christ".

3. THE scripture speaks from time to time, of God's glory, as though it were his
ultimate end of the goodness of the moral part of the creation; and that end,
in a respect and relation to which chiefly it is, that the value or worth of
their virtue consists. As in Phil. 1. 10. 11. "That ye may approve things that
are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offense till the day of
Christ: being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God." Here the apostle shows how the
fruits of righteousness in them are valuable and how they answer their end.
viz. in being "by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God." Joh. 15. 8.
"Herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit." Signifying that by
this means it is, that the great end of religion is to be answered. And in 1
Pet. 4. 11. the apostle directs the christians to regulate all their religious
performances, with reference to that one end. "If any man speak, let him speak
as the oracles of God: if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability
which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified; to whom be praise
and dominion forever and ever, amen." And, from time to time, embracing and
practicing true religion, and repenting of sin, and turning to holiness, is
expressed by glorifying God, as though that were the sum and end of the whole
matter. Rev. 11. 13. "And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand;
and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven." So, Rev.
14. 6, 7. "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth; -- saying with a
loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him." As though this were the sum and end
of that virtue and religion, which was the grand design of preaching the gospel
every where through the world. Rev. 16. 9. -- "And repented not, to give him
glory." Which is as much as to say, they did not forsake their sins and turn to
true religion, that God might receive that which is the great end he seeks, in
the religion he requires of men. See to the same purpose, Psalm. 22. 21, -- 23.
Isai. 66. 19. 24. 15. 25. 3. Jer. 13. 15, 16. Dan. 5. 23. Romans 15. 5, 6.

AND as the exercise of true religion and virtue in christians is summarily
expressed by their glorifying God; so when the good influence of this on
others, as bringing them by the example to turn to the ways and practice of
true goodness, is spoken of, it is expressed in the same manner. Matt. 5. 16.
"Let your light ^o shine before men, that others seeing your good works, may
glorify your father which is in heaven." 1 Pet. 2. 12. "Having your
conversation honest among the gentiles, that whereas they speak evil against
you as evildoers, they may by your good works which they behold, glorify God
in the day of visitation."

THAT the ultimate end of moral goodness, or righteousness is answered in God's
glory being attained, is supposed in the objection which the apostle makes, or
supposes some will make, in Romans 3. 7. "For if the truth of God has more
abounded through my lie unto his glory, why am I judged as a sinner?" i. e.
seeing the great end of righteousness is answered by my sin, in God's being
glorified, why is my sin condemned and punished: and why is not my vice
equivalent to virtue?

AND the glory of God is spoken of as that wherein consists the value and end
of particular graces. As of faith, Romans 4. 20. "He staggered not at the promise
of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God." Phil. 2.
11. "That every tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of
God the father." Of repentance. Josh. 6. 19. "Give I pray thee glory, to the
Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him." Of charity. 2 Cor. 8. 19. --
"With this grace, which is administered by us, to the glory of the same Lord,
and declaration of your ready mind." Thanksgiving and praise. Luke 7. 18.
"There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger."
Psalm. 50. 23. "Whosoever offers praise glorifieth me, and to him that orders
his convers^^^^^ aright, will I show the salvation of God." Concern^^^ which
last place may be observed; -- God here seems to say this to such as abounded
in their sacrifices and outward ceremonies of religion, as taking it for
granted, and as what they knew already, and supposed in their religious
performances, that the end of all religion was to glorify God. They supposed
they did this in the best manner, in offering a multitude of sacrifices (see
the preceding part of the psalm.) But here God corrects this mistake, and
informs that this grand end of religion is not attained this way, but in
offering the more spiritual sacrifices of praise and a holy conversation.

IN fine, the words of the apostle in 1 Cor. 6. 20. are worthy of particular
notice. "Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify
God in your body and in your spirit, which are his." Here not only is
glorifying God spoken of, as what summarily comprehends the end of that
religion and service of God, which is the end of Christ's redeeming us: but
here I would further remark this. -- That the apostle in this place urges, that
inasmuch as we are not our own, but bought for God, that we might be his;
therefore we ought not to act as if we were our own, but as God's; and should
not use the members of our bodies, or faculties of our souls for ourselves, as
making ourselves our end, but for God, as making him our end. And he expresses
the way in which we are to make God our end, viz. in making his glory our end.
"Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are his." Here it
cannot be pretended, that though christians are indeed required to make God's
glory their end; yet it is but as a subordinate end, as subservient to their
own happiness, as a higher end; for then in acting chiefly and ultimately for
their ownselves, they would use themselves more as their own, than as God's;
which is directly contrary to the design of the apostle's exhortation, and the
argument he is upon; which is, that we should give ourselves, as it were, away
from ourselves to God, and use ourselves as his, and not our own, acting for
his sake, and not our own sakes. Thus it is evident by pos. 9. that the glory
of God is the last end for which he created the world.

4. THERE are some things in the word of God, that lead us to suppose that it
requires of men, that they should desire and seek God's glory, as their highest
and last end in what they do. As particularly the passage last mentioned. This
appears from what has been just now observed upon it. The same may be argued
from 1 Cor. 10. 30. "Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God." And 1 Pet. 4. 11. -- "That God in all things may be
glorified." Which was mentioned before. And it may be argued that Christ
requires his followers should desire and seek God's glory in the first place,
and above all things else, from that prayer which he gave his disciples, as the
pattern and rule for the direction of his followers in their prayers. The first
petition of which is, "Hallowed be thy name." Which in scripture language is
the same with, glorified be thy name; as is manifest from Lev. 10. 3. Ezekiel. 28.
22. and many other places. Now our last and highest end is doubtless what
should be first in our desires, and consequently first in our prayers: and
therefore we may argue, that since Christ directs that God's glory should be
first in our prayers, that therefore this is our last end. This is further
confirmed by the conclusion of the Lord's prayer, "For thine is the kingdom,
the power and glory." Which, as it stands in connection with the rest of the
prayer, implies that we desire and ask all these things, which are mentioned in
each petition, with a subordination, and in subservience to the dominion and
glory of God; in which all our desires ultimately terminate, as their last end.
God's glory and dominion are the two first things mentioned in the prayer, and
are the subject of the first half of the prayer; and they are the two last
things mentioned in the same prayer, in it is conclusion: and God's glory is the
alpha and omega in the prayer. From these things we may argue, according to
pos. 8. that God's glory is the last end of the creation.

5. THE glory of God appears, by the account given in the word of God, to be
that end or event, in the earnest desires of which, and in their delight in
which, the best part of the moral world, and when in their best frames, do most
naturally express the direct tendency of the spirit of true goodness, and give
vent to the virtuous and pious affections of their heart, and do most properly
and directly testify their supreme respect to their creator. This is the way in
which the holy apostles, from time to time, gave vent to the ardent exercises
of their piety, and expressed and breathed forth their regard to the supreme
being. Romans 11. 36. "To whom be glory forever and ever, amen". Chap. 16. 27.
"To God only wise, be glory, through Jesus Christ, forever, amen". Gal. 1. 4, 5.
"Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world, according to the will of God and our father, to whom be glory forever
and ever, amen". 2 Timothy 4. 18. "And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil
work, and will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory forever
and ever, amen". Ephesians. 3. 21. "Unto him be glory in the church, by Christ Jesus
throughout all ages, world without end". Heb. 13. 21. -- "Through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory forever and ever, amen". Phil 4. 20. "Now unto God and our
father, be glory forever and ever, amen". 2 Pet. 3. 18. "To him be glory both
now and forever, amen". Jude 25. "To the only wise God our savior, be glory
and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever, amen". Rev. 1. 5, 6. "Unto
him that loved us etc -- to him be glory and dominion forever and ever, amen".
It was in this way that holy David, the sweet psalmist of Israel, vented the
ardent tendencies and desires of his pious heart. 1 Chronicles. 16. 28, 29. "Give
unto the LORD ye kindreds of the people, give unto the LORD glory and strength:
give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name". We have much the same
expressions again, Psalm. 29. 1, 2. and 69. 7, 8. See also, Psalm. 57. 5. 72. 18,
19. 115. 1. So the whole church of God, through all parts of the earth. Isai. 42.
10, 11, 12. In like manner the saints and angels in heaven express the piety of
their hearts. Rev. 4. 9, 11. and 5. 11, 12, 13, 14. and 7. 12. This is the
event that the hearts of the seraphim especially exult in, as appears by Isai.
6, 2, 3. "Above it stood the seraphim. -- And one cried unto another and said,
Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory".
So at the birth of Christ, Luke 2. 14. "Glory to God in the highest, etc.

IT is manifest that these holy persons in earth and heaven, in thus expressing
their desires of the glory of God, have respect to it, not merely as a
subordinate end, or merely for the sake of something else; but as that which
they look upon in itself valuable, and in the highest degree so. It would be
absurd to say, that in these ardent exclamations, they are only giving vent to
their vehement benevolence to their fellow creatures, and expressing their
earnest desires that God might be glorified, that so his subjects may be made
happy by the means. It is evident it is not so much love, either to themselves,
or fellow creatures, which they express, as their exalted and supreme regard to
the most high and infinitely glorious Being. When the church says, "Not unto
us, not unto us, O Jehovah, but to thy name give glory", it would be absurd to
say, that she only desires that God may have glory, as a necessary or
convenient means of their own advancement and felicity. From these things it
appears, by the eleventh position, that God's glory is the end of the creation.

6. THE scripture leads us to suppose, that Christ sought God's glory, as his
highest and last end. Joh. 7. 18. "He that speaks of himself, seeks his own
glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him". When Christ says, he did not seek his own glory, we
cannot reasonably understand him, that he had no regard to his own glory, even
the glory of the human nature; for the glory of that nature was part of the
reward promised him, and of the joy set before him. But we must understand him,
that this was not his ultimate aim; it was not the end that chiefly governed
his conduct: and therefore when, in opposition to this, in the latter part of
the sentence, he says, "But he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same
is true, etc." it is natural from the antithesis to understand him, that this
was his ultimate aim, his supreme governing end. Joh. 12. 27, 28. "Now is my
soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: But for
this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name". Christ was now
going to Jerusalem, and expected in a few days there to be crucified: and the
prospect of his last sufferings, in this near approach, was very terrible to
him. Under this distress of mind, in so terrible a view, he supports himself
with a prospect of what would be the consequence of his sufferings, viz. God's
glory. Now, it is the end that supports the agent in any difficult work that he
undertakes, and above all others, his ultimate and supreme end. For this is
above all others valuable in his eyes; and so, sufficient to countervail the
difficulty of the means. That is the end, which is in itself agreeable and sweet
to him, which ultimately terminates his desires, is the center of rest and
support; and so must be the fountain and sum of all the delight and comfort he
has in his prospects, with respect to his work. Now Christ has his soul
straightened and distressed with a view of that which was infinitely the most
difficult part of his work, which was just at hand. Now certainly if his mind
seeks support in the conflict from a view of his end: it must most naturally
repair to the highest end, which is the proper fountain of all support in this
case. We may well suppose, that when his soul conflicts with the appearance of
the most extreme difficulties, it would resort for support to the idea of his
supreme and ultimate end, the fountain of all the support and comfort he has in
the means, or the work. The same thing, viz. Christ's seeking the glory of God
as his ultimate end, is manifest by what Christ says, when he comes yet nearer
to the hour of his last sufferings, in that remarkable prayer, the last he ever
made with his disciples, on the evening before his crucifixion; wherein he
expresses the sum of his aims and des^^^s. His first words are, "Father, the
hour is come, glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify thee". As this is
his first request, we may suppose it to be his supreme request and desire, and
what he ultimately aimed at in all. If we consider what follows to the end, all
the rest that is said in the prayer, seems to be but an amplification of this
great request.

ON the whole, I think it is pretty manifest, that Jesus Christ sought the
glory of God as his highest and last end; and that therefore, by position
twelfth, this was God's last end in the creation of the world.

7. IT IS manifest from scripture, that God's glory is the last end of that
great work of providence, the work of redemption by Jesus Christ. This is
manifest from what is just now observed, of its being the end ultimately ^ought
by Jesus Christ the redeemer. And if we further consider the texts mentioned in
the proof of that, and take notice of the context, it will be very evident,
that it was what Christ sought as his last end, in that great work which he
came into the world upon, viz. to procure redemption for his people. It is
manifest that Christ professes in Joh. 7. 18. that he did not seek his own
glory in what he did, but the glory of him that sent him. He means that he did
not seek his own glory, but the glory of him that sent him, in the work of his
ministry; the work he performed, and which he came into the world to perform,
and which his father sent him to work out, which is the work of redemption. And
with respect to that text, Joh. 12. 27, 28. it has been already observed, that
Christ comforted himself in the view of the extreme difficulty of his work,
which was the work of redemption, in the prospect of that which he had respect
to, and rejoiced in, as the highest, ultimate and most valuable excellent end
of that work, which he set his heart most upon, and delighted most in. And in
the answer that the father made him from heaven at that time, in the latter
part of the same verse, "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again",
the meaning plainly is, that God had glorified his name in what Christ had
done, in the work he sent him upon, and would glorify it again, and to a
greater degree, in what he should further do, and in the success thereof.
Christ shows that he understood it thus, in what he says upon it, when the
people took notice of it, wondering at the voice; some saying, that it
thundered, others, that an angel spoke to him. Christ says, "This voice came
not because of me, but for your sakes". And then he says (exulting in the
prospect of this glorious end and success) "Now is the judgment of this world;
now is the prince of this world cast out, and I, if I be lift up from the
earth, will draw all men unto me". In the success of the same work of
redemption, he places his own glory, as was observed before, in these words in
the 23, and 24, verses of the same chapter. "The hour is come, that the son of
man should be glorified. Verily, verily I say unto you, except a corn of wheat
fall into the ground, it abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much
fruit".

So it is manifest that when he seeks his own and his father's glory, in that
prayer, Joh. 17. (which, it has been observed, he then seeks as his last end)
he seeks it as the end of that great work he came into the world upon, which he
is now about to finish in his death. What follows through the whole prayer,
plainly shows this: and particularly the 4th. and 5th. verses. "I have
glorified thee on earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.
And now, O father, glorify thou me with thine own self". Here it is pretty plain
that declaring to his father, that he had glorified him on earth, and finished
the work God gave him to do, meant that he had finished the work which God gave
him to do for this end, viz. that he might be glorified. He had now finished
that foundation that he came into the world to lay for his glory. He had laid a
foundation for his father's obtaining his will, and the utmost that he
designed. By which it is manifest, that God's glory was the utmost of his
design, or his ultimate end in this great work.

AND it is manifest by Joh. 13. 31, 32. that the glory of the father, and his
own glory, are what Christ exulted in, in the prospect of his approaching
sufferings, when Judas was gone out to betray him, as the end his heart was
mainly set upon, and supreamly delighted in. "Therefore when he was gone out,
Jesus said, Now is the son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If
God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall
straitway glorify him".

THAT the glory of God is the highest and last end of the work of redemption,
is confirmed by the song of the angels at Christ's birth. Luke 2. 14. "Glory to
God in the highest, and on earth, peace and good will toward men". It must be
supposed that they knew what was God's last end in sending Christ into the
world: and that in their rejoicing on the occasion of his incarnation, their
minds would be most taken up with, and would most rejoice in that which was
most valuable and glorious in it; which must consist in its relation to that
which was its chief and ultimate end. And we may further suppose, that the
thing which chiefly engaged their minds, as what was most glorious and joyful
in the affair, is what would be first expressed in that song which was to
express the sentiments of their minds, and exultation of their hearts.

THE glory of the father and the son is spoken of as the end of the work of
redemption, in Phil. 2. 6, -- 11. very much in the same manner as in Joh. 12.
23, 28. and 13. 31, 32. and 17. 1, 4, 5. "Who being in the form of God, -- made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross: wherefore
God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name, etc. -- that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, -- and every tongue confess, that Jesus is
the Lord, TO THE GLORY OF GOD THE FATHER". So God's glory, o^ the praise of his
glory, is spoken of as the end of the work of redemption, in Ephesians 1. 3, etc.
"Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he has
chosen us in him. -- Having predestined us to the adoption of children, -- TO
THE PRAISE OF THE GLORY OF HIS GRACE". And in the continuance of the same
discourse concerning the redemption of Christ, in follows in what the same
chapter, God's glory is once and again mentioned as the great end of all.
Several things belonging to that great redemption are mentioned in the
following verses: such as God's great wisdom in it, ver 8. The clearness of
light granted through Christ, ver. 9. God's gathering together in one, all things
in heaven and earth in Christ, ver. 10. God's giving the christians that were
first converted to the christian faith from among the jews, an interest in this
great redemption, ver. 11. Then the great end is added, ver. 12. "That we
should be TO THE PRAISE OF HIS GLORY, who first trusted in Christ". And then is
mentioned the bestowing of the same great salvation on the gentiles, in its
beginning or first fruits in the world, and in the completing it in another
world, in the two next verses. And then the same great end is added again. "In
whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your
salvation: In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, UNTO THE PRAISE OF HIS GLORY". The same
thing is expressed much in the same manner, in 2 Cor. 4. 14, 15 -- "He which
raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us
with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the abundance of grace might
through the thanksgiving of many, redound TO THE GLORY OF GOD".

THE same is spoken of as the end of the work of redemption in the
old testament. Psalm. 79. 9. "Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of
thy name; deliver us and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake". So in the
prophecies of the redemption of Jesus Christ. Isai. 44. 23. "Sing, O ye
heavens; for the LORD has done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break
forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the
LORD has redeemed Jacob, and GLORIFIED HIMSELF in Israel." Thus the works of
creation are called upon to rejoice at the attaining of the same end, by the
redemption of God's people, that the angels rejoiced at, when Christ was born.
See also chap. 48. 10, 11. and 49. 3.

THUS it is evident that the glory of God is the ultimate end of the work of
redemption. -- Which is the chief work of providence toward the moral world,
as is abundantly manifest from scripture: the whole universe being put in
subjection to Jesus Christ; all heaven and earth, angels and men being subject
to him, as executing this office: and put under him to that end, that all
things may be ordered by him, in subservience to the great designs of his
redemption: all power, as he says, being given to him, in heaven and in earth,
that he may give eternal life to as many as the father has given him: and he
being exalted far above all principality and power, and might and dominion, and
made head over all things to the church. The angels being put in subjection to
him, that he may employ them all as ministering spirits, for the good of them
that shall be the heirs of his salvation: and all things being so governed by
their redeemer for them, that all things are theirs, whether things present or
things to come: and all God's works of providence in the moral government of
the world, which we have an account of in scripture history, or that are
foretold in scripture prophecy, being evidently subordinate to the great
purposes and ends of this great work. And besides, the work of redemption is
that work, by which good men are, as it were, created, or brought into being,
as good men, or as restored to holiness and happiness. The work of redemption
is a new creation, according to scripture representation, whereby men are
brought into a new existence, or are made new creatures.

FROM these things it follows, according to the 5th, 6th, and 7th positions,
that the glory of God is the last end of the creation of the world.

8. THE scripture leads us to suppose, that God's glory is his last end in his
moral government of the world in general. This has been already shown
concerning several things that belong to God's moral government of the world.
As particularly, in the work of redemption, the chief of all his dispensations,
in his moral government of the world. And I have also observed it, with respect
to the duty which God requires of the subjects of his moral government, in
requiring them to seek his glory as their last end. And this is actually the
last end of the moral goodness required of them; the end which gives their
moral goodness its chief value. And also, that it is what that person which God
has set at the head of the moral world, as its chief governor, even Jesus
Christ, seeks as his chief end. And it has been shown, that it is the chief end
for which that part of the moral world which are good, are made, or have their
existence as good. I now further observe, that this is the end of the
establishment of the public worship and ordinances of God among mankind. Hag.
1. 8. "Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I will
take pleasure in it, and I will BE GLORIFIED, says the LORD." This is spoken
of as the end of God's promises of rewards, and of their fulfillment. 2 Cor. 1.
20. "For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen, TO THE GLORY
OF GOD by us." And this is spoken of as the end of the execution of God's
threatenings, in the punishment of sin. Number. 14. 20, 21, 22, 23. "And the LORD
said, I have pardoned according to thy word. But as truly as I live, all the
earth shall be filled with THE GLORY OF JEHOVAH. Because all these men, etc --
Surely they shall not see the land." The glory of Jehovah is evidently here
spoken of, as that which he had regard to, as his highest and ultimate end;
which therefore he could not fail of; but must take place every where, and in
every case, through all parts of his dominion, whatever became of men. And
whatever abatements might be made, as to judgments deserved; and whatever
changes might be made in the course of God's proceedings, from compassion to
sinners; yet the attaining of God's glory was an end, which being ultimate and
supreme, must in no case whatsoever give place. This is spoken of as the end of
God's executing judgments on his enemies in this world. Exodus 14. 17, 18 "And I
will get me honor ( Ikhabhedha, I will be glorified) upon Pharaoh, and upon
all his host, etc." Ezekiel. 28. 22 "Thus says the Lord God, Behold I am against
thee O Zion, and I WILL BE GLORIFIED in the midst of thee: And they shall know
that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be
sanctified in her." So Ezekiel. 39. 13. "Yea, all the people of the land shall
bury them; and it shall be to them a renown, the day that I shall be glorified,
says the Lord God." And this is spoken of as the end, both of the executions
of wrath, and in the glorious exercises of mercy, in the misery and happiness
of another world. Romans 9. 22, 23. "What if God willing to show his wrath, and
make his power known, endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory on
the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory". And this is
spoken of as the end of the day of judgment, which is the time appointed for
the highest exercises of God's authority as moral governor of the world; and is
as it were, the day of the consummation of God's moral government, with respect
to all his subjects in heaven, earth and hell. 2 These. 1. 9, 10. "Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and
to be admired in all them that believe". Then his glory shall be obtained, with
respect both to saints and sinners.

FROM these things it is manifest by the fourth position, that God's glory is
the ultimate end of the creation of the world.

9. IT appears from what has been already observed, that the glory of God is
spoken of in scripture as the last end of many of God's works: and it is plain
that this thing is in fact the issue and result of the works of God's common
providence, and of the creation of the world. Let us take God's glory in what
sense so ever, consistent with its being something brought to pass, or a good
attained by any work of God, certainly it is the consequence of these works:
and besides it is expressly so spoken of in scripture. This is implied in the
1st. ver. of the 8th. psalm, wherein are celebrated the works of creation; the
heavens being the work of God's fingers; the moon and the stars being ordained
by God; and God's making man a little lower than the angels, etc. The first
verse is, "O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who
have set thy glory above the heavens", or upon the heavens. By name and glory,
very much the same thing is intended here, as in many other places, as shall be
particularly shown afterward. So the psalm concludes as it began. "O Lord our
Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth"! So in the 148th. psalm,
after a particular mention of most of the works of creation, enumerating them
in order, the psalmist says, ver. 13. "Let them praise the name of the Lord,
for his name alone is excellent, his glory is above the earth and the heaven".
And in in the 104th psalm, after a very particular, orderly and magnificent
representation of God's works of creation and common providence, it is said in
the 31st ver. "The glory of the Lord shall endure forever: the Lord shall
rejoice in his works". Here God's glory is spoken of, as the grand result, and
blessed consequence of all these works, which God values, and on account of
which he rejoices in these works. And this is one thing doubtless implied in
the song of the seraphim, Isai. 6. 3. "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts,
the whole earth is full of his glory".

THE glory of God, in being the result and consequence of those works of
providence that have been mentioned, is in fact the consequence of the
creation. The good attained in the use of a thing, made for use, is the result
of the making of that thing, as the signifying the time of day, when actually
attained by the use of a watch, is the consequence of the making of the watch.
So that it is apparent that the glory of God is a thing that is actually the
result and consequence of the creation of the world. And from what has been
already observed, it appears, that it is what God seeks as good, valuable and
excellent in itself. And I presume, none will pretend, that there is any thing
peculiar in the nature of the case, rendering it a thing valuable in some of
the instances wherein it takes place, and not in others: or that the glory of
God, though indeed an effect of all God's works, is an exceeding desirable effect
of some of them; but of others, a worthless and insignificant effect. God's
glory therefore, must be a desirable, valuable consequence of the work of
creation. Yea it is expressly spoken of in Psalm. 104 3. (as was observed) as an
effect, on account of which, God rejoices and takes pleasure in the works of
creation.

THEREFORE it is manifest by position third, that the glory of God is an
ultimate end in the creation of the world.

SECT. IV.
PLACES of scripture that lead us to suppose, that GOD created the world for
his NAME, to MAKE HIS PERFECTIONS KNOWN; and that he made it FOR HIS PRAISE.

HERE I shall first take notice of some passages of scripture, that speak of
God's name as being made God's end, or the object of his regard, and the regard
of his virtuous and holy intelligent creatures, much in the same manner as has
been observed of God's glory.

As particularly, God's name is in like manner spoken of, as the end of his
acts of goodness toward the good part of the moral world, and of his works of
mercy and salvation toward his people. As 1 Samuel 12. 22. "The Lord will not
forsake his people, for his great name's sake." Psalm. 23. 3. "He restores my
soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness, for his name's sake." Psalm.
31. 3. "For thy name's sake lead me, and guide me." Psalm. 109. 21. "But do thou
for me, -- for thy name's sake." The forgiveness of sin in particular, is often
spoken of as being for God's name's sake. 1 John 2. 12. "I write unto you,
little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake." Psalm.
25. 11. "For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great."
Psalm. 79. 9. "Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name, and
deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake." Jer. 14. 7. "O Lord,
though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy name's sake."

THESE things seem to show, that the salvation of Christ is for God's name's
sake. Leading and guiding in the way of safety and happiness, restoring the
soul, the forgiveness of sin, and that help, deliverance and salvation, that is
consequent thereon, is for God's name. And here it is observable, that those two
great temporal salvations of God's people, the redemption from Egypt, and that
from Babylon, that are often represented as figures and similitudes of the
redemption of Christ, are frequently spoken of as being wrought for God's
name's sake. So is that great work of God, in delivering his people from Egypt,
carrying them through the wilderness to their rest in Canaan. 2 Samuel 7. 23.
"And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom
God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name." Psalm. 106.
8. "Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake." Isai. 63. 12. "That led
them by the right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing the waters
before them, to make himself an everlasting name." In the both chap. of Ezekiel.
God rehearsing the various parts of (...) wonderful (...) ^dds from time to
time, "I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted before the
heathen," as in ver. 9. 14, 22. See also Josh. 7. 8, 9. Dan. 9 15. So is the
redemption from the Babylonish captivity. Isai. 48. 9, 10. "For my name's sake
will I defer mine anger. -- For mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do
it, for how should my name be polluted?" In Ezekiel. 36. 21, 22, 23. the reason is
given for God's mercy in restoring Israel. "But I had pity for my holy name. --
Thus says the Lord, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for
my holy name's sake; -- And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned
among the heathen." And chap. 39. 25. "Therefore thus says the Lord God, now
will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house
of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name." Daniel prays that God would
forgive his people, and show them mercy for his own sake. Dan. 9. 19.

WHEN God from time to time speaks of showing mercy, and exercising goodness
and promoting his people's happiness for his name's sake, we cannot understand
it as of a merely subordinate end. How absurd would it be to say, that he
promotes their happiness for his name's sake, in subordination to their good;
and that his name may be exalted only for their sakes, as a means of promoting
their happiness! especially when such expressions as these are used, "For mine
own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it, for how should my name be
polluted?" and "Not for your sakes do I this, but for my holy name's sake".

AGAIN, it is represented as though God's people had their existence, at least as
God's people, for God's name's sake. God's redeeming or purchasing them, that
they might be his people, for his name, implies this. As in that passage
mentioned before, 2 Samuel 7. 23. -- "Thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem
for a people to himself, and to make him a name". So God's making them a people
for his name, is implied in Jer. 13. 11. "For as the girdle cleaves to the
loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel
etc. -- that they may be unto me for a people, and for a name." Act. 15. 14.
"Simeon has declared how God at the first did visit the gentiles, to take out
of them a people for his name."

THIS also is spoken of as the end of the virtue and religion, and holy
behavior of the saints. Romans 1. 5. "By whom we have received grace and
appostleship, for obedience to the ^aith among all nations for his name." Matt.
19. 29. "Every one that forsakes houses or brethren etc. -- for my name's
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life." 3 John 7. "Because that for his name's sake they went forth, taking nothing of
the gentiles." Rev. 2. 3. "And have born, and have patience, and for my name's
sake have labored, and have not ^ainted."

AND we find that holy persons express their desire of this, and their joy in
it, in the same manner as in the glory of God. 2 Samuel 7. 26. "Let thy name be
magnified forever." Psalm. 76. 1. "In Judah is God known, his name is great in
Israel." Psalm. 148. 13. "Let them praise the name of the Lord; for his name
alone is excellent, his glory is above the earth, and heaven." Psalm. 135. 13.
"Thy name O Lord, endures forever, and thy memorial throughout all
generations." Isai. 12. 4. "Declare his doings among the people, make mention
that his name is exalted."

THE judgments God executes on the wicked, are spoken of as being for the sake
of his name, in like manner as for his glory. Exodus 9. 16. "And in very deed
for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my
name may be declared throughout all the earth". Neh. 9. 10. "And shewedst signs
and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his
land; for thou knewedst that they dealt proudly against them: so did thou get
thee a name as at this day".

AND this is spoken of as a consequence of the works of creation, in like
manner as God's glory. Psalm. 8. 1. "O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all
the earth! who have set thy glory above the heavens". And then at the
conclusion of the observations on the works of creation, the psalm ends thus
(ver. 9.) "O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth". So
Psalm. 148. 13. after a particular mention of the various works of creation,
"Let them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is excellent in all
the earth, his glory is above the earth and the heaven".

So we find manifestation, or making known God's perfections, his greatness and
excellency, is spoken of very much in the same manner as God's glory.

THERE are several scriptures which would lead us to suppose this to be the
great thing that God sought of the moral world, and the end aimed at in the
moral agents, which he had created, wherein they are to be active in answering
their end. This seems implied in that argument God's people sometimes made use
of, in deprecating a state of death and destruction: that in such a state, they
cannot know or make known the glorious excellency of God. Psalm. 88. 18, 19.
"Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave, or thy faithfulness in
destruction? Shall thy wonders be known in the dark, and thy righteousness in
the land of forgetfulness"? So Psalm. 30. 9. Isai. 38. 18, 19. The argument
seems to be this: Why should we perish? and how shall thine end, for which thou
have made us, be obtained in a state of destruction, in which thy glory cannot
be known or declared?

THIS is spoken of as the end of the good part of the moral world, or the end
of God's people in the same manner as the glory of God. Isai. 43. 21. "This
people have I formed for myself, they shall show forth my praise". 1 Pet. 2. 9.
"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out
of darkness into mavelous light".

AND this seems to be represented as the thing wherein the value and proper
fruit and end of their virtue appears. Isai. 60. 6. Speaking of the conversion
of the gentile nations to true religion -- "They shall come and show forth the
praises of the Lord". Isai. 66. 19. "I will send -- unto the nations -- and to
the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory;
and they shall declare my glory among the gentiles.

AND this seems by scripture representations to be the end, in the desires of
which, and delight in which appears the proper tendency and rest of true
virtue, and holy dispositions; much in the same manner as the glory of God. 1 Chronicles 16. 8. "Make known his deeds among the people". Ver. 23, 24. "Show forth
from day to day thy salvation. Declare his glory among the heathen". See also,
Psalm. 9. 1, 11, 14. and 19. 1. and 26. 7. and 71. 18. and 75. 9. and 76. 1. and
79. 13. and 96. 2, 3. and 101. 1. and 107. 22. and 118. 17. and 145. 6, 11, 12.
Isai. 42. 12. and 64. 1, 2. Jer. 50. 10.

THIS seems to to be spoken of as a great end of the acts of God's moral
government. Particularly, the great judgments he executes for sin. Exodus 9. 16.
"And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, to show in thee my
power, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth". Dan. 4.
17. "This matter is by the decree of the watchers, etc. -- To the intent that
the living may know that the most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives
it to whomsoever he will; and sets up over it the basest of men". But places
to this purpose are too numerous to be particularly recited. See them in the
margin. Exodus 14. 17, 18. 1 Samuel 17. 46. Psalm. 83. 18. Isai. 4^. 3. Ezekiel. 6. 7,
10, 13, 14. and 7. 4, 9, 27. and 11. 10, 11, 12. and 12. 15, 16, 20. and 13. 9,
14, 21, 23. and 14. 8. and 15. 7. and 21. 5. and 22. 16. and 25. 7, 11, 17. and
26. 6. and 28. 22, 23, 24. and 29. 9, 16. and 30. 8, 19, 25, 26. and 32. 15.
and 33. 29. and 35. 4, 12, 15. and 38. 23. and 39, 6, 7, 21, 22.


THIS is also spoken of as a great end of God's works of favor and mercy to his
people. 2 King. 19. 19. "Now therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save
thou us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou
art the Lord God, even thou only". 1 King. 8. 59, 60. -- "That he maintain the
cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel at all times as the
matter shall require, that all the people of the earth may know that the Lord
is God, and that there is none else". See other passages to the same purpose
referred to in the margin. Exodus 6. 7. and 8. 22. and 16. 12. 1 King. 8. 43. and
20. 28. Psalm. 102. 21. Ezekiel. 23. 49. and 24. 24. and 25. 5. and 35. 9. and 39.
21, 22.


THIS is spoken of as the end of the eternal damnation of the wicked, and also
the eternal happiness of the righteous. Romans 9. 22, 23. "What if God, willing
to show his wrath, and make his power known, endured with much long suffering,
the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: and that he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he ha^^ before prepared unto
glory"?

THIS is spoken of from time to time, as a great end of the miracles which God
wrought. See Exodus 7. 17. and 8. 10. and. 10. 2. Deuteronomy. 29. 5, 6. Ezekiel. 24. 27.

THIS is spoken of as a great end of ordinances. Exodus 29. 44, 45, 46. "And I
will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation; I will sanctify also both
Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priests office. And I will dwell
among the children of Israel, and will be their God. And they shall know that I
am the Lord their God, etc." Chap. 31. 13. "Verily my sabbaths shall ye keep;
for it is a sign between me and you, throughout your generations; that ye may
know that I am the Lord that does sanctify you". We have again almost the same
words, Ezekiel. 20. 12, and ver. 20.

THIS is spoken of as a great end of the redemption out of Egypt. Psalm. 106. 8.
"Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake that he might make his mighty
power to be known." See also Exodus 7. 5 and Deuteronomy. 4. 34, 35. And also of the
redemption from the Babylonish captivity. Ezekiel 20. 34, -- 38. "And I will bring
you out from the people, and will gather you out of the countries whither ye
are scattered. -- And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people; and
there I will plead with you, as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness
of the land of Egypt. -- And I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
And I will purge out the rebels. -- And ye shall know that I am the Lord." Ver.
42. "And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land
of Israel." -- Ver. 44. "And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have
wrought with you for my name's sake." See also, chap. 28. 25, 26. and 36. 11.
and 37. 6, 13.

THIS is also spoken of as a great end of the work of redemption of Jesus
Christ: both of the purchase of redemption by Christ, and the application of
redemption. Romans 3. 25, 26. "Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness. -- To declare I say,
at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus." Ephesians. 2. 4, -- 7. "But God who is rich in mercy etc.
-- That he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness
toward us through Jesus Christ." chap. 3. 8, 9, 10. "To preach among the
gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see, what is
the fellowship of that mystery which, from the beginning of the world has been
hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: To the intent that now unto
the principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known by the church
the manifold wisdom of God." Psalm. 2^. 21, 22. "Save me from the lion's mouth.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will
I praise thee," compared with Heb. 2 12. and Joh. 17. 26. Isai. 64. 4. "O that
thou would rent the heavens -- to make thy name known to thine adversaries.
-- "

AND it is spoken of as the end of that great actual salvation, which should
follow Christ's purchase of salvation, both among Jews and gentiles. Isai. 49.
22, 23. "I will lift up my hand to the gentiles, -- and they shall bring thy
sons in their arms -- and kings shall be thy nursing fathers -- and thou shall
know that I am the Lord." See also, Ezekiel. 16. 62. and 29. 21. and 34. 27. and
36. 38, and 39. 28, 29. Joel 3. 17.


THIS is spoken of as the end of God's common providence. Job 37 6. 7. "For he
says to the snow, Be thou on the earth. Likewise to the small rain, and to the
great rain of his strength. He seals up the hand of every man, that all men
may know his work".

IT is spoken of as the end of the day of judgment, that grand consummation of
God's moral government of the world, and the day for the bringing all things to
their designed ultimate issue. It is called "The day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God", Romans 2. 5.

AND the declaration, or openly manifesting God's excellency is spoken of as
the actual, happy consequence and effect of the work of creation. Psalm. 19. at
the beginning. "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handy work. Day unto day utters speech, night unto night shows forth
knowledge. -- In them has he placed a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a
bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run his
race, etc."

IN like manner, there are many scriptures that speak of God's PRAISE, in many
of the forementioned respects, just in the same manner as of his name and glory.

THIS is spoken of as the end of the being of God's people, in the same manner.
Jer. 13. 11. "For as the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so have I
caused to (...) unto me the whole house of Israel, and he whole house of Judah,
says the Lord; that they might be unto me for a name, and for a praise, and
for a glory."

IT is spoken of as the end of the moral world, Matt. 21. 16. "Out of the mouth
of babes and sucklings have thou perfected praise." That is, so have thou in
thy sovereignty and wisdom ordered it, that thou should obtain the great end
for which intelligent creatures are made, more especially from some of them
that are in themselves weak, or inferior and more insufficient. Compare Psalm.
8. 1, 2.

AND the same thing that was observed before concerning the making known God's
excellency, may also be observed concerning God's praise. That it is made use
of as an argument in deprecating a state of destruction, that in such a state
this end cannot be answered; in such a manner as seems to imply its being an
ultimate end, that God had made man for. Psalm. 88. 10. "Shall the dead arise
and praise thee? shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? -- shall
thy wonders be known in the dark?" Psalm. 30. 9. "What profit is there in my
blood! when I go down to the pit, shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare
thy truth?" Psalm. 115. 17, 18. "The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that
go down into silence: but we will bless the Lord, from this time forth and
forevermore. Praise ye the Lord." Isai. 38. 18, 19. "For the grave cannot
praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee; they that go down into the pit cannot
hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee."

IT is spoken of as the end of the virtue of God's people, in like manner as is
God's glory. Phil. 1. 11. "Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which
are by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God."

IT is spoken of as the end of the work of redemption. In the first chap. of
Ephesians. where that work in the various parts of it is particularly insisted on,
and set forth in its exceeding glory, this is mentioned from time to time as
the great end of all, that it should be "to the praise of his glory." (As in
ver. 6, 12, 14.) By which we may doubtless understand much the same thing, with
that which in Phil. 1. 11. is expressed, "his praise and glory." Agreeable to
this, Jacob's fourth son, from whom the Messiah the great Redeemer was to
proceed, by the spirit of prophecy, or the special direction of God's
providence, was called PRAISE, with reference to this happy consequence, and
glorious end of that great redemption, this Messiah, one of his posterity, was
to work out.

THIS in the old testament is spoken of as the end of the forgiveness of the
sin of God's people, and their salvation, in the same manner as is God's name
and glory. Isai. 48. 9, 10, 11. "For my name's sake will I defer mine anger,
and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee no^ off. Behold I
have refined thee -- for mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it;
for how should my name be polluted? and my glory will I not give to another."
Jer. 33. 8, 9. "And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, -- and I will
pardon all their iniquities --. And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise,
and an honor."

AND that the holy part of the moral world, do express desires of this, and
delight in it, as the end which holy principles in them tend to, reach after,
and rest in, in their highest exercises, just in the same manner as the glory
of God, is abundantly manifest. It would be endless to enumerate particular
places wherein this appears; wherein the saints declare this, by expressing
their earnest desires of God's praise; calling on all nations, and all beings
in heaven and earth to praise him; in a rapturous manner calling on one
another, crying Hallelujah, praise ye the Lord, praise him forever". Expressing
their resolutions to praise him as long as they live through all generations,
and forever; declaring how good, how pleasant and comely the praise of God is,
etc.

AND it is manifest that God's praise in the desirable and glorious consequence
and effect of all the works of creation, by such places as these. Psalm. 145. 5,
-- 10. and 148. throughout, and 103. 19, -- 22.

SECT. V.
PLACES of scripture from whence it may be argued, that communication of good
to the creature, was one thing which God had in view, as an ultimate end of the
creaon of the world.

1. ACCORDING to the scripture, communicating good to the creatures, is what is
in itself pleasing to God: and that this is not merely subordinately agreeable,
and esteemed valuable on account of its relation to a further end, as it is in
executing justice in punishing the sins of men; which God is inclined to as fit
and necessary in certain cases, and on the account of good ends attained by it:
but what God is inclined to on its own account, and what he delights in simply
and ultimately. For though God is sometimes in scripture spoken of as taking
pleasure in punishing men's sins, Deuteronomy. 28. 63. "The Lord will rejoice over
you, to destroy you". Ezekiel. 5. 13. "Then shall mine anger be accomplished, and
I will cause my ^ury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted". Yet God is
often spoken o^ as exercising goodness and showing mercy, with delight, in a
manner quite different, and opposite to that of his executing wrath. For the
latter is spoken of as what God proceeds to with backwardness and reluctance;
the misery of the creature being not agreeable to him on its own account. Neh.
9. 17 "That thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great loving kindness". Psalm. 103. 8. "The Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy". Psalm. 145. 8. "The Lord is
gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy". We have
again almost the same words, Jonah 4. 2. Mic. 7. 10. "Who is a God like thee,
that pardons iniquity, etc -- He retains not his anger forever, because he
delights in mercy". Ezekiel. 18. 32. "I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye". Lam.
3. 33. "He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men". Ezekiel.
33. 11. "As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel". 2 Pet. 3. 9. "Not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance".

2. THE work of redemption wrought out by Jesus Christ, is spoken of in such a
manner as being from the grace and love of God to men, that does not well
consist with his seeking a communication of good to them, only subordinately,
i. e. not at all from any inclination to their good directly, or delight in
giving happiness to them, simply and ultimately considered; but only
indirectly, and wholly from a regard to something entirely diverse, which it is
a means of. Such expressions as that in Joh. 3. 16. carry another idea. "God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life". And 1 John 4. 9. 10. "In
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love;
not that we loved God but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a
propitiation for our sins". So Ephesians. 2. 4. "But God, who is rich in mercy, for
his great love wherewith he loved us, etc". But if indeed this was only from
love to something else, and a regard to a further end, entirely diverse from
our good; then all the love is truly terminated in that, its ultimate object!
and God's love consists in regard toward that: and therein is God's love, and
therein is his love manifested, strictly and properly speaking, and not in that
he loved us, or exercised such high regard toward us. For if our good be not
at all regarded ultimately, but only subordinately, then our good or interest
is in itself considered, nothing in God's regard or love: God's respect is all
terminated upon, and swallowed up in something diverse, which is the end, and
not in the means.

So the scripture every where represents concerning Christ, as though the great
things that he did and suffered, were in the most direct and proper sense, from
exceeding love to us; and not as one may show kindness to a person, ^o whose
interest, simply and in itself considered, he is entirely indifferent, only as
it may be a means of promoting the interest of another (that is indeed directly
regarded) which is connected with it. Thus the apostle Paul represents the
matter, Gal. 2. 20. "Who loved me, and gave himself for me". Ephesians. 5. 25.
"Husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the church, and gave himself
for it". And Christ himself, Joh. 17. 19, "For their sakes I sanctify myself".
And the scripture represents Christ as resting in the salvation and glory of
his people, when obtained, as in what he ultimately sought, as having therein
reached the goal at the end of his race; obtained the prize he aimed at;
enjoying the travail of his soul, in which he is satisfied, as the recompense
of his labors and extreme agonies. Isai. 53. 10, 11. "When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail
of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities". He sees the travail
of his soul, in seeing his seed, the children brought forth in the issue of his
travail. This implies that Christ has his delight, most truly and properly, in
obtaining the salvation of his church, not merely as a means conducing to the
thing which terminates his delight and joy; but as what he rejoices and is
satisfied in, most directly and properly: as do those scriptures, which
represent him as rejoicing in his obtaining this fruit of his labor and
purchase, as the bridegroom, when he obtains his bride. Isai. 62. 5. "As the
bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee". And
how emphatical and strong to the purpose, are the expressions in Zeph. 3. 17.
"The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice
over thee with joy: he will rest in his love, he will rejoice over thee with
singing". The same (...) may be argued from Prove. 8. 30, 31. "Then was I by
him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always
before him: rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were
with the sons of men". And from those places that speak of the saints as God's
portion, his jewels and peculiar treasure. These things are abundantly
confirmed by what is related, Joh. 12. 23. -- 32. But the particular
consideration of what may be observed to the present purpose, in that passage
of scripture, may be referred to the next section.

3. THE communications of divine goodness, particularly forgiveness of sin, and
salvation, are spoken of from time to time, as being for God's goodness sake,
and for his mercies sake, just in the same manner as they are spoken of, as
being for God's name's sake, in places observed before. Psalm. 25. 7. "Remember
not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy
remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord". In the 11th. ver. the
psalmist says, "For thy name's sake, O Lord pardon mine iniquity". Neh. 9. 31.
"Nevertheless for thy great mercies sake, thou have not utterly consumed them,
nor forsaken them; for thou art a gracious and a merciful God". Psalm. 6. 4.
"Return O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake". Psalm. 31. 16.
"Make thy to face shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake." Psalm.
44. 26. "Arise for our help; redeem us for thy mercies sake." And here it may
be observed, after what a remarkable manner God speaks of his love to the
children of Israel in the wilderness, as though his love were for love's sake,
and his goodness were its own end and motive. Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. "The Lord did not
set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any
people, for ye were the fewest of all people; but because the Lord loved you."

4. THAT the government of the world in all parts of it, is for the good of
such as are to be the eternal subjects of God's goodness, is implied in what
the scripture teaches us of Christ's being set at God's right hand, made king
of angels and men; set at the head of the universe, having all p^^er given him
in heaven und earth, to that end that he may promote their happiness; being
made head over all things to the church, and having the government of the whole
creation for their good. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. Joh. 17. 2. Mat. 11. 27. and
28. 18, 19. Joh. 3. 35.
Christ mentions it (Mar. 28. 29.) as the reason why the son of man is made
Lord of the sabbath, that "the sabbath was made for man". And if so, we may in
like manner argue, that all things were made for man, that the son of man is
made Lord of all things.

5. THAT God uses the whole creation, in his whole government of it, for the
good of his people, is most elegantly represented in Deuteronomy. 33. 26. "There is
none like the God of Jeshurun, who rides on the heavens in thine help, and in
his excellency on the sky". The whole universe is a machine, which God has
made for his own use* to be his chariot for him to ride in; as is represented
in Ezekiels vision. In this chariot God's seat, or throne is heaven, where he
sits, who uses and governs and rides in this chariot (Ezekiel. 1. 22, 26, 27, 28.)
The inferior part of the creation, this visible universe, subject to such
continual changes and revolutions, are the wheels of the chariot, under the
place of the seat of him who rides in this chariot. God's providence in the
constant revolutions and alterations and successive events, is represented by
the motion of the wheels of the chariot, by the spirit of him who sits in his
throne on the heavens, or above the firmament. Moses tells us for whose sake it
is that God moves the wheels of this chariot, or rides in it sitting in his
heavenly seat; and to what end he is making his progress, or goes his appointed
journey in it, viz. the salvation of his people.

6. GOD's judgments on the wicked in this world, and also their eternal
damnation in the world to come, are spoken of as being for the happiness of
God's people. So are his judgments on them in this World. Isai. 43. 3, 4. "For
I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy savior. I gave Egypt for
thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou have been precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore will I give
men for thee, and people for thy life". So the works of God's vindictive
justice and wrath, are spoken of as works of mercy to his people, Psalm. 136.
10. 15, 17, 18, 19, 20. And so is their eternal damnation in another world.
Romans 9. 22. 23. "What if God, willing to show his wrath and make his power
known, endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory". Here it is evident
the last verse comes in, in connect on with the foregoing, as giving another
reason of the destruction of the wicked, viz. the showing the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy; in higher degrees of their glory and happiness,
in an advancement of their relish of their own enjoyments, and greater sense of
their value, and of God's free grace in the bestowment.

7. IT seems to argue that God's goodness to them who are to be the eternal
subjects of his goodness, is the end of the creation, that the whole creation,
in all parts of it, and all God's disposals of it, is spoken of as THEIR'S. 1
Cor. 3. 22, 23. "All things are yours. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours". The terms are very universal; and both works of creation and providence
are mentioned: and it is manifestly the design of the apostle to be understood
of every work of God whatsoever. Now, how can we understand this any otherwise,
than that all things are for their benefit; and that God made and uses all for
their good?

8. ALL God's works, both his works of creation and providence, are represented
as works of goodness or mercy to his people in the 136th. psalm. His wonderful
works in general, ver. 4. "To him who alone does great wonders; for his mercy
endures forever". The works of creation in all parts of it. Ver. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. "To him that by wisdom made the heavens; for his mercy endures forever. To
him that stretched out the earth above the waters; for his mercy endures
forever. To him that made great lights; for his mercy endures forever. The sun
to rule by day; for his mercy endures forever. The moon and stars to rule by
night; for his mercy endures forever". And God's works of providence, in the
following part of the psalm.

9. THAT expression in the blessed sentence pronounced on the righteous at the
day of judgment, "Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world", seems to hold forth as much, as that the eternal expressions and
fruits of God's goodness to them, was God's end in creating the world, and in
his providential disposals ever since the creation: that God in all his works,
in laying the foundation of the world, and ever since the foundation of it, had
been preparing this kingdom and glory for them.

10. AGREEABLE to this, the good of men is spoken of as an ultimate end of the
virtue of the moral world. Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. "He that loves another has
fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not
kill, etc. -- And if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended
in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Love works no ill
to his neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law". Gal. 5. 14.
"All the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thyself". Jam. 2. 8. "If ye fulfill the royal law, according to
the scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself, thou shall do well".

IF the good of the creature be one end of God in all things he does; and so be
one end of all things that he requires moral agents to do; and an end they
should have respect to in all that they do, and which they should regulate all
parts of their conduct by; these things may be easily explained: but otherwise
it seems difficult to be accounted for, that the Holy Ghost should thus express
himself from time to time. The scripture represents it to be the spirit of all
true saints, to perfer the welfare of God's people to their chief joy. And this
was the spirit of Moses and the prophets of old: and the good of God's church
was an end they regulated all their conduct by. And so it was with the
apostles. 2 Cor. 4. 15. "For all things are for your sakes." 2 Timothy 2. 10. "I
endure all things for the elects sake, that they may also obtain the salvation
which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory." And the scriptures represent as
though every christian should in all things he does be employed for the good of
God's church, as each particular member of the body, is in all things employed,
for the good of the body. Romans 12. 4, 5. etc. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 12. 12,
25. to the end; together with the whole of the next chapter. To this end the
scripture teaches us the angels are continually employed. Heb. 1. 14.

SECT. VI.
WHEREIN is considered what is meant by the GLORY OF GOD, and the NAME OF GOD
in scripture, when spoken of as GOD's end in his works.

HAVING thus considered what things are spoken of in the holy scriptures, as
the ends of God's works; and in such a manner as justly to lead us to suppose,
they were the ends which God had ultimately in view, in the creation of the
world: I now proceed particularly to enquire concerning some of these things,
what they are, and how the terms are to be understood.

I BEGIN first, with the GLORY OF GOD.

AND here I might observe, that the phrase, the glory of God, is sometimes
manifestly used to signify the second person in the Trinity. But it is not
necessary at this time to consider that matter, or stand to prove it from
particular passages of scripture. Omitting this therefore, I proceed to observe
concerning the hebrew word Cabhodh, which is the word most commonly used in the
old testament where we have the word glory in the english bible. The root which
it comes from is either the verb Cabhadh, which signifies to be heavy, or make
heavy, or from the adjective Cabhedh, which signifies heavy or weighty. These,
as seems pretty manifest, are the primary significations of these words, though
they have also other meanings, which seem to be derivative. The noun C^bhedh
signifies gravity, heaviness, greatness and abundance. Of very many places it
will be sufficient to name a few. Prove. 27. 3. 2 Samuel 14. 26. 1 King. 12. 11.
Psalm. 38. 4. Isai. 30. 27. And as the weight of bodies arises from two things,
viz. solidity or density, or specific gravity, as it is called, and their
magnitude; so we find the word Cabhedh used to signify dense, as in Exodus 19.
16. Gnanatz Cobhedh a dense cloud. And it is very often used for great. Isai.
32. 2. Genesis 5. 9. 1 King. 10. 2. 2 King. 6. 14. and 18. 17. Isai. 36. 2. and
other places.

The word Cabhodh, which is commonly translated glory, is used in such a manner
as might be expected from this signification of the words from whence it comes.
Sometimes it is used to signify what is infernal, what is within the being or
person inherent, in the subject, or what is in the possession of the person:
and sometimes for emanation, exhibition or communication of this internal
glory: and sometimes for the knowledge or sense, or effect of these, in those
who behold it, to whom the exhibition or communication is made; or an
expression of this knowledge or sense or effect. And here I would note, that
agreeable to the use of the word Cabhodh in the old testament, is that of the
word Doxa in the new. For as the word Cabhodh is generally translated by Doxa
in the septuagint; so it is apparent, that this word is designed to be used to
signify the same thing in the new testament, with Cabhodh in the old. This
might be abundantly proved by comparing particular places of the old testament;
but probably it will not be denied.

I THEREFORE proceed particularly to consider these words, with regard to their
use in scripture, in each of the forementioned ways.

1. As to internal glory. When the word is used to signify what is within,
inherent or in the possession of the subject, it very commonly signifies
excellency, or great valuableness, dignity, or worthiness or regard. This
according to the hebrew idiom, is as it were the weight of a thing, as that by
which it is heavy; as to be light, is to be worthless, without value,
contemptible. Number. 21. 5. "This light bread." 1 Samuel 18. 23, "Seems it a
light thing." Judge. 9. 4. " Light persons," i. e. worthless, vain, vile
persons. So Zeph. 3. 4. To set light is to despise, 2 Samuel 19. 43. Belshazzar's
vileness in the sight of God, is represented by his being Tekel, weighed in the
balances and ^ound light, Dan. 5. 27. And as the weight of a thing arises from
these two things, its magnitude, and its specific gravity conjunctly, so the
word glory is very commonly used to signify the excellency of a person or
thing, as consisting either in greatness, or in beauty, or as it were
preciousness, or in both conjunctly; as will abundantly appear by considering
the places refered to in the margin. Exodus 16. 7. and 28. 2, 40. and 3. 8. Number.
16. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 24 and 28. 58. 2 Samuel 6. 20. 1 Chronicles. 16. 24. Est. 1. 4. Job.
29. 20. Psalm. 19. 1. and 45. 13. and 63. 3. and 66. 3. and 67. 6. and 87. 3.
and 102. 16, and 145. 5, 12, 13. Isai. 4. 2. and 10. 18. and 16. 40. and 35.
21. and 40. 5. and 60. 13. and 62. 2. Ezekiel. 31. 18. Hab. 2. 14. Hag. 2. 3, 9.
Matt. 6, 29. and 16. 27. and 24. 30. Luke 9. 31, 32. Joh. 1. 14. and 2. 11. and
11. 40. Romans 6. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 8. and 15. 40. 2 Cor. 3. 10. Ephesians. 3 21. Col. 1.
11. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Tit. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 17.


SOMETIMES that internal great and excellent good, which is called glory, is
rather in possession than inherent. Any one may be called heavy, that possesses
an abundance; and he that is empty and destitute, may be called light. Thus we
find riches is sometimes called glory. Genesis 31. 1. "And of that which was our
fathers, has he gotten all this glory." E^^h. 5. 11. "Haman, told them of the
glory of his riches." Psalm. 49. 16, 17. "Be not afraid when one is made rich,
when the glory of his house is increased. For when he dies, he shall carry
nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him." Nah. 2. 9. "Take ye the
spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold; for there is none end of the store and
glory out of the pleasant furniture.

AND it is often put for a great height of happiness and prosperity and fullness
of good in general. Genesis 45. 13. "You shall tell my father of all my glory in
Egypt." Job. 19. 9. "He has stripped me of my glory." Isai. 10. 3. "Where will
you leave your glory." Ver. 10. "Therefore shall the Lord of hosts send among
his fat ones leanness, and under his glory shall he kindle a burning, like the
burning of a fire." Isai. 17. 3, 4. "The kingdom shall cease from Damascus, and
the remnant of Syria; they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel. And
in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin,
and the fatness of his flesh shall be made lean." Isai. 21. 16. "And all the
glory of Kedar shall fail." Isai. 61. 6. "Ye shall eat the riches of the
gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves." Chap. 66. 11, 12.
"That ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. -- I
will extend peace to her, like a river, and the glory of the gentiles like a
flowing stream." Hos. 9. 11. "As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away as a
bird." Matt. 4. 8. -- "Shows him all all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them." Luke 24. 26. "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to enter into his glory?" Joh. 17. 27. "And the glory which thou gave me,
have I given them." Romans 5. 2. "And rejoice in hope of the glory of God." Chap.
8. 18. "The sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us". See also chap. 2. 7, 10. and 3. 23
and 9. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 7. "The hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world,
unto our glory." 2 Cor. 4. 17. -- "Works out for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory." Ephesians. 1. 18. "And what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the saints." 1 Pet. 4. 13. "But rejoice inasmuch as ye are made
partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding joy." Chap. 1. 8. "Ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory." See also, Colos. 1. 27. and 3. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Timothy 2. 10. Heb. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 11, 21. and 5. 1, 10.
2 Pet. 1. 3. Rev. 21. 24, 26. Psalm. 73. 24. and 149. 5. Isai. 11. 10.


2 THE word glory, is used in scripture often to express the exhibition,
emanation or communication of the internal glory. Hence it often signifies a
visible exhibition of glory; as in an effulgence or shining brightness, by an
emanation of beams of light. Thus the brightness of the sun and moon and stars
is called their glory in 1 Cor. 15. 41. But in particular, the word is very
often thus used, when applied to God and Christ. As in Ezekiel. 1. 28. "As the
appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the
appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the
likeness of the glory of the Lord." And chap. 10. 4. "Then the glory of the
Lord went up from the cherub, and stood over the threshold of the house, and
the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness
of the Lord's glory." Isai. 6. 1, 2, 3. "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne
high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood the
seraphim. -- And one cried to another and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory." Compared with Joh. 12. 4. "These
things said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spoke of him." Ezekiel. 43. 2. "And
behold the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east. -- And the
earth shined with his glory." Isai. 24. 23. "Then the moon shall be confounded
and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously." Isai. 60. 1, 2. "Arise, shine,
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold
the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people; but the Lord
shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee." Together with
ver. 19. "The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory." Luke 2. 9. "The glory of the Lord
shone round about them." Act. 22. 11. "And when I could not see, for the glory
of that light." In 2. Cor 3.7. The shining of Moses's face is called the glory
of his countenance. And to this Christ's glory is compared ver. 18. "But we all
with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image, from glory to glory." And so chap. 4. 4. "Left the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them."
Ver. 6. "For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ." Heb. 1. 3. "Who is the brightness of his glory." The
apostle Peter, speaking of that emanation of exceeding brightness, from the
bright cloud that over shadowed the disciples in the mount of transfiguration,
and of the shining of Christ's face at that time, says, 2 Pet. 1. 17. "^or he
received from God the father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to
him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well
pleased." Rev. 18. 1. "Another angel came down from heaven, having great power,
and the earth was lightened with his glory." Rev. 21. 11. "Having the glory of
God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious, like a jasper stone,
clear as crystal." Ver. 23. "And the city had no need of the sun, nor of the
moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it." So the word for a
visible effulgence or emanation of light in the places to be seen in the
margin. Exodus 16. 12. and 24. 16, 17, 23. and 40. 34, 35. Lev. 9. 6, 23. Number.
14. 10. and 16. 19. 1 King. 8. 11. 2 Chronicles. 5. 14. and 7. 1, 2, 3. Isai. 58. 8.
Ezekiel. 3. 23. and 8. 4. and 9. 3. and 10. 18, 19. and 11. 22, 23. and 43. 4, 5.
and 44. 4. Act, ^. 55. Rev. 15. 8.


THE word glory, as applied to God or Christ, sometimes evidently signifies the
communications of God's fullness and means much the same thing, with God's
abundant and exceeding goodness and grace. So Ephesians. 2. 16. "That he would grant
you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, by his
spirit in the inner man." The expression, "According to the riches of his
glory", is apparently equivalent to that in the same epistle, chap. 1. 7.
"According to the riches of his grace". And chap. 2. 7. "The exceeding riches
of his grace in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus". In like manner is
the word glory used in Phil. 4. 19. "But my God shall supply all your need,
according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus". And Romans 9. 23. "And that
he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy". In this,
and the foregoing verse, the apostle speaks of God's making known two things,
his great wrath, and his rich grace. The former, on the vessels of wrath, ver.
22. The latter, which he calls the riches of his glory, on the vessels of
mercy, ver. 23. So when Moses says, "I beseech thee show me thy glory;" God
granting his request, makes answer, "I will make all my goodness to pass before
thee." Exodus 33. 18, 19. DR. Goodwin observes (vol. 1. of his works, part 2d,
page 166.) that riches of grace are called riches of glory in scripture. "The
scripture." says he, speaks of riches of glory in Ephesians. 3. 16. That he would
grant you according to the riches of his glory; yet eminently mercy is there
intended: for it is that which God bestows, and which the apostle there prays
for. And he calls his mercy there his glory, as elsewhere he does, as being the
most eminent excellency in God -- That in Romans 9. 22, 23. compared, is
observable. In the 22 d ver. where the apostle speaks of God's making known the
power of his wrath, says he, God willing to show his wrath, and make his power
known. But in ver. 23 d when he comes to speak of mercy, he says, That he
might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy.


WHAT we find in Joh. 12. 23, -- 32. is worthy of particular notice in this
place. The words and behavior of Christ, which we have an account of here,
argue two things.

1. THAT the happiness and salvation of men, was an end that Christ ultimately
aimed at in the labors and sufferings he went through, for our redemption (and
consequently, by what has been before observed, an ultimate end of the work of
creation.) The very same things which were observed before in this passage
(chap. second, sect. third) concerning God's glory, are equally, and in the
same manner observable, concerning the salvation of men. As it was there
observed, that Christ in the great conflict of his soul, in the view of the
near approach of the most extreme difficulties which attended his undertaking,
comforts himself in a certain prospect of obtaining the end he had chiefly in
view. It was observed that the glory of God is therefore mentioned and dwelt
upon by him, as what his soul supported itself and rested in, as this great
end. And at the same time, and exactly in the same manner, is the salvation of
men mentioned and insisted on, as the end of these great labors and
sufferings, which satisfied his soul, in the prospect of undergoing them.
Compare the 23 d and 24 th verses; and also the 28 th and 29 th verses; ver.
31. and 32. And,

2. THE glory of God, and the emanations and fruits of his grace in man's
salvation, are so spoken of by Christ on this occasion in just the same manner,
that it would be quite unnatural, to understand him as speaking of two distinct
things. Such is the connection, that what he says of the latter, must most
naturally be understood as exegetical of the former. He first speaks of his own
glory and the glory of his father, as the great end that should be obtained by
what he is about to suffer; and then explains and amplifies what he says on
this, in what he expresses of the salvation of men that shall be obtained by
it. Thus in the 23. ver. he says, "The hour is come that the son of man should
be glorified." And in what next follows, he evidently shows how he was to be
glorified, or wherein his glory consisted: "Verily, verily I say unto you,
except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone; but if
it die, it brings forth much fruit." As much fruit is the glory of the seed,
so is the multitude of redeemed ones, which should spring from his death, his
glory. HERE may be remembered what was before observed of the church's being so
often spoken of as the glory and fullness of Christ.
So concerning the glory of his father, in the 27 th, and following verses.
"Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say! Father, save me from this hour?
But for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name. Then came
there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify
it again." In an assurance of this, which this voice declared, Christ was
greatly comforted, and his soul even exulted under the view of his approaching
sufferings. And what this glory was, in which Christ's soul was so comforted on
this occasion, his own words which he then spoke, plainly show. When the people
said it thundered; and others said, an angel spoke to him; then Christ explains
the matter to them, and tells them what this voice meant. Ver. 30, 31, 32.
"Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your
sakes. Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be
cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me."
By this behavior, and these speeches of our redeemer, it appears that the
expressions of divine grace, in the sanctification and happiness of the
redeemed, are especially that glory of his, and his father, which was the joy
that was set before him, for which he endured the cross, and despised the
shame: and that this glory especially, was the end of the travail of his soul,
in obtaining which end he was satisfied, agreeable to Isai. 53. 10, 11.

THIS is agreeable to what has been just observed, of God's glory being so often
represented by an effulgence, or emanation, or communication of light, from a
luminary or fountain of light. What can be thought of, that so naturally and
aptly represents the emanation of the internal glory of God; or the flowing
forth, and abundant communication of that infinite fullness of good that is in
God? Light is very often in scripture put for comfort, joy, happiness and for
good in general. Isai. 6. 3. -- "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the
whole earth is full of his glory." In the original, His glory is the fullness of
the whole earth: which signifies much more than the words of the translation.
God's glory, consisting especially in his holiness, is that, in the sight or
communications of which man's fullness, i. e. his holiness and happiness,
consists. By God's glory here, there seems to be respect to that train, or
those effulgent beams that filled the temple: these beams signifying God's
glory shining forth, and communicated. This effulgence or communication is the
fullness of all intelligent creatures, who have no fullness of their own.


AGAIN, the word glory, as applied to God in scripture, implies the view or
knowledge of God's excellency. The exhibition of glory, is to the view of
beholders. The manifestation of glory, the emanation or effulgence of
brightness, has relation to the eye. Light or brightness is a quality that has
relation to the sense of seeing: we see the luminary by it is light. And
knowledge is often expressed in scripture by light. The word glory very often
in scripture signifies or implies honor, as any one may soon see by casting his
eye on a concordance. See particularly Heb. 3. 3.
But honor implies the knowledge of the dignity and excellency of him who has
the honor. And this is often more especially signified by the word glory, when
applied to God. Number. 14. 21. "But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be
filled with the glory of the Lord." i. e. All the earth shall see the
manifestations I will make of my perfect holiness and hatred of sin, and so of
my infinite excellence. This appears by the context. So Ezekiel. 39. 21, 22, 23.
"And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my
judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them. So the
house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God. And the heathen shall
know, that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity." And
it is manifest in many places, where we read of God's glorifying himself, or of
his being glorified, that one thing directly intended, is a manifesting or
making known his divine greatness and excellency.

AGAIN, glory, as the word is used in scripture, often signifies or implies
praise. This appears from what was observed before, that glory very often
signifies honor, which is much the same thing with praise, viz. high esteem and
respect of heart, and the expression and testimony of it in words and actions.
And it is manifest that the words glory and praise, are often used as equivalent
expressions in scripture. Psalm. 50. 23. "Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me".
Psalm. 22. 23. "Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; all ye seed of Israel,
glorify him". Isai. 42. 8. "My glory I will not give unto another, nor my
praise to graven images". Ver. 12. "Let them give glory unto the Lord, and
declare his praise in the islands". Isai. 48. 9, 10, 11. "For my name's sake
will I defer mine anger; for my praise will I refrain for thee. -- For mine own
sake will do it; for -- I will not give my glory unto another". Jer. 13. 11.
"That they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and
for a glory". Ephesians. 1. 6. "To the praise of the glory of his grace". Ver. 12.
"To the praise of his glory". So ver. 14. The phrase is apparently equivalent
to that, Phil. 1. 11. "Which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory of
God". 2 Cor. 4. 15. "That the abundant grace might, through the thanksgiving of
many, redound to the glory of God"

IT is manifest the praise of God, as the phrase is used in scripture, implies
the high esteem and love of the heart, exalting thoughts of God, and
complacence in his excellence and perfection. This is so manifest to every one
acquainted with the scripture, that there seems to be but little or no need to
refer to particular places. However, if any need satisfaction, they may, among
enumerable other places which might be mentioned, turn to those in the margin.
Psalm. 145. 1, -- 12. and 34. 1, 2, 3. and 44. 8. and 71. 14, 15. and 99. 2, 3.
and 107. 31, 32. and 108. 3, 4, 5. and 119. 164. and 148. 13 and 150. 2. Rev.
19. 1, 2, 3. --


IT also implies joy in God, or rejoicing in his perfections, as is manifest by
Psalm. 33. 2. "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the
upright". Other passages to the same purpose, see in the margin. Psalm. 9. 1, 2,
14. and 28. 7. and 35. 27, 28. and 42. 4. and 63. 5. and 67. 3, 4, 5. and 71.
22, 23. and 104. 33, 34. and 106. 47. and 135. 3. and 147. 1. and 149. 1, 2, 5,
6. Act. 2. 46, 47. and 3. 8. Rev. 19, 6, 7.
How often do we read of singing praise? But singing is commonly an expression
of joy. It is called, making a joyful noise. Psalm. 66. 1, 2. and 96. 4, 5.
And as it is often used, it implies gratitude or love to God for his benefits
to us. Psalm. 30. 12. and 35. 18. and 63. 3, 4. and 66. 8, 9. and 71. 6, 7, 8.
and and 79. 13. and 98. 4, 5. and 100. 4. and 107. 21, 22. and 138. 2. And many
other places --.


HAVING thus considered what is implied in the phrase, THE GLORY OF GOD, as we
find it used in scripture; I proceed to enquire what is meant by the name of
God.

AND I observe that it is manifest that God's name and his glory, at least very
often, signify the same thing in scripture. As it has been observed concerning
the glory of God, that it sometimes signifies the second person in the trinity;
the same might be shown of the name of God, if it were needful in this place.
But that the name and glory of God are often equipollent expressions, is
manifest by Exodus 33. 18, 19. When Moses says, "I beseech thee, show me thy
glory",: and God grants his request, he says, "I will proclaim the name of the
Lord before thee". Psalm. 8. 1. "O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the
earth! Who have set thy glory above the heavens". Psalm. 79. 9. "Help us O God
of our salvation, for the glory or thy name; and deliver us, and purge away our
sins, for thy name's sake". Psalm. 102. 15. "So the heathen shall fear the name
of the Lord; and all the kings of the earth, thy glory". Psalm. 148. 13. "His
name alone is excellent, and his glory is above the earth and heaven. Isai. 48.
9. "For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I
refrain ^or thee". Ver. 11. "For mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I
do it: for how should my name be polluted? And I will not give my glory unto
another". Isai. 49. 19. "They shall fear the name of the Lord from the west,
and his glory from the rising of the sun". Jer. 13. 11. "That they might be
unto me for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory. As glory often implies
the manifestation, publication and knowledge of excellency, and the honor that
any one has in the world; so it is evident does name. Genesis 11. 4. "Let us make
us a name". Deuteronomy. 26. 19. "And to make thee high above all nations, in praise,
in name, and in honor". See also, 2 Samuel 7. 9. and 8. 13. and 23. 18. Neh. 9.
10. Job 30. 8. Prove. 22. 1. Many other places import the same thing.


So it is evident that by name is sometimes meant much the same thing as praise,
by several places which have been just mentioned, as Isai. 48. 9. Jer. 13. 11.
Deuteronomy. 26, 19. And also by Jer. 33. 9. "And it shall be unto me for a name, a
praise and an honor, before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear of
all the good I do unto them". Zeph. 3. 20. "I will make you a name and a praise
among all people of the earth".

AND it seems that the expression or exhibition of God's goodness is especially
called his name, in Exodus 33. 19. "I will make all my goodness pass before
thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee". And chap. 34. 5,
6, 7. "And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and
proclaimed the name of the Lord. And the Lord passed by before him, and
proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, longsuffering and
abundant in goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands", etc.

AND the same illustrous brightness and effulgence in the pillar of cloud, that
appeared in the wilderness, and dwelt above the mercy seat in the tabernacle
and temple (or rather the spiritual divine brightness and effulgence
represented by it) which is so often called the glory of the Lord, is also
often called the name of the Lord. Because God's glory was to dwell in the
tabernacle, therefore he promises, Exodus 29. 43. "There will I meet with the
children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory." And
the temple was called the house of God's glory, Isai. 60. 7. In like manner,
the name of God is said to dwell in the sanctuary. Thus we often read of the
place that God chose, to put his name there: or (as it is in the hebrew) to
cause his name to inhabit there. So it is sometimes rendered by our
translators. As Deuteronomy. 12. 11. "Then there shall be a place which the Lord your
God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there". And the temple is often
spoken of as built for God's name. And in Psalm. 74. 7. the temple is called the
dwelling place of God's name. The mercy seat in the temple was called the
throne of God's name or glory, Jer. 14. 21. "Do not abhor us, for thy name's
sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory". Here God's name and his glory,
seem to be spoken of as the same.

SECT. VII.
SHOWING that the ultimate end of the creation of the world, is BUT ONE, and
what THAT ONE END is.

FROM what has been observed in the last section, it appears, that however the
last end of the creation is spoken of in scripture under various denominations;
yet if the whole of what is said relating to this affair, be duly weighed, and
one part compared with another, we shall have reason to think, that the design
of the spirit of God don't seem to be to represent God's ultimate end as
manifold, but as one. For though it be signified by various names, yet they
appear not to be names of different things, but various names involving each
other in their meaning; either different names of the same thing, or names of
several parts of one whole, or of the same whole viewed in various lights, or
in its different respects and relations. For it appears that all that is ever
spoken of in the scripture as an ultimate end of God's works, is included in
that one phrase, the glory of God; which is the name by which the last end of
God's works is most commonly called in scripture; and seems to be the name
which most aptly signifies the thing.

THE thing signified by that name, the glory of God, when spoken of as the
supreme and ultimate end of the work of creation, and of all God's works, is
the emanation and true external expression of God's internal glory and fullness;
meaning by his fullness, what has already been explained. Or in other words,
God's internal glory extant, in a true and just exhibition, or external
existence of it. It is confessed that there is a degree of obscurity in these
definitions: but perhaps an obscurity which is unavoidable, through the
imperfection of language, and words being less fitted to express things of so
sublime a nature. And therefere the thing may possibly be better understood, by
using many words and a variety of expressions, by a particular consideration of
it, as it were by parts, than by any short definition.

THERE is included in this, the exercise of God's perfections to produce a
proper effect, in opposition to their lying eternally dormant and ineffectual:
as his power being eternally without any act or fruit or that power; his wisdom
eternally ineffectual in any wise production, or prudent disposal of any thing,
etc. The manifestation of his internal glory to created understandings. The
communication of the infinite fullness of God to the creature. The creature's
high esteem of God, love to God, and complacence and joy in God; and the proper
exercises and expressions of these.

THESE at first view may appear to be entirely distinct things: but if we more
closely consider the matter, they will all appear to be one thing, in a variety
of views and relations. They are all but the emanation of God's glory; or the
excellent brightness and fullness of the divinity diffused, overflowing, and as
it were enlarged; or in one word, existing ad extra. God's exercising his
perfection to produce a proper effect, is not distinct from the emanation or
communication of his fullness: for this is the effect, viz. his fullness
communicated, and the producing this effect is the communication of his
fullness; and there is nothing in this effectual exerting of God's perfection,
but the emanation of God's internal glory. The emanation or communication, is
of the internal glory or fullness of God, as it is. Now God's internal glory, as
it is in God, is either in his understanding, or will. The glory or fullness of
his understanding, is his knowledge. The internal glory and fullness of God,
which we must conceive of as having its special seat in his will, is his
holiness and happiness. The whole of God's internal good or glory, is in these
three things, viz. his infinite knowledge; his infinite virtue or holiness, and
his infinite joy and happiness. Indeed there are a great many attributes in
God, according to our way of conceiving or talking of them: but all may be
reduced to these; or to the degree, circumstances and relations of these. We
have no conception of God's power, different from the degree of these things,
with a certain relation of them to effects. God's infinity is not so properly a
distinct kind of good in God, but only expresses the degree of the good there
is in him. So God's eternity is not a distinct good; but is the duration of
good. His immutability is still the same good, with a negation of change. So
that, as I said, the fullness of the Godhead is the fullness of his
understanding, consisting in his knowledge, and the fullness of his will,
consisting in his virtue and happiness. And therefore the external glory of God
consists in the communication of these. The communication of his knowledge is
chiefly in giving the knowledge of himself: for this is the knowledge in which
the fullness of God's understanding chiefly consists. And thus we see how the
manifestation of God's glory to created understandings, and their seeing and
knowing it, is not distinct from an emanation or communication of God's
fullness, but clearly implied in it. Again, the communication of God's virtue or
holiness, is principally in communicating the love of himself (which appears by
what has before been observed.) And thus we see how, not only the creature's
seeing and knowing God's excellence, but also supreamly esteeming and loving
him, belongs to the communication of God's fullness. And the communication of
God's joy and happiness, consists chiefly in communicating to the creature,
that happiness and joy, which consists in rejoicing in God, and in his glorious
excellency; for in such joy God's own happiness does principally consist. And
in these things, viz. in knowing God's excellency, loving God for it, and
rejoicing in it; and in the exercise and expression of of these, consists God's
honor and praise: so that these are clearly implied in that glory of God, which
consists in the emanation of his internal glory. And though we suppose all these
things, which seem to be so various, are signified by that glory, which the
scripture speaks of as the last end of all God's works; yet it is manifest
there is no greater, and no other variety in it, than in the internal and
essential glory of God itself. God's internal glory is partly in his
understanding, and partly in his will. And this internal glory, as seated in
the will of God, implies both his holiness and his happiness: both are
evidently God's glory, according to the use of the phrase. So that as God's
external glory is only the emanation of his internal glory, this variety
necessarily follows. And again, it hence appears that here is no other variety
or distinction, but what necessarily arises from the distinct faculties of the
creature, to which the communication is made, as created in the image of God;
even as having these two faculties of understanding and will. God communicates
himself to the understanding of the creature, in giving him the knowledge of
his glory; and to the will of the creature, in giving him holiness, consisting
primarily in the love of God: and in giving the creature happiness, chiefly
consisting in joy in God. These are the sum of that emanation of divine fullness
called in scripture, the glory of God. The first part of this glory, is called
truth, the latter, grace. Joh. 1. 14. "We beheld his glory, the glory of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth".

THUS we see that the great and last end of God's works which is so variously
expressed in scripture, is indeed but one; and this one end is most properly
and comprehensively called, THE GLORY OF GOD; by which name it is most commonly
called in scripture. And is fitly compared to an effulgence or emanation of
light from a luminary, by which this glory of God is abundantly represented in
scripture. Light is the external expression, exhibition and manifestation of
the excellency of the luminary, of the sun for instance: It is the abundant,
extensive emanation and communication of the fullness of the sun to innumerable
beings that partake of it. It Is by this that the sun itself is seen, and his
glory beheld, and all other things are discovered: it is by a participation of
this communication from the sun, that surrounding objects receive all their
luster, beauty and brightness. It Is by this that all nature is quickened and
receives life, comfort and joy. Light is abundantly used in scripture to
represent and signify these three things, knowledge, holiness and happiness.
It Is used to signify knowledge, or that manifestation and evidence by which
knowledge is received. Psalm. 19 8. and 119. 105. 130 Prove. 6. 23. Isai 8. 20.
and 9 2. and 29. 18. Dan. 5. 11. Ephesians 5. 13. "But all things that are reproved,
are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever does make manifest, is light."
And in other places of the new testament innumerable. --

IT IS used to signify virtue or moral good. Job. 25. 5. Ecel. 8. 1. Isai. 5. 20
and 24. 23. and 62. 1. Ezekiel 28. 7. 17. Dan. 2. 31. 1 John 1. 5. And many other
places --

AND it is abundantly used to signify comfort, joy and happiness. Esth. 8. 16.
Job 18. 18. and 22. 28. and 29. 3. and 30. 26. Psalm. 27. 1. and 97 11. and 118.
27. and 112. 4. Isai. 42. 16. and 50. 10. and 59. 9. Jer. 13. 16. Lam. 3. 2.
Ezekiel. 32. 8. Amos 5. 18. M^c 7. 8, 9. And other places. --




WHAT has been said may be sufficient to show how those things, which are
spoken of in scripture as ultimate ends of God's works, though they may seem at
first view to be distinct, are all plainly to be reduced to this one thing,
viz. God's internal glory or fullness extant externally, or existing in its
emanation. And though God in seeking this end, seeks the creature's good; yet
therein appears his supreme regard to himself.

THE emanation or communication of the divine fullness, consisting in the
knowledge of God, love to God, and joy in God, has relation indeed both to God,
and the creature: but it has relation to God as its fountain, as it is an
emanation from God; and as the communication itself, or thing communicated, is
something divine, something of God, something of his internal fullness; as the
water in the stream is something of the fountain; and as the beams of the sun,
are something of the sun. And again, they have relation to God, as they have
respect to him as their object: for the knowledge communicated is the knowledge
of God; and so God is the object of the knowledge: and the love communicated,
is the love of God; so God is the object of that love: and the happiness
communicated, is joy in God; and so he is the object of the joy communicated.
In the creature's knowing, esteeming, loving, rejoicing in, and praising God,
the glory of God is both exhibited and acknowledged; his fullness is received
and returned. Here is both an emanation, and remanation. The refulgence shines
upon and into the creature, and is reflected back to the luminary. The beams of
glory come from God, and are something of God, and are refunded back again to
their original. So that the whole is of God, and in God; and to God; and God is
the beginning, middle and end in this affair.

AND though it be true that God has respect to the creature in these things; yet
his respect to himself, and to the creature in this matter, are not properly to
be looked upon, as a double and divided respect of God's heart. What has been
said in chap. 1. sect. 3, 4, may be sufficient to show this. Nevertheless, it
may not be amiss here briefly to say a few things; though they are mostly implied
in what has been said already.

WHEN God was about to create the world, he had respect to that emanation of
his glory, which is actually the consequence of the creation, just as it is
with regard to all that belongs to it, both with regard to its relation to
himself, and the creature. He had regard to it, as an emanation from himself,
and a communication of himself, and as the thing communicated, in its nature
returned to himself, as its final term. And he had regard to it also, as the
emanation was to the creature, and as the thing communicated was in the
creature, as its subject. And God had regard to it in this manner, as he had a
supreme regard to himself, and value for his own infinite internal glory. It
was this value for himself that caused him to value and seek that his internal
glory should flow forth from himself. It was from his value for his glorious
perfections of wisdom and righteousness, etc. -- that he valued the proper
exercise and effect of these perfections* in wise and righteous acts and
effects. It was from his infinite value for his internal glory and fullness,
that he valued the thing itself, which is communicated, which is something of
the same, extant in the creature. Thus, because he infinitely values his own
glory, consisting in the knowledge of himself, love to himself, and complacence
and joy in himself; he therefore valued the image, communication or
participation of these, in the creature. And it is because he values himself,
that he delights in the knowledge and love and joy of the creature; as being
himself the object of this knowledge, love and complacence. For it is the
necessary consequence of the true esteem and love of any person or being
(suppose a son or friend) that we should approve and value others esteem of the
same object, and disapprove and dislike the contrary. For the same reason is it
the consequence of a being's esteem and love of himself, that he should approve
of others esteem and love of himself.

THUS it is easy to conceive, how God should seek the good of the creature,
consisting in the creature's knowledge and holiness, and even his happiness,
from a supreme regard to himself; as his happiness arises from that which is an
image and participation of God's own beauty; and consists in the creature's
exercising a supreme regard to God and complacence in him; in beholding God's
glory, in esteeming and loving it, and rejoicing in it, and in his exercising
and testifying love and supreme respect to God: which is the same thing with
the creature's exalting God as his chief good, and making him his supreme end.

AND though the emanation of God's fullness which God intended in the creation,
and which actually is the consequence of it* is to the creature as it is object,
and the creature is the subject of the fullness communicated, and is the
creature's good; and was also regarded as such, when God sought it as the end
of his works: yet it don't necessarily follow, that even in so doing, he did
not make himself his end. It comes to the same thing. God's respect to the
creature's good, and his respect to himself, is not a divided respect; but both
are united in one, as the happiness of the creature aimed at, is happiness in
union with himself. The creature is no further happy with this happiness which
God makes his ultimate end, than he becomes one with God. The more happiness
the greater union: when the happiness is perfect, the union is perfect. And as
the happiness will be increasing to eternity, the union will become more and
more strict and perfect; nearer and more like to that between God the Father,
and the Son; who are so united, that their interest is perfectly one. If the
happiness of the creature be considered as it will be, in the whole of the
creature's eternal duration, with all the infinity of its progress, and
infinite increase of nearness and union to God; in this view, the creature must
be looked upon as united to God in an infinite strictness.

IF God has respect to something in the creature, which he views as of
everlasting duration, and as rising higher and higher through that infinite
duration, and that not with constantly diminishing (but perhaps an increasing)
celerity: then he has respect to it, as, in the whole, of infinite height;
though there never will be any particular time when it can be said already to
have come to such an height.

LET the most perfect union with God, be represented by something at an
infinite height above us; and the eternally increasing union of the saints with
God, by something that is ascending constantly toward that infinite height,
moving upwards with a given velocity; and that is to continue thus to move to
all eternity. God who views the whole of this eternally increasing height,
views it as an infinite height. And if he has respect to it, and makes it his
end, as in the whole of it, he has respect to it as an infinite height, though
the time will never come when it can be said it has already arrived at this
infinite height.

GOD aims at that which the motion or progression which he causes, aims at, or
tends to. If there be many things supposed to be so made and appointed, that by
a constant and eternal motion, they all tend to a certain center; then it
appears that he who made them and is the cause of their motion, aimed at that
center, that term of their motion, to which they eternally tend, and are
eternally, as it were, striving after. And if God be this center; then God
aimed at himself. And herein it appears, that as he is the first author of
their being and motion, so he is the last end, the final term, to which is
their ultimate tendency and aim.

WE may judge of the end that the creator aimed at, in the being, nature and
tendency he gives the creature, by the mark or term which they constantly aim
at in their tendency and eternal progress; though the time will never come,
when it can be said it is attained to, in the most absolutely perfect manner.

BUT if strictness of union to God be viewed as thus infinitely exalted; then
the creature must be regarded as infinitely, nearly and closely united to God.
And viewed thus, their interest must be viewed as one with God's interest; and
so is not regarded properly with a disjunct and separate, but an undivided
respect. And as to any difficulty of reconciling God's not making the creature
his ultimate end, with a respect properly distinct from a respect to himself;
with his benevolence and free grace, and the creatures obligation to gratitude,
the reader must be referred to chap. 1. sect. 4. obj. 4. where this objection
has been considered and answered at large.

IF by reason of the strictness of the union of a man and his family, their
interest may be looked upon as one, how much more one is the interest of Christ
and his church, (whose first union in heaven is unspeakably more perfect and
exalted, than that of an earthly father and his family) if they be considered
with regard to their eternal and increasing union? Doubtless it may justly be
esteemed as so much one, that it may be supposed to be aimed at and sought, not
with a distinct and separate, but an undivided respect.

IT IS certain that what God aimed at in the creation of the world, was the good
that would be the consequence of the creation, in the whole continuance of the
thing created.

IT IS no solid objection against God's aiming at an infinitely perfect union of
the creature with himself, that the particular time will never come when it can
be said, the union is now infinitely perfect. God aims at satisfying justice in
the eternal damnation of sinners; which will be satisfied by their damnation,
considered no otherwise than with regard to its eternal duration. But yet there
never will come that particular moment, when it can be said, that now justice
is satisfied. But if this don't satisfy our modern free-thinkers, who don't
like the talk about satisfying justice with an infinite punishment; I suppose
it will not be denied by any, that God, in glorifying the saints in heaven with
eternal felicity, aims to satisfy his infinite grace or benevolence, by the
bestowment of a good infinitely valuable, because eternal: and yet there never
will come the moment, when it can be said, that now this infinitely valuable
good has been actually bestowed.

The Nature of true Virtue.
CHAP. I.
Showing wherein the essence of true virtue consists.
WHATEVER controversies and variety of opinions there are about the nature of
virtue, yet all (excepting some skeptics, who deny any real difference between
virtue and vice) mean by it something beautiful, or rather some kind of beauty,
or excellency. -- It Is not all beauty, that is called virtue; for instance, not
the beauty of a building, of a flower, or of the rainbow: but some beauty
belonging to Beings that have perception and will -- It Is not all beauty of
mankind, that is called virtue; for instance, not the external beauty of the
countenance, or shape, gracefulness of motion, or harmony of voice: but it is a
beauty that has its original seat in the mind. -- But yet perhaps not every
thing that may be called a beauty of mind, is properly called virtue. There is
a beauty of understanding and speculation. There is something in the ideas and
conceptions of great philosophers and statesmen, that may be called beautiful;
which is a different thing from what is most commonly meant by virtue. But
virtue is the beauty of those qualities and acts of the mind, that are of a
moral nature, i. e. such as are attended with desert or worthiness of praise,
or blame. Things of this sort, it is generally agreed, so far as I know, are
not any thing belonging merely to speculation; but to the disposition and will,
or (to use a general word, I suppose commonly well understood) to the heart.
Therefore I suppose, I shall not depart from the common opinion, when I say,
that virtue is the beauty of the qualities and exercises of the heart, or those
actions which proceed from them. So that when it is enquired, what is the
nature of true virtue? This is the same as to enquire, what that is which
renders any habit, disposition, or exercise of the heart truly beautiful? -- I
use the phrase true virtue, and speak of things truly beautiful, because I
suppose it will generally be allowed, that there is a distinction to be made
between some things which are truly virtuous, and others which only seem to be
virtuous, through a partial and imperfect view of things: that some actions and
dispositions appear beautiful, if considered partially and superficially, or
with regard to some things belonging to them, and in some of their
circumstances and tendencies, which would appear otherwise in a more extensive
and comprehensive view, wherein they are seen clearly in their whole nature and
the extent of their connections in the universality of things. -- There is a
general and a particular beauty. By a particular beauty, I mean that by which a
thing appears beautiful when considered only with regard to its connection
with, and tendency to some particular things within a limited, and as it were,
a private sphere. And a general beauty is that by which a thing appears
beautiful when viewed most perfectly, comprehensively and universally, with
regard to all its tendencies, and its connections with every thing it stands
related to. -- The former may be without and against the latter. As, a few
notes in a tune, taken only by themselves, and in their relation to one
another, may be harmonious; which, when considered with respect to all the
notes in the tune, or the entire series of sound, they are connected with, may
be very discordant and disagreable. (Of which more afterward) -- That only
therefore, is what I mean by true virtue, which is that, belonging to the heart
of an intelligent Being, that is beautiful by a general beauty, or beautiful in
a comprehensive view as it is in itself, and as related to every thing that it
stands in connection with. And therefore when we are inquiring concerning the
nature of true virtue, viz. wherein this true and general beauty of the heart
does most essentially consist, -- this is my answer to the inquiry --

TRUE virtue most essentially consists in benevolence to Being in general. Or
perhaps to speak more accurately, it is that consent, propensity and union of
heart to Being in general, that is immediately exercised in a general good will.

THE things which were before observed of the nature of true virtue, naturally
lead us to such a notion of it. If it has its seat in the heart, and is the
general goodness and beauty of the disposition and exercise of that, in the
most comprehensive view, considered with regard to its universal tendency, and
as related to every thing that it stands in connection with; what can it
consist in, but a consent and good will to Being in general? -- Beauty does not
consist in discord and dissent, but in consent and agreement. And if every
intelligent Being is some way related to Being in general, and is a part of the
universal system of existence; and so stands in connection with the whole; what
can its general and true beauty be, but its union and consent with the great
whole.

IF any such thing can be supposed as an union of heart to some particular
Being, or number of Beings, disposing it to benevolence to a private circle or
system of Beings, which are but a small part of the whole; not implying a
tendency to an union with the great system, and not at all inconsistent with
enmity toward Being in general; this I suppose not to be of the nature of true
virtue: although it may in some respects be good, and may appear beautiful in a
confined and contracted view of things. -- But of this more afterward.

IT is abundantly plain by the holy scriptures, and generally allowed, not only
by christian divines, but by the more considerable deists, that virtue most
essentially consists in love. And I suppose, it is owned by the most
considerable writers, to consist in general love of benevolence, or kind
affection: though, it seems to me, the meaning of some in this affair is not
sufficiently explained; which perhaps occasions some error or confusion in
discourses on this subject.

WHEN I say, true virtue consists in love to Being in general, I shall not be
likely to be understood, that no one act of the mind or exercise of love is of
the nature of true virtue, but what has Being in general, or the great system
of universal existence, for its direct and immediate object: so that no
exercise of love or kind affection to any one particular Being, that is but a
small part of this whole, has any thing of the nature of true virtue. -- But,
that the nature of true virtue consists in a disposition to benevolence toward
Being in general. Though, from such a disposition may arise exercises of love to
particular Beings, as objects are presented and occasions arise. No wonder,
that he who is of a generally benevolent disposition, should be more disposed
than another to have his heart moved with benevolent affection to particular
Persons, whom he is acquainted and conversant with, and from whom arise the
greatest and most frequent occasions for exciting his benevolent temper. -- But
my meaning is, that no affections toward particular persons, or Beings, are of
the nature of true virtue, but such as arise from a generally benevolent
temper, or from that habit or frame of mind, wherein consists a disposition to
love Being in general.

AND perhaps it is needless for me to give notice to my readers, that when I
speak of an intelligent Being's having a heart united and benevolently disposed
to Being in general, I thereby mean intelligent Being in general. Not inanimate
things, or Beings that have no perception or will; which are not properly
capable objects of benevolence.

LOVE is commonly distinguished into love of benevolence and love of
complacence. -- Love of benevolence is that affection or propensity of the
heart to any Being, which causes it to incline to its well-being, or disposes
it to desire and take pleasure in its happiness. And if I mistake not, it is
agreeable to the common opinion, that beauty in the object is not always the
ground of this propensity: but that there may be such a thing as benevolence,
or a disposition to the welfare of those that are not considered as beautiful;
unless mere existence be accounted a beauty. And benevolence or goodness in the
divine Being is generally supposed, not only to be prior to the beauty of many
of its objects, but to their existence: so as to be the ground both of their
existence and their beauty, rather than they the foundation of God's
benevolence; as it is supposed that it is God's goodness which moved him to give
them both Being and beauty. So that if all virtue primarily consists in that
affection of heart to Being, which is, exercised in benevolence, or an
inclination to its good, then God's virtue is so extended as to include a
propensity not only to Being actually existing, and actually beautiful, but to
possible Being, so as to incline him to give Being, beauty and happiness -- But
not now to insist particularly on this -- What I would have observed at
present, is, that it must be allowed, benevolence does not necessarily
presuppose beauty in its object.

WHAT is commonly called love of complacence, presupposes beauty. -- For it is
no other than delight in beauty; or complacence in the person or Being beloved
for his beauty.

IF virtue be the beauty of an intelligent Being, and virtue consists in love,
then it is a plain inconsistence, to suppose that virtue primarily consists in
any love to its object for its beauty; either in a love of complacence, which
is delight in a Being for his beauty, or in a love of benevolence, that has the
beauty of its object for its foundation. For that would be to suppose, that the
beauty of intelligent Beings primarily consists in love to beauty; or, that
their virtue first of all consists in their love to virtue. Which is an
inconsistence, and going in a circle. Because it makes virtue, or beauty of
mind, the foundation or first motive of that love wherein virtue originally
consists, or wherein the very first virtue consists; or, it supposes the first
virtue to be the consequence and effect of virtue. So that virtue is originally
the foundation and exciting cause of the very beginning or first Being of
virtue, Which makes the first virtue, both the ground, and the consequence,
both cause and effect of itself. Doubtless virtue primarily consists in
something else besides any effect or consequence of virtue. If virtue consists
primarily in love to virtue, then virtue, the thing loved, is the love of
virtue; so that virtue must consist in the love of the love of virtue. And if
it be inquired, what that virtue is, which virtue consists in the love of the
love of, it must be answered, it is the love of virtue. So that there must be
the love of the love of the virtue, and so on in infinitum. For there is no end
of going back in a circle. We never come to any beginning, or foundation. For
it is without beginning and hangs on nothing.

THEREFORE, if the essence of virtue or beauty of mind lies in love, or a
disposition to love, it must primarily consist in something different both from
complacence, which is a de^ight in beauty, and also from any benevolence that
has the beauty of its object for its foundation. Because it is absurd, to say
that virtue is primarily and first of all the consequence of itself. For this
makes virtue primarily prior to itself.

NOR can virtue primarily consist in gratitude; or one Being's benevolence to
another for his benevolence to him. Because this implies the same
inconsistence. For it supposes a benevolence prior to gratitude, that is the
cause of gratitude. Therefore the first benevolence, or that benevolence which
has none prior to it, cannot be gratitude.

THEREFORE there is room left for no other conclusion than that the primary
object of virtuous love is Being, simply considered; or, that true virtue
primarily consists, not in love to any particular Beings, because of their
virtue or beauty, nor in gratitude, because they love us; but in a propensity
and union of heart to Being simply considered; exciting absolute Benevolence
(if I may so call it) to Being in general. -- I say, true virtue primarily
consists in this. For I am far from asserting, that there is no true virtue in
any other love than this absolute benevolence. But I would express what appears
to me to be the truth, on this subject, in the following particulars.

THE first object of a virtuous benevolence is Being, simply considered: and if
Being, simply considered, be its object, then Being in general is its object;
and the thing it has an ultimate propensity to, is the highest good of Being in
general. And it will seek the ^ood of every individual Being unless it be
conceived as not consistent with the highest good of Being in general. In which
case the good of a particular Being, or some Beings, may be given up for the
sake of the highest good of Being in general. And particularly if there be any
Being that is looked upon as statedly and irreclaimably opposite and an enemy
to Being in general, then consent and adherence to Being in general will induce
the truly virtuous heart to forsake that Being, and to oppose it.

AND further, if Being, simply considered, be the first object of a truly
virtuous benevolence, then that Being who has most of Being, or has the
greatest share of existence, other things being equal, so far as such a Being
is exhibited to our faculties or set in our view, will have the greatest share
of the propensity and benevolent affection of the heart. -- I say, other things
being equal, especially because there is a secondary object of virtuous
benevolence, that I shall take notice of presently. Which is one thing that
must be considered as the ground or motive to a purely virtuous benevolence.
Pure benevolence in its first exercise is nothing else but Being's uniting,
consent, or propensity to Being; appearing true and pure by its extending to
Being in general, and inclining to the general highest good, and to each Being,
whose welfare is consistent with the highest general good, in proportion to the
Degree of existence I say, -- in proportion to the degree of existence, --
because one Being may have more existence than another, as he may be greater
than another. That which is great, has more existence, and is further from
nothing, than that which is little. One Being may have every thing positive
belonging to it, or every thing which goes to it is positive existence (in
opposition to defect) in an higher degree than another; or a greater capacity
and power, greater understanding, every faculty and every positive quality in
an higher degree. An Archangel must be supposed to have more existence, and to
be every way further removed from non entity, than a worm, or a flea.
understand, other things being equal.

THE second object of a virtuous propensity of heart is benevolent Being. -- A
secondary ground of pure benevolence is virtuous benevolence itself in its
object. When any one under the influence of general benevolence, sees another
Being possessed of the like general benevolence, this attaches his heart to
him, and draws forth greater love to him, than merely his having existence:
because so far as the Being beloved has love to Being in general, so far his
own Being is, as it were, enlarged; extends to, and in some sort comprehends,
Being in general: and therefore he that is governed by love to Being in
general, must of necessity have complacence in him, and the greater degree of
benevolence to him, as it were out of gratitude to him for his love to general
existence, that his own heart is extended and united to, and so looks on its
interest as its own. It Is because his heart is thus united to Being in general,
that he looks on a benevolent propensity to Being in general, wherever he sees
it, as the beauty of the Being in whom it is; an excellency, that renders him
worthy of esteem, complacence, and the greater good will.

BUT several things may be noted more particularly concerning this secondary
ground of a truly virtuous love.

1. THAT loving a Being on this ground necessarily arises from pure benevolence
to Being in general, and comes to the same thing. For he that has a simple and
pure good will to general entity or existence, must love that temper in others,
that agrees and conspires with itself. A spirit of consent to Being must agree
with consent to Being. That which truly and sincerely seeks the good of others,
must approve of, and love that which joins with him in seeking the good of
others.

2. THIS which has been now mentioned as a secondary ground of virtuous love,
is the thing wherein true moral or spiritual beauty primarily consists. Yea,
spiritual beauty consists wholly in this, and the various qualities and
exercises of mind which proceed from it, and the external actions which proceed
from these internal qualities and exercises. And in these things consists all
true virtue, viz. in this love of Being, and the qualities and acts which arise
from it.

3. As all spiritual beauty lies in these virtuous principles and acts, so it is
primarily on this account they are beautiful, viz. that they imply consent and
union with Being in general. This is the primary and most essential beauty of
every thing that can justly be called by the name of virtue, or is any moral
excellency in the eye of one that has a perfect view of things. I say, -- the
primary and most essential beauty, -- because there is a secondary and inferior
sort of beauty; which I shall take notice of afterward.

4. THIS spiritual beauty, that is but a secondary ground of a virtuous
benevolence, is the ground, not only of benevolence, but complacence, and is
the primary ground of the latter; that is, when the complacence is truly
virtuous. Love to us in particular, and kindness received, may be a secondary
ground: but this is the primary objective foundation of it.

5. IT must be noted, that the degree of the aimableness or valuableness of
true virtue, primarily consisting in consent and a benevolent propensity of
heart to Being in general, in the eyes of one that is influenced by such a
spirit, is not in the simple proportion of the degree of benevolent affection
seen, but in a proportion compounded of the greatness of the benevolent Being
or the degree of Being and the degree of benevolence. One that loves Being in
general, will necessarily value good will to Being in general, wherever he sees
it. But if he sees the same benevolence in two Beings, he will value it more in
two, than in one only. Because it is a greater thing, more favorable to Being
in general, to have two Beings to favor it, than only one of them. For there is
more Being, that favors Being: both together having more Being than one alone.
So, if one Being be as great as two, has as much existence as both together,
and has the same degree of general benevolence, it is more favorable to being
in general than if there were general benevolence in a Being that had but half
that share of existence. As a large quantity of gold, with the same degree of
preciousness, i. e. with the same excellent quality of matter, is more valuable
than a small quantity of the same metal.

6. IT is impossible that any one should truly relish this beauty, consisting
in general benevolence, who has not that temper himself. I have observed, that
if any Being is possessed of such a temper, he will unavoidably be pleased with
the same temper in another. And it may in like manner be demonstrated, that
it is such a spirit, and nothing else, which will relish such a spirit. For if a
Being, destitute of benevolence, should love benevolence to Being in general,
it would prize and seek that which it had no value for. Because to love an
inclination to the good of Being in general, would imply a loving and prizing
the good of Being in general. For how should one love and value a disposition
to a thing, or a tendency to promote a thing, and for that very reason, because
it tends to promote it, -- when the thing itself is what he is regardless of,
and has no value for, nor desires to have promoted.

CHAP. II.
Showing how that love, wherein true virtue consists, respects the divine Being
and created Beings.
FROM what has been said, it is evident, that true virtue must chiefly consist
in love to God; the Being of Beings, infinitely the greatest and best of
Beings. This appears, whether we consider the primary or secondary ground of
virtuous love. It was observed, that the first objective ground of that love,
wherein true virtue consists, is Being, simply considered: and as a necessary
consequence of this, that Being who has the most of Being, or the greatest
share of universal existence, has proportionably the greatest share of virtuous
benevolence, so far as such a Being is exhibited to the faculties of our minds,
other things being equal. But God has infinitely the greatest share of
existence, or is infinitely the greatest Being. So that all other Being, even
that of all created things whatsoever, throughout the whole universe, is as
nothing in comparison of the divine Being.

AND if we consider the secondary ground of love, viz. beauty, or moral
excellency, the same thing will appear. For as God is infinitely the greatest
Being, so he is allowed to be infinitely the most beautiful and excellent: and
all the beauty to be found throughout the whole creation, is but the reflection
of the diffused beams of that Being who has an infinite fullness of brightness
and glory. God's beauty is infinitely more valuable, than that of all other
Beings upon both those accounts mentioned, viz. the degree of his virtue, and
the greatness of the Being possessed of this virtue. And God has sufficiently
exhibited himself, in his Being, his infinite greatness and excellency: and has
given us faculties, whereby we are capable of plainly discovering immense
superiority to all other Beings, in these respects. Therefore he that has true
virtue, consisting in benevolence to Being in general, and in that complacence
in virtue, or moral beauty, and benevolence to virtuous Being, must necessarily
have a supreme love to God, both of benevolence and complacence. And all true
virtue must radically and essentially, and as it were summarily, consist in
this. Because God is not only infinitely greater and more excellent than all
other Being, but he is the head of the universal system of existence; the
foundation and fountain of all Being and all beauty; from whom all is perfectly
derived, and on whom all is most absolutely and perfectly dependant; of whom,
and through whom, and to whom is all Being and all perfection; and whose Being
and beauty is as it were the sum and comprehension of all existence and
excellence: much more than the sun is the fountain and summary comprehension of
all the light and brightness of the day.

IF it should be objected, that virtue consists primarily in benevolence, but
that our fellow creatures, and not God, seem to be the most proper objects of
our benevolence; inasmuch as our goodness extends not to God, and we cannot
be profitable to him. -- To this I answer,

1. A BENEVOLENT propensity of heart is exercised, not only in seeking to
promote the happiness of the Being, toward whom it is exercised, but also in
rejoicing in his happiness. Even as gratitude for benefits received will not
only excite endeavors to requite the kindness we receive, by equally
benefiting our benefactor, but also if he be above any need of us, or we have
nothing to bestow, and are unable to repay his kindness, it will dispose us to
rejoice in his prosperity.

2. THOUGH we are not able to give any thing to God, which we have of our own,
independantly; yet we may be the instruments of promoting his glory, in which
he takes a true and proper delight. [As was shown at large in the former
treatise, on God's end in creating the world. Chap. 1. sect. 4. Whither I must
refer the reader for a more full answer to this objection.]

WHATEVER influence such an objection may seem to have on the minds of some,
yet is there any that owns the Being of a God, who will deny that any love or
benevolent affection, is due to God, and proper to be exercised toward him? If
no benevolence is to be exercised toward God, because we cannot profit him,
then for the same reason, neither is gratitude to be exercised toward him for
his benefits to us; because we cannot requite him. But where is the man, who
believes a God and a providence, that will say this?

THERE seems to be an inconsistence in some writers on morality, in this
respect, that they don't wholly exclude a regard to the Deity out of there
schemes of morality, but yet mention it so slightly, that they leave me room
and reason to suspect they esteem it a less important and a subordinate part of
true morality; and insist on benevolence to the created system in such a
manner, as would naturally lead one to suppose, they look upon that as by far
the most important and essential thing in their scheme. But why should this be?
If true virtue consists partly in a respect to God, then doubtless it consists
chiefly in it. If true morality requires that we should have some regard, some
benevolent affection to our creator, as well as to his creatures, then
doubtless it requires the first regard to be paid to him; and that he be every
way the supreme object of our benevolence* I^ his being above our reach, and
beyond all capacity of being profited by us, don't hinder but that nevertheless
he is the proper object of our love, then it don't hinder that he should be
loved according to his dignity, or according to the degree in which he has
those things wherein worthiness of regard consists, so far as we are capable of
it. But this worthiness none will deny, consists in these two things, greatness
and moral goodness. And those that own a God, don't deny that he infinitely
exceeds all other Beings in these. If the Deity is to be looked upon as within
that system of Beings which properly terminates our benevolence, or belonging
to that whole, certainly he is to be regarded as the head of the system, and
the chief part of it; if it be proper to call him a part, who is infinitely
more than all the rest, and in comparison of whom and without whom all the rest
are nothing, either as to beauty or existence. And therefore certainly, unless
we will be atheists, we must allow that true virtue does primarily and most
essentially consist in a supreme love to God; and that where this is wanting,
there can be no true virtue.

BUT this being a matter of the highest importance, I shall say something
further to make it plain, that love to God is most essential to true virtue;
and that no benevolence whatsoever to other Beings can be of the natue of true
virtue, without it.

AND therefore let it be supposed, that some Beings, by natural instinct or by
some other means, have a determination of mind to union and benevolence to a
particular person, or private system, It may be here noted, that when hereafter
I use such a phrase as private system of Beings, or others similar, I thereby
intend any system or society of Beings that contains but a small part of the
great system comprehending the universality of existence. I think, that may
well be called a private system, which is but an infinitely small part of this
great whole we stand related to. I therefore also call that affection, private
affection, which is limited to so narrow a circle: and that general affection
or benevolence, which has Being in general for it is object.
which is but a small part of the universal system of Being: and that this
disposition or determination of mind is independent on, or not subordinate to
benevolence, to Being in general. Such a determination, disposition, or
affection of mind is not of the nature of true virtue.

THIS is allowed by all with regard to self love; in which, good will is
confined to one single person only. And there are the same reasons, why any
other private affection or good will though extending to a society of persons,
independent of, and unsubordinate to, benevolence to the universality, should
not be esteemed truly virtuous. For, notwithstanding it extends to a number of
persons, which taken together are more than a single person, yet the whole
falls infinitely short of the universality of existence; and if put in the
scales with it, has no greater proportion to it than a single person.

HOWEVER, it may not be amiss more particularly to consider the reasons why
private affections, or good will limited to a particular circle of Beings,
^alling infinitely short of the whole existence, and not dependent upon it, nor
subordinate to general benevolence, cannot be of the nature of true virtue.

1. SUCH, a private affection, detached from general benevolence and
independent on i^, as the case may be, will be against general benevolence, or
o^ a contrary tendency; and will set a person against general existence, and
make him an enemy to it -- As it is with selfishness, or when a man is governed
by a regard to his own private interest, independent of regard to the public
good, such a temper exposes a man to act the part of an enemy to the public.
As, in every case wherein his private interest seems to ^^ash with the public;
or in all those cases wherein such things are presented to his view, that suit
his personal appetites or private inclinations, but are inconsistent with the
good of the public. On which account a selfish, contracted, narrow spirit is
generally abhorred, and is esteemed base and sordid. -- But if a man's
affection takes in half a dozen more and his regards extend so far beyond his
own single person as to take in his children and family; or if it reaches
further still, to a larger circle, but falls infinitely short of the universal
system, and is exclusive of Being in general; his private affection exposes him
to the same thing, viz. to pursue the interest of its particular object in
opposition to general existence: which is certainly contrary to the tendency of
true virtue; yea, directly contrary to the main and most essential thing in its
nature, the thing on account of which chiefly its nature and tendency is good.
For the chief and most essential good that is in virtue, is its favoring Being
in general. Now certainly, if private affection to a limited system had in
itself the essential nature of virtue, it would be impossible, that it should
in any circumstance whatsoever have a tendency and inclination directly
contrary to that wherein the essence of virtue chiefly consists.

2. PRIVATE affections, if not subordinate to general affection, is not only
liable, as the case may be, to issue in enmity to Being in general, but has a
tendency to it as the case certainly is, and must necessarily be. For he that
is influenced by private affection, not subordinate to regard to Being in
general, sets up its particular or limited object above Being in general; and
this most naturally tends to enmity against the latter, which is by right the
great supreme, ruling, and absolutely sovereign object of our regard. Even as
the setting up another prince as supreme in any kingdom, distinct from the
lawful sovereign, naturally tends to enmity against the lawful sovereign.
Wherever it is sufficiently published, that the supreme, infinite, and
all-comprehending Being requires a supreme regard to himself; and insists upon
it, that our respect to him should universally rule in our hearts, and every
other affection be subordinate to it, and this under the pain of his
displeasure (as we must suppose it is in the world of intelligent creatures, if
God maintains a moral kingdom in the world) then a consciousness of our having
chosen and set up another prince to rule over us, and subjected our hearts to
him, and continuing in such an act, must unavoidably excite enmity, and fix us
in a stated opposition, to the supreme Being. This demonstrates, that affection
to a private society of system, independent on general benevolence, cannot be
of the nature of true virtue. For this would be absurd, that it has the nature
and essence of true virtue, and yet at the same time has a tendency opposite to
true virtue.

3. NOT only would affection to a private system, unsubordinate to regard to
Being in general, have a tendency to opposition to the supreme object of
virtuous affection, as its effect and consequence, but would become itself an
opposition to that object. Considered by itself in its nature, detached from
its effects, it is an instance of great opposition to the rightful supreme
object of our respect. For it exalts its private object above the other great
and infinite object; and sets that up as supreme, in opposition to this. It
puts down Being in general, which is infinitely superior in itself and
infinitely more important, in an inferior place; yea, subjects the supreme
general object to this private infinitely inferior object: which is to treat it
with great contempt and truly to act in opposition to it, and to act in
opposition to the true order of things, and in opposition to that which is
infinitely the supreme interest; making this supreme and infinitely important
interest, as far as in us lies, to be subject to, and dependent on, an interest
infinitely inferior. This is to act against it, and to act the part of an enemy
to it. He that takes a subject, and exalts him above his prince, sets him as
supreme instead of the prince, and treats his prince wholly as a subject,
therein acts the part of an enemy to his prince.

FROM these things, I think, it is manifest, that no affection limited to any
private system, not dependent on, nor subordinate to Being in general, can be
of the nature of true virtue; and this, whatever the private system be, let it
be more or less extensive, consisting of a greater or smaller number of
individuals, so long as it contains an infinitely little part of universal
existence, and so bears no proportion to the great all-comprehending system. --
And consequently, that no affection whatsoever to any creature, or any system
of created beings, which is not dependent on, nor subordinate to a propensity
or union of the heart to God, the supreme and infinite Being, can be of the
nature of true virtue.

FROM hence also it is evident, that the divine virtue, or the virtue of the
divine mind, must consist primarily in love to himself, or in the mutual love
and friendship which subsists eternally and necessarily between the several
persons in the Godhead, or that infinitely strong propensity there is in there
divine persons one ^o another. There is no need of multiplying words, to prove
that it must be thus, on a supposition that virtue in its most essential na^^e,
consists in benevolent ^ffect on or propensity of heart toward Being in
general; and so flowing out to particular Beings, in a greater or lesser
degree, according to the measure of existence and beauty which they are
possessed of. -- It will also follow from the foregoing things, that God's
goodness and love to created Beings, is derived from, and subordinate to his
love to himself. [In what manner it is so, I have endeavored in some measure
to explain in the preceding discourse of God's end in creating the world.]

WITH respect to the manner in which a virtuous love in created Beings, one to
another, is dependent on, and derived from love to God, this will appear by a
proper consideration of what has been said; that it is sufficient to render
love to any created Being virtuous, if it arise from the temper of mind wherein
consists a disposition to love God supremely. Because it appears from what has
been already observed, all that love to particular Beings, which is the fruit
of a benevolent propensity of heart to Being in general, is virtuous love. But,
as has been remarked, a benevolent propensity of heart to Being in general, and
a temper or disposition to love God supremely, are in effect the same thing.
Therefore, if love to a created Being comes from that temper or propensity of
the hea^e, it is virtuous. -- However, every particular exercise of love to a
creature may not sensibly arise from any exercise of love to God, or an
explicit consideration of any similitude, conformity, union or relation to God,
in the creature beloved.

THE most proper evidence of love to a created Being, its arising from that
temper of mind wherein consists a supreme propensity of heart to God, seems to
be the agreableness of the kind and degree of our love to God's end in our
creation and in the creation of all things, and the coincidence of the
exercises of our love, in their manner, order, and measure, with the manner in
which God himself exercises love to the creature in the creation and government
of the world, and the way in which God as the first cause and supreme disposer
of all things, has respect to the creature's happiness, in subordination to
himself as his own supreme end. For the true virtue of created Beings is
doubtless their highest excellency, and their true goodness, and that by which
they are especially agreeable to the mind of their creator -- But the true
goodness of a thing (as was observed before) must be its agreableness to its
end, or its fitness to answer the design for which it was made. Or, at least,
this must be its goodness in the eyes of the workman. -- Therefore they are
good moral agents whose temper of mind or propensity of heart is agreeable to
the end for which God made moral agents. But, as has been shown, the last end
for which God has made moral agents, must be the last end for which God has
made all things: it being evident, that the moral world is the end of the rest
of the world; the inanimate and unintelligent world being made for the rational
and moral world, as much as a house is prepared for the inhabitants.

BY these things it appears, that a truly virtuous mind, being as it were under
the sovereign dominion of love to God, does above all things seek the glory of
God, and makes this his supreme, governing, and ultimate end: consisting in the
expression of God's perfections in their proper effects, and in the
manifestation of God's glory to created understandings, and the communications
of the infinite fullness of God to the creature; in the creature's highest
esteem of God, love to God, and joy in God, and in the proper exercises and
expressions of these. -- And so far as a virtuous mind exercises true virtue in
benevolence to created Beings, it chiefly seeks the good of the creature,
consisting in its knowledge or view of God's glory and beauty, its union with
God, and conformity to him, love to him, and joy in him. -- And that temper or
disposition of heart, that consent, union, or propensity of mind to Being in
general, which appears chiefly in such exercises, is virtue, truly so called;
or in other words, true grace and real holiness. And no other disposition or
affection but this is of the nature (...) true virtue.

COROLLARY. Hence it appears, that these schemes of religion or moral
philosophy, which, however well in some respects, they may treat of benevolence
to mankind, and other virtues depending on it, yet have not a supreme regard to
GOD, and love to him, laid in the foundation, and all other virtues handled in
a connection with this, and in a subordination to this, are not true schemes of
philosophy, but are fundamentally and essentially defective -- And whatever
other benevolence or generosity toward mankind, and other virtues, or moral
qualifications which go by that name, any are possessed of, that are not
attended with a love to God which is altogether above them, and to which they
are subordinate, and on which they are dependent, there is nothing of the
nature of true virtue or religion in them. -- And it may be asserted in
general, that nothing is o^ the nature of true virtue, in which God is not the
first and the last; or, which with regard to their exercises in general, have
not their first foundation and source in apprehensions of God's supreme dignity
and glory, and in answerable esteem and love of him, and have not respect to
God as the supreme end.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the secondary and inferior kind of beauty.
THOUGH this which has been spoken of, alone, is justly esteemed the true
beauty of moral agents, or spiritual Beings: this alone being what would appear
beautiful in them, upon a clear and comprehensive view of things: and therefore
alone is the moral amiableness of Beings that have understanding and will, in
the eyes of him that perfectly sees all things as they are. Yet there are other
qualities, other sensations, propensities and affections of mind, and
principles o^ action, that often obtain the epithet of virtuous, and by many
are supposed to have the nature of true virtue: which are entirely of a
distinct nature from this, and have nothing of that kind; and therefore are
erroneously confounded with real virtue: -- as may particularly and fully
appear from things which will be observed in this and the following chapters.

THAT consent, agreement, or union of Being to Being, which has been spoken of,
viz. the union or propensity of minds to mental or spiritual existence, may be
called the highest, and first, or primary beauty, that is to be found among
things that exist: being the proper and peculiar beauty of spiritual and moral
Beings, which are the highest and first part of the universal system, for whose
sake all the rest has existence. Yet there is another, in^erior, secondary
beauty, which is some image of this, and which is not peculiar to spiritual
Beings, but is found even in inanimate things: which consists in a mutual
consent and agreement of different things, in form, manner, quantity, and
visible end or design; called by the various names of regularity, order,
uniformity, symmetry, proportion, harmony, etc. Such is the mutual agreement of
the various sides of a square, or equilateral triangle, or of a regular
polygon. Such is, as it were, the mutual consent of the different parts of the
periphery of a circle, or surface of a sphere, and of the corresponding parts
of an ellipsis. Such is the agreement of the colors, figures, dimensions, and
distances of the different spots on a chess board. Such is the beauty of the
figures on a piece of chints, or brocade. Such is the beautiful proportion of
the various parts of an human body, or countenance. And such is the sweet
mutual consent and agreement of the various notes of a melodious tune. This is
the same that Mr. HUTCHESON, in his treatise on beauty, expresses by uniformity
in the midst of variety. Which is no other than the consent or agreement of
different things, in form, quantity.etc He observes, that the greater the
variety is, in equal uniformity, the greater the beauty. Which is no more than
to say, the more there are of different mutually agreeing things, the greater
is the beauty. And the reason of that is, because it is more considerable to
have many things consent one with another, than a few only.

THE beauty which consists in the visible fitness of a thing to its use, and
unity of design, is not a distinct sort of beauty from this. For it is to be
observed, that one thing which contributes to the beauty of the agreement and
proportion of various things, is their relation one to another; which connects
them, and introduces them together into view and consideration, and whereby one
suggests the other to the mind, and the mind is led to compare them and so to
expect and desire agreement. Thus the uniformity of two or more pillars, as
they may happen to be found in different places, is not an equal degree of
beauty, as that uniformity in so many pillars in the corresponding parts of the
same building. So means and an intended effect are related one to another. The
answerableness of a thing to its use is only the proportion, fitness, and
agreeing of a cause or means to a visibly designed effect, and so an effect
suggested to the mind by the idea of the means. This kind of beauty is not
entirely different from that beauty which there is in fitting a mortise to its
tenon. Only when the beauty consists in unity of design, or the adaptedness of
a variety of things to promote one intended effect, in which all conspire, as
the various parts of an ingenious complicated machine, there is a double
beauty, as there is a twofold agreement and conformity. First, there is the
agreement of the various parts to the designed end. Secondly, through this, viz.
the designed end or effect, all the various particulars agree one with another
as the general medium of their union whereby they being united in this third,
they thereby are all united one to another.

THE reason, or at least one reason why God has made this kind of mutual
consent and agreement of things beautiful and grateful to those intelligent
Beings that perceive it, probably is, that there is in it some image of the
true, spiritual original beauty, which has been spoken of: consisting in
Being's consent to Being, or the union of minds or spiritual Beings in a mutual
propensity and affection of heart. The other is an image of this, because by
that uniformity diverse things become as it were one, as it is in this cordial
union. And it pleases God to observe analogy in his works, as is manifest in
fact in innumerable instances; and especially to establish inferior things in
an analogy to superior. Thus, in how many instances has he formed brutes in
analogy to the nature of mankind? and plants, in analogy to animals, with
respect to the manner of their generation, nutrition, etc. And so he has
constituted the external world in an analogy to things in the spiritual world,
in numberless instances; as might be shown, if it were necessary, and here were
proper place and room for it. -- Why such analogy in God's works pleases him,
it is not needful now to inquire. It is sufficient that he makes an agreement or
consent of different things, in their form, manner, measure, etc. to appear
beautiful, because here is some image of an higher kind of agreement and
consent of spiritual Beings. It has pleased him to establish a law of nature,
by virtue of which the uniformity and mutual correspondence of a beautiful
plant, and the respect which the various parts of a regular building seem to
have one to another, and their agreement and union, and he consent or concord
of the various notes of a melodious tune, should appear beautiful; because
therein is some image of the consent of mind, of the different members of a
society or system of intelligent Beings, sweetly united in a benevolent
agreement of heart. -- And here by the way, I would further observe, probably
*it is with regard to this image or resemblance, which secondary beauty has of
true spiritual beauty, that God has so constituted nature, that the presenting
of this inferior beauty, especially in those kinds of it which have the
greatest resemblance of the primary beauty, as the harmony of sounds, and the
beauties of nature, have a tendency to assist those whose hearts are under the
influence of a truly virtuous temper, to dispose them to the exercises of
divine love, and enliven in them a sense of spiritual beauty.

FROM what has been said we may see, that there are two sorts of agreement or
consent of one thing to another. (1.) There is a cordial agreement; that
consists in concord and union of mind and heart: which, if not attended
(viewing things in general) with more discord than concord, is true virtue, and
the original or primary beauty, which is the only true moral beauty. -- (2.)
There is a natural union or agreement: which, though some image of the other, is
entirely a distinct thing; the will, disposition, or affection of the heart
having no concern in it, but consisting only in uniformity and consent of
nature, form, quantity, etc* (as before described) wherein lies an inferior
secondary sort of beauty, which may, in distinction from the other, be called
natural beauty. -- This may be sufficient to let the reader know how I shall
hereafter use the phrases of cordial, and natural agreement; and moral,
spiritual, divine, and primary original beauty, and secondary, or natural
beauty.

CONCERNING this latter, inferior kind of beauty, the following things may be
observed.

1. THE cause why secondary beauty is grateful to Men, is only a law of nature,
which God has fixed, or an instinct he has given to mankind; and not their
perception of the same thing which God is pleased to have regard to, as the
ground or rule by which he has established such a law of nature. -- This
appears in two things.

(1.) THAT which God has respect to, as the rule or ground of this law of
nature he has given us, whereby things having a secondary beauty are made
grateful to men, is their mutual agreement and proportion, in measure, form
etc. But in many instances persons that are gratified, and have their minds
affected, in presenting this beauty, don't reflect on that particular agreement
and proportion, which according to the law of nature is the ground and rule of
beauty in the case, yea, are ignorant of it. Thus, a man may be pleased with
the harmony of the notes in a tune, and yet know nothing of that proportion or
adjustment of the notes, which by the law of nature is the ground of the
melody. He knows not, that the vibrations in one note regularly co-incide with
the vibrations in another; that the vibrations of a note co-incide in time with
two vibrations of its octave; and that two vibrations of a note co-incide with
three of its fifth, etc. -- Yea, he may not know, that there are vibrations of
the air in the case, or any corresponding motions in the organs of hearing, in
the auditory nerve, or animal spirits. -- So, a man may be affected and pleased
with a beautiful proportion of the features in a face, and yet not know what
that proportion is, or what measures, quantities, and distances it consists in.

IN this a sensation of secondary beauty differs from a sensation of primary
and spiritual beauty, consisting in a spiritual union and agreement. What makes
the latter grateful, is perceiving the union itself. It Is the immediate view of
that wherein the beauty fundamentally lies, that is pleasing to the virtuous
mind.

(2.) AS was observed before, God in establishing such a law that mutual
natural agreement of different things, in form, quantity, etc. should appear
beautiful or grateful to men, seems to have had regard to the image and
resemblance there is in such a natural agreement, of that spiritual cordial
agreement, wherein original beauty consists, as one reason why he established
such a law. But it is not any reflection upon, or preception of, such a
resemblance of this to spiritual beauty, that is the reason why such a form or
state of objects appear beautiful to men: but their sensation of pleasure, on a
view of this secondary beauty is immediately owing to the law God has
established, or the instinct he has given.

2. ANOTHER thing observable concerning this kind of beauty, is, that it
affects the mind more (other things being equal) when taken notice of in
objects which are of considerable importance, than in little trivial matters.
Thus, the symmetry of the parts of a human body, or countenance, affects the
mind more than the beauty of a flower. So, the beauty of the solar system, more
than as great and as manifold an order and uniformity in a tree. And the
proportions of the parts of a church, or a palace, more than the same
proportions in some little slight compositions, made to please children.

3. IT may be observed (which was hinted before) that not only uniformity and
proportion, etc. of different things is requisite in order to this inferior
beauty, but some relation or connection of the things thus agreeing one with
another. As, the uniformity or likeness of a number of pillars, scattered
hither and thither, does not constitute beauty, or at least by no means in an
equal degree as uniformity in pillars connected in the same building, in parts
that have relation one to another So if we (...) unlike, and very
disproportioned, in distant places, which have no relation to each other, this
excites no such idea of deformity, as disagreement and inequality or
disproportion in things related and connected: and the nearer the relation and
the stricter the connection, so much the greater and more disgustful is the
deformity, consisting in their disagreement.

4. THIS secondary kind of beauty, consisting in uniformity and proportion, not
only takes place in material and external things, but also in things
immaterial; and is, in very many things, plain and sensible in the latter, as
well as the former: and when it is so, there is no reason why it should not be
grateful to them that behold it, in these, as well as the other, by virtue of
the same sense or the same determination of mind to be gratified with
uniformity and proportion. If uniformity and proportion be the things that
affect, and appear agreeable to, this sense of beauty, then why should not
uniformity and proportion affect the same sense in immaterial things, as well
as material, if there be equal capacity of discerning it in both? and indeed
more in spiritual things ( caeteris paribus) as these are more important than
things merely external and material?

THIS is not only reasonable to be supposed, but is evident in fact, in
numberless instances. There is a beauty of order in society, besides what
consists in benevolence, or can be referred to it, which is of the secondary
kind. As, when the different members of society have all their appointed
office, place and station, according to their several capacities and talents,
and every one keeps his place, and continues in his proper business. In this
there is a beauty, not of a different kind from the regularity of a beautiful
building, or piece of skilful architecture, where the strong pillars are set in
their proper place, the pilasters in a place fit for them, the square pieces of
marble in the pavement in a place suitable for them, the pannels in the walls
and partitions in their proper places, the cornishes in places proper for them,
etc. As the agreement of a variety in one common design, of the parts of a
building, or complicated machine, is one instance of that regularity, which
belongs to the secondary kind of beauty, so there is the same kind of beauty in
immaterial things, in what is called wisdom, consisting in the united tendency
of thoughts, ideas, and particular volitions, to one general purpose: which is
a distinct thing from the goodness of that general purpose, as being useful and
benevolent.

So there is a beauty in the virtue called justice, which consists in the
agreement of different things, that have relation to one another, in nature,
manner, and measure: and therefore is the very same sort of beauty with that
uniformity and proportion, which is observable in those external and material
things that are esteemed beautiful. There is a natural agreement and
adaptedness of things that have relation one to another, and an harmonious
corresponding of one thing to another: that he which from his will does evil to
others, should receive evil from the will of others, or from the will of him or
them whose business it is to take care of the injured, and to act in their
behalf: and that he should suffer evil in proportion to the evil of his doings.
Things are in natural regularity and mutual agreement, not in a metaphorical
but literal sense, when he whose heart opposes the general system, should have
the hearts of that system, or the heart of the head and ruler of the system,
against him: and that in consequence, he should receive evil, in proportion to
the evil tendency of the opposition of his heart. -- So, there is a like
agreement in nature and measure, when he that loves, has the proper returns of
love: when he that from his heart promotes the good of another, has his good
promoted by the other; as there is a kind of justice in a becoming gratitude.

INDEED most of the duties incumbent on us, if well considered, will be found
to partake of the nature of justice. There is some natural agreement of one
thing to another; some adaptedness of the agent to the object; some
answerableness of the act to the occasion; some equality and proportion in
things of a similar nature, and of a direct relation one to another. So it is
in relative duties; duties of children to parents, and of parents to children;
duties of husbands and wives; duties of rulers and subjects; duties of
friendship and good neighborhood: and all duties that we owe to God, our
creator, preserver, and benefactor; and all duties whatsoever, considered as
required by God, and as branches of our duty to him, and also considered as
what are to be performed with a regard to Christ, as acts of obedience to his
precepts, and as testimonies of respect to him, and of our regard to what he
has done for us, the virtues and temper of mind he has exercised toward us,
and the benefits we have or hope for therefrom.

IT is this secondary kind of beauty, which belongs to the virtues and duties
required of us, that Mr. Wollaston seems to have had in his eye, when he
resolved all virtue into an agreement of inclinations, volitions and actions
with truth. He evidently has respect to the justice there is in the virtues and
duties that are proper to be in one Being toward another; which consists in
one Being's expressing such affections and using such a conduct toward
another, as has a natural ag^erment and proportion to what is in them, and
what we receive from them: which is as much a natural conformity of affection
and action with its ground, object and occasion, as that which is between a
true proposition and the thing spoken of in it.

BUT there is another and higher beauty in true virtue, and in all truly
virtuous dispositions and exercises, than what consists in any uniformity or
similarity of various things; viz. the union of heart to Being in general, or
to GOD the Being of Beings, which appears in those virtues; and which those
virtues, when true, are the various expressions or effects of. Benevolence to
Being in general, or to Being simply considered, is entirely a distinct thing
from uniformity in the midst of variety, and is a superior kind of beauty.

IT IS true, that benevolence to Being in general, when a person has it, will
naturally incline him to justice, or proportion in the exercises of it. He that
loves Being, simply considered, will naturally (as was observed before) other
things being equal, love particular Beings, in a proportion compounded of the
degree of Being, and the degree of virtue or benevolence to Being, which they
have. And that is to love Beings in proportion to their dignity. For the
dignity of any Being consists in those two things. Respect to Being, in this
proportion, is the first and most general kind of justice; which will produce
all the subordinate kinds. So that, after benevolence to Being in general
exists, the proportion which is observed in objects, may be the cause of the
proportion of benevolence to those objects: but no proportion is the cause or
ground of the existence of such a thing as benevolence to Being. The tendency
of objects to excite that degree of benevolence, which is proportionable to the
degree of Being, etc. Is the consequence of the existence of benevolence; and
not the ground of it. Even as a tendency of bodies, one to another, by mutual
attraction, in proportion to the quantity of matter, is the consequence of the
Being of such a thing as mutual attraction; and not attraction the effect of
proportion.

BY this it appears, that just affections and acts have a beauty in them,
distinct from, and superior to, the uniformity and equality there is in them:
for which, he that has a truly virtuous temper, relishes and delights in them.
And that is the expression and manifestation there is in them of benevolence to
Being in general. -- And besides this, there is the agreement of justice to the
will and command of God: and also something in the tendency and consequences of
justice, that is agreeable to general benevolence, viz. as in many respects it
tends to the glory of God, and the general good. Which tendency also makes it
beautiful to a truly virtuous mind. So that the tendency of general benevolence
to produce justice, also the tendency of justice to produce effects agreeable to
general benevolence, both render justice pleasing to a virtuous mind. And it is
on these accounts chiefly, that justice is grateful to a virtuous taste, or a
truly benevolent heart. But, though it be true, there is that in the uniformity
and proportion there is in justice, which is grateful to a benevolent heart, as
this uniformity and proportion tends to the general good; yet that is no
argument, that there is no other beauty in it but its agreeing with
benevolence. For so the external regularity and order of the natural world
gratifies benevolence, as it is profitable, and tends to the general good; but
that is no argument, that there is no other sort of beauty in external
uniformity and proportion, but only its suiting benevolence by tending to the
general good.

5. FROM all that has been observed concerning this secondary kind of beauty,
it appears that that disposition or sense of the mind, which consists in
determination of mind to approve and be pleased with this beauty, considered
simply and by itself, has nothing of the nature of true virtue, and is entirely
a different thing from a truly virtuous taste. For it has been shown, that this
kind of beauty is entirely diverse from the beauty of true virtue, whether it
takes place in material or immaterial things. And therefore it will follow,
that a taste of this kind of beauty is entirely a different thing from a taste
of true virtue. Who will affirm, that a disposition to approve of the harmony
of good music, or the beauty of a square, or equilateral triangle, is the same
with true holiness, or a truly virtuous disposition of mind! It Is a relish of
uniformity and proportion, that determines the mind to approve these things.
And if this be all, there is no need of any thing higher, or of any thing in
any respect diverse, to determine the mind to approve and be pleased with equal
uniformity and proportion among spiritual things which are equally discerned.
It Is virtuous to love true virtue, as that denotes an agreement of the heart
with virtue. But it argues no virtue, for the heart to be pleased with that
which is entirely distinct from it.

THOUGH it be true, there is some analogy in it to spiritual and virtuous beauty;
as much as material things can have analogy to things spiritual (of which they
can have no more than a shadow) yet, as has been observed, men do not approve
it because of any such analogy perceived.

AND not only reason, but experience plainly shows, that men's approbation of
this sort of beauty, does not spring from any virtuous temper, and has no
connection with virtue. For, otherwise, men's delight in the beauty of squares,
and cubes, and regular polygons in the regularity of buildings, and the
beautiful figures in a piece of embroidery, would increase in proportion to
men's virtue; and would be raised to a great height in some eminently virtuous
or holy men; but would be almost wholly lost in some others that are very
vicious and lewd. It Is evident in fact, that a relish of these things does not
depend on general benevolence, or any benevolence at all to any Being
whatsoever, any more than a man's loving the taste of honey, or his being
pleased with the smell of a rose. A taste of this inferior beauty in things
immaterial, is one thing which has been mistaken by some moralists, for a true
virtuous principle, implanted naturally in the hearts of all mankind.

CHAP. IV.
Of self-love, and its various influence, to cause love to others, or the
contrary.
MANY assert, that all love arises from self-love. In order to determine this
point, it should be clearly determined what is meant by self-love.

SELF-LOVE, I think, is generally defined -- a man's love of his own happiness.
Which is short, and may be thought very plain: but indeed is an ambiguous
definition, as the pronoun, his own, is equivocal, and liable to be taken in
two very different senses. For a man's own happiness may either be taken
universally, for all the happiness or pleasure which the mind is in any regard
the subject of, or whatever is grateful and pleasing to men; or it may be taken
for the pleasure a man takes in his own proper, private, and separate good. And
so, self-love may be taken two ways.

1. SELF-LOVE may be taken for the same as his loving whatsoever is grateful or
pleasing to him. Which comes only to this, that self-love is a man's liking,
and being suited and pleased in that which he likes, and which pleases him; or,
that it is a man's loving what he loves. For whatever a man loves, that thing is
grateful and pleasing to him, whether that be his own peculiar happiness, or
the happiness of others. And if this be all that they mean by self-love, no
wonder they suppose that all love may be resolved into self-love. For it is
undoubtedly true, that whatever a man loves, his love may be resolved into his
loving what he loves, -- if that be proper speaking -- If by self-love is meant
nothing else but a man's loving what is grateful or pleasing to him, and being
averse to what is disagreable, this is calling that self-love, which is only a
general capacity of loving, or hating; or a capacity of being either pleased or
displeased: which is the same thing as a man's having a faculty of will. For if
nothing could be either pleasing or displeasing, agreeable or disagreable to a
man, then he could incline to nothing, and will nothing. But if he is capable
of having inclination, will and choice, then what he inclines to, and chooses,
is grateful to him; whatever that he, whether it be his own private good, the
good of his neighbors, or the glory of God. And so far as it is grateful or
pleasing to him, so far it is a part of his pleasure, good or happiness.

BUT if this be what is meant by self-love, there is an impropriety and
absurdity even in the putting of the question, Whether all our love, or our
love to each particular object of our love, don't arise from self-love? For
that would be the same as to enquire, Whether the reason why our love is fixed
on such and such particular objects, is not, that we have a capacity of loving
some things? This may be a general reason why men love or hate any thing at
all; and therein differ from stones and trees, which love nothing, and hate
nothing. But it can never be a reason why men's love is placed on such and such
objects. That a man, in general, loves and is pleased with happiness, or (which
is the same thing) has a capacity of enjoying happiness, cannot be the reason
why such and such things become his happiness: as for instance, why the good of
his neighbor, or the happiness and glory of God, is grateful and pleasing to
him, and so becomes a part of his happiness.

OR if what they mean, who say that all love comes from self-love, be not, that
our loving such and such particular persons and things, arises from our love to
happiness in general, but from a love to love our own happiness, which consists
in these objects; so, the reason why we love benevolence to our friends, or
neighbors, is, because we love our happiness, consisting in their happiness,
which we take pleasure in: -- still the notion is absurd. For here the effect
it made the cause of that, of which it is the effect: our happiness, consisting
in the happiness of the person beloved, loved, is made the cause of our love to
that person. Whereas, the truth plainly is, that our love to the person is the
cause of our delighting, or being happy in his happiness. How comes our
happiness to consist in the happiness of such as we love, but by our hearts
being first united to them in affection, so that we as it were, look on them as
our selves, and so on their happiness as our own?

MEN who have benevolence to others, have pleasure when they see others
happiness, because seeing their happiness gratifies some inclination that was
in their hearts before. They before inclined to their happiness; which was by
benevolence or good will; and therefore when they see their happiness, their
inclination is suited, and they are pleased. But the Being of inclinations and
appetites is prior to any pleasure in gratifying these appetites.

2. SELF-LOVE, as the phrase is used in common speech, most commonly signifies
a man's regard to his confined private self, or love to himself with respect to
his private interest.

BY private interest I mean that which most immediately consists in those
pleasures, or pains, that are personal. For there is a comfort, and a grief,
that some have in others pleasures, or pains; which are in others originally,
but are derived to them, or in some measure become their's, by virtue of a
benevolent union of heart with others. And there are other pleasures and pains
that are originally our own, and not what we have by such a participation with
others. Which consist in perceptions agreeable, or contrary, to certain
personal inclinations implanted in our nature; such as the sensitive appetites
and aversions. Such also is the disposition or the determination of the mind to
be pleased with external beauty, and with all inferior secondary beauty,
consisting in uniformity, porportion, etc. whether in things external or
internal, and to dislike the contrary deformity. Such also is the natural
disposition in men to be pleased in a perception of their being the objects of
the honor and love of others, and displeased with others hatred and contempt.
For pleasures and uneasinesses of this kind are doubtless as much owing to an
immediate determination of the mind by a fixed law of our nature, as any of the
pleasures or pains of external sense. And these pleasures are properly of the
private and personal kind; being not by any participation of the happiness or
sorrow of others, through benevolence. It Is evidently mere self-love, that
appears in this disposition. It is easy to see, that a man's love to himself
will make him love love to himself, and hate hatred to himself. And as God has
constituted our nature, self-love is exercised in no one disposition more than
in this, Men, probably, are capable of much more pleasure and pain through this
determination of the mind, than by any other personal inclination, or aversion,
whatsoever. Though perhaps we don't so very often see instances of extreme
suffering by this means, as by some others, yet we often see evidences of men's
dreading the contempt of others more than death: and by such instances may
conceive something what men would suffer, if universally hated and despised;
and may reasonably infer something of the greatness of the misery, that would
arise under a sense of universal abhorrence, in a great view of intelligent
Being in general, or in a clear view of the Deity, as incomprehensibly and
immensely great, so that all other Beings, are as nothing and vanity, --
together with a sense of his immediate continual presence, and an infinite
concern with him and dependence upon him, -- and living constantly in the midst
of most clear and strong evidences and manifestations of his hatred and
contempt and wrath.

BUT to return, -- These things may be sufficient to explain what I mean by
private interest; in regard to which, self-love, most properly so called, is
immediately exercised.

AND here I would observe, that if we take self-love in this sense, so love to
some others may truly be the effect of self-love; i. e. according to the common
method and order, which is maintained in the laws of nature. For no created
thing has power to produce an effect any otherwise than by virtue of the laws
of nature. Thus, that a man should love those that are of his party, when there
are different parties contending one with another; and that are warmly engaged
on his side, and promote his interest, -- this is the natural consequence of a
private self-love. Indeed there is no metaphysical necessity, in the nature of
things, that because a man loves himself, and regards his own interest, he
therefore should love those that love him, and promote his interest; i. e. to
suppose it to be otherwise, implies no contradiction. It will not follow from
any absolute metaphysical necessity, that because bodies have solidity,
cohesion, and gravitation toward the center of the earth, therefore a weight
suspended on the beam of a balance should have greater power to counter-balance
a weight on the other side, when at a distance from the fulcrum, than when it
is near. It implies no contradiction, that it should be otherwise: but only as
it contradicts that beautiful proportion and harmony, which the author of
nature observes in the laws of nature he has established. Neither is there any
absolute necessity, the contrary implying a contradiction, that because there
is an internal mutual attraction of the parts of the earth, or any other
sphere, whereby the whole becomes one solid coherent body, therefore other
bodies that are around it, should also be attracted by it, and those that are
nearest, be attracted most. But according to the order and proportion generally
observed in the laws of nature, one of these effects is connected with the
other, so that it is justly looked upon as the same power of attraction in the
globe of the earth, which draws bodies about the earth toward its center, with
that which attracts the parts of the earth themselves one to another; only
exerted under different circumstances. By a like order of nature, a man's love
to those that love him, is no more than a certain expression or effect of
self-love. No other principle is needful in order to the effect, if nothing
intervenes to counter-vail the natural tendency of self-love. Therefore there
is no more true virtue in a Man's thus loving his friends merely from
self-love, than there is in self-love itself, the principle from whence it
proceeds. So, a man's being disposed to hate those that hate him, or to resent
injuries done him, arises from self-love in like manner as the loving those
that love us, and being thankful for kindness shown us.

But it is said by some, that it is apparent, there is some other principle
concerned in exciting the passions of gratitude and anger, besides self-love,
viz. a moral sense, or sense of moral beauty and deformity, determining the
minds of all mankind to approve of, and be pleased with virtue, and to
disapprove of vice, and behold it with displicence; and that their seeing or
supposing this moral beauty or deformity, in the kindness of a benefactor, or
opposition of an adversary, is the occasion of these affections of gratitude or
anger. Otherwise, why are not these affections excited in us toward inanimate
things, that do us good, or hurt? Why don't we experience gratitude to a
garden, or fruitful field? And why are we not angry with a tempest, or blasting
mildew, or an overflowing stream? We are very differently affected toward
those that do us good from the virtue of generosity, or hurt us from the vice
of envy and malice, than toward things that hurt or help us, which are
destitute of reason and will. -- Now concerning this, I would make several
remarks.

1. THOSE who thus argue, that gratitude and anger cannot proceed from
self-love, might argue in the same way and with equal reason, that neither can
these affections arise from love to others: which is contrary to their own
scheme.

THEY say, that the reason why we are affected with gratitude and anger toward
men, rather than things without life, is moral sense: which they say, is the
effect of that principle of benevolence or love to others, or love to the
public, which is naturally in the hearts of all mankind. -- But now I might
say, according to their own way of arguing, gratitude and anger cannot arise
from love to others, or love to the public, or any sense of mind that is the
fruit of public affection. For, how differently are we affected toward those
that do good or hurt to the public from understanding and will, and from a
general public spirit, or public motive, -- I say, how differently affected are
we toward these, from what we are toward such inanimate things as the sun and
the clouds, that do good to the public, by enlightening and enlivening beams and
refreshing showers; or mildew, and an overflowing stream, that does hurt to the
public, by destroying the fruits of the earth! Yea, if such a kind of argument
be good, it will prove that gratitude and anger cannot arise from the united
influence of self-love, and public love, or moral sense arising from public
affection. For, if so, why are we not affected toward inanimate things, that
are beneficial or injurious both to us and the public, in the same manner as to
them that are profitable or hurtful to both on choice and design, and from
benevolence, or malice?

2. On the supposition of its being indeed so, that men love those who love
them, and are angry with those who hate them, from the natural influence of
self-love; it is not at all strange that the author of nature, who observes
order, uniformity and harmony in establishing its laws, should so order that it
should be natural for self-love to cause the mind to be affected differently
toward exceedingly different objects; and that it should cause our heart to
extend itself in one manner toward inanimate things, which gratify self-love,
without sense or will, and in another manner toward Beings which we look upon
as having understanding and will, like ourselves, and exerting these faculties
in our favor, and promoting our interest from love to us. No wonder, seeing we
love ourselves, that it should be natural to us to extend something of that
same kind of love which we have for ourselves, to them who are the same kind of
Beings as ourselves, and comply with the inclinations of our self-love, by
expressing the same sort of love toward us.

3. IF we should allow that to be universal, that in gratitude and anger there
is the exercise of some kind of moral sense (as it is granted, there is
something that may be so called.) All the moral sense, that is essential to
those affections, is a sense of DESERT; which is to be referred to that sense of
justice, before spoken of, consisting in an apprehension of that secondary kind
of beauty, that lies in uniformity and proportion: which solves all the
difficulty in the objection. -- This, or some appearance of it, to a narrow
private view, indeed attends all anger and gratitude. Others love and kindness
to us, or their ill will and injuriousness, appears to us to deserve our love,
or our resentment. Or, in other words, it seems to us no other than just, that
as they love us, and do us good, we also should love them, and do them good.
And so it seems just, that when others hearts oppose us, and they from their
hearts do us hurt, our hearts should oppose them, and that we should desire
they themselves may suffer in like manner as we have suffered: i. e. there
appears to us to be a natural agreement, proportion, and adjustment between
these things. Which is indeed a kind of moral sense, or sense of a beauty in
moral things. But, as was before shown, it is a moral sense of a secondary
kind, and is entirely different from a sense or relish of the original
essential beauty of true virtue; and may be without any principle of true
virtue in the heart. Therefore doubtless it is a great mistake in any to
suppose, all that moral sense which appears and is exercised in a sense of
desert, is the same thing as a love of virtue, or a disposition and
determination of mind to be pleased with true virtuous beauty, consisting in
public benevolence. Which may be further confirmed, if it be considered that
even with respect to a sense of justice or desert, consisting in uniformity
[and agreement between others actions toward us, and our actions toward them,
in a way of well-doing, or of ill-doing] it is not absolutely necessary to the
being of these passions of gratitude and anger, that there should be any notion
of justice in them, in any public or general view of things; -- as will appear
by what shall be next observed.

4. THOSE authors, who hold that that moral sense which is natural to all
mankind, consists in a natural relish of the beauty of virtue, and so arises
from a principle of true virtue implanted by nature in the hearts of all --
they hold that true virtue consists in public benevolence. Therefore, if the
affections of gratitude and anger necessarily imply such a moral sense as they
suppose, then these affections imply some delight in the public good, and an
aversion of the mind to public evil. And if this were so, then every time any
man feels anger for opposition he meets with, or gratitude for any favor,
there must be at least a supposition of a tendency to public injury in that
opposition, and a tendency to public benefit in the favor that excites his
gratitude. But how far is this from being true? As, in such instances as these,
which, I presume, none will deny to be possible, or unlike to any thing that
ever happens among mankind. A ship's crew enter into a conspiracy against the
master, to murder him, and run away with the ship, and turn pirates: but before
they bring their matters to a ripeness for execution, one of them repents, and
opens the whole design; whereupon the rest are apprehended and brought to
justice. The crew are enraged with him that has betrayed them, and earnestly
seek opportunity to revenge themselves upon him. -- And for an instance of
gratitude, a gang of robbers that have long infested the neighboring country,
have a particular house whither they resort, and where they meet from time to
time, to divide their booty or prey, and hold their consultations for carrying
on their pernicious designs. The magistrates and officers of the country, after
many fruitless endeavors to discover their secret haunt and place of resort,
at length by some means are well informed where it is, and are prepared with
sufficient force to surprise them, and sieze them all, at the place of
rendezvous, at an hour appointed when they understand they will all be there. A
little before the arrival of the appointed hour, while the officers with their
bands are approaching, some person is so kind to these robbers, as to give them
notice of their danger, so as just to give them opportunity to escape. They are
thankful to him, and give him a handful of money for his kindness. -- Now in
such instances, I think, it is plain, that there is no supposition of a public
injury in that which is the occasion of their anger; yea, they know the
contrary. Nor is there any supposition of public good in that which excites
their gratitude; neither has public benevolence, or moral sense, consisting in
a determination to approve of what is for the public good, any influence at all
in the affair. And though there be some affection, besides a sense of
uniformity and proportion, that has influence in such anger and gratitude, it
is not public affection or benevolence, but private affection; yea, that
affection which is to the highest degree private, consisting in a man's love of
his own person.

5. THE passion of anger, in particular, seems to have been unluckily chosen as
a medium to prove a sense and determination to delight in virtue, consisting in
benevolence, natural to all mankind.

FOR, if that moral sense which is exercised in anger, were that which arose
from a benevolent temper of heart, being no other than a sense or relish of the
beauty of benevolence, one would think, a disposition to anger should increase,
at least in some proportion, as a man had more of a sweet, benign, and
benevolent temper: which seems something disagreable to reason, as well as
contrary to experience, which shows that the less men have of benevolence, and
the more they have of a contrary temper, the more are they disposed to anger
and deep resentment of injuries.

AND though gratitude be that which many speak of as a certain noble principle
of virtue, which God has implanted in the hearts of all mankind; and though it
be true, there is a gratitude, that is truly virtuous, and the want of
gratitude, or an ungrateful temper, is truly vicious, and argues an abominable
depravity of heart (as I may have particular occasion to show afterward) yet I
think, what has been observed, may serve to convince such as impartially
consider it, not only that not all anger, or hating those which hate us, but
also that not all gratitude, or loving those which love us, arises from a truly
virtuous benevolence of heart.

ANOTHER sort of affections, which may be properly referred to self-love, as its
source, and which might be expected to be the fruit of it, according to the
general analogy of nature's laws, is affections to such as are near to us by
the ties of nature; that we look upon as those whose Beings we have been the
occasions of, and that we have a very peculiar propriety in, and whose
circumstances, even from the first beginning of their existence, do many ways
lead them, as it were necessarily, to an high esteem of us, and to treat us
with great dependence, submission and compliance; and whom the constitution of
the world makes to be united in interest, and accordingly to act as one in
innumerable affairs, with a communion in each other's affections, desires,
cares, friendships, enmities, and pursuits. Which is the case of men's
affection to their children. -- And in like manner self-love will also beget in
a man some degree of affections toward others, with whom he has connection in
any degree parallel. -- As to the opinion of those that ascribe the natural
affection there is between parents and children, to a particular instinct of
nature, I shall take notice of it afterward.

AND as men may love persons and things from self-love, so may love to
qualities and characters arise from the same source. Some represent as though
there were need of a great degree of metaphysical refining, to make it out,
that men approve of others from self-love, whom they hear of at a distance, or
read of in history, or see represented on the stage, from whom they expect no
profit or advantage. But perhaps it is not considered, that what we approve of
in the first place, is the character; and from the character we approve the
person. And is it a strange thing, that men should from self-love like a temper
or character, which in its nature and tendency falls in with the nature and
tendency of self-love; and which, we know by experience and self-evidence,
without metaphysical refining, in the general tends to men's pleasure and
benefit? -- And on the contrary, should dislike what they see tends to men's
pain and misery? -- Is there need of a great degree of subtilty and
abstraction, to make it out, that a child, which has heard and seen much,
strongly to fix an idea, of the pernicious deadly nature of the rattle-snake,
should have aversion to that species or form, from self-love; so as to have a
degree of this aversion and disgust excited by seeing even the picture of that
animal? And that from the same self-love it should be pleased and entertained
with a lively figure and representation of some pleasant fruit, which it has
often tasted the sweetness of? or, with the image of some bird, which, it has
always been told, is innocent, and whose pleasant singing it has often been
entertained with? -- Though, the child neither fears being bitten by the
picture of the snake, nor expects to eat of the painted fruit, or to hear the
figure of the bird sing. I suppose none, will think it difficult to allow, that
such an approbation or disgust of a child may be accounted for from its natural
delight in the pleasures of taste and hearing, and its aversion to pain and
death, through self-love, together with the habitual connection of these
agreeable or terrible ideas with the form and qualities of these objects, the
ideas of which are impressed on the mind of the child by their images.

AND where is the difficulty of allowing, that a child or man may hate the
general character of a spiteful and malicious man, for the like reason as he
hates the general nature of a serpent; knowing, from reason, instruction and
experience, that malice in men is pernicious to mankind, as well as spite or
poison in a serpent? And if a man may from self-love disapprove the vices of
malice, envy, and others of that sort, which naturally tend to the hurt of
mankind, why may he not from the same principle approve the contrary virtues of
meekness, peaceableness, benevolence, charity, generosity, justice, and the
social virtues in general; which, he as easily and clearly knows, naturally
tend to the good of mankind?

IT IS undoubtedly true, that some have a love to these virtues from a higher
principle. But yet I think it as certainly true, that there is generally in
mankind, a sort of approbation of them, which arises from self-love.

BESIDES what has been already said, the same thing further appears from this;
that men commonly are most affected toward, and do most highly approve, those
virtues which agree with their interest most, according to their various
conditions in life. We see that persons of low condition are especially
enamored with a condescending, accessible, affable temper in the great; not
only in those whose condescension has been exercised toward themselves; but
they will be peculiarly taken with such a character when they have accounts of
it from others, or when they meet with it in history, or even in romance. --
The poor will most highly approve and commend liberality. -- The weaker sex,
who especially need assistance and protection, will peculiarly esteem and
applaud fortitude and generosity in those of the other sex, they read or hear
of, or have represented to them on a stage.

AS I think it plain from what has been observed, that men may approve, and be
disposed to commend a benevolent temper, from self-love, so the higher the
degree of benevolence is, the more may they approve of it. Which will account
for some kind of approbation, from this principle, even of love to enemies;
viz. as a man's loving his enemies is an evidence of a high degree of
benevolence of temper; -- the degree of it appearing from the obstacles it
overcomes.

AND it may be here observed, that the consideration of the tendency and
influence of self-love may show, how men in general may approve of justice from
another ground, besides that approbation of the secondary beauty there is in
uniformity and proportion, which is natural to all. Men from their infancy see
the necessity of it, not only that it is necessary for others, or for human
society; but they find the necessity of it for themselves, in instances that
continually occur: which tends to prejudice them in its favor, and to fix an
habitual approbation of it from self-love.

AND again, that forementioned approbation of justice and desert, arising from
a sense of the beauty of natural agreement and proportion, will have a kind of
reflex, and indirect influence to cause men to approve benevolence, and
disapprove malice; as men see that he who hates and injures others, deserves to
be hated and punished, and that he who is benevolent, and loves others, and
does them good, deserves himself also to be loved and rewarded by others, as
they see the natural congruity or agreement and mutual adaptedness of these
things. And having always seen this, malevolence becomes habitually connected
in the mind with the idea of being hated and punished, which is disagreable to
self-love; and the idea of benevolence is habitually connected and associated
with the idea of being loved and rewarded by others, which is grateful to
self-love. And by virtue of this association of ideas, benevolence itself
becomes grateful, and the contrary displeasing.

SOME vices may become in a degree odious by the influence of self-love, through
an habitual connection of ideas of contempt with it; contempt being what
self-love abhors. So it may often be with drunkenness, gluttony, sottishness,
cowardice, sloth, niggardliness. -- The idea of contempt becomes associated
with the idea of such vices, both because we are used to observe that these
things are common objects of contempt, and also find that they excite contempt
in ourselves. -- Some of them appear marks of (...), i. e. of small abilities,
and weakness of mind, and insufficiency for any considerable effects among
mankind. -- By others, men's influence is contracted into a narrow sphere, and
by such means persons become of less importance, and more insignificant among
mankind. And things of little importance are naturally little accounted of. --
And some of these ill qualities are such as mankind find it their interest to
treat with contempt, as they are very hurtful to human society.

THERE are no particular moral virtues whatsoever, but what in some or other of
these ways, and most of them in several of these ways, come to have some kind
of approbation from self love, without the influence of a truly virtuous
principle; nor any particular vices, but what by the same means meet with some
disapprobation.

THIS kind of approbation and dislike, through the joint-influence of self-love
and association of ideas, is in very many vastly heightened by education; as
this is the means of a strong, close, and almost irrefragable association, in
innumerable instances, of ideas which have no connection any other way than by
education; and of greatly strengthening that association, or connection, which
persons are led into by other means: as any one would be convinced, perhaps
more effectually than in most other ways, if they had opportunity of any
considerable acquaintance with American savages and their children.

CHAP. V.
Of natural conscience, and the moral sense.
THERE is yet another disposition or principle, of great importance, natural to
mankind; which, if we consider the consistence and harmony of nature's laws,
may also be looked upon as in some sort arising from self-love, or self-union:
and that is a disposition in man to be uneasy in a consciousness of being
inconsistent with himself, and as it were, against himself, in his own actions.
This appears particularly in the inclination of the mind to be uneasy in the
consciousness of doing that to others, which he should be angry with them for
doing to him, if they were in his case, and he in theirs; or, of forbearing to
do that to them, which he would be displeased with them for neglecting to do to
him.

I HAVE observed from time to time, that in pure love to others (i. e. love not
arising from self-love) there is an union of the heart with others; a kind of
enlargement of the mind, whereby it so extends itself as to take others into a
man's self: and therefore it implies a disposition to feel, to desire, and to
act as though others were one with ourselves. So, self-love implies an
inclination to feel and act as one with ourselves: which naturally renders a
sensible inconsistence with ourselves, and self-opposition, in what we
ourselves choose and do, to be uneasy to the mind: which will cause uneasiness
of mind to be the consequence of a male volent and unjust behavior toward
others and a kind of disapprobation of acts of this nature, and an approbation
of the contrary. To do that to another, which we should be angry with him for
doing to us, and to hate a person for doing that to us, which we should incline
to and insist on doing to him, if we were exactly in the same case, is to
disagree with ourselves, and contradict ourselves. It would be, for ourselves
both to choose and adhere to, and yet to refuse and utterly reject, as it were
the very same thing. No wonder, this is contrary to nature. No wonder, that
such a self-opposition, and inward war with a man's self, naturally begets
unquietness, and raises disturbance in his mind.

A THUS approving of actions, because we therein act as in agreement with
ourselves, or as one with ourselves, -- and a thus disapproving and being
uneasy in the consciousness of disagreeing and being inconsistent with
ourselves in what we do, -- is quite a different thing from approving or
disapproving actions because in them we agree and are united with Being in
general: which is loving or hating actions from a sense of the primary beauty
of true virtue, and odiousness of sin. -- The former of these principles is
private: the latter is public and truly benevolent in the highest sense. The
former (i. e. an inclination to agree with ourselves) is a natural principle:
but the latter (i. e. an agreement or union of heart to the great system, and
to God, the head of it, who is all and all in it) is a divine principle.

IN that uneasiness now mentioned, consists very much of that inward trouble
men have from reflections of conscience: and when they are free from this
uneasiness, and are conscious to themselves, that in what they have acted
toward others, they have done the same which they should have expected from
them in the same case, then they have what is called peace of conscience, with
respect to these actions. And there is also an approbation of conscience, of
the conduct of others toward ourselves. As when we are blamed, condemned, or
punished by them, and are conscious to ourselves that if we were in their case,
and they in ours, we should in like manner, blame, condemn, and punish them.
And thus men's consciences may justify God's anger and condemnation. When they
have the ideas of God's greatness, their relation to him, the benefits they
have received from him, the manifestations he has made of his will to them,
etc. strongly impressed on their minds, a consciousness is excited within them
of those resentments, which would be occasioned in themselves by an injurious
treatment in any wise parallel.

THERE is such a consciousness as this oftentimes within men, implied in the
thoughts and views of the mind, which perhaps on reflection they could hardly
give an account of. Unless men's consciences are greatly stupify'd, it is
naturally and necessarily suggested; and does habitually, spontaneously,
instantaneously, and as it were insensibly arise in the mind. And the more so
for this reason, viz. that we have not, nor ever had from our infancy, any
other way to conceive of any thing which other persons act or suffer, or of any
thing about intelligent, moral agents, but by recalling and exciting the ideas
of what we ourselves are conscious of in the acts, passions, sensations,
volitions, etc. which we have found in our own minds; and by putting the ideas
which we obtain by this means, in the place of another; or as it were
substituting ourselves in their place. Thus, we have no conception, in any
degree, what understanding, perception, love, pleasure, pain, or desire are in
others, but by putting ourselves as it were in their stead, or transferring the
ideas we obtain of such things in our own minds by consciousness, into their
place; making such an alteration, as to degree and circumstances, as what we
observe of them requires. It Is thus in all moral things that we conceive of in
others, which are all mental, and not corporeal things; and every thing that we
conceive of, belonging to others, more than shape, size, complexion, situation,
and motion of their bodies. And this is the only way that we come to be capable
of having ideas of any perception or act even of the Godhead. We never could
have any notion what understanding or vo^^^ion, love or hatred are, either in
created spirits or in God, if we had never experienced what understanding and
volition, love and hatred are in our own minds. Knowing what they are by
consciousness, we can add degrees, and deny limits, and remove changeableness
and other imperfections, and ascribe them to God. Which is the only way we come
to be capable of conceiving of any thing in the Deity.

BUT though it be so, that men in thinking of others do as it were put
themselves in their place, they do it so naturally, or rather habitually,
instantaneously, and without set purpose, that they do it insensibly, and can
scarce give any account of it, and many would think strange if they were told
of it. So it may be in men's substituting themselves in others place in such
exercises of conscience as have been spoken of: and the former substitution
leads to the latter, in one whose conscience is not greatly stupefied. For in
all his thoughts of the other person, in whatever he apprehends or conceives of
his moral conduct to others or to himself, if it be in loving or hating him,
approving or condemning him, rewarding or punishing him, he necessarily as it
were puts himself in his stead, for the forementioned reason; and therefore the
more naturally, easily and quietly sees whether he being in his place should
approve or condemn, be angry or pleased as he is.

Natural conscience consists in these two things.

1. IN that which has now been spoken of: that disposition to approve or
disapprove the moral treatment which passes between us and others, from a
determination of the mind to be easy, or uneasy, in a consciousness of our
being consistent, or inconsistent with ourselves. Hereby we have a disposition
to approve our own treatment of another, when we are conscious to ourselves
that we treat him so as we should expect to be treated by him, were he in our
case and we in his; and to disapprove of our own treatment of another, when we
are conscious that we should be displeased, with the like treatment from him,
if we were in his case. So we in our consciences approve of another's treatment
of us, if we are conscious to ourselves, that if we were in his case, and he in
ours, we should think it just to treat him as he treats us; and disapprove his
treatment of us, when we are conscious that we should think it unjust, if we
were in his case. Thus men's consciences approve or disapprove the sentence of
their judge, by which they are acquitted or condemned. -- But this is not all
that is in natural conscience. Besides this approving or disapproving from
uneasiness as being inconsistent with ourselves, there is another thing that
must preceed it, and be the foundation of it. As for instance, when my
conscience disapproves my own treatment of another, being conscious to myself,
that were I in his case, I should be displeased and angry with him for so
treating me, the question might be asked, but what would be the ground of that
supposed disapprobation, displeasure and anger, which I am conscious would be
in me in that case? -- That disapprobation must be on some other grounds.

Therefore,

2. THE other thing which belongs to the approbation or disapprobation of
natural conscience, is the sense of desert, which was spoken of before:
consisting, as was observed, in a natural agreement, proportion and harmony
between malevolence or injury and resentment and punishment; or between loving
and being loved, between showing kindness and being rewarded, etc. Both these
kinds of approving or disapproving concur in the approbation or disapprobation
of conscience: the one founded on the other. Thus, when a man's conscience
disapproves of his treatment of his neighbor, in the first place he is
conscious that if he were in his neighbors stead, he should resent such
treatment, from a sense of justice, or from a sense of uniformity and equality
between such treatment and resentment and punishment; as before explained. And
then in the next place he perceives, that therefore he is not consistent with
himself, in doing what he himself should resent in that case; and hence
disapproves it, as being naturally averse to opposition to himself.

APPROBATION and disapprobation of conscience, in the sense now explained, will
extend to all virtue and vice; to every thing whatsoever that is morally good
or evil, in a mind which does not confine its view to a private sphere, but
will take things in general into its consideration, and is free from
speculative error. For, as all virtue or moral good may be resolved into love
to others, either God or creatures, so men easily see the uniformity and
natural agreement there is between loving others, and being accepted and
favored by others. And all vice, sin, or moral evil summarily consisting in the
want of this love to others, or in the contrary, viz. hatred or malevolence, so
men easily see the natural agreement there is between hating and doing ill to
others, and being hated by them and suffering ill from them, or from him that
acts for all and has the care of the whole System. And as this sense of
equality and natural agreement extends to all moral good and evil, so this lays
a foundation of an equal extent with the other kind of approbation and
disapprobation, which is grounded upon it, arising from an aversion to
self-inconsistence and opposition. For in all cases of benevolence or the
contrary toward others, we are capable of putting ourselves in the place of
others, and are naturally led to do it, and so of reflecting, or being
conscious to ourselves, how we should like or dislike such treatment from
others. Thus natural conscience, if the understanding be properly enlightened,
and errors and blinding stupifying prejudices are removed, concurs with the law
of God, and is of equal extent with it, and joins its voice with it in every
article.

AND thus, in particular, we may see in what respect this natural conscience
that has been described, extends to true virtue, consisting in union of heart
to Being in general, and supreme love to God. For, although it sees not, or
rather does not taste its primary and essential beauty, i. e. it tastes no
sweetness in benevolence to Being in general, simply considered, or loves i^
not for Being in general's sake (for nothing but general benevolence itself can
do that) yet this natural conscience. common to mankind, may approve of it from
that uniformity, equality and justice, which there is in it, and the demerit
which is seen in the contrary, consisting in the natural agreement between the
contrary and being hated of Being in general. Men by natural conscience may see
the justice (or natural agreement) there is in yielding all to God, as we
receive all from God; and the justice there is in being his that has made us,
and being willingly so, which is the same as being dependent on his will, and
conformed to his will in the manner of our Being, as we are for our Being
itself, and in the conformity of our will to his will, on whose will we are
universally and most perfectly dependent; and also the justice there is in our
supreme love to God, from his goodness, -- the natural agreement there is
between our having supreme respect to him who exercises infinite goodness to
us, and from whom we receive all well-being. -- Besides that disagreement and
discord appears worse to natural sense (as was observed before) in things
nearly related and of great importance: and therefore it must appear very ill,
as it respects the infinite Being, and in that infinitely great relation which
there is between the creator and his creatures. And it is easy to conceive how
that sense which is in natural conscience, should see the desert of punishment,
which there is in the contrary of true virtue, viz. opposition and enmity to
Being in general. For, this is only to see the natural agreement there is
between opposing Being in general, and being opposed by Being in general; with
a consciousness how that if we were infinitely great. we should expect to be
regarded according to our greatness, and should proportionably resent contempt.
Thus natural conscience, if well informed, will approve of true virtue, and
will disapprove and condemn the want of it, and opposition to it; and yet
without seeing the true beauty of it. Yea, if men's consciences were fully
enlightened, if they were delivered from being confined to a private sphere, and
brought to view and consider things in general, and delivered from being
stupefy'd by sensual objects and appetites, as they will be at the day of
judgment, they would approve nothing but true virtue, nothing but general
benevolence, and those affections and actions that are consistent with it, and
subordinate to it. For they must see that consent to Being in general, and
supreme respect to the Being of Beings, is most just; and that every thing
which is inconsistent with it, and interferes with it, or flows from the want
of it, is unjust, and deserves the opposition of universal existence.

THUS has God established and ordered, that this principle of natural
conscience, which though it implies no such thing as actual benevolence to
Being in general, nor any delight in such a principle, simply considered, and
so implies no truly spiritual sense or virtuous taste, yet should approve and
condemn the same things that are approved and condemned by a spiritual sense or
virtuous taste.

THAT moral sense which is natural to mankind, so far as it is disinterested,
and not founded in association of ideas, is the same with this natural
conscience that has been described. The sense of moral good and evil, and that
disposition to approve virtue, and disapprove vice, which men have by natural
conscience, is that moral sense, so much insisted on in the writings of many of
late: a misunderstanding of which seems to have been the thing that has misled
those moralists who have insisted on a disinterested moral sense, universal in
the world of mankind, as an evidence of a disposition to true virtue,
consisting in a benevolent temper, naturally implanted in the minds of all men.
Some of the arguments made use of by these writers, do indeed prove that there
is a moral sense or taste, universal among men, distinct from what arises from
self-love. Though I humbly conceive, there is some confusion in their
discourses on the subject, and not a proper distinction observed in the
instances of men's approbation of virtue, which they produce. Some of which are
not to their purpose, being instances of that approbation of virtue, that was
described, which arises from self-love. But other instances prove that there is
a moral taste, or sense of moral good and evil, natural to all, which don't
properly arise from self-love Yet (...) conceive there are no instances of this
kind which may no^ be referred to natural conscience, and particularly to that
which I have observed to be primary in the approbation of natural conscience,
viz. a sense of desert and approbation o^ that natural agreement there is,
(...) manner and measure, in justice. But I think it is plain from what has
been said, that neither this, not any thing else wherein consists the sense of
moral good and even which there is in natural conscience, is of the nature of a
truly virtuous taste, or determination of mind to relish and delight in the
essen^^a^ beauty of true virtue, arising from a virtuous benevolence of heart.

BUT it further appears from this -- If the approbation of conscience were the
same with the approbation of the inclination of the heart, or the natural
disposition and determination of the mind, to love and be pleased with virtue,
then approbation and condemnation of conscience would always be in proportion
to the virtuous temper of the mind; or rather, the degree would be just the
same. In that person who had a high degree of a virtuous temper, therefore, the
testimony of conscience in favor of virtue would be equally full: But he that
had but little, would have as little a degree of the testimony of conscience
for virtue, and against vice. But, I think, the case is evidently otherwise.
Some men, through the strength of vice in their hearts, will go on in sin against
clearer light and stronger convictions of conscience, than others. If
conscience's approving duty and disapproving sin, were the same thing as the
exercise of a virtuous principle of the heart, in loving duty and hating sin,
then remorse of conscience will be the same thing as repentance: and just in
the same degree as the sinner feels remorse of conscience for sin* in the same
degree is his heart turned from the love of sin to the hatred of it, inasmuch
as they are the very same thing.

CHRISTIANS have the greatest reason to believe, from the scriptures, that in
the future day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God when sinners
shall be called to answer before their judge, and all their wickedness, in all
its aggravations, brought forth, and clearly manifested in the perfect light of
that day, and God will reprove them, and set their sins in order before them,
their consciences will be greatly awakened and convinced, their mouths will be
stopped, all stupidity of conscience will be at an end, and conscience will
have its full exercise: and therefore their consciences will approve the
dreadful sentence of the judge against them, and seeing that they have deserved
so great a punishment, will join with the judge in condemning them. And this,
according to the notion I am opposing, would be the same thing as their being
brought to the fullest repentance; their hearts being perfectly changed to hate
sin and love holiness; and virtue or holiness of heart in them will be brought
to the most full and perfect exercise. But how much otherwise, have we reason
to suppose, it will then be? viz. That the sin and wickedness of their heart
will come to its highest dominion and compleatest exercise; that they shall be
wholly left of God, and given up to their wickedness, even as the devils are!
When God has done waiting on sinners, and his spirit done striving with them,
he will not restrain their wickedness, as he does now. But sin shall then rage
in their hearts, as a fire no longer restrained or kept under. It Is proper for
a judge when he condemns a criminal, to endeavor so to set his guilt before
him as to convince his conscience of the justice of the sentence. This the
almighty will do effectually, and do to perfection, so as most thoro'ly to
awaken and convince the conscience. But if natural conscience, and the
disposition of the heart to be pleased with virtue, were the same, then at the
same time that the conscience was brought to its perfect exercise, the heart
would be made perfectly holy: or, would have the exercise of true virtue and
holiness in perfect benevolence of temper. But instead of this, their
wickedness will then be brought to perfection, and wicked men will become very
devils, and accordingly will be sent away as cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his angels.

BUT supposing natural conscience to be what has been described, all these
difficulties and absurdities are wholly avoided. Sinners, when they see the
greatness of the Being, whom they have lived in contempt of, and in rebellion
on and opposition to, and have clearly set before them their obligations to
him, as their creator, preserver, benefactor, etc. together with the degree in
which they have acted as enemies to him, may have a clear sense of the desert
of their sin, consisting in the natural agreement there is between such
contempt and opposition of such a Being, and his despising and opposing them;
between their being and acting as so great enemies to such a God, and their
suffering the dreadful consequences of his being and acting as their great
enemy: and their being conscious within themselves of the degree of anger,
which would naturally arise in their own hearts in such a case, if they were in
the place and state of their judge. In order to these things there is no need
of a virtuous benevolent temper, relishing and delighting in benevolence, and
loathing the contrary. The conscience may see the natural agreement between
opposing and being opposed, between hating and being hated, without abhorring
malevolence from a benevolent temper of mind, or without loving God from a view
of the beauty of his holiness. These things have no necessary dependence one on
the other.

CHAP. VI.
of particular instincts of nature, which in some respects resemble virtue.
THERE are various dispositions and inclinations natural to men, which depend
on particular laws of nature, determining their minds to certain affections and
actions toward particular objects; which laws seem to be established chiefly
for the preservation of mankind, though not only for this, but also for their
comfortably subsisting in the world. Which dispositions may be called instincts.

SOME of these instincts respect only ourselves personally: such are many of
our natural appetites and aversions. Some of them are not wholly personal, but
more social, and extend to others: such are the mutual inclinations between the
sexes, etc. -- Some of these dispositions are more external and sensitive: such
are some of our natural inclinations that are personal; as those that relate to
meat and drink. And of this sort also are some dispositions that are more
social, and in some respects extend to others: as, the more sensitive
inclinations of the sexes toward each other. Besides these instincts of the
sensitive kind, there are others that are more internal and mental: consisting
in affections of the mind, which mankind naturally exercise toward some of
their fellow creatures, or in some cases toward men in general. Some of these
instincts that are mental and social, are what may be called kind affections;
as having something in them of benevolence, or a resemblence of it. And others
are of a different sort, having something in them that carries an angry
appearance; such as the passion of jealousy between the sexes, especially in
the male toward the female.

IT IS only the former of these two last mentioned sorts, that it is to my
purpose to consider in this place, viz those natural instincts which appear in
benevolent affections, or which have the appearence of benevolence, and so in
some respects resemble virtue. These I shall therefore consider; and shall
endeavor to show that none of them can be of the nature of true virtue.

THAT kind affection which is exercised toward those who are near one to
another in natural relation, particularly the love of parents to their
children, called natural affection, is by many referred to instinct. I have
already considered this sort of love as an affection that arises from
self-love; and in that view, and in that supposition have shown, it cannot be
of the nature of true virtue. But if any think, that natural affection is more
properly to be referred to a particular instinct of nature, than to self-love,
as its cause, I shall not think it a point worthy of any controversy or
dispute. In my opinion, both are true; viz. that natural affection is owing to
natural instinct, and also that it arises from self-love. It may be said to
arise from instinct, as it depends on a law of nature. But yet it may be truly
reckoned as an affection arising from self-love; because, though it arises from a
law of nature, yet that is such a law as according to the order and harmony
every where observed among the laws of nature, is connected with, and follows
from self-love: as was shown before. However, it is not necessary to my present
purpose, to insist on this. For if it be so, that natural affection to a man's
children or family, or near relations, is not properly to be ascribed to
self-love, as its cause, in any respect, but is to be esteemed an affection
arising from a particular independent instinct of nature, which the creator in
his wisdom has implanted in men for the preservation and well-being of the
world of mankind, yet it cannot be of the nature of true virtue. For it has
been observed, and I humbly conceive, proved before (chap. II.) that if any
Being or Beings have by natural instinct, or any other means, a determination
of mind to benevolence, extending only to some particular persons or private
system, however large that system may be, or however great a number of
individuals it may contain, so long as it contains but an infinitely small part
of universal existence, and so bears no proportion to this great and universal
system, -- such limited private benevolence, not arising from, nor being
subordinate to benevolence to Being in general, cannot have the nature of true
virtue.

HOWEVER, it may not be amiss briefly to observe now, that it is evident to a
demonstration, those affections cannot be of the nature of true virtue, from
these two things.

First, THAT they don't arise from a principle of virtue. -- A principle of
virtue, I think, is owned by the most considerable of late writers on morality
to be general benevolence or public affection: and I think it has been proved
to be union of heart to Being simply considered; which implies a disposition to
benevolence to Being in general. Now by the supposition, the affections we are
speaking of do not arise from this principle; and that, whether we suppose they
arise from self-love, or from particular instincts: because either of those
sources is diverse from a principle of general benevolence. And,

Secondly, THESE private affections, if they do not arise from general
benevolence, and they are not connected with it in their first existence, have
no tendency to produce it. This appears from what has been observed: for being
not dependent on it, their detached and unsubordinate operation rather tends
to, and implies opposition to Being in general, than general benevolence; as
every one sees and owns with respect to self-love. And there are the very same
reasons why any other private affection, confined to limits infinitely short of
universal existence, should have that influence, as well as love that is
confined to a single person. -- Now upon the whole, nothing can be plainer than
that affections which don't arise from a virtuous principle, and have no
tendency to true virtue, as their effect, cannot be of the nature of true
virtue.

FOR the reasons which have been given, it is undeniably true, that if persons
by any means come to have a benevolent affection limited to a party that is
very large, or to the country or nation in general, of which they are a part,
or the public community they belong to, though it be as large as the Roman empire
was of old, yea, if there could be an instinct or other cause determining a
person to benevolence toward the whole world of mankind, or even all created
sensible natures throughout the universe, exclusive of union of heart to
general existence and of love to God, nor derived from that temper of mind
which disposes to a supreme regard to him, nor subordinate to such divine love,
it cannot be of the nature of true virtue.

IF what is called natural affection, arises from a particular natural
instinct, so, much more indisputably, does that mutual affection which
naturally arises between the sexes. I agree with Hutcheson and Hume in this,
that there is a foundation laid in nature for kind affections between the
sexes, that are truly diverse from all inclinations to sensitive pleasure, and
don't properly arise from any such inclination. There is doubtless a
disposition both to a mutual benevolence and mutual complacence, that are not
naturally and necessarily connected with any sensitive desires. But yet it is
manifest such affections as are limited to opposite sexes, are from a
particular instinct, thus directing and limiting them; and not arising from a
principle of general benevolence; for this has no tendency to any such
limitation. And though these affections don't properly arise from the sensitive
desires which are between the sexes, yet they are implanted by the author of
nature chiefly for the same purpose, viz. the preservation or continuation of
the world of mankind, to make persons willing to forsake father and mother, and
all their natural relations in the families where they were born and brought
up, for the sake of a stated union with a companion of the other sex, and to
dispose to that union in bearing and going through with that series of labors,
anxieties, and pains requisite to the Being, support and education of a family
of children. Though not only for these ends, but partly also for the comfort of
mankind as united in a marriage-relation. -- But I suppose, few (if any) will
deny, that the peculiar natural dispositions there are to mutual affection
between the sexes, arise from an instinct or particular law of nature. And
therefore it is manifest from what has been said already, that those natural
dispositions cannot be of the nature of true virtue.

ANOTHER affection which is owing to a particular instinct, implanted in men
for like purposes with other instincts, is that pity which is natural to
mankind, when they see others in great distress. -- It Is acknowledged, that
such an affection is natural to mankind. But I think it evident, that the pity
which is general and natural, is owing to a particular instinct, and is not of
the nature of true virtue. I am far from saying, that there is no such thing as
a truly virtuous pity among mankind. For I am far from thinking, that all the
pity or mercy which is any where to be found among them, arises merely from
natural instinct, or, that none is to be found, which arises from that truly
virtuous divine principle of general benevolence to sensitive Beings. Yet at
the same time I think, this is not the case with all pity, or with that
disposition to pity which is natural to mankind in common. I think I may be
bold to say, this does not arise from general benevolence, nor is truly of the
nature of benevolence, or properly called by that name.

IF all that uneasiness on the sight of others extreme distress, which we call
pity, were properly of the nature of benevolence, then they who are the
subjects of this passion, must needs be in a degree of uneasiness in being
sensible of the total want of happiness, of all such as they would be disposed
to pity in extreme distress. For that certainly is the most direct tendency and
operation of benevolence or good will, to desire the happiness of its object.
But now this is not the case universally, where men are disposed to exercise
pity. There are many men, with whom that is the case in respect to some others
in the world, that it would not be the occasion of their being sensibly
affected with any uneasiness, to know they were dead (yea men who are not
influenced by the consideration of a future state, but view death as only a
cessation of all sensibility, and consequently an end of all happiness) who yet
would have been moved with pity toward the same persons, if they had seen them
under some very extreme anguish. -- Some men would be moved with pity by seeing
a brute-creature under extreme and long torments, who yet suffer no uneasiness
in knowing that many thousands of them every day cease to live, and so have an
end put to all their pleasure, at butchers shambles in great cities. -- It Is
the nature of true benevolence ^o desire and rejoice in the prosperity and
pleasure of the object of it; and that, in some-proportion to its degree of
prevalence. But persons may greatly pity those that are in extreme pain,, whose
positive pleasure they may still be very indifferent about. In this case, a man
may be much moved and affected with uneasiness, who yet would be affected with
no sensible joy in seeing signs of the same person's or Being's enjoyment of
very high degrees of pleasure.

YEA, pity may not only be without benevolence, but may consist with true
malevolence, or with such ill will as shall cause men not only not to desire
the positive happiness of another, but even to desire his calamity. They may
pity such an one when his calamity goes beyond their hatred. A man may have
true malevolence toward another, desiring no positive good for him, but evil:
and yet his hatred not be infinite, but only to a certain degree. And when he
sees the person whom he thus hates, in misery far beyond his ill will, he may
then pity him: because then the natural instinct begins to operate. For
malevolence will not overcome the natural instinct, inclining to pity others in
extreme calamity, any further than it goes, or to the limits of the degree of
misery it wishes to its object. Men may pity others under exquisite torment,
when yet they would have been grieved if they had seen their prosperity. And
some men have such a grudge against one or another, that they would be far from
being uneasy at their very death, nay, would even be glad of it. And when this
is the case with them, it is manifest that their heart is void of benevolence
toward such persons, and under the power of malevolence. Yet at the same time
they are capable of pitying even these very persons, if they should see them
under a degree of misery very much disproportioned to their ill will.

THESE things may convince us that natural pity is of a nature very different
from true virtue, and not arising from a disposition of heart to general
benevolence: but is owing to a particular instinct, which the creator has
implanted in mankind, for the same purposes as most other instincts, viz.
chiefly for the preservation of mankind, though not exclusive of their
well-being. The giving of this instinct is the fruit of God's mercy, and an
instance of his love of the world of mankind, and an evidence that though the
world be so sinful, it is not God's design to make it a world of punishment: and
therefore has many ways made a merciful provision for men's relief in extreme
calamities: and among others has given mankind in general a disposition to
pity; the natural exercises whereof extend beyond those whom we are in a near
connection with, especially in case of great calamity; because commonly in such
cases men stand in need of the help of others beside their near friends, and
because commonly those calamities which are extreme, without releif, tend to
men's destruction. This may be given as the reason why men are so made by the
author of nature, that they have no instinct inclining as much to rejoice at
the sight of others great prosperity and pleasure, as to be grieved at their
extreme calamity, viz. because they don't stand in equal necessity of such an
instinct as that in order to their preservation. But if pure benevolence were
the source of natural pity, doubtless it would operate to as great a degree in
congratulation, in cases of others great prosperity, as in compassion toward
them in great misery.

THE instincts God has given to mankind in this world, which in some respects
resemble a virtuous benevolence, are agreeable to the state that God designed
mankind for here, where he intends their preservation, and comfortable
subsistence. But in the world of punishment, where the state of the wicked
inhabitants will be exceeding different, and God will have none of these
merciful designs to answer, there, we have great reason to think, will be no
such thing as a disposition to pity, in any case; as also there will be no
natural affection toward near relations, and no mutual affection between
opposite sexes.

To conclude what I have to say on the natural instinct disposing men to pity
others in misery, I would observe, that this is a source of a kind of
abhorrence in men of some vices, as cruelty and oppression; and so, of a sort
of approbation of the contrary virtues, hamanity, mercy, etc. Which aversion
and approbation, however, so far as they arise from this cause only, are not
from a principle of true virtue.

CHAP. VII.
The reasons why those things that have been mentioned, which have not the
essence of virtue, have yet by many been mistaken for true virtue.
THE first reason that may be given of this, is, that although they have not the
specific and distinguishing nature and essence of virtue, yet they have
something that belongs to the general nature of virtue. -- The general nature
of true virtue is love. It is expressed both in love of benevolence and
complacence; but primarily in benevolence to persons and Beings, and
consequently and secondarily in complacence in virtue, -- as has been shown.
There is something of the general nature of virtue in those natural affections
and principles that have been mentioned, in both those respects.

IN many of these natural affections there is something of the appearance of
love to persons. In some of them there appears the tendency and effect of
benevolence, in part. Others have truly a sort of benevolence in them, though it
be a private benevolence, and in several respects falls short of the extent of
true virtuous benevolence, both in its nature and object.

THE last mentioned passion, natural to mankind in their present state, viz.
that of pity to others in distress, though not properly of the nature of love, as
has been demonstrated, yet has partly the same influence and effect with
benevolence. One effect of true benevolence is to cause persons to be uneasy,
when the objects of it are in distress, and to desire their relief. And natural
pity has the same effect.

NATURAL gratitude, though in every instance wherein it appears it is not
properly called love, because persons may be moved with a degree of gratitude
toward persons on certain occasions, whom they have no real and proper
friendship for, as in the instance of Saul toward David, once and again, after
David's sparing his life, when he had so fair opportunity to kill him: yet it
has the same or like operation and effect with friendship, in part, for a
season, and with regard to so much of the welfare of its object, as appears a
deserved requital of kindness received. And in other instances it may have a
more general and abiding influence, so as more properly to be called by the
name of love. So that many times men from natural gratitude do really with a
sort of benevolence love those who love them. From this, together with some
other natural principles, men may love their near friends, love their own
party, love their country, etc.

THE natural disposition their is to mutual affection betweeen the sexes, often
operates by what may properly be called love. There is often times truly a kind
both of benevolence and complacence. As there also is between parents and
children.

THUS these things have something of the general nature of virtue, which is
love: and especially the thing last mentioned have something of a love of
benevolence. What they are essentially defective in, is, that they are private
in their nature, they don't arise from any temper of benevolence to Being in
general, nor have they a tendency to any such effect in their operation. But
yet agreeing with virtue in its general nature, they are beautiful within their
own private sphere: i. e. they appear beautiful if we confine our views to that
private system, and while we shut all other things they stand in any relation
to, out of our consideration. If that private system contained the sum of
universal existence, then their benevolence would have true beauty; or, in
other words, would be beautiful, all things considered: but now it is not so.
These private systems are so far from containing the sum of universal Being, or
comprehending all existence which we stand related to, that it contains but an
infinitely small part of it. The reason why men are so ready to take these
private affections for true virtue, is the narrowness of their views; and above
all, that they are so ready to leave the divine Being out of their view, and to
neglect him in their consideration, or to regard him in their thoughts as though
he were not properly belonging to the system of real existence, but as a kind
of shadowy, imaginary Being, And though most men allow that there is a God, yet
in their ordinary view of things, his Being is not apt to come into the
account, and to have the influence and effect of a real existence, as it is with
other Beings which they see, and are conversant with by their external senses.
In their views of beauty and deformity, and in the inward sensations of
displicence and approbation which rise in their minds, it is not a thing natural
to them to be under the influence of a view of the Deity, as part of the
system, and as the head of the system, and he who is all in all, in comparison
of whom all the rest is nothing, and with regard to whom all other things are
to be viewed, and their minds to be accordingly impressed and affected.

YEA, we are apt through the narrowness of our views, in judging of the beauty of
affections and actions to limit our consideration to only a small part of the
created system. When private affections extend themselves to a considerable
number, we are very ready to look upon them as truly virtuous, and accordingly
to applaud them highly. Thus it is with respect to love to a large party, or a
man's love to his country. For though his private system contains but a small
part even of the world of mankind, yet being a considerable number, through the
contracted limits of the mind and the narrowness of his views, they are ready
to fill his mind and engross his ^ight, and to seem as if they were all. Hence
among the Romans love to their country was the highest virtue: though this
affection of theirs, so much extolled among them, was employed as it were for
the destruction of the rest of the world of mankind. -- The larger the number
is, that private affection extends to, the more apt men are, through the
narrowness of their sight, to mistake it for true virtue; because then the
private system appears to have more of the image of the universal system.
Whereas, when the circle it extends to, is very small, it is not so apt to be
looked upon virtuous, or not so virtuous. As, a man's love to his own children.
--

AND this is the reason why self-love is by nobody mistaken for true virtue.
For though there be something of the general nature of virtue in this, here is
love and good will, yet the object is so private, the limits so narrow, that it
by no means engrosses the view; unless it be of the person himself, who through
the greatness of his pride may imagine himself as it were all. The minds of men
are large enough to take in a vastly greater extent: and though self-love is far
from being useless in the world, yea, it is exceeding necessary to society,
besides its directly and greatly seeking the good of one, yet every body sees
that if it be not subordinate to, and regulated by, another more extensive
principle, it may make a man a common enemy to the system he is related to. And
though this is as true of any other private affection, notwithstanding its extent
may be to a system that contains thousands of individuals, and those private
systems bear no greater proportion to the whole of universal existence, than
one alone, yet they bear a greater proportion to the extent to the view and
comprehension of men's minds, and are more apt to be regarded as if they were
all, or at least as some resemblance of the universal system.

Thus I have observed how many of these natural principles, which have been
spoken of, resemble virtue in its primary operation, which is benevolence. Many
of them also have a resemblance of it in its secondary operation, which is its
approbation of and complacence in virtue itself. Several kinds of approbation
of virtue have been taken notice of, as common to mankind, which are not of the
nature of a truly virtuous approbation, consisting in a sense and relish of the
essential beauty of virtue, consisting in a Being's cordial union to Being in
general, from a spirit of love to Being in general. As particularly, the
approbation of conscience, from a sense of the inferior and secondary beauty
which there is in virtue, consisting in uniformity, and from a sense of desert,
consisting in a sense of the natural agreement of loving and being beloved,
showing kindness and receiving kindness. So from the same principle, there is a
disapprobation of vice, from a natural opposition to deformity and
disproportion, and a sense of evil desert, or the natural agreement there is
between hating and being hated, opposing and being opposed, etc. together with
a painful sensation naturally arising in a sense of self-opposition and
inconsistence. -- Approbation of conscience is the more readily mistaken for a
truly virtuous approbation, because by the wise constitution of the great
governor of the world (as was observed) when conscience is well informed, and
thoroughly awakened, it agrees with the latter fully and exactly, as to the
object approved, though not as to the ground and reason of approving. It approves
all virtue, and condemns all vice. It approves true virtue, and indeed approves
nothing that is against it, or that falls short of it; as was shown before. And
indeed natural conscience is implanted in all mankind, there to be as it were
in God's stead, and to be an internal judge or rule to all, whereby to
distinguish right and wrong.

IT has also been observed, how that virtue, consisting in benevolence, is
approved, and vice, consisting in ill will, is disliked, from the influence of
self-love, together with association of ideas, in the same manner as men
dislike those qualities in things without life or reason, with which they have
always connected the ideas of hurtfulness, malignancy, perniciousness; but like
those things with which they habitually connect the ideas of profit,
pleasantness, comfortableness, etc. This sort of approbation or liking of
virtue, and dislike of vice, is easily mistaken for true virtue, not only
because those things are approved by it that have the nature of virtue, and the
things disliked have the nature of vice, but because here is much of
resemblance of virtuous approbation, it being complacence from love; the
difference only lying in this, that it is not from love to Being in general,
but from self-love.

THERE is also, as has been shown, a liking of some virtues, and dislike of
some vices, from the influence of the natural instinct of pity. This men are
apt to mistake for the exercise of true virtue, on many accounts. Here is not
only a kind of complacence, and the objects of complacence are what have the
nature of virtue, and the virtues indeed very amiable, such as humanity, mercy,
tenderness of heart, etc. and the contrary very odious; but besides, the
approbation is not merely from self-love, but from compassion, an affection
that respects others, and resembles benevolence, as has been shown.

ANOTHER reason, why the things which have been mentioned, are mistaken for
true virtue, is, that there is indeed a true negative moral goodness in them.
By a negative moral goodness, I mean the negation or absence of true moral
evil. They have this negative moral goodness, because a being without them
would be an evidence of a much greater moral evil. Thus, the exercise of
natural conscience in such and such degrees, wherein appears such a measure of
an awakening or sensibility of conscience, though it be not of the nature of real
positive virtue or true moral goodness, yet has a negative moral goodness;
because in the present state of things, it is an evidence of the absence of
that higher degree of wickedness, which causes great insensibility or stupidity
of conscience. For sin, as was observed, is not only against a spiritual and
divine sense of virtue, but is also against the dictates of that moral sense
which is in natural conscience. No wonder, that this sense being long opposed
and often conquered, grows weaker. All sin has its source from selfishness, or
from self-love, not subordinate to regard to Being in general. And natural
conscience chiefly consists in a sense of desert, or the natural agreement
between sin and misery. But if self were indeed all, and so more considerable
than all the world besides, there would be no ill desert in his regarding
himself above all, and making all other interests give place to private
interest. -- And no wonder that men by long acting from the selfish principle,
and by being habituated to treat themselves as if they were all, increase in
pride, and come as it were naturally to look on themselves as all, and so to
lose entirely the sense of ill desert in their making all other interests give
place to their own. -- And no wonder that men by often repeating acts of sin,
without punishment, or any visible appearance of approaching punishment, have
less and less sense of the connection of sin with punishment. That sense which
an awakned conscience has of the desert of sin, consists chiefly in a sense of
its desert of resentment of the Deity, the fountain and head of universal
existence. But no wonder that by a long continued worldly and sensual life, men
more and more lose all sense of the Deity, who is a spiritual and invisible
Being. The mind being long involved in, and engrossed by sensitive objects,
becomes sensual in all its operations, and excludes all views and impressions
of spiritual objects, and is unfit for their contemplation. Thus the conscience
and general benevolence are entirely different principles, and sense of
conscience differs from the holy complacence of a benevolent and truly virtuous
heart. Yet wickedness may by long habitual exercise greatly diminish a sense of
conscience. So that there may be negative moral goodness, in sensibility of
conscience, as it may be an argument of the absence of that higher degree of
wickedness, which causes stupidity of conscience.

So with respect to natural gratitude, though there may be no virtue merely in
loving them that love us, yet the contrary may be an evidence of a great degree
of depravity, as it may argue a higher degree of selfishness, so that a man is
come to look upon himself as all, and others as nothing, and so their respect
and kindness as nothing. Thus an increase of pride diminishes gratitude. -- So
does sensuality, or the increase of sensual appetites, and coming more and more
under the power and impression of sensible objects, tends by degrees to make
the mind insensible to any thing else; and those appetites take up the whole
soul; and through habit and custom the water is all drawn out of other channels,
in which it naturally flows, and is all carried as it were into one channel.

IN like manner natural affection, and natural pity, though not of the nature of
virtue, yet may be diminished greatly by the increase of those two principles
of pride and sensuality, and as the consequence of this, being habitually
disposed to envy, malice, etc. These lusts when they prevail to a high degree
may overcome and diminish the exercise of those natural principles: even as
they often overcome and diminish common prudence in a man, as to seeking his
own private interest, in point of health, wealth, or honor, and yet no one will
think it proves that a man's being cunning, in seeking his own personal and
temporal interest has any thing of the nature and essence of true virtue.

ANOTHER reason why these natural principles and affections are mistaken for
true virtue, is, that in several respects they have the same effect, which true
virtue tends to; especially in these two ways --

1. THE present state of the world is so ordered and constituted by the wisdom
and goodness of its supreme ruler, that these natural principles for the most
part tend to the good of the world of mankind. So do natural pity, gratitude,
parental affection, etc. Herein they agree with the tendency of general
benevolence, which seeks and tends to the general good. But this is no proof
that these natural principles have the nature of true virtue. For self-love is
a principle that is exceeding useful and necessary in the world of mankind. So
are the natural appetites of hunger and thirst etc. But yet nobody will assert,
that these have the nature of true virtue.

2. THESE principles have a like effect with true virtue in this respect, that
they tend several ways to restrain vice, and prevent many acts of wickedness.
-- So, natural affection, love to our party, or to particular friends, tends to
keep us from acts of injustice toward these persons; which would be real
wickedness -- Pity preserves from cruelty, which would be real and great moral
evil. -- Natural conscience tends to restrain sin in general, in the present
state of the world. -- But neither can this prove these principles themselves
to be of the nature of true virtue. For so is this present state of mankind
ordered by a merciful God, that men's self-love does in innumerable respects
restrain from acts of true wickedness; and not only so, but puts men upon
seeking true virtue: yet is not itself true virtue, but is the source of all
the wickedness that is in the world.

ANOTHER reason why these inferior affections especially some of them, are
accounted virtuous, is, that there are affections of the same denomination,
which are truly virtuous. Thus, for instance, there is a truly virtuous pity,
or a compassion to others under affliction or misery from general benevolence.
Pure benevolence would be sufficient to excite pity to another in calamity, if
there were no particular instinct, or any other principle determining the mind
thereto. It is easy to see how benevolence, which seeks another's good should
cause us to desire his deliverance from evil. And this is a source of pity far
more extensive than the other. It excites compassion in cases that are
overlooked by natural instinct. And even in those cases to which instinct
extends, it mixes its influence with the natural principle, and guides and
regulates its operations. And when this is the case, the pity which is
exercised, may be called a virtuous compassion. -- So there is a virtuous
gratitude, or a gratitude that arises not only from self-love, but from a
superior principle of disinterested general benevolence. As it is manifest, that
when we receive kindness from such as we love already, we are more disposed to
gratitude, and disposed to greater degrees of it, than when the mind is
destitute of any such friendly prepossession. Therefore, when the superior
principle of virtuous love has a governing hand, and regulates the affair, it
may be called a virtuous gratitude. -- So there is a virtuous love of justice,
arising from pure benevolence to Being in general, as that naturally and
necessarily inclines the heart, that every particular Being should have such a
share of benevolence as is proportioned to its dignity, consisting in the
degree of its Being, and the degree of its virtue. Which is entirely diverse
from an apprehension of justice, from a sense of the beauty of uniformity in
variety: as has been particularly shown already. And so it is easy to see how
there may be a virtuous sense of desert different from what is natural and
common. And so a virtuous conscienciousness, or a sanctified conscience. -- And
as when natural affections have their operations mixed with the influence of
virtuous benevolence, and are directed and determined hereby, they may be
called virtuous, so there may be a virtuous love of parents to children, and
between other near relatives, a virtuous love of our town, or country, or
nation. Yea, and a virtuous love between the sexes, as there may be the
influence of virtue mingled with instinct, and virtue may govern with regard to
the particular manner of its operation, and may guide it to such ends as are
agreeable to the great ends and purposes of true virtue.

GENUINE virtue prevents that increase of the habits of pride and sensuality,
which tend to over-bear and greatly diminish the exercises of the forementioned
useful and necessary principles of nature. And a principle of general
benevolence softens and sweetens the mind, and makes it more susceptible of the
proper influence and exercise of the gentler natural instincts, and directs
every one into its proper channel, and determines the exercise to the proper
manner and measure, and guides all to the best purposes.

CHAP. VIII.
In what respects virtue or moral good is founded in sentiment; and how far it
is founded in the reason and nature of things.
THAT which is called virtue, is a certain kind of beautiful nature, form or
quality that is observed in things. That form or quality is called beautiful to
any one beholding it to whom it is beautiful, which appears in itself agreeable
or comely to him, or the view or idea of which is immediately pleasant to the
mind. I say, agreeable in itself and immediately pleasant, to distinguish it
from things which in themselves are not agreeable nor pleasant, but either
indifferent or disagreable, which yet appear eligible and agreeable indirectly
for something else that is the consequence of them, or with which they are
connected. Such a kind of indirect agreableness or eligibleness in things, not
for themselves, but for some thing else, is not what is called beauty. But when
a form or quality appears lovely, pleasing and delightful in itself, then it is
called beautiful; and this agreableness or gratefulness of the idea is what is
called beauty. It is evident therefore by this, that the way we come by the
idea or sensation or beauty, is by immediate sensation of the gratefulness of
the idea called beautiful; and not by finding out by argumentation any
consequences, or other things that it stands connected with; any more than
tasting the sweetness of honey, or perceiving the harmony of a tune, is by
argumentation on connections and consequences. And this manner of being
affected with the immediate presence of the beautiful idea depends not,
therefore, on any reasonings about the idea, after we have it, before we can
find out whether it be beautiful, or not; but on the frame of our minds,
whereby they are so made that such an idea, as soon as we have it, is grateful,
or appears beautiful.

THEREFORE, if this be all that is meant by them who affirm, virtue is founded
in sentiment and not in reason, that they who see the beauty there is in true
virtue, don't perceive it by argumentation on its connexions and consequences,
but by the frame of their own minds, or a certain spiritual sense given them of
God, whereby they immediately perceive pleasure in the presence of the idea of
true virtue in their minds, or are directly gratified in the view or
contemplation of this object, this is certainly true.

BUT if thereby is meant, that the frame of mind, or inward sense given them by
God, whereby the mind is disposed to delight in the idea or view of true
virtue, is given arbitrarily, so that if he had pleased he might have given a
contrary sense and determination of mind, which would have agreed as well with
the necessary nature of things, this I think is not true.

VIRTUE, as I have observed, consists in the cordial consent or union of Being
to Being in general. And, as has also been observed, that frame of mind,
whereby it is disposed to relish and be pleased with the view of this, is
benevolence or union of heart itself to Being in general, or a universally
benevolent frame of mind: because he whose temper is to love Being in general,
therein must have a disposition to approve and be pleased with love to Being in
general. Therefore now the question is, whether God in giving this temper to a
created mind, whereby it unites to or loves Being in general, acts so
arbitrarily, that there is nothing in the necessary nature of things to hinder
but that a contrary temper might have agreed or consisted as well with that
nature of things, as this?

AND in the first place I observe, that to assert this, would be a plain
absurdity, and contrary to the very supposition. For here it is supposed, that
virtue in its very essence consists in agreement or consent of Being to Being.
Now certainly agreement itself to Being in general must necessarily agree
better with general existence, than opposition and contrariety to it.

I OBSERVE secondly, that God in giving to the creature such a temper of mind,
gives that which is agreeable to what is by absolute necessity his own temper
and nature. For, as has been often observed, God himself is in effect* Being in
general; and without all doubt it is in itself necessary, and impossible it
should be otherwise, that God should agree with himself, be united with
himself, or love himself: and therefore, when he gives the same temper to his
creatures, this is more agreeable to his necessary nature, than the opposite
temper: yea, the latter would be infinitely contrary to his nature.

LET it be noted, thirdly, by this temper only can created Beings be united to,
and agree with one another. This appears, because it consists in consent and
union to Being in general; which implies agreement and union with every
particular Being, except such as are opposite to Being in general, or excepting
such cases wherein union with them is by some means inconsistent with union
with general existence. But certainly if any particular created Being were of a
temper to oppose Being in general, that would infer the most universal and
greatest possible discord, not only of creatures with their creator, but of
created Beings one with another.

Fourthly, I OBSERVE, there is no other temper but this, that a man can have,
and agree with himself, or be without self-inconsistence, i. e. without having
some inclinations and relishes repugnant to others. And that for these reasons.
Every Being that has understanding and will, necessarily loves happiness. For,
to suppose any Being not to love happiness, would be to suppose he did not love
what was agreeable to him; which is a contradiction: or at least would imply,
that nothing was agreeable or eligible to him, which is the same as to say, that
he has no such thing as choice, or any faculty of will. So that every Being who
has a faculty of will, must of necessity have an inclination to happiness. And
therefore, if he be consistent with himself, and has not some inclinations
repugnant to others, he must approve of those inclinations whereby Beings
desire the happiness of Being in general, and must be against a disposition to
the misery of Being in general: because otherwise he would approve of
opposition to his own happiness. For, if a temper inclined to the misery of
Being in general prevailed universally, it is apparent, it would tend to
universal misery. But he that loves a tendency to universal misery, in effect
loves a tendency to his own misery: and as he necessarily hates his own misery,
he has then one inclination repugnant to another. -- And besides, it
necessarily follows from self-love, that men love to be loved by others;
because in this others love agrees with their own love. But if men loved hatred
to Being in general, they would in effect love the hatred of themselves: and so
would be inconsistent with themselves, having one natural inclination contrary
to another.

THESE things may help us to understand why that spiritual and divine sense, by
which those that are truly virtuous and holy, perceive the excellency of true
virtue, is in the sacred scriptures called by the name of light, knowledge,
understanding, etc. If this divine sense were a thing arbitrarily given,
without any foundation in the nature of things, it would not properly be called
by such names. For, if there were no correspondence or agreement in such a
sense with the nature of things, any more than there would have been in a
diverse or contrary sense, the idea we obtain by this spiritual sense could in
no respect be said to be a knowledge or perception of any thing besides what
was in our own minds. For this idea would be no representation of any thing
without. But since it is otherwise, since it is agreeable, in the respects
abovementioned, to the nature of things and especially since it is the
representation and image of the moral perfection and excellency of the divine
Being, hereby we have a perception of that moral excellency, of which we could
have no true idea without it. And it being so, hereby persons have that true
knowledge of God, which greatly enlightens the mind in the knowledge of divine
things in general, and does (as might be shown, if it were necessary to the
main purpose of this discourse) in many respects assist persons to a right
understanding of things in general, to understand which our faculties were
chiefly given us, and which do chiefly concern our interest; and assists us to
see the nature of them, and the truth of them, in their proper evidence.
Whereas, the want of this spiritual sense, and the prevalence of those
dispositions that are contrary to it, tends to darken and distract the mind,
and dreadfully to delude and confound men's understandings.

AND as to that moral sense, common to mankind, which there is in natural
conscience, neither can this be truly said to be no more than a sentiment
arbitrarily given by the creator, without any relation to the necessary nature
of things: but is established in an agreement with the nature of things; so as
no sense of mind that can be supposed, of a contrary nature and tendency could
be. This will appear by these two things. --

1. THIS moral sense, if the understanding be well informed, and be exercised
at liberty and in an extensive manner, without being restrained to a private
sphere, approves the very same things which a spiritual and divine sense
approves; and those things only; though not on the same grounds, nor with the
same kind of approbation. Therefore, as that divine sense has been already
shown to be agreeable to the necessary nature of things, so this inferior moral
sense, being so far correspondent to that, must also so far agree with the
nature of things.

2. IT has been shown, that this moral sense consists in approving the
uniformity and natural agreement there is between one thing and another. So
that by the supposition it is agreeable to the nature of things. For therein it
consists, viz. a disposition of mind to consent to, or like, the agreement of
the nature of things, or the agreement of the nature and form of one thing with
another. And certainly such a temper of mind as likes the agreement of things
to the nature of things, is more agreeable to the nature of things than an
opposite temper of mind.

HERE it may be observed -- As the use of language is for mankind to express
their sentiments or ideas to each other, so that those terms in language, by
which things of a moral nature are signified, are to express those moral
sentiments or ideas that are common to mankind; therefore it is, that moral
sense which is in natural conscience, that chiefly governs the use of language
among mankind, and is the mind's rule of language in these matters among
mankind; it is indeed the general natural rule which God has given to all men,
whereby to judge of moral good and evil. By such words, right and wrong, good
and evil, when used in a moral sense, is meant in common speech that which
deserves praise or blame, respect or resentment. But as has been often
observed, mankind in general have a sense of desert, by this natural moral
sense.

THEREFORE here may arise a question, which may deserve to be considered, viz
Seeing it is thus, that sentiment among mankind is the rule of language, as to
what is called by the name of good and evil, worthy and unworthy; and it is
apparent, that sentiment, at least as to many particulars, by some means or
other is different in different persons, in different nations; that being
thought to deserve praise by one, which by others is thought to be worthy of
blame; how therefore can virtue and vice be any other than arbitrary, not at
all determined by the nature of things, but by the sentiments of men with
relation to the nature of things?

IN order to the answering this question with clearness, it may be divided into
two: viz. Whether men's sentiments of moral good and evil are not arbitrary, or
rather casual and accidental? And, whether the way of their using words in what
they call good and evil, is not arbitrary, without respect to any common
sentiment in all, conformed to the nature of things?

As TO the first, I would observe, that the general disposition or sense of
mind exercised in a sense of desert of esteem or resentment, may be the same in
all: though as to particular objects and occasions with regard to which it is
exercised, it may be very various in different men or bodies of men, through
the partiality or error that may attend the view or attention of the mind. In
all, a notion of desert of love, or resentment, may consist in the same thing,
in general, viz. a suitableness, or natural uniformity and agreement between
the affections and acts of the agent, and the affections and treatment of
others some way concerned; or the natural agreement between love (or something
that some way implies love, or proceeds from it, or tends to it) and love; a
natural agreement between treating well, and being well treated; the natural
agreement between hating (or something that some way partakes of the nature of
hatred) and being hated, etc. I say, this general notion of desert may be the
same: and yet occasions and objects through variety of apprehensions about
these occasions and objects, and the various manner in which they are viewed,
by reason of the partial attention of the mind, may be extremely various; and
example, custom, education, and association may have a hand in this, in ways
innumerable. But it is needless to dwell long on this, since things which have
been said by others (Mr. Hutcheson, in particular) may abundantly show, that
the differences which are to be found among different persons and nations,
concerning moral good and evil, are not inconsistent with a general moral
sense, common to all mankind.

NOR, secondly, is the use of the words, good and evil, right and wrong, when
used in a moral sense, altogether unfix'd and arbitrary, according to the
variety of notions, opinions, and views, that occasion the forementioned
variety of sentiment. For though the signification of words is determined by use,
yet that which governs in the use of terms is general or common use. And
mankind, in what they would signify by terms, are obliged to aim at a
consistent use: because it is easily found that the end of language, which is
to be a common medium of manifesting ideas and sentiments, cannot be obtained
any other way than by a consistent use of words; both that men should be
consistent with themselves, and one with another, in the use of them. But men
cannot call any thing right or wrong, worthy or ill-deserving, consistently, any
other way than by calling things so, which truly deserve praise or blame, i. e.
things, wherein (all things considered) there is most uniformity in connecting
with them praise or blame. There is no other way that they can use these terms
consistently with themselves. Thus, if thieves or traitors may be angry with
informers, that bring them to justice, and call their behavior by odious
names, yet herein they are inconsistent with themselves; because, when they put
themselves in the place of those that have injured them, they approve the same
things they condemn. And therefore such are capable of being convinced, that
they apply these odious terms in an abusive manner. So, a nation that
prosecutes an ambitious design of universal empire, by subduing other nations
with fire and sword, may affix terms that signify the highest degrees of
virtue, to the conduct of such as show the most engaged, stable, resolute
spirit in this affair, and do most of this bloody work. But yet they are
capable of being convinced, that they use these terms inconsistently, and abuse
language in it, and so having their mouths stopped. -- And not only will men
use such words inconsistently with themselves, but also with one another, by
using them any otherwise than to signify true merit or ill-deserving, as before
explained. For there is no way else, wherein men have any notion of good or
ill-desert, that mankind in general can agree in. Mankind in general seem to
suppose some general standard or foundation in nature for an universal
consistence in the use of the terms whereby they express moral good and evil;
which none can depart from but through error and mistake. This is evidently
supposed in all disputes they may have one with another, about right and wrong;
and in all endeavors used to evince or prove that any thing is either good or
evil, in a moral sense.

FINIS

