Dr. MAYHEW's DISCOURSE ON POPISH IDOLATRY.

POPISH IDOLATRY: A DISCOURSE DELIVERED IN THE CHAPEL OF HARVARD-COLLEGE IN
CAMBRIDGE, NEW ENGLAND, MAY 8. 1765. AT THE LECTURE founded by the Honorable
PAUL DUDLEY, ESQUIRE. BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. PASTOR OF THE WEST CHURCH IN
BOSTON.

-- If any man that is called a brother be -- an idolater -- with such an one
no not to eat.

Apostle PAUL. -- Be not deceived: Neither fornicators, nor idolaters -- shall
inherit the kingdom of God.

IDEM. -- Idolaters -- shall have their part in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone; which is the second death.

Apostle JOHN. -- Without are dogs -- and idolaters --

ID. BOSTON: Printed by R. and S. DRAPER, EDES and GILL, and T. and J. FLEET.
MDCCLXV.

2 CORINTHIANS. VI. 16. -- WHAT agreement has the temple of GOD with idols? --
TWO branches of the popish controversy, viz. the infallibility and supremacy
claimed by the bishop and church of Rome, were handled by the two aged and
learned divines The Rev. EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH, D. D. late HOLLIS Professor of
Divinity; and the Rev. Mr. THOMAS FOXCROFT, of BOSTON.
, whom I have the honor to succeed in this department of the Dudleian Lecture.
It is now proposed, by divine assistance, to offer something concerning the
idolatry of that church; it being one of the capital errors objected against
her. This branch of the controversy alone is so fruitful, that it would require
many discourses to handle it in all its extent and variety. This learned
audience will, therefore, expect nothing more in a single discourse, though long,
than a general idea of popish idolatry; an imperfect sketch, the outlines of it.

Idolatry consists in general in the service of idols, or false, imaginary
deities. But this, like all other crimes, admits of various degrees. The
worship of a creature under the formal notion of its being the true God,
exclusively of him, is the grossest kind of idolatry. The worship of any
creature in common with him, as though it were equally God, is a lower, but
still very high degree of it. A third species thereof is paying such service to
creatures, under the notion of religion, as God has forbidden, and as they are
unworthy of; although it may be professedly paid to them, not as gods, but in
subordination to him, as the ultimate object of worship. It is also idolatry to
worship the true God by images, or under any supposed material representations
of him. And it may be laid down as a general rule, that all such practices as
the scripture has condemned as idolatrous in Jews or Pagans, are equally
idolatrous in professed Christians.

Protestants have not accused Papists of the first and grossest kind of
idolatry, or worshipping idols exclusively of the true God; but they have
charged them with all the others: And to make good this old accusation, is the
business now before me. In the prosecution of which, a summary account will be
given of the doctrine and practice of the church of Rome respecting the worship
of the eucharist, saints and angels, pictures and images.

Christians early began to speak too mystically, not to say unintelligibly,
concerning the eucharist, or Lord's supper. They did so more and more, till the
doctrine of transubstantiation, and the worship of the sacrament, were fully
established. The council of Trent, confirmed by pope Pius IV, and considered as
an authentic standard of popery, defines the doctrine of the church of Rome as
to this, and many other points, more particularly than had been done by any
former council. In session 13th that council declares as follows: 'Principio
docet sancta synodus,' etc. In the first place the holy synod teaches, and
openly and simply professes, that in the pure sacrament of the holy eucharist,
after the consecration of the bread and wine, our Lord Jesus Christ, true God
and man, is truly, really and substantially contained under the species [or
appearances] of those sensible things Conc. Trident. Sess. 13. cap. 1.
. This great mystery is increased in chapter 3d of the same session, where the
council attempts to explain it. It is there said, 'Statim post consecrationem,'
etc. That immediately after consecration, the true body of our Lord, and his
true blood, exist under the species of bread and wine, together with his soul
and Divinity; his body indeed under the species of bread, and his blood under
the species of wine, by virtue of the words [of consecration;] but the body
itself under the species of wine, and the blood under the species of bread, and
the soul under both, by virtue of that natural connection and concomitancy, by
which the parts of Christ the Lord, who presently rose from the dead to die no
more, are united together; and also the Divinity, because of the admirable
hypostatical union thereof with the body and soul. Wherefore it is most true,
that one and the same thing [or as much tantumdem.
] is contained under either species, and under both: (...) whole and perfect
Christ existeth under the species of bread, and under every part of its
species; also under he species of wine, and under its parts.

Thus these venerable fathers. And this wonderful change of the bread and wine
is said, in the next chapter, to have been conveniently and properly called
transubstantiation. It follows, chapter 5th, 'Nullus itaque dubitandi locus
relinquitur,' etc. There is therefore no room left for doubt, but that all the
faithful of Christ, according to the practice ever received in the catholic
church, should in reverence give the worship of latria, which is due to the
true God, to this most holy sacrament. For neither is it therefore the less to
be adored, because it was instituted by Christ the Lord, to be taken [or eaten
and drunk] ut sumatur.
. Thus the council: And in the Roman ritual this sacrament is honored with the
title of our Creator.

It must be observed here, that the church of Rome distinguishes worship into
latria, dulia, hyperdulia and coadoration. By the first of which, latria, they
understand the highest kind of worship, or that which is due to God alone. And
the council of Trent expressly declares, that the eucharist is to be worshipped
therewith. The doctrine and practice of the church of Rome in this respect are
exactly conformable to each other. The eucharist is worshipped by them in the
most solemn manner, with prostrations, prayers and incense. The host is often
carried in processions, with the greatest solemnity: And those who are but
casually present where it passes along, are obliged to kneel down, as in an act
of worship to God; unless, perhaps, they will run the risque of the
inquisition, or of being knocked on the head by the devout rabble that attend
it. It is well known, that the chief accusation against the old reformers, was,
that they denied transubstantiation; though some even of those who suffered
death, particularly John Hus and Jerome of Prague, did not differ materially
from the church of Rome in this point; as plainly appears from Mons. Lenfant's
History of the council of Constance. And what great stress the church of Rome
lays upon this doctrine, as a most distinguishing and essential article of
faith, will further appear from the canons, i. e. curses, of the council of
Trent, sess. 13. Some of which are here faithfully translated, partly with that
view, and partly with a view to give the unlearned reader a clearer idea of
what the church of Rome holds, as to this matter. They are as follows.

Canon I. 'Si quis negaverit,' etc. 'If any one shall deny, that in the most
holy sacrament of the eucharist the body and blood, together with the soul and
divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, are truly, really and substantially
contained, and therefore whole Christ; but shall say, they are in it only as in
a sign, or figure, or in virtue; let him be anathema.'

Can. II. 'If any one shall say, that the substance of bread and wine remain in
the holy sacrament of the eucharist, together with the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and shall deny that admirable and singular conversion of the
whole substance of bread into body, and of the whole substance of wine into
blood, the species [or appearance] only of bread and wine remaining; which
conversion, indeed, the catholic church most fitly calls transubstantiation;
let him be anathema.'

Can. III. 'If any one shall deny, that in the venerable sacrament of the
eucharist whole Christ is contained under each species, and under the several
parts of each species; let him be anathema.'

Can. VI. 'If any one shall say, that in the holy sacrament of the eucharist,
Christ the only begotten Son of God is not to be adored with the worship of
latria, even external; -- let him be anathema.'

So important a doctrine is this, in the church of Rome: And more persons, it
is apprehended, have suffered death from her for denying it, and refusing to
worship the eucharist, than for any other supposed heresy whatever.




Their doctrine and worship being harmonious in this respect; it follows, that
if the doctrine of transubstantiation is false, their worship grounded thereon
is idolatry. It is beyond the design of this discourse to enter into a
particular discussion of that doctrine, or the arguments by which it is
defended: It shall suffice to observe a few things with relation thereto.

This doctrine is as plainly absurd, self-repugnant, and impossible to be true,
as any one that can be imagined. For what can be more so, than that bread and
wine should be changed into the very body and blood of Christ; while yet all
the known properties of bread and wine remain, without the subject or
substance; and none of the peculiar properties of flesh or blood are perceived?
What more impossible, than that this bread and wine should also be changed, at
the same time, into an human soul, and into the very substance of the Deity?
This doctrine supposes also, that the same undivided body of Christ may be
wholly in heaven and wholly on earth, and in ten million different places on
earth, at the same time. It supposes, that though the bread is wholly changed
into body, and the wine wholly into blood; yet both the body and blood of
Christ, the soul and Divinity, exist wholly and perfectly under each of the
species seperately considered, and under every part thereof, be they ever so
minute and numerous: Every apparent crumb of consecrated wafer, and each drop
of consecrated wine, however small, contains whole, entire Christ under that
species; body, blood, soul and Divinity; and yet it is owned, that there is but
one Christ! Besides; this doctrine supposes, that when our Lord instituted the
supper, he took his whole body into his own hand, which was but a part of it;
put himself into his own mouth, swallowed down his entire body into his
stomach, and at the same time gave his body and blood to be wholly eaten and
drunk by each of his apostles! Could the most fertile imagination invent
grosser, more ridiculous, or more impious incongruities?

The evidence of sense is the most certain, that we are capable of; and by this
we know that transubstantiation is false. The Romanists do not pretend to deny,
but that all the five senses bear testimony against it, as much as they
possibly could if it were false, or if the bread and wine remained after the
juggling, hocus-pocus Hocus-pocus seems only a corrupt pronunciation of Hoc est
corpus.
trick, which they term consecration. It is, therefore, at best weak and
puerile, in such a case as this, to urge the testimony of scripture, or divine
revelation. For the truth of the Christian revelation itself depends on the
truth of certain facts, by which there was an appeal made to the senses of men;
particularly the miracles and resurrection of our Savior. The evidence of
sense being set aside as precarious, it cannot be proved that ever our Lord
uttered those words, 'This is my body'; that he had any body at all; or that
there was ever such a person in the world, as 'the man Christ Jesus,' in
distinction from a mere phantasm, or, in the language of our adversaries, from
the species of a man. Thus does the church of Rome, by this doctrine, subvert
the very foundations of christianity. We cannot be more certain, that any one
thing in nature is what it appears to be, and not another, the most different
therefrom, than that true bread and wine remain after consecration; and
consequently, that transubstantiation is the grossest imposition and insult,
that ever the priesthood itself put upon the superstitious credulity of mankind.

This doctrine then, being plainly false, the church of Rome is certainly
guilty of idolatry, in worshipping the eucharist as true God. For what is
idolatry, if it be not so, to believe a creature to be the Creator, and to pay
divine homage thereto accordingly? Besides; when, to justify their worship of
the eucharist, so often objected against as idolatry, they allege
transubstantiation; making this supposed change the ground of their worship;
this is an implicit acknowledgment, that their worship would actually be
idolatrous, if there were no such change: For why is this alleged, to
exculpate themselves, if their worship of the eucharist would not be idolatry
without it?

Some Roman-catholics have, indeed, expressly owned this consequence. Costerus
particularly, a learned jesuit, expresses himself very strongly, as cited by
doctor H. More. Says he, The errors of those were more tolerable, who
worshipped some golden or silver statue, or some image of any other materials,
for their God, as the heathen worshipped their gods; or a red cloth hung upon
the top of a spear, as is reported of the Laplanders; or some live animal, as
of old the Egyptians did; than those who worship a bit of bread, as hitherto
the Christians have done all over the world, if the doctrine of
transubstantiation be not true. Thus do some Roman-catholics fully agree with
us in this consequence; but others deny it. And the substance of what the
latter say, is, That though transubstantiation should be false; yet the Deity is
certainly there present in the bread and wine, so that they do not miss of the
proper object of adoration, while they seem to worship those material objects:
And, that they cannot be justly charged with idolatry, because they do not
intentionally worship a creature, knowing it to be so, but firmly believing it
to be true God. Thus they try to exculpate themselves, on the very disagreeable
supposition that transubstantiation is an error, and their infallibility
mistaken; whether effectually, or not, may appear from the following
considerations.

The divine nature is essentially everywhere; intimately and equally present
in all sensible objects throughout the universe. And if merely the divine
presence in an object, will excuse its worshippers from idolatry, then all
other creatures may be worshipped without idolatry, as well as the eucharist;
provided the worshippers intentionally direct their devotions ultimately, not
to these objects abstractly considered, but as symbols of the Deity present in
them. This is a plain consequence, and allowed by some Roman-catholics. Thus,
no person, who is a believer in the true God, an omnipresent being, can ever be
guilty of idolatry, how many material objects soever he may worship in the same
sense that the Romanists worship bread and wine in the eucharist. Though each of
these objects is supposed to be God, and worshipped under that persuasion; and
though the votary would be mistaken in this respect; yet he would not miss of the
proper object of adoration, because, the worst come to the worst, God is
present therein, whom he intends to worship; which is sufficient to clear him
from idolatry. For example; if one person should worship the sun, another an
image of wood or brass, a third a man, a fourth a beast, and the fifth a devil,
even with latria; each of the devonionists being so infatuated as to believe
the object of his worship the living and true God; Roman-catholics could not,
upon the principle aforesaid, charge them with idolatry; or do it without
condemning themselves. They would, indeed, be mistaken, but not idolaters;
because it was their intention to worship the true God.

But all idolatry, when people are sincere in their worship, supposes some
mistake, or error in the judgment, either as to the object or the act of
worship. Without some erroneous opinions there can be no idolatry: And, as a
learned divine has justly observed, where this sin is committed the most in
good earnest, there is the greatest mistake in the judgment of the worshipper.
But they who allege, that a mistake with respect to transubstantiation, if it
be really one, excuses the worshippers of the bread and wine from idolatry,
because they think they are worshipping God; do in effect say, that idolatry
cannot be committed by any one, who is so erroneous as to believe the creature
he worshippeth to be God most high. This is quite absurd: For according to this
way of reasoning, the more ignorantly and stupidly any worship mere creatures,
believing their proper Deity, and the more devoutly they adore them; so much
less liable they are to the imputation of idolatry. But the direct contrary is
manifestly true: By how much more sincerely any believe a creature to be the
true God, and worship it as such; by so much the more gross is their idolatry.
Let us suppose, for illustration, that among the Israelites of old, who
worshipped golden calves, there were persons of different opinions; that some
adored them merely as symbols, or representations of the true God; but that
others were so sottish as to believe the calf, to which they bowed down, was
really Jehovah himself under the appearance or species of a calf; even the very
God that created, and brought them out of Egypt. Now, on this supposition,
would any sensible man say, that the former were, indeed, guilty of idolatry,
but not the latter; because they believed this four-footed beast to be their
Creator? Ought it not to be said, on the contrary, that they were, for that
very reason, more brutish idolaters than the others, who worshipped it only as
an image or symbol of the Godhead? Or let us apply this to the heathens. The
ignorant vulgar, who worshipped sensible objects as real deities, were ever and
justly accounted more sottish idolaters than those speculative persons, who had
no such high opinion of these objects, but worshipped them merely as
representations of the gods; or rather, as some of them seem to have done, of
the various powers, virtues and perfections of one almighty, spiritual and
invisible being. Thus, if among the ancient Persians some adored the rising
sun, only as the most glorious symbol of the Deity, and a principal mean or
instrument of his munificence, while others worshipped it as being itself God;
the idolatry of the latter was certainly more gross than that of the former. By
the same rule, the more sincerely any believe transubstantiation, and worship
the eucharist as God; the more sottish is their idolatry. Their idolatry would
be less scandalous, though real, if they worshipped it merely as a representation
of the Deity, or a sacred memorial of our redemption by Christ. And here it is
natural to observe, that the idolatry of the Romanists is more gross in this
respect, than that of the Israelites in worshipping golden calves, or than many
persons, even among the Pagans, were chargeable with. There is no good reason
to think, that the Israelites believed a golden calf, which they had just made,
to be the true God, their Creator; as the Papists do, bread and wine. And it is
certain, that some of the more intelligent heathens disclaimed, with much
indignation, the thought of worshipping any material objects, otherwise than as
symbols of the Deity; while the vulgar adored them, as having divinity
belonging to them. So that popish idolatry, in this respect, approaches nearer
to that of vulgar Pagans, than to that of the more enlightened among them. And
indeed, none of them were ever so brutal and savage, as to eat what he took for
a deity: at least we read of no such sect as that of God-eaters, even in the
most barbarous nations and ages. And it is certain that the Egyptians, who
worshipped many sorts of animals, roots and vegetables, that were good for
food, as gods; yet thought it impious at once to adore and devour them: But the
Papists, it seems, are less delicate, or squeamish.

Let me dismiss this part of the subject with a remark of the late Dr.
Middleton, agreeable to what was just now said, in his excellent Letter from
Rome, showing an exact conformity between popery and paganism in many
particulars. As to that celebrated act of popish idolatry, the worship of the
host, says he, I must confess, that I cannot find the least resemblance of it
in any part of the pagan worship: and as often as I have been standing by at
mass, and seen the whole congregation prostrate on the ground, in the humblest
posture of adoring; I could not help reflecting on a passage of Tully, when
speaking of the absurdity of the heathens in the choice of their gods: But was
man, says he, ever so mad as to take that which he feeds upon for a god? Sed
ecquem tam amentem esse putas, qui illud, quo vescatur, Deum credat esse.

CIC. de Not. Deor. jjj.
This was an extravagance reserved for popery alone: And what an old Roman
could not but think too gross even for Egyptian idolatry to swallow, is now
become the principal part of worship, and the most distinguishing article of
faith, in modern Rome.

LET us now proceed to the worship of saints and angels, as practiced in the
same church; by which the charge of idolatry will be further fixed upon her.

The worship of demons, or the souls of renowned persons after their decease,
is a very ancient species of idolatry; as some suppose, even more ancient than
the flood. Be that as it may, this became afterward almost an universal
practice. For it is past dispute, that the greater part of the gods and
goddesses worshipped by the heathens, were demons; deceased heroes and kings,
the inventors of arts, and other famous persons, male and female. This kind of
worship was strictly prohibited to the Israelites; but yet they sometimes fell
into it, in conformity to their heathen neighbors. Christianity, which was
designed to be the religion of the world, not of one nation only, was
particularly adapted to put an end to this, and all other kinds of
superstitious, false worship among the Gentiles; and to establish that of one
God, by one Mediator, throughout the earth. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time. 1 Timothy ii. 6.
And there is none other God but one. For though there be that are called gods,
whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,) but to
us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we by him; and
one Lord, Jesus Christ, etc. 1 Cor. viii. 4, 5, 6.
The primary business of the apostles, when they went among the Gentiles, was
to convert them from the worship of demons, and other idols, to the faith and
worship of the true God. We preach unto you, said they, that ye should turn
from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven and earth, and the
sea, and all things that are therein Acts xiv.
. During the apostolic age, and some time after, Christians in general were so
averse to the worship of demons, and all other sorts of idolatry, that they
determinately refused any compliances with the worship of their heathen
neighbors, even at the expense of their blood. They considered the worship of
angels and demons as inconsistent with the religion which they professed; and
as what would have been an implicit renunciation of it. But the church of Rome
is, in effect, for reconciling these things together; even the temple of God
with idols. For many ages past, the worship of demons, or angels, and the souls
of dead men and women, has been fully established therein, and as much
practiced as ever the like worship was among the heathens. The chief difference
is, that the Romanists do not call the saints or angels gods and goddesses;
though, for aught that appears, they attribute as much power to them at least,
as the pagans did to their inferior deities; and depend as much upon them.

The rise and progress of this species of idolatry in the Christian church, was
briefly as follows. The martyrs were justly held in great honor after their
decease. The caemeteries, or places of their burial, used to be much
frequented, even from the earliest times: There the people prayed, not to them
indeed, but to God; and sometimes sung hymns in honor of their memory. All this
was done for some time, without any thought of worshipping them, though not
wholly without superstition. But an extravagant, and even idolatrous veneration
for them succeeded, at least as early as the fourth century. For Vigilantius,
who lived at the latter end of it, as Dr. Middleton has observed, publicly
charged the ruling clergy with paganizing and idolatry, on account of several
heathenish customs then in the church; particularly the veneration of saints
and relics. We see, says he, in effect, a pagan rite introduced into our
churches, under the pretext of religion; when heaps of wax candles are lighted
up in clear sunshine, and people are everywhere kissing and adoring, I know
not what, contemptible dust, preserved in a little vessel, and wrapped up in
precious linen. These men do great honor truly to the blessed martyrs, by
lighting up paultry candles to those, whom the Lamb in the midst of the throne
illuminates with all the luster of his majesty. It is said that Jerome, who
attempted to answer Vigilantius, neither disowned these practices, nor denied
that they were borrowed from the pagan worship; but justified them by saying,
That was once done to idols, and was then to be detested; but this is done to
the martyrs, and is therefore to be received. Vid. Letter from Rome, the latter
end.
So it seems, that even in Jerome's opinion, what was detestable superstition
and idolatry when done by Christians in honor of the martyrs: There needed only
to transfer the veneration from those idols to the saints, in order to render
it laudable, at least admissible: The kind of worship might be retained, if the
particular objects of it were changed, and christian demons introduced instead
of pagan demons!

But worldly policy, as well as superstition, had some hand in establishing
saint-worship. When Christian teachers became corrupt and worldly-minded, through
the indiscrete zeal, or, perhaps, policy, of Constantine the Great, they aimed
more at increasing the number of nominal Christians, for secular ends, than
that of real ones; or preserving their religion in its original purity and
simplicity. And accordingly, observing how attached the Pagans were to the
worship of their gods and demigods, to their magnificent temples, images, and
the feasts kept in honor of their deities; the Christian leaders were for
bringing them over, by imitating many of their customs. Then spacious churches
were built, sumptuously adorned, and dedicated to the martyrs; pictures, images
and altars were brought into use therein; and the formal invocation of saints
encouraged. Thus Christians rivalled, if not surpassed Pagans, in their own
way, with a view to bring them over to the faith of Christ, at least to a
profession of it. By which temporizing policy, as bishop Stillingfleet
observes, christianity came at last to be little or nothing else but 'reformed
paganism,' as to its external worship: Or, as Turretin says, the empire was
brought over to the faith, but the church also infected with the pomp of the
empire; the Pagans were converted to Christ, but the Christian worship depraved
to the fashion of paganism. See more relating to this, Letter from Rome, sub
fin.


The worship of saints prevailed more and more until the Reformation, though not
equally in all parts, nor without opposition. It continues in the church of
Rome to this day, nearly in as high credit as ever. That the saints are to be
invocated, and festivals and temples consecrated to them, is an article of
faith in the church of Rome, and mentioned as such, in common with the most
essential doctrines of christianity; without the belief of which there is
supposed to be no salvation. Septimus articulus ecclesiae Romanae est, sanctos
in coelo regnantes esse honorandos, ac festos dies atque basilicas illis
consecrandas esse. Vid. Praelud. nonum in Summam council. omn. Per Franciscum
Longum a Coriolanum.
They are from time to time canonizing new saints, though more sparingly than in
some ages past; just as in old pagan Rome they were from time to time enrolling
more dead men in the number of the gods. They erect oratories and altars to
them, prostrate themselves before their shrines, and burn incense to them; all
nearly in the same manner, that the Pagans did to their factitious deities. And
the Pantheon at Rome, formerly the temple of all the gods, is now dedicated to
Mary and all the saints. They also make formal vows and prayers to them for
blessings temporal, spiritual and eternal. Why might they not as well offer
sheep and oxen in sacrifice to them, as pay them such worship as this; and yet
be free from idolatry?

Let me instance in a few of their hymns and prayers to the saints, by way of
specimen. To St. Nicholas they address themselves as follows: 'Ergo pie nos
exaudi,' etc. Therefore graciously here us, who are intent on praising thee,
lest we are subjected to the fraud of the enemy; bring us help. Deliver us from
all evil; conduct us in the right way; and after this life, introduce us into
eternal joys. To St. Agnes thus: 'Ave, Agnes gloriosa,' etc. Hail, glorious
Agnes; preserve me in the right faith, O sweet and beloved virgin, I entreat
thee with prayers. Grant to all, that they may in perfect charity worship God,
by whom thou wast elected. They have longer forms of devotion to other saints;
in which they distinctly implore of them almost every blessing that can be
named; at least as many and great ones as the Pagans used to pray for to any of
their gods, not excepting their Jupiter optimus maximus; although they call this
worship, which they pay to the saints in common, only dulia, in distinction
from latria. But their worship of the virgin Mary they term hyperdulia; by
which it is not easy to know what they mean, only in general, that it is
something more extravagant and outrageous than their worship of other saints,
or of angels. In her Rosarie, as it is called, that is, a kind of liturgy for
the virgin Mary, and in other devotional books, they give her the following
titles: Queen regent of heaven, mistress of angels, mother of grace, mother of
mercy, mother of God, the hope of the world, the trust of sinners, the repairer
and savior of despairing souls, the giver of spiritual grace, the female
savior of the world, the healer of the sick, the confirmer of the just, the
restorer of them that go astray, the helper and hope of the desolate, a most
ready helper; and the like.

They seldom speak of the merits and intercession of Christ, but in conjunction
with those of Mary; and in language that expresses their hope of salvation by
here is, as truly as by his See particularly, in the Ritual the offices called
the sacrament of repentance, and the visitation of the sick; also the prayer
for a woman after child bearing.
. They solemnly confess their sins to God and to her, in the same breath; as
may be seen in several parts of the Ritual. They sometimes beseech her to
exercise the authority of a mother, and to command her son. And in the office
entitled Ordo commendationis animae, the dying person is directed to pray to
her in these terms: 'Maria, matter gratiae', etc. O Mary, mother of grace,
mother of mercy, do thou protect me from the enemy, and receive me in the hour
of death. Let me here subjoin a prayer or hymn to Mary out of the Rosarie, as
follows: 'Reparatrix salvatrix', etc. Thou female repairer and savior of the
despairing soul, the showerer down and bestower of spiritual grace, heal my
wounds, I pray, I fervently desire; and grant the gifts of grace to the soul
that calls upon thee: That I may be chaste and modest, gentle, valiant,
sober, godly, regular, circumspect, a stranger to revenge, well instructed, and
guarded by the divine oracles; constant, grave and pleasant, benign, lovely,
prudent in heart, careful to speak the truth, hating evil, ever cleaving to God
in pious works. Part of another of these admirable collects in the Rosarie, is
as follows: 'Cor meum illumina', etc. Enlighten my heart, thou refulgent star
of the sea, and ever defend me from the devices of the enemy. O glorious virgin
Mary, mother of the eternal King, deliver us from all evil, and from the
punishment of Hell. This is a specimen of hyperdulia.

They have another approved book among them, called the Mary-Psalter, and the
Psalter of our Lady, the work of their seraphic doctor Bonaventure, and
himself, if we can believe so strange a thing, both a saint and a cardinal; in
which book the devotional psalms of David are turned into forms of prayer and
praise to Mary: So that, with some little variations, the same devotions which
David offered to the King of heaven, they offer to the Queen of heaven, at
once, according to their divinity, his mother, spouse and daughter. Part of one
of these psalms is thus paraphrased: 'In te, Domina, speravi', etc. In thee,
Lady, have I hoped; I shall never be confounded. Receive me to thy favor;
incline thine ear unto me, and rejoice me in my trouble. Thou art my strength
and my refuge, my consolation and my protection. Unto thee have I cried when my
heart was in distress; and thou heardest me from the top of the eternal hills.
Into thy hands, O Lady, I commend my spirit, my whole life, my last day.
Another thus: 'Salus sempiterna', etc. Eternal salvation is in thy hand, O
Lady; they that will duly honor thee, shall receive it. Thy clemency shall not
fail through eternal ages; and thy mercy is from generation to generation.
Another thus: 'Dispositione tua mundus', etc. By thy disposition [or
providence] the world endures, which thou, with God, has founded from the
beginning. O Lady, I am wholly thine; save me, because thy praises are
delightful in my pilgrimage. This is hyperdulia with a witness! And to these
specimens of devotion to Mary let me subjoin part of an equally pious
inscription mentioned by Dr. Middleton, over the gate of a great church in
Italy; viz. There is no one who can be saved, O most holy virgin, but through
thee -- Mary, indeed, opens the bosom of her mercy to all; so that the whole
universe receives out of her fullness: The captive, redemption; the sick, a
cure; the sad, comfort; the sinner, pardon; the just, grace; the angle, joy;
the whole Trinity, glory. The learned writer last named, very pertinently
remarks, that when Jeremiah rebukes the people of Judah for burning incense to
the Queen of heaven, one can hardly help imagining, that he is prophetically
pointing out the worship now paid to the virgin; to whom they actually burn
incense at this day under that very title Vid. Offic B. Virg. 'Salve Regina;
Ave Regina coelorum; Domina angelorum' --
. It is also well known that their churches, especially in Italy, are filled
with votive tables and offerings to Mary and other saints, for supposed cures
and deliverances wrought by them; in like manner as the heathen temples were
adorned, in honor of the gods and goddesses. And Dr. Stillingfleet relates,
that there was once a dispute among some Romancatholics, whether the Lord's
prayer might, or might not, be used to the saints. And it was well resolved,
and very subtly, says he, that ultimately, principally, primarily and
strictly, they might not; but secondarily, less principally and largely, and
relatively they might.

With suchlike vain distinctions they amuse themselves, impose upon the
ignorant, and endeavor to palliate their idolatrous worship of saints and
angels. They say, they do not call them gods, or worship them with latria; but
with an inferior worship. The council of Trent says, in session 25th, 'Sanctos
una cum Christo regnantes', etc. That the saints reigning together with Christ,
offer up their prayers to God for men: that it is good and profitable humbly to
invocate them, and to fly to their prayers, help and aid, for blessings to be
impetrated of God by his Son', etc. By which cautious manner of speaking, it
seems the council was a little afraid, either expressly to condemn or to justify
saint-worship in all its enormous extent, or in the manner in which it was
then, and is now actually practiced. I must crave leave to make several
remarks, relative to this point.

The distinction between latria and dulia, on which the church of Rome lays so
much stress, is an arbitrary one, without any solid foundation in scripture.
But taking their own explanation of these terms, the distinction will not
excuse them from idolatry. People may be guilty of this, by paying an
unwarrantable worship to saints and angels, or other creatures, though they do
not adore them as equal to God in nature and dignity, but worship them as
inferior to him. We are, indeed, to give honor, or, if they please, worship,
which is an equivocal term, This word is diverse times used in scripture, to
express the honor that may be justly due, and paid to creatures.
to all those to whom it is due; and in such manner and measure as it belongs
to them, either by the express appointment of God, or by natural reason and
right, in virtue of the known relation in which they stand toward us. But the
thing insisted on is, that that service and respect, whether it be called honor
only, or worship, which the church of Rome pays to saints and angels, is
unwarranted by reason, contrary to scripture, and properly idolatrous. Though the
holy angels are all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to the heirs of
salvation; yet we are forbidden to worship them thus. Let no man beguile you of
your reward, says the apostle, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of
angels, intruding into those which he has not seen Col. II. 18
-- When John fell at the feet of an angel, paying him too profound a
reverence; though it cannot be supposed, that he thought the angel was God, or
meant to worship him as God, he received a check from him: 'See thou do it not:
I am thy fellow servants', etc. Rev XIX 10. and XXII 8.
And the council of Laodicea, convened anno 320 or 321, expressly condemned the
worship of angels under the name of idolatry, and as a forsaking our Lord Jesus
Christ Vid. Conc. Laod c 35
. Now, surely, if even angels are not to be bowed down and prayed to by us,
though we know they minister to us, and are a superior order of beings; much less
are the saints to be thus worshipped. We are to be followers, but not
worshippers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises; unless
thinking and speaking of them with honor, and imitating their virtues, be to
worship them. We know not that they have any concern with human affairs, or
that they have any knowledge of what is passing in this lower world. But we are
sure, neither they, nor the angels are omniscient, omnipotent or omnipresent:
Which consideration alone shows the folly, at least, of worshipping them in the
manner the Papists do. Besides; the worship of demons [(...)] is condemned by
the apostle. I would not, says he, that ye should have fellowship with demons.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of demons Vid. 1 Cor. X. 19 --
22.
. And giving heed to 'doctrines of demons', is one characteristic of those who
should 'depart from the faith' in the last days. Now, this Greek word certainly
signifies an angel or spirit, whether good or bad. For Socrates, by the demon,
of which he boasted, surely meant not the devil, or an evil malicious being,
but a good genius, angel or spirit; and all the popish saints are properly
demons This is clearly evinced by many learned Protestants; particularly Mr
Jos. Mede, in his apostasy of the latter times. See also Sir Isaac Newton 's
Observations on Daniel and the Apocalypse, ch 14 Part I.
. It is well if some of them are not demons even in the bad sense of the word.

Moreover; though they do not give their saints the titles of dii and deae, gods
and goddesses; yet they call them divi and numina; as the Pagans of old Rome
called dead men and women after their apotheosis If the indignation of the
reader will not be too much raised, it may be an agreeable amusement to him to
compare the following pagan and popish inscriptions, exhibited by Dr. Middleton
in opposite columns, to show how nearly Papists have adopted the language, as
well as spirit of paganism; and ascribed the same powers, characters and
attributes to their saints, which had formerly been ascribed to heathen
deities. Pagan inscriptions.
Mercurio et Minervae Diis Tutelarib. Dii qui huic templo praesident. Numini
Mercurii sacr. Herculi victori pollenti potenti invicto. Praestiti Jovi. S.
Diis Deabusque CUM JOVE.
Popish inscriptions.
Maria et Francisce Tutelares mei. Divo Eustorgio Qui huic templo praesidet.
Numini Divi Georgii pollentis potentis invicti. Divis Praestitibus juvantibus
Georgio Stephanoque CUM DEO OPT. MAX.

. And it appears from the example before produced, that they directly implore
of them the greatest blessings of time and eternity; health of body and mind,
guidance in the true faith, spiritual grace, protection from the devil,
deliverance from all evil, salvation from the pains of hell, a gracious
reception at death, and admission to the joys of heaven. They may, if they
please, call this only dulia and hyperdulia: But what more, what greater or
better do, or can they, pray for to God himself? These are blessings, which he
alone can bestow. And when they pray thus to the saints, expressing their
confidence in their protection in the same terms, in which good men use to
express their's in the power, providence and grace of God; this is really
giving divine honors to them: And if latria, as they say, is the worship that
belongs exclusively to God; then this is plainly latria, whatever they may call
it. To give such worship as this to the saints, is an implicit ascription of
divine perfections to them, while they are explicitly owned to be but
creatures. It is a kind of worship, which supposes them to be omnipotent,
omniscient, and omnipresent; since He alone, who is possessed of those
perfections, can be supposed to hear prayers at all times, from all parts of
the earth at the same time; and able to grant such blessings. How poor an
evasion is it then, for Romancatholics to say, they neither call the saints
gods, nor worship them with supreme worship? For is not this to suppose them
really gods? And is not that even supreme worship, which can, with propriety,
be given only to God almighty? It is of no consequence, except as a matter of
criticism, whether this be called latria or dulia: And if they are guilty of an
apparent inconsistency in this respect, as well as of idolatry; it much more
concerns their own infallibility to clear it up, than it concerns us.

Besides; this distinction might serve some pagan idolaters as well as it does
them; all those, who acknowledged one God, as supreme. For him alone they
professedly worshipped with supreme honors, answering to the latria of the
Papists; the others they worshipped as subordinate, with a worship answering to
dulia or hyerdulia. But can we think that the apostle Paul would have been
satisfied with such an apoloy as this? Suppose an Athenian Sophist, for
example, had said to him: Although you see us worship, and offer sacrifices to,
many invisible beings, male and female; so that you consider us as polytheists
and idolaters; you are mistanken, for want of attending to our learned
distinctions. You must know then, that some of us at least, own one supreme and
most perfect being: Him only we intentionally honor with latria; the rest we
worship only with dulia, or hyperdulia, as subordinate to him. Observe well
this distinction, good Master Paul; and you will then see we are no idolaters,
how many demons, demi gods and goddesses soever we worship. Now, one may be
pretty certain, that the holy apostle's spirit would not have been less
'stirred in him', for an apology of this sort, than when he came to Athens, and
'saw the city wholly given to idolatry' Acts XVII. 16.
. Nor is an apology of this kind more satisfactory from the mouth of a modern
Romanist, than it would have been from that of an old Athenian.

One cannot well help remarking here, by the way, the great disingenuity and
assurance of those Romancatholics, who pretend that they pray to the saints
only as friendly intercessors, to pray for them. Were this true, it would not
excuse them; but nothing can be more false. And indeed, they are so much given
to denying notorious facts, and asserting known falsehoods, in their disputes
with Protestants; that a famous ancient hieroglyphic in Diospolis, ought,
methinks, to be inscribed in all their churches; the nearer the pulpit or altar
the better. In that hieroglyphic a young child signified coming into the world;
an old man, going out of it; an hawk, the Deity; an hippopotamus, hatred; and a
crocodile, impudence. All which, being taken together, in the Egyptian manner,
expressed this useful lesson; O ye that come into the world, and that go out of
it, God hates impudence.

Never did any pagan idolaters implore greater blessings of their supreme, or
so great of their inferior deities, or demons, as the Romancatholics implore
directly of their saints, especially of Mary. But it has sometimes been said by
them, that there is a material difference in this respect: That those dead men
and women, whom the heathens worshipped, were ignorant of true religon, and
black with crimes in their lifetime; whereas those that are worshipped in the
church of Rome, were very holy persons, adorned with many shining virtues, the
workers of miracles, the special favorites of heaven; and the like. Be it so:
But the question is not, who were the best, the most worthy of imitation, and
an honorable remembrance; but whether any demons, or dead men, were they ever
so holy, can be thus worshipped without idolatry? True, it is more foolish and
wicked to adore an ill man thus after his decease, than a wise and good one:
But yet the latter is as truly idolatry as the other. If the Pagans were
idolaters in worshipping their deceased kings and heroes, it was neither only
nor chiefly, because they were wicked; but because they were demons, or dead
men; creatures that ought not to be thus worshipped, although they had been
virtuous and good. And since the Romanists pay the like, if not greater honors,
to dead men and women, or demons; this must, for the same reason, be idolatry
in them also.

But it may be remembered, that some of those men, whom the Pagans deified, had
really been great benefactors to their respective countries and ages; teachers
of agriculture, and other useful arts; the destroyers of tyrants, and other
wild beasts and monsters; the founders of cities and empires; wise legislators;
upright judges, and good kings, the fathers of their people. In which respects
they had at least as good a title to great honors, both living, and after their
decease, as some of the popish saints; I think a much better. For diverse of
those, who adorn the Roman calendar, were but ignorant enthusiasts, scarce
better than madmen; persons who never did any thing worthy of applause. Was
Symeon Stilites worthy of signal honors for having his station thirty years on
a high pillar, like a statue on its pedestal? or the more like a god? Was
Anthony, for peaching to birds, beasts and fishes? Was Francis, for hearing
Christ's voice, as they say, come from a crucifix This circumstance is
mentioned by bp. Stillingfleet, as from cardinal Bonaventure.
; and being so transported with pious zeal or something else, as to throw away
his breeches? Were others, for wearing out much hair-cloth and whip-cord on
their backs, and no shoes on their feet, for many years? or for those numerous
ridiculous feats, which knaves reported, and fools believed, as miracles? But
other popish saints had, if possible, even less sanctity than these; being
rebels, traitors and assassines; the pests of society, and disturbers of
kingdoms. Were not Osiris, Hercules and AEsculapius, Vulcan, Rhadamanthus and
Romulus, at least as worthy to be enrolled among the gods, as Ignatius Loyola,
Garnet and Thomas a Becket, among the saints? It is more absurd to worship such
contemptible and wicked persons as some of the popish saints were, than some of
those, whom the Pagans deified; or even than to worship the stars and elements,
which are so useful to us. And I would gladly know, says one, why I may not as
well honor God by giving worship to the sun, as to Ignatius Loyola, or St.
Francis, or any other late canonized saint? -- The sun is a certain monument of
God's goodness, wisdom and power, and I cannot be mistaken therein; but I can
never be certain of the holiness of those persons I am to give divine worship
to. For all that I can know, Ignatius Loyola was a great hypocrite; but I am
sure that the sun is none; but that he shines, and communicates perpetual
influences, to the huge advantage of the world. Dr. Stillingfleet.


But to have done with saint-worship; the doctrine and precepts of scripture
are clearly against this practice of the Romanists. And what scripture example
there is of it, which they may think worthy their imitation, I know not;
except, perhaps, it be that of the wicked rich man in hell, who earnestly
prayed Saint Abraham, but in vain, to send Lazarus to cool his tongue with a
drop of water. But, methinks, it is time enough for men to follow this example,
when they come into that place of torment themselves, and despair of God's
hearing their prayers. A dreadful extremity! to which we pray our adversaries
may never be reduced: And if there is any such place as the purgatory they talk
of, we should be rejoiced, if there were any good reason to hope they might
escape even that also -- For, by their own account, it is a very tedious,
round-about and painful way to heaven.

THERE is time to add but little concerning the worship of pictures and images.
This was probably introduced into the church in the fourth century, in common
with other bad customs; and spread fast, though not without opposition. In the
eighth century the indignation of many was so raised against it, that they
destroyed all the images in churches, wherever they could; and were therefore
called the Iconoclasts. They chiefly occasioned the calling of the second
council of Nice, anno 787; in which they were censured, and the worship of
images confirmed; especially as that council expresses it, the image of the
Lord and God, our Savior Jesus Christ; nextly that of our immaculate lady the
mother of God, of the venerable angels, and then those of all the saints. The
council, however palliates this idolatry by saying, they did not mean to give
images the worship of latria, but an honorary adoration, as to a type; which
redounds to the honor of the prototype. 'Imaginis enim honor,' etc. For the
honor of an image terminates on the prototype; and he that adores an image,
also adores therein what is represented by it. Vid. Con. Nicaen. II. Act. 7.
This council also speaks of the great benefit of pictures and images, in
edifying the people, especially the vulgar, who could not read. The author here
subjoins a translation of a passage or two, by which the sense of
Romancatholics as to the worship of crucifixes, and other images of Christ, may
further appear; as also, what is meant by coadoration, a term used, but not
explained, in this discourse. 'Nec inde sequitur, hoc posito, imagines', etc.
Nor does it follow, this being supposed, that images are to be retained only to
help the memory, as modern heretics would have it: for memory is purely
historical, and memory exciteth to render worship to God and the saints; but
according to this notion images would be kept for that latter remembrance [
only.] Nevertheless the other opinion is more probable, and more agreeable to
the synod, that images should be honored even in themselves, and should be the
material terminative object of veneration, and not only the exemplar,
apprehended in them, or at the presence of them; because when the council says,
that images are to be adored, but not with latria, it intends that another
thing should be adored besides the exemplar only; for since Christ should be
adored with true latria, the synod would not deny the worship of latria to his
image, if indeed in the adoration of it, not his image, but Christ himself were
adored, to whom no other adoration besides that of latria, belongs. So that
it intimates hereby, that some adoration belongs to images, distinct from the
veneration and honor of the prototype, and which, in the kind of worship, is
inferior. -- An image is honored two ways. First, as it is itself the material
terminative object of worship, but the prototype the cause for which it is
worshipped. Secondly, so that the image is honored together with the prototype;
yet so that the prototype should be primarily honored, the image secondarily,
as the royal robes are honored together with the king; and that is called
coadoration rather than adoration. Thus I apprehend in my mind him that was
crucified, together with the cross [ perhaps not always] and in adoring the
Crucified with a direct intention, the cross itself is coadored in the same
act. Suma council. omn. Opera and studio M. L. Bail. Abbavil. Doct. Theol. ac
Propaeniten. Paris. In conc. Nicaen II.
The council of Trent refers to, and confirms the decrees of this; adding some
farther explanations and cautions, relative to this point; particularly the
following: Non 'propterea Divinitatem figurari', etc. Vid. Conc. Trident, sess.
XXV.
That the Divinity is not therefore figured, as though it could be seen with
bodily eyes, or expressed by colors or figures [a good reason why it should not
be at all attempted.] Moreover, adds the council, let all superstition in the
invocation of saints, in the veneration of relics, and in the sacred use of
images, be taken away.

Here is a plain concession, that they figure the Divinity, even while they
acknowledge it cannot be seen, or expressed by figures or colors: Which might,
perhaps, pass for a contradiction in any church, but an infallible one. But not
to stand on such niceties with them; to make and worship any picture or image
of Christ, considered as God, which is what they chiefly intend here, is
idolatry; and directly contrary to the second commandment, whether it be
latria, or dulia only, that is paid thereto. And the distinctions, of which the
Papists serve themselves, would serve as well to justify the Israelites of old,
provided they worshipped golden calves only as symbols or types of Jehovah;
intending this honor should terminate on him, as the prototype. Upon the same
principle, those Pagans who worshipped images, not for their own sake, but as
supposed representations of the invisible God, could not be charged with
idolatry, how often soever they might kiss, prostrate themselves before, and
offer incense and sacrifices to them. Some pagan worshippers of idols and
images could, probably, have made such a plea as truly, and with a much better
grace, than those of the Romancatholics who have the holy scriptures; in which
all image worship is plainly forbidden. And, indeed, the leaders in the church
of Rome have shown a consciousness, that scripture was against them in this
respect, by leaving the second commandment wholly out of those which are
designed for common use, and dividing the last of the ten into two, to complete
the number.

As to other pictures and images; if it be idolatry to worship saints and
angels, as it is practiced in the church of Rome; it is even more so, to
worship their images. As some have justly observed, they are guilty of double
idolatry in this respect; first, in worshipping saints and angels themselves,
and then in adoring their images, with the like external worship of prayers,
prostrations and incense: for either of these things would be idolatry, without
the other. The same arguments which prove, that the Pagans worshipping the
images of their demons, or inferior deities, was idolatry, will also show the
idolatry of the church of Rome, in worshipping the images of angels and saints,
who are, strictly and properly, their demons. The more intelligent sort of
pagans did not ascribe divinity to their images themselves; nor honor them with
a more profound reverence, internal or external, than Romancatholics pay to
theirs. Nay, some of them were entirely against the use of any images in their
religious services; as tending to give people too gross conceptions of the
Deity. And when the council of Trent so gravely injoins, that all superstition
in the worship of saints and relics, and in the sacred use of images, should
be taken away, still encouraging these practices themselves; it is as
anti-scriptural and irrational as if those fathers had decreed, that men should
commit fornication, but without unchastity; theft and robbery, but without
injustice; murder, without breach of charity; and blasphemy, without impiety.
The sacred use of these vices, is hardly a greater solecism than the other. The
superstition of this kind of worship cannot be taken away, without taking away
that worship itself. Nor is there any better foundation for a distinction
between the use and abuse thereof, than between the use and abuse of lying and
adultery, incest and perjury. Indeed, the leaders in the church of Rome find
all these crimes very useful in their turns, and subservient to their own ends,
when kept under their discrete and skilful management: So that, in their
opinion, laying them wholly aside might, perhaps, be the greatest possible
abuse of them. For what would then become of their dispensations, pardons,
indulgencies, and I know not what; the wicked craft, by which they have their
wealth?

THE patience of this learned and respectable audience shall be requested no
longer, than while I subjoin a few reflections.

If then, the church of Rome be grossly idolatrous in the several respects
aforesaid; highly dishonouring God, and the one Mediator whom he has
appointed, by an undue worship of, and dependence upon, many creatures; it
follows, that she is so far from being the only true church, and chaste spouse
of Christ, that she is a most corrupt one, a filthy prostitute, who has
forsaken her first love, and is become, indeed, the 'mother of harlots.' Some
Papists expressly own, that if the church of Rome is guilty of heresy, much
more, if guilty of idolatry, it falls under the apostle's excommunication, Gal.
I. 8. And if she be not actually guilty of both, it will be difficult at least,
I believe absolutely impossible, to show what church or person ever was, that
named the name of Christ. If soundness of doctrine and purity of worship are
essential marks of a true church, as they allow; we must look for them, not in
that of Rome, but elsewhere; unless we proceed upon the quaint maxim of one
who said, that whoever would find what he is in search of, must look for it
where it is not, as well as where it is. And if these marks are wanting,
another, which they likewise boast of, must also fail them; viz. holiness: At
least, it is not easy to see how that can be an holy church, however catholic
it may be, in which such abominable idolatry is publicly authorized, and
universally practiced.

It further appears from hence, what great danger there is of perdition in the
communion of this church; every true son and daughter of which is, and must be,
an idolater. The wrath of God has not been revealed from heaven more
frequently, or in more awful terms, against any one class of sinners, than
against idolaters. And one of the most distinguishing characters of the great
apostasy from the faith, foretold, is idolatry, will worship, a voluntary,
affected humility, and worshipping of angels and demons. 'The Spirit spoke
expressly, that in the latter times some should apostatize from the faith,
giving heed to erroneous spirits, and doctrines concerning demons, through the
hypocrisy of liars, having feared consciences; forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God,' etc. 1 Timothy IV. 1, 2, 3. The
author has followed the learned and excellent Mr. Jos. Mede's translation of
this passage, which is unquestionably the most grammatical and proper.
It is so much easier to find all these characters in a certain church now in
the world, than the marks of a true one; that there is hardly any room to doubt
about the right application of them.

The ancient Babylon was famous for idolatry; of which it seems to have been
the first seat after the flood; perhaps was the principal, for a considerable
time before either Egypt or Phoenicia obtained the infamous pre-eminence. If
so, this suggests one intelligible reason, why the apostate, idolatrous party
in the christian world should be designed by the spirit of prophecy, under the
title of Babylon: And even the Romancatholics generally own, that Rome is the
Babylon of the new testament; only they say, it is Rome pagan, not christian.
Which, though said without any good reason, and even contrary to strong evidence,
was yet necessary for them to say; unless they would farther own, that the most
dreadful curses in the whole bible are pointed directly against themselves; for
these are pointed against Babylon. Nor is it wholly unworthy of remark, that
the modern Babylon also nearly resembles the ancient in respect of the
particular kind of death, which she inflicts on those, who renounce her
idolatrous worship. In the ancient, they who would not fall down and worship
idols, were cast into a furnace of fire: In the modern, burning to death is the
ordinary punishment for such dissenters and schismatics; and in her is found
the blood of prophets and of saints. The former was a most inhuman enemy and
persecutor of God's people: But yet, where she slew her thousands, the latter
has slain her ten thousands. So much does the pretended only true and unerring
church exceed the ancient Babylon in execrable cruelty, persecution and tyranny!

Although there had been no other weighty objection against the church of Rome,
besides her idolatry, this alone would sufficiently justify those who have
renounced her communion: For what agreement has the temple of God with idols?
or his worship, with that of bread, demons and images? But so enormously
antichristian is this church in many other respects, that we might almost
reckon idolatry itself among her lesser errors and abominations! In one view of
it, indeed, or merely as it affects civil society, it is far from being the
greatest. No person, surely, can ever want good authority to leave the
communion of such a church. A warrant for it may be found in almost every page
of the bible; particularly Revel. xviii. Where, after a description of Babylon
as 'fallen,' or apostatized; as become the habitation of demons [(...)] and a
cage of every unclean and hateful bird, etc. it follows, And I heard a voice
from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: For her sins have reached
unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. This is sufficient warrant
to come out of a church, whether Rome or any other, to which the characters of
Babylon actually agree. And how much soever the church of Rome may curse those
of the Reformation, or imprecate upon them the vengeance of Peter, Paul, the
Queen of heaven, and the other saints; we may be pretty sure, that they have
neither power nor inclination to harm us on this account; that they will
neither destroy us themselves, nor pray God to do it. They who invocate them to
this end, in solemn form, and support and propagate what they mis-call
religion, by persecution, fire and sword; have far more reason to fear the
imprecations of those saints that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held; whom John saw under the altar, while they cried with
a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Rev. VI.
-- O Babylon, if thou fear not the imprecations of those saints, who have
been slain in and by thee, for the testimony which they held against thy
idolatry, and other abominations; at least fear him, whom all saints and angels
adore. Thou have made kings and nations drunk with the wine of thy fornication;
and thyself with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. And though thou glorifiest
thyself, and live deliciously by fraud, oppression and blood, saying, I sit a
queen, and shall see no sorrow; yet know, that thy day is coming: For strong is
the Lord God who judges thee! Rev. XVIII.


Detestable as the idolatry of the church of Rome is, there are other of her
principles and practices, as has been intimated, which more immediately affect
the peace and order of civil society, the honor of princes, and the liberty and
common rights of mankind. Our controversy with her is not merely a religious
one: It is not, on our part, only a defense of the worship of one God by one
Mediator, in opposition to that of a thousand demons or idols; of the authority
of the sacred oracles, in opposition to that of idle legends and traditions;
and of sober reason in opposition to the grossest fanaticism: But a defense of
our laws, liberties, and civil rights as men, in opposition to the proud claims
and encroachments of ecclesiastical persons, who under the pretext of religion,
and saving men's souls, would engross all power and property to themselves, and
reduce us to the most abject slavery: It is a defense, if I may so express it,
of the common rights of seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting; all which
popery attacks and undermines, by the doctrihe of transubstantiation; and would
take them from us, as a means of making us dutiful sons, or rather wretched
slaves of the church. We must not see, taste or smell, but as the church is
pleased to give us leave. If she shows us a morsel of bread, or a drop or two
of wine, after the priest has played a few tricks with it; we must believe it
is no longer bread or wine, but God. And whatever else she declares, we must
implicitly receive it on her authority, on pain of being burnt in this world,
and damned in the next! So important is this controversy, as the honorable
founder of this lecture well knew; having himself written and published a
learned dissertation relative thereto. On 'slaves, and souls of men, Rev.
XVIII. 13.
Although we had no regard for true religion, yet we ought in reason and prudence
to detest the church of Rome, in the same degree: that we prize our freedom.
Her laws, more arbitrary than those of Draco, are, in effect, like his, all
written in blood. Popery and liberty are incompatible; at irreconcilable
enmity with each other. May gracious Heaven ever preserve us from the one, and
bless us with the other: At least, if we are ever to be so unhappy as to lose
our liberty, God grant the loss may not be aggravated, by having it taken from
us either by lordly, tyrannical priests, or by those of the laity, from whom we
have the best reason to expect the defense and security of it.

Popery is now making great strides in England; as great, perhaps, as it did in
the reign either of Charles or James the second: I pray God, things may not at
length be brought to as bad a pass! Thousands of weak and wicked Protestants
are annually perverted to an impious, horrid system of tyranny over the bodies
and souls of men; which less deserves the name of religion, than that of an
outrage on the senses, and most valuable rights of men, and a satire upon God.
If we may believe those who pretend to know, and probably do, popish priests,
jesuits, and other emissaries, are very open and bold in our mother country of
late years, meeting with no vigorous opposition: And even popish bishops reside
there, and go about to exercise every part of their function, without offense.
It seems, there is far less good old protestant zeal than were to be wished and
expected: Many, who call themselves protestants, look upon popery as an
harmless, indifferent thing, notwithstanding its inherent, restless, intolerant
malignity, and most destructive tendency. Heaven only knows what the end of
these things will be; the prospect is alarming!

The agents of Rome, ever restless and scheming, compass sea and land to make
proselytes; going about continually from country to country, seeking whom they
may devour: And, probably, there is no protestant country, in which there are
not some of them, at least lurking, if they dare not discover themselves. We
should not be ignorant of their devices; nor ever off our guard against them.
May this seminary of learning, may the people, ministers and churches of
New England, ever be preserved from popish, and all other pernicious errors.
Our Savior, on a memorable occasion, said to the tempter, It is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. If our popish
tempters are not confounded and silenced with the like answer, it seems as if
they had even less modesty than he, who once said, as the church of Rome now,
in effect, faith; If thou will fall down and worship ME, all shall be thine.

To conclude: They who would keep themselves pure from ever species of
idolatry, must not only abstain from the worship of idols in the common gross
sense, as practiced by Pagans and Papists; but also from an inordinate love of
this world, its pleasures and enjoyments; and love God supremely. The apostle
styles a covetous man 'an idolater': Ephesians. V. 5. and Col. III. 5.
For there are many that make gold their hope, and say unto the fine gold,
'Thou art my confidence,' even before it is formed into an image by art, and
man's device. By the same rule, all other wicked men are in some sense
idolaters. Whatever usurps that place, that pre-eminence in the affections of
men, which is due to God alone; that is their idol, that is their God. How many
idolaters are there then, even among protestants? They only, who love God above
all things, worship him in spirit and in truth, whatever church they live in
commuion with. May such worshippers, whom the Father seeks, be increased in
every church, to his glory; even till 'THE MAN OF SIN,' whose coming is after
the working of satan, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish, shall finally be consumed by the breath of the Lord, and destroyed with
the brightness of his coming! 2 Thessalonians. II.


PAGE 30, line 12 from the top, read, those things

Advertisement.
AFTER repeated inquiry, the author could never obtain a sight either of the
whole Rosarie of the Virgin Mary, or of the whole Mary-Psalter. Those parts of
them, which are produced in the foregoing discourse, were selected from among
others of the same tenor, and translated by him from the Latin, as he found it
cited by authors of reputation; particularly Doctor Henry More. For other
citations he is wholly accountable himself. -- Many other prayers to the
saints, even in the early ages of the church, may be seen in Sir I. Newton's
Observations on Daniel, etc. Part I. chapter 14. And among them a pretty remarkable
prayer of Gregory Nazianzen to St. Athanasius; the latter of whom, as Sir Isaac
observes, even from his youth, looked upon the dead saints as mediators of our
prayers, etc.


