THE RIGHTS OF COLONIES EXAMINED.

-- FOR THE CHILDREN OUGHT NOT TO LAY UP FOR THE PARENTS, BUT THE PARENTS FOR
THE CHILDREN. ST. PAUL. PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY WILLIAM GODDARD. M.DCC.LXV.

THE RIGHTS OF COLONIES EXAMINED.
Mid the low murmurs of submissive fear
And mingled rage, my Hambden raised his voice,
And to the laws appealed; --
THOMPSON'S Liberty. LIBERTY is the greatest blessing that men enjoy, and
slavery the heaviest curse that human nature is capable of. -- This being so,
makes it a matter of the utmost importance to men, which of the two shall be
their portion. Absolute Liberty is, perhaps, incompatible with any kind of
government. -- The safety resulting from society, and the advantage of just and
equal laws, has caused men to forego some part of their natural liberty, and
submit to government. This appears to be the most rational account of it is
beginning; although, it must be confessed, mankind have by no means been agreed
about it: Some have found it is origin in the divine appointment: Others have
thought it took it is rise from power: Enthusiasts have dreamed that dominion
was founded in grace. Leaving these points to be settled by the descendants of
Filmer, Cromwell, and Venner, we will consider the British constitution, as it
at present stands, on revolution principles; and from thence endeavor to find
the measure of the magistrate's power, and the people's obedience.

THIS glorious constitution, the best that ever existed among men, will be
confessed by all, to be founded by compact, and established by consent of the
people. By this most beneficent compact, British subjects are to be governed
only agreeable to laws to which themselves have some way consented, and are not
to be compelled to part with their property, but as it is called for by the
authority of such laws: The former is truly liberty; the latter is really to be
possessed of property, and to have something that may be called one's own.

ON the contrary, those who are governed at the will of another, or of others,
and whose property may be taken from them by taxes, or otherwise, without their
own consent, and against their will, are in the miserable condition of slaves:
For liberty solely consists in an independancy upon the will of another; and by
the name of slave, we understand a man who can neither dispose of his person or
goods, but enjoys all at the will of his master; says Sidney on government.
These things premised; whether the British American colonies on the continent,
are justly entitled to like privileges and freedom as their fellow subjects in
Great Britain are, shall be the chief point examined. In discussing this
question, we shall make the colonies in New England, with whose rights we are
best acquainted, the rule of our reasoning; not in the least doubting but all
the others are justly entitled to like rights with them.

NEW ENGLAND was first planted by adventurers, who left England, their native
country, by permission of King CHARLES the first; and, at their own expense,
transported themselves to America, with great risque and difficulty settled
among savages, and in a very surprising manner, formed new colonies in the
wilderness. Before their departure, the terms of their freedom, and the
relation they should stand in to the mother country, in their emigrant state,
were fully settled; they were to remain subject to the King, and dependant on
the kingdom of Great Britain. In return, they were to receive protection, and
enjoy all the rights and privileges of freeborn Englishmen.

THIS is abundantly proved by the charter given to the Massachusetts colony,
while they were still in England, and which they received and brought over with
them, as the authentic evidence of the conditions they removed upon. The
colonies of Connecticut and Rhode Island also, afterward obtained charters
from the crown, granting them the like ample privileges. By all these charters,
it is in the most express and solemn manner granted, that these adventurers,
and their children after them forever, should have and enjoy all the freedom
and liberty that the subjects in England enjoy: That they might make laws for
their own government, suitable to their circumstances; not repugnant to, but as
near as might be, agreeable to the laws of England: That they might purchase
lands, acquire goods, and use trade for their advantage, and have an absolute
property in whatever they justly acquired. These with many other gracious
privileges, were granted them by several kings; and they were to pay as an
acknowledgement to the crown, only one fifth part of the ore of gold and
silver, that should at any time be found in the said colonies, in lieu of, and
full satisfaction for, all dues and demands of the crown and kingdom of England
upon them.

THERE is not any thing new or extraordinary in these rights granted to the
British colonies: -- The colonies from all countries, at all times, have
enjoyed equal freedom with the mother state. Indeed, there would be found very
few people in the world, willing to leave their native country, and go through
the fatigue and hardship of planting in a new uncultivated one, for the sake of
losing their freedom. They who settle new countries must be poor; and, in
course, ought to be free. Advantages, pecuniary or agreeable, are not on the
side of emigrants and surely they must have something in their stead.

To illustrate this, permit us to examine what has generally been the
condition of colonies with respect to their freedom; we will begin with those
who went out from the ancient commonwealths of Greece, which are the first,
perhaps, we have any good account of. Thucidides, that grave and judicious
historian, says of one of them, they were not sent out to be slaves, but to be
the equals of those who remain behind; and again, the Corinthiens gave public
notice, that a new colony was going to Epidamnus, into which all that would
enter, should have equal and like privileges with those who staid at home. This
was uniformly the condition of all the Grecian colonies; they went out and
settled new countries; they took such forms of government as themselves chose,
though it generally nearly resembled that of the mother state, whether
democratical or oligarchical. It Is true, they were fond to acknowledge their
original, and always confessed themselves under obligation to pay a kind of
honorary respect to, and show a filial dependence on, the commonwealth from
whence they sprung. Thucidides again tells us, that the Corinthians complained
of the Coreyreans, from whom, though a colony of their own, they had received
some contemptuous treatment: for they neither paid them the usual honor on
their public solemnities, nor began with a Corinthian in the distribution of
the sacrifices, which is always done by other colonies. From hence it is plain
what kind of dependence the Greek colonies were under, and what sort of
acknowledgment they owed to the mother state.

IF we pass from the Grecian to the Roman colonies, we shall find them not less
free: But this difference may be observed between them, that the Roman colonies
did not, like the Grecian, become separate states, governed by different laws,
but always remained a part of the mother state; and all that were free of the
colonies, were also free of Rome, and had right to an equal suffrage in making
all laws, and appointing all officers for the government of the whole
commonwealth. For the truth of this, we have the testimony of St. Paul, who
though born at Tarsus, yet assures us he was born free of Rome. And Grotius
gives us the opinion of a Roman king, concerning the freedom of colonies: King
Tullius says. for our part, we look upon it to be neither truth nor justice,
that mother cities ought of necessity and by the law of nature, to rule over
their colonies.

WHEN we come down to the latter ages of the world, and consider the colonies
planted in the three last centuries, in America, from several kingdoms in
Europe, we shall find them, says Pussendorf, very different from the ancient
colonies, and gives us an instance in those of the Spaniards. Although it be
confessed these fall greatly short of enjoying equal freedom with the ancient
Greek and Roman ones; yet it will be said truly, they enjoy equal freedom with
their countrymen in Spain: but as they are all under the government of an
absolute monarch, they have no reason to complain that one enjoys the liberty
the other is deprived of. The French colonies will be found nearly in the same
condition, and for the same reason, because their fellow subjects in France
have also lost their liberty. And the question here is not whether all
colonies, as compared one with another, enjoy equal liberty, but whether all
enjoy as much freedom as the inhabitants of the mother state; and this will
hardly be denied in the case of the Spanish, French, or other modern foreign
colonies.

By this it fully appears, that colonies in general, both ancient and modern
have always enjoyed as much freedom as the mother state from which they went
out: And will any one suppose the British colonies in America, are an exception
to this general rule? Colonies that came out from a kingdom renowned for
liberty; from a constitution founded on compact; from a people, of all the sons
of men, the most tenacious of freedom; who left the delights of their native
country, parted from their homes, and all their conveniences, searched out and
subdued a foreign country with the most amazing travail and fortitude, to the
infinite advantage and emolument of the mother state; that removed on a firm
reliance of a solemn compact, and royal promise and grant, that they, and their
successors forever, should be free; should be partakers and sharers in all the
privileges and advantages of the then English, now British constitution.

IF it were possible a doubt could yet remain, in the most unbelieving mind,
that these British colonies are not every way justly and fully entitled to
equal liberty and freedom with their fellow subjects in Europe, we might show,
that the parliament of Great Britain, have always understood their rights in
the same light.

BY an act passed in the thirteenth year of the reign of his late majesty King
GEORGE the second, entitled an act for naturalizing foreign protestants, and
c. and by another act, passed in the twentieth year of the same reign, for
nearly the same purposes, by both which it is enacted and ordained, that all
foreign protestants, who had inhabited, and resided for the space of seven
years, or more, in any of his majesty's colonies in America, might, on the
conditions therein-mentioned, be naturalized, and thereupon should be deemed,
adjudged and taken to be his majesty's natural born subjects of the kingdom of
Great Britain, to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as if they, and
every one of them, had been, or were born within the same. No reasonable man
will here suppose the parliament intended by these acts to put foreigners, who
had been in the colonies only seven years, in a better condition than those who
had been born in them, or had removed from Britain thither, but only to put
these foreigners on an equality with them; and to do this, they are obliged to
give them all the rights of natural born subjects of Great Britain.

FROM what has been shown, it will appear beyond a doubt, that the British
subjects in America, have equal rights with those in Britain; that they do not
hold those rights as a privilege granted them, nor enjoy them as a grace and
favor bestowed; but possess them as an inherent indefeasible right; as they,
and their ancestors, were freeborn subjects, justly and naturally entitled to
all the rights and advantages of the British constitution.

AND the British legislative and executive powers have considered the colonies
as possessed of these rights, and have always heretofore, in the most tender
and parental manner, treated them as their dependant, though free, condition
required. The protection promised on the part of the crown, with cheerfulness
and great gratitude we acknowledge, has at all times been given to the
colonies. The dependence of the colonies to Great Britain has been fully
testified by a constant and ready obedience to all the commands of his present
Majesty, and his royal predecessors; both men and money having been raised in
them at all times when called for, with as much alacrity and in as large
proportions as has been done in Great Britain, the ability of each considered.
It must also be confessed with thankfulness, that the first adventurers and
their successors, for one hundred and thirty years, have fully enjoyed all the
freedoms and immunities promised on their first removal from England. -- But
here the scene seems to be unhappily changing: -- The British ministry, whether
induced by a jealousy of the colonies, by false informations, or by some
alteration in the system of political government, we have no information;
whatever has been the motive, this we are sure of, the parliament in their
last session, passed an act, limitting, restricting, and burdening the trade of
these colonies, much more than had ever been done before; as also for greatly
enlarging the power and jurisdiction of the courts of admiralty in the
colonies; and also came to a resolution, that it might be necessary to
establish stamp duties, and other internal taxes, to be collected within them.
This act and this resolution have caused great uneasiness and consternation
among the British subjects on the continent of America: how much reason there
is for it, we will endeavor, in the most modest and plain manner we can, to
lay before our readers.

IN the first place, let it be considered, that although each of the colonies
has a legislature within itself, to take care of it is interests, and provide
for it is peace and internal government, yet there are many things of a more
general nature, quite out of the reach of these particular legislatures, which
it is necessary should be regulated, ordered and governed. One of this kind is,
the commerce of the whole British empire, taken collectively, and that of each
kingdom and colony in it, as it makes a part of the whole: Indeed, every thing
that concerns the proper interest and fit government of the whole
commonwealth, of keeping the peace, and subordination of all the parts toward
the whole, and one among another, must be considered in this light: Amongst
these general concerns, perhaps, money and paper credit, those grand
instruments of all commerce, will be found also to have a place. These, with
all other matters of a general nature, it is absolutely necessary should have a
general power to direct them; some supreme and overruling authority, with
power to make laws, and form regulations for the good of all, and to compel
their execution and observation. It being necessary some such general power
should exist somewhere, every man of the least knowledge of the British
constitution, will be naturally led to look for, and find it in the parliament
of Great Britain; that grand and august legislative body, must from the nature
of their authority, and the necessity of the thing, be justly vested with this
power, Hence, it becomes the indespensable duty of every good and loyal
subject, cheerfully to obey and patiently submit to all the acts, laws, orders
and regulations that may be made and passed by parliament, for directing and
governing all these general matters.

HERE it may be urged by many, and indeed, with great appearance of reason,
that the equity, justice, and beneficence of the British constitution, will
require, that the separate kingdoms and distant colonies, who are to obey and
be governed by these general laws and regulations, ought to be represented,
some way or other, in parliament; at least whilst these general matters are
under consideration. Whether the colonies will ever be admitted to have
representatives in parliament, -- whether it be consistent with their distant
and dependant state, -- and whether if it were admitted, it would be to their
advantage, -- are questions we will pass by; and observe, that these colonies
ought in justice, and for the very evident good of the whole commonwealth, to
have notice of every new measure about to be pursued, and new act that is about
to be passed, by which their rights, liberties, or interests will be affected:
They ought to have such notice, that they may appear and be heard by their
agents, by council, or written representation, or by some other equitable and
effectual way.

THE colonies are at so great a distance from England, that the members of
parliament can, generally, have but little knowledge of their business,
connections and interest, but what is gained from people who have been there;
the most of these, have so slight a knowledge themselves, that the informations
they can give, are very little to be depended on, though they may pretend to
determine with confidence, on matters far above their reach. All such kind of
informations are too uncertain to be depended on, in the transacting business
of so much consequence, and in which the interests of two millions of free
people are so deeply concerned. There is no kind of inconveniency, or mischief,
can arise from the colonies having such notice, and being heard in the manner
abovementioned: But, on the contrary, very great mischiefs have already
happened to the colonies, and always must be expected, if they are not heard,
before things of such importance are determined concerning them.

HAD the colonies been fully heard, before the late act had been passed, no
reasonable man can suppose it ever would have passed at all, in the manner it
now stands; for what good reason can possibly be given for making a law to
cramp the trade and ruin the interests of many of the colonies, and at the same
time, lessen in a prodigious manner the consumption of the British manufactures
in them? These are certainly the effects this act must produce; a duty of three
pence per gallon on foreign melasses, is well known to every man in the least
acquainted with it, to be much higher than that article can possibly bear; and
therefore must operate as an absolute prohibition. This will put a total stop
to our exportation of lumber, horses, flour, and fish, to the French and Dutch
sugar colonies; and if any one supposes we may find a sufficient vent for these
articles in the English islands in the West Indies, he only verifies what was
just now observed, that he wants truer information. Putting an end to the
importation of foreign melasses, at the same time puts an end to all the costly
distilleries in these colonies, and to the rum trade to the coast of Africa,
and throws it into the hands of the French. With the loss of the foreign
melasses trade, the codfishery of the English, in America, must also be lost,
and thrown also into the hands of the French. That this is the real state of
the whole business, is not fancy; this, nor any part of it, is not
exaggeration, but a fober and most melancholy truth.

VIEW this duty of three pence per gallon, on foreign melasses, not in the
light of a prohibition, but supposing the trade to continue, and the duty to be
paid. Heretofore there has been imported into the colony of Rhode Island only,
about one million one hundred and fifty thousand gallons, annually; the duty on
this quantity is fourteen thousand three hundred and seventy-five pounds,
sterling, to be paid yearly by this little colony; a larger sum than was ever
in it at any one time: This money is to be sent away, and never to return; yet
the payment is to be repeated every year. -- Can this possibly be done? Can a
new colony, compelled by necessity to purchase all it is clothing, furniture,
and utensils from England, to support the expenses of it is own internal
government, obliged by it is duty to comply with every call from the crown to
raise money on emergencies; after all this, can every man in it pay twenty-four
shillings sterling a year, for the duties of a single article only? There is
surely no man in his right mind believes this possible. The charging foreign
melasses with this high duty, will not affect all the colonies equally, nor any
other near so much as this of Rhode Island, whose trade depended much more on
foreign melasses, and on distilleries, than that of any others; this must show
that raising money for the general service of the crown, or of the colonies, by
such a duty, will be extremely unequal, and therefore unjust. And now taking
either alternative; by supposing on one hand, the foreign melasses trade is
stopped, and with it the opportunity or ability of the colonies to get money,
or on the other, that this trade is continued, and that the colonies get money
by it, but all their money is taken from them by paying the duty; can Britain
be gainer by either? Is it not the chiefest interest of Britain, to dispose of
and to be paid for her own manufactures? And does she not find the greatest and
best market for them in her own colonies? Will she find an advantage in
disabling the colonies to continue their trade with her? Or can she possibly
grow rich by their being made poor?

MINISTERS have great influence, and parliaments have great power; -- can
either of them change the nature of things, stop all our means of getting
money, and yet expect us to purchase and pay for British manufactures? The
genius of the people in these colonies, is as little turned to manufacturing
goods for their own use, as is possible to suppose in any people whatsoever;
yet necessity will compel them, either to go naked in this cold country, or to
make themselves some sort of clothing, if it be only of the skins of beasts.

BY the same act of parliament, the exportation of all kinds of timber, or
lumber, the most natural produce of these new colonies, is greatly incumbered
and uselessly embarrassed, and the shipping it to any part of Europe, except
Great Britain, prohibited: This must greatly affect the linen manufactory in
Ireland, as that kingdom used to receive great quantities of flax-seed from
America, many cargoes, being made of that and of barrel staves, were sent
thither every year; but, as the staves can no longer be exported thither, the
ships carrying only flax-seed casks, without the staves, which used to be
intermixed among them, must lose one half of their freight, which will prevent
their continuing this trade, to the great injury of Ireland, and of the
plantations: And what advantage is to accrue to Great Britain by it, must be
told by those who can perceive the utility of this measure.

ENLARGING the power and jurisdiction of the courts of vice-admiralty in the
colonies, is another part of the same act, greatly and justly complained of.
Courts of admiralty have long been established in most of the colonies, whose
authority were circumscribed within moderate territorial jurisdictions; and
these courts have always done the business, necessary to be brought before such
courts for trial, in the manner it ought to be done, and in a way only
moderately expensive to the subjects; and if seizures were made, or
informations exhibited, without reason, or (...) to law, the informer, or
seizor, was left to the justice on the common law, there to pay for his folly,
or suffer for his temerity. But now this course is quite altered, and a
customhouse officer may make a seizure in Georgia, of goods ever so legally
imported, and carry the trial to Halifax, at fifteen hundred miles distance;
and thither the owner must follow him to defend his property; and when he comes
there, quite beyond the circle of his friends, acquaintance, and
correspondents, among total strangers, he must there give bond, and must find
sureties to be bound with him in a large sum, before he shall be admitted to
claim his own goods; when this is complied with, he has a trial, and his goods
acquitted. If the judge can be prevailed on, (which it is very well known may
too easily be done) to certify, there was only probable cause for making the
seizure, the unhappy owner shall not maintain any action against the illegal
seizor, for damages, or obtain any other satisfaction; but he may return to
Georgia quite ruined, and undone in conformity to an act of parliament. Such
unbounded encouragement and protection given to informers, must call to every
one's remembrance Tacitus's account of the miserable condition of the Romans,
in the reign of Tiberius their emperor, who let loose and encouraged the
informers of that age. Surely if the colonies had been fully heard, before this
had been done, the liberties and properties of the Americans would not have
been so much disregarded.

THE resolution of the house of commons, come into during the same session of
parliament, asserting their rights to establish stamp duties, and internal
taxes, to be collected in the colonies without their own consent, has much
more, and for much more reason, alarmed the British subjects in America, than
any thing that had ever been done before. These re solutions, carried into
execution, the colonies cannot help but consider as a manifest violation of
their just and long enjoyed rights. For it must be confessed by all men, that
they who are taxed at pleasure by others, cannot possibly have any property,
can have nothing to be called their own; they who have no property, can have no
freedom, but are indeed reduced to the most abject slavery; are in a condition
far worse than countries conquered and made tributary; for these have only a
fixed sum to pay, which they are left to raise among themselves, in the way
that they may think most equal and easy; and having paid the stipulated sum,
the debt is discharged, and what is left is their own. This is much more
tolerable than to be taxed at the mere will of others, without any bounds,
without any stipulation and agreement, contrary to their consent, and against
their will. If we are told that those who lay these taxes upon the colonies,
are men of the highest character for their wisdom, justice, and integrity, and
therefore cannot be supposed to deal hardly, unjustly, or unequally by any;
admitting, and really believing that all this is true, it will make no
alteration in the nature of the case; for one who is bound to obey the will of
another, is as really a slave, though he may have a good master, as if he had a
bad one; and this is stronger in politic bodies than in natural ones, as the
former have perpetual succession, and remain the same; and although they may
have a very good master at one time, they may have a very bad one at another.
And indeed, if the people in America, are to be taxed by the representatives of
the people in Britain, their malady is an increasing evil, that must always
grow greater by time. Whatever burdens are laid upon the Americans, will be so
much taken off the Britons; and the doing this will soon be extremely popular,
and those who put up to be members of the house of commons, must obtain the
votes of the people by promising to take more and more of the taxes off them,
by putting it on the Americans. This must most assuredly be the case, and is
will not be in the power even of the parliament to prevent it; the people's
private interest will be concerned, and will govern them; they will have such,
and only such representatives as will act agreeable to this their interest; and
these taxes laid on Americans, will be always a part of the supply bill, in
which the other branches of the legislature can make no alteration: and in
truth, the subjects in the colonies will be taxed at the will and pleasure of
their fellow subjects in Britain. -- How equitable, and how just this may be,
must be left to every impartial man to determine.

BUT it will be said, that the moneys drawn from the colonies by duties, and by
taxes, will be laid up and set apart to be used for their future defense: This
will not at all alleviate the hardship, but serves only more strongly to mark
the servile state of the people. Free people have ever thought, and always will
think, that the money necessary for their defense, lies safest in their own
hands, until it be wanted immediately for that pupose. To take the money of the
Americans, which they want continually to use in their trade, and lay it up for
their defense, at a thousand leagues distance from them, when the enemies they
have to fear, are in their own neighborhood, has not the greatest probability
of friendship or of prudence.

IT is not the judgment of free people only, that money for defending them is
safest in their own keeping, but it has also been the opinion of the best and
wisest kings and governors of mankind, in every age of the world, that the
wealth of a state was most securely as well as most profitably deposited in the
hands of their faithful subjects: Constantius, emperor of the Romans, though an
absolute prince, both practiced and praised this method. Dioclesian sent
persons on purpose to reproach him with his neglect of the public, and the
poverty to which he was reduced by his own fault. Constantius heard these
reproaches with patience; and, having persuaded those who made them in
Dioclesian's name, to stay a few days with him, he sent word to the most
wealthy persons in the provinces, that he wanted money, and that they had now
an opportunity of showing whether or no they truly loved their prince. Upon
this notice every one strove who should be foremost in carrying to the
exchequer all their gold, silver, and valuable effects; so that in a short time
Constantius from being the poorest, became by far the most wealthy of all the
four princes. He then invited the deputies of Dioclesian to visit his treasury,
desiring them to make a faithful report to their master of the state in which
they should find it. They obeyed; and, while they stood gazing on the mighty
heaps of gold and silver, Constantius told them, that the wealth which they
beheld with astonishment, had long since belonged to him; but that he had left
it by way of depositum, in the hands of his people: adding, the richest and
surest treasure of the prince was the love of his subjects. The deputies were
no sooner gone, than the generous prince sent for those who had assisted him in
his exigency, commended their zeal, and returned to every one what they had so
readily brought into his treasury.

Universal Hist. vol. XV. page 523.

WE are not insensible, that when liberty is in danger, the liberty of
complaining is dangerous; yet, a man on a wreck was never denied the liberty of
roaring as loud as he could; says Dean Swift. And we believe no good reason can
be given, why the colonies should not modestly and soberly enquire, what right
the parliament of Great Britain have to tax them. We know such enquiries, by a
late letter-writer, have been branded with the little epithet of mushroom
policy; and he insinuates, that for the colonies to pretend to claim any
privileges, will draw down the resentment of the parliament on them. -- Is the
defense of liberty become so contemptible, and pleading for just rights so
dangerous? Can the guardians of liberty be thus ludicrous? Can the patrons of
freedom be so jealous and so severe? -- If the British house of commons are
rightfully possessed of a power to tax the colonies in America, this power must
be vested in them by the British constitution, as they are one branch of the
great legislative body of the nation: As they are the representatives of all
the people in Britain, they have beyond doubt, all the power such a
representation can possibly give; yet, great as this power is, surely it cannot
exceed that of their constituents. And can it possibly be shown, than the
people in Britain have a sovereign authority over their fellow subjects in
America? Yet such is the authority that must be exercised in taking people's
estates from them by taxes, or otherwise without their consent. In all aids
granted to the crown by the parliament, it is said with the greatest propriety,
" We freely give unto your Majesty;" for they give their own money, and the
money of those who have entrusted them with a proper power for that purpose:
But can they with the same propriety give away the money of the Americans, who
have never given any such power? Before a thing can be justly given away, the
giver must certainly have acquired a property in it; and have the people in
Britain justly acquired such a property in the goods and estates of the people
in these colonies, that they may give them away at pleasure?

IN an emperial state, which consists of many separate governments, each of
which has peculiar privileges, and of which kind it is evident the empire of
Great Britain is; no single part, though greater than another part, is by that
superiority entitled to make laws for, or to tax such lesser part; but all
laws, and all taxations, which bind the whole, must be made by the whole: This
may be fully verified by the empire of Germany, which consists of many states,
some powerful, and others weak, yet the powerful never make laws to govern or
to tax the little and weak ones, neither is it done by the emperor, but only by
the diet, consisting of the representatives of the whole body. Indeed, it must
be absurd to suppose, that the common people of Great Britain have a sovereign
and absolute authority over their fellow subjects in America, or even any sort
of power whatsoever over them; but it will be still more absurd, to suppose
they can give a power to their representatives, which they have not themselves.
If the house of commons do not receive this authority from their constituents,
it will be difficult to tell by what means they obtained it, except it be
vested in them by mere superiority and power.

SHOULD it be urged, that the money expended by the mother country, for the
defense and protection of America, and especially during the late war, must
justly entitle her to some retaliation from the colonies; and that the stamp
duties and taxes, intended to be raised in them, are only designed for that
equitable purpose; if we are permitted to examine how far this may rightfully
vest the parliament with the power of taxing the colonies, we shall find this
claim to have no sort of equitable foundation. In many of the colonies,
especially those in New England, who were planted, as is before observed, not
at the charge of the crown or kingdom of England, but at the expense of the
planters themselves, and were not only planted, but also defended against the
savages, and other enemies, in long and cruel wars, which continued for an
hundred years, almost without intermission, solely at their own charge: And in
the year 1746, when the Duke D'Anville came out from France, with the most
formidable French fleet that ever was in the American seas, enraged at these
colonies for the loss of Louisbourg, the year before, and with orders to make
an attack on them; even in this greatest exigence, these colonies were left to
the protection of heaven, and their own efforts. These colonies having thus
planted and defended themselves, and removed all enemies from their borders,
were in hopes to enjoy peace, and recruit their state, much exhausted by these
long struggles; but they were soon called upon to raise men, and send out to
the defense of other colonies, and to make conquests for the crown; they
dutifully obeyed the requisition, and with ardor entered into those services,
and continued in them until all encroachments were removed, and all Canada, and
even the Havana, conquered. They most cheerfully complied with every call of
the crown; they rejoiced, yea even exulted, in the prosperity and exaltation of
the British empire. But these colonies, whose bounds were fixed, and whose
borders were before cleared from enemies, by their own fortitude, and at their
own expense, reaped no sort of advantage by these conquests; they are not
enlarged, have not gained a single acre of land, have no part in the Indian or
interior trade; the immense tracts of land subdued, and no less immense and
profitable commerce acquired, all belong to Great Britain; and not the least
share or portion to these colonies, though thousands of their men have lost
their lives, and millions of their money have been expended in the purchase of
them; for great part of which we are yet in debt, and from which we shall not
in many years be able to extricate ourselves. Hard will be the fate, yea cruel
the destiny, of these unhappy colonies if the reward they are to receive for
all this, is the loss of their freedom; better for them Canada still remained
French, yea far more eligible that it ever should remain so, than that the
price of its reduction should be their slavery.

IF the colonies are not taxed by parliament, are they therefore exempted from
bearing their proper share in the necessary burdens of government? This by no
means follows. Do they not support a regular internal government in each
colony, as expensive to the people here, as the internal government of Britain
is to the people there? Have not the colonies here, at all times when called
upon by the crown, raised money for the public service, done it as cheerfully
as the parliament have done on like occasions? Is not this the most easy, the
most natural, and most constitutional way of raising money in the colonies?
What occasion then to distrust the colonies, -- what necessity to fall on an
invidious and unconstitutional method, to compel them to do what they have ever
done freely? Are not the people in the colonies as loyal and dutiful subjects
as any age or nation ever produced, -- and are they not as useful to the
kingdom, in this remote quarter of the world, as their fellow subjects are who
dwell in Britain? The parliament, it is confessed, have power to regulate the
trade of the whole empire; and has it not full power, by this means, to draw
all the money and all the wealth of the colonies into the mother country, at
pleasure? What motive, after all this, can remain, to induce the parliament to
abridge the privileges, and lessen the rights of the most loyal and dutiful
subjects; subjects justly entitled to ample freedom, who have long enjoyed,
and not abused or forfeited their liberties, who have used them to their own
advantage, in dutiful subserviency to the orders and interests of
Great Britain? Why should the gentle current of tranquillity, that has so long
run with peace through all the British states, and flowed with joy and with
happiness in all her countries, be at last obstructed, be turned out of its
true course, into unusual and winding channels, by which many of those states
must be ruined; but none of them can possibly be made more rich or more happy?

BEFORE we conclude, it may be necessary to take notice of the vast difference
there is between the raising money in a country by duties, taxes, or otherwise,
and employing and laying out the money again in the same country; and raising
the like sums of money, by the like means, and sending it away quite out of the
country where it is raised. Where the former of these is the case, although the
sums raised may be very great, yet that country may support itself under them;
for as fast as the money is collected together, it is again scattered abroad,
to be used in commerce and every kind of business; and money is not made
scarcer by this means, but rather the contrary, as this continual circulation
must have a tendency to prevent, in some degree, it is being hoarded. But where
the latter method is pursued, the effect will be extremely different; for here,
as fast as the money can be collected, it is immediately sent out of the
country, never to return but by a tedious round of commerce, which at best must
take up much time: Here all trade, and every kind of business depending on it,
will grow dull, and must languish more and more, until it comes to a final stop
at last. If the money raised in Great Britain in the three last years of the
late war, and which exceeded forty millions sterling, had been sent out of the
kingdom, would not this have nearly ruined the trade of the nation in three
years only? Think then, what must be the condition of these miserable colonies,
when all the money proposed to be raised in them, by high duties on the
importation of diverse kinds of goods, by the postoffice, by stamp duties, and
other taxes, is sent quite away, as fast as it can be collected; and this to be
repeated continually, and last forever! Is it possible for colonies under these
circumstances to support themselves, to have any money, any trade, or other
business, carried on in them? Certainly it is not; nor is there at present, or
ever was, any country under heaven, that did, or possibly could support itself
under such burdens.

WE finally beg leave to assert, that the first planters of these colonies were
pious christians; were faithful subjects; who, with a fortitude and
perseverance little known, and less considered, settled these wild countries,
by God's goodness, and their own amazing labors; thereby added a most valuable
dependence to the crown of Great Britain; were ever dutifully subservient to
her interests; so taught their children, that not (...) has been disaffected to
this day; but all have honestly obeyed every royal command, and cheerfully
submitted to every constitutional law; have as little inclination as they have
ability to throw off their dependancy; have carefully avoided every offensive
measure, and every interdicted manufacture; have risqued their lives as they
have been ordered, and furnished their money when it has been called for; have
never been troublesome or expensive to the mother country; have kept due order,
and supported a regular government; have maintained peace, and practiced
christianity; and in all conditions, and in every relation, have demeaned
themselves as loyal, as dutiful, and as faithful subjects ought; and that no
kingdom or state has, or ever had, colonies more quiet, more obedient, or more
profitable, than these have ever been. --

MAY the same divine goodness, that guided the first planters, protected the
settlements, inspired kings to be gracious, parliaments to be tender, ever
preserve, ever support our present gracious King; give great wisdom to his
ministers, and much understanding to his parliaments; perpetuate the
sovereignty of the British constitution, and the filial dependancy and
happiness of all the colonies.

P --.
PROVIDENCE, in NEW ENGLAND, NOVEMBER 30, 1764.

