A COURSE OF EXPERIMENTS, In that CURIOUS and ENTERTAINING Branch of NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY.

CALLL'D ELECTRICITY;

Accompanied with LECTURES on the NATURE and PROPERTIES of the ELECTRIC FIRE.

By WILLIAM JOHNSON.

NEW YORK:

Printed by H. GAIN, at the Bible and Crown, in Hanover-Square, 1765.

As the Knowledge of Nature tends to enlarge the human Mind, and give us more
noble and exalted Ideas of the GOD OF NATURE; it is presumed this Course will
meet with Encouragement, as a rational and agreeable Entertainment.

The Works of the LORD are great, and sought out of all them that have Pleasure
therein. PSALM. CXI. 2.
LECTURE I.
I. OF ELECTRICITY IN GENERAL, with some Account of its Discovery.

II. Experiments, showing that the electric Fire, commonly produced by the
Friction of Glass, is not created by that Friction.

III. That it is not extracted out of the Substance of the Glass.

IV. That it is not collected from the Circumambient Air: But,

V. That it is attracted by the excited Glass from the Earth, by Means of
intermediate conducting Matter; the whole Tarraqueous Globe, and every Thing
thereon, possessing a large Portion of it, commonly called the natural Quantity.

VI. That our Bodies contain enough of it at all Times, to set an House on Fire.

VII. That it has, when in a State of Rest, no sensible Heat.

VIII. That, by its violent Motion in passing through other Bodies, it produces
a very intense Degree of Heat. Both these Propositions will be proved by a very
accurate Thermometer, of a new Construction.

IX. That it is not the same with common or culinary Fire.

X. That it will live or subsist in Water, as well as in any other Matter; and
Sparks may be seen, and felt, rising out of cold Water, or even Ice, that will
kindle up a burning Flame.

XI. That it is an extremely subtle Fluid, passing through so dense a Body as
Metal, with the greatest Facility; even more readily than through any other
Matter we are acquainted with.

XII. That some Bodies electrise positively, or increase the natural Quantities
in Bodies approaching them, whilst others electrise negatively, or diminish it.

XIII. That the same Body, under different Circumstances, may be made to
electrise both positively and negatively.

XIV. That the electric Fire is a simple Homogine Body, and not of two distinct
Kinds, as some have imagined.

XV. That Bodies, having only their na^^^ Quantity, neither attract nor repel
each o^^^^

XVI. That Bodies, having their natural Quantity equally increased or
diminished, se^^^mutually to repel each other.

XVII. That this is not a real Repulsion, but apparent only; there being no
Repulsion between electrised Bodies.

XVIII. That Bodies having different Quantities, in Proportion to their
Magnitudes, attract each other; and the greater the Difference, the stronger
the attraction.

XIX. That different Quantities, in separate Bodies, may be reduced to an
Equality, by Means of Metal, in the Form of a slender sharp Point, more
readily, and at a greater Distance, than in any other Form.

XX. A surprising Property of an electric Atmosphere, whereby Bodies may be
electrised, both plus and minus, by the same Glass, and same Friction.

XXI. An artificial Spider, animated by the electric Fire, so as to act like a
live one.

XXII. A new Property discovered in electrised Points, by Means of which will
be exhibited a Sort of electrical Horse-Race.

XXIII. A Shower of electrised Sand, whereby one of the Phenomenon of
Thunder-Storms is explained.

XXIV. Electrised Money, which scarce any one will take when offered.

XXV. The Salute repulsed, or Fire darting from a Lady's Lips or Cheek, so that
she may defy any Gentleman to salute her.

XXVI. Spirits kindled by Fire darting from Ladies Eyes, (without a Metaphor.)

XXVII. A diverting Experiment, which cannot well be understood, but by those
who try it.

XXVIII. A Battery of seven Guns, fired by a Spark issuing from a Person's
Finger.

LECTURE II.
I. A Description and Explanation of the famous Leyden Experiment or electrised
Phial, which is the Foundation of most of the Improvements, which have since
been made in Electricity.

II. An empty Bottle performing the Leyden Experiment, without having any
non-electric Matter communicating with its inner Surface.

III. The amazing Force of the electric Fire, shown by its passing through a
Number of Bodies at the same Time.

IV. The electric Fire shown to be the same with Lightning, from the Simularity
of Appearance.

V. A bright Flash of real Lightning darting from a painted Cloud, so as to
give the most beautiful and natural Representation of a real Thunder-Storm.

VI. The Cause and Effects of Lightning explained.

VII. The electric Element shown to be real Lightning, from the Simularity of
its Effects in tearing and rending Bodies through which it passes.

VIII. -- In the instantaneous Destruction of Animal Life.

IXandX. -- In melting Metal in the Twinkling of an Eye, with the most intense
Degree of Heat.

XI. An Experiment, showing why Thunder Clouds float lower in the Air than
other Clouds do; and why Eminences are most frequently struck by Lightning.

XII. -- Why we have Thunder more frequent in Summer than in Winter.

XIII. An Experiment, showing how to avert the Course of a Flash of Lightning
from Buildings, Ships, etc. so as to prevent it from doing them the least
Damage.

XIV. -- Showing what Part of a House or Chamber, not properly secured against
Lightning, is safe to remain in during a Gust, or in Case the House should be
struck by Lightning.

XV. -- Showing a probable Method of entirely preventing the impending Stroke
of Lightning.

XVI. The endeavoring to guard against Lightning in the Manner proposed, shown
not to be chargeable with Presumption, nor inconsistent with any of the
Principles of natural or revealed Religion.

XVII. The Manner of erecting an Apparatus in Houses for making Experiments on
the Positive and Negative State of the electric Fluid in the Clouds in Thunder
Storms, etc. shown by an Experiment, with an exact Representation in Minature,
of such an Apparatus.

XVIII. A Battery of seven Guns, fired by a Spark, passing through cold Water.


