A Continuation OF THE NARRATIVE Of the State, etc. of the Indian
Charity-School, At LEBANON, in Connecticut; From Nov. 27th, 1762, to Sept. 3d,
1765.

By Eleazar Wheelock, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Lebanon.

BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD and SAMUEL DRAPER, in Newbury-street, 1765.

A Continuation of the NARRATIVE, etc. of the Indian Charity-School in Lebanon.
A NARRATIVE of this School was published in the Year 1763. In which may be
seen the original Design, Rise, and Progress of it from its Beginning to Nov.
27th, 1762; together with the Grounds and Reasons for prosecuting the Plan
which has hitherto been pursued; and which, by the Smiles of Heaven, has been
remarkably succeeded. The following Pages are designed to exhibit to the
Reader, the State of said School from the above Date to September 3d, 1765; by
which may appear to the impartial and candid Reader, the singular Smiles of
Divine Providence, by which it has been hitherto supported, and the encouraging
Prospects of it is future and extensive Usefulness.

August 1st, 1762, Mr. James Lesley began to teach this School. And by the
generous Donation of his painful Labors for almost 9 Months; and of the
Reverend Mr. Charles Jeffry Smith for about 3 Months; and about 6 Weeks of
another young Gentleman, (who chooses to be nameless;) it was kept in the best
Manner from the above mentioned Date 'til September 17th, 1763, free from any
other Cost for Tuition, than the Masters Board, and a few Months Horse-keeping.
And the whole of my Disbursements from November 27th, 1762, to November 27th,
1763, (including part of Mr. Kirtland's Support at College; and the fitting out
and Support of Samuel Ashpo in his short Mission of about six Weeks to Jeningo,
from whence he was obliged to retreat, on account of the Rupture of the Nations
round about, with the English, after preaching to them 10 Days) I say, the
whole Amount, charged at the Rates I mentioned in my former Narrative, is, in
sterling Money, L. s. d. 272 14 11 The Balance of my former Account was 57 0 0
L. 329 14 11

[In this Time the Number of the Charity Scholars was generally 23.]

What Tuition was charged before Mr. Lesley's generous Intentions were known,
has since been taken off the Account.

Donations received between Nov. 27th, 1762 and Nov. 27, 1763, are as follow:
Sterling.

L s. d. From the Honorable General Assembly of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, 75 l. 12 s. L. M. is 56 14 0 From the Honorable General
Assembly of the Province of New Hampshire, 50 l. Sterling. Advance 2 l. 10. per
Ct. 51 5 0 From the Hon. London Commissioners in Boston, 10 l. Lawful Money, is
7 10 0 From Mr. John Smith, Merchant, in Boston, 20 0 0 From Mr. William
Dickson of Edinburgh, 5 0 0 From a Lady, in England, unknown, 10 l. Sterling
with additional Advantage, mentioned in my former Narrative 14 0 0 Private
Donations in my Journey to Portsmouth, (the most of which were of the
Congregation under the Rev. Mr. Parsons in Newbury) 59 l. 7 s. 4 d. 44 10 6
Private Donations from several Quarters 25 12 3 Interest of Subscriptions 10 l.
19 s. 8 is 8 4 9 L. 232 16 6 To which add,
1 l. 13 s. 4 d. lawful Money for Isaiah Uncaus's Support from September 26th,
to November. 26, 1762, not reckoned in former Account, is 1 5 0 An Error in
former Account 10 0 0 Advance on 79 l. 10 Sterling, suppose 8 l. per Cent. not
reckoned in former Account 6 7 2 L. 250 8 8 Balance referred to Account in the
next Page 79 6 3 L. 329 14 11

Received also a valuable Collection of Books from an Honorable Society in
London, for promoting religious Knowledge among the Poor.

Sterling. L. s. d. The Balance of my Account with the School, Nov. 27th,
1763, agreeable to the foregoing 79 6 3 Disbursements for the School from
November 27th, 1763, to November 27th, 1764. (including Expenses of fitting out
David Fowler to accompany Mr. Occom in his Mission; also the fitting out and
supplying of Joseph Woolley to accompany Mr. Kirtland into the Indian Country,
and tarry through the Winter at Onohokwage; also part of Mr. Kirtland's College
Expenses 291 14 4 (In this Time the Number of Charity Scholars was generally
23.) L. 371 0 71

Donations received between November 27th, 1763, and November 27th, 1764, are
as follow.
Sterling. L. s. d. From the Honorable General Assembly of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, 108 l. -- lawful Money. is 81 0 0 From the Honorable London
Commissioners in Boston, 20 l -- lawful Money is 15 0 0 From the Presbyterian
Congregation in New York, a Collection of 120 l. New York Currency is 67 10 0
From one of the Friends who chooses to be nameless 100 Dollars 22 10 0 From Dr.
Redman of Philadelphia, 24 Dollars 5 8 0 From unknown Persons in Newbury, 34 l.
16 s. 10 d. L. M. is 26 2 7 Private Donatione, etc. from several Quarters 35 3
6 Interest of Subscriptions, 7 l. 8 s. 5 L. M. is 5 11 4 258 5 6 To which add,
What I have received for Tuition more than what I have paid to Schoolmasters 2
1 0 Balance referred to Account in the next Page 110 14 0 371 0 7

Benefactions for Mr. Kirtland, through my Hands, are included in the above
private Donations. But of that which was given immediately to him, in his
Journey to Boston, previous to his Mission, no Account is made.

Received also in June 1764, a neat Pair of Globes, and a valuable Collection
of Books, from the Rev. Dr. Andrew Gifford of London. And, at the same Time, a
valuable Collection of Books from the Rev. John Erskine and Mr. William
Dickinson, of Edinburgh, and an honorable Society in Edinburgh for promoting
reliligious Knowledge among the Poor.

Sterling. L. s. d. The Balance of the foregoing Account, November. 27th, 1764,
110 14 0 Disbursements for the School from Nov. 27, 1764, to May 27, 1765,
including Clothing bought for the Missionaries and Schoolmasters, preparatory
to their being sent forth into the Indian Country 254 5 0 [In this Time the
Number of Charity Scholars was 26] 364 19 0

March 12th, 1765, the Board of Correspondents met to examine Mr. Titus Smith
and Mr. Theophilus Chamberlain, of their Qualifications for Missionaries; and
approved them. And also examined and approved David Fowler, a Montauk Indian,
and Joseph Woolley and Hezekiah Calvin, Delawares, for Schoolmasters among the
Indians. They also examined Jacob Fowler, a Montauk, Moses, Johannes, Abraham
Primus, Abraham Secundus, and Peter, Mohawks; and approved them as well
accomplished for Schoolmasters, excepting their Want of Age; and therefore
appointed them to serve in the Capacity of Ushers, under the Direction and
Conduct of the Missionaries.

The Missionaries were ordained April 24th -- at which Time we had not one
Penny in Stock to support the great Charge of executing the Plan we had lain,
as may appear by the Account connected herewith: nor any where to look or
depend for the same, but upon him who disposes the Hearts of Men as he pleases,
to accomplish his own Designs. The Missionaries and Schoolmasters were
clothed, and furnished with four Horses, Furniture, etc. etc. etc. with all
convenient Speed; and had no Occasion to wait one Day to be furnished with a
present Supply of Money for the Support of their several Missions; and all sat
out, viz. David Fowler on the 29th of April -- Messieurs Smith and Chamberlain
on the 19th of June -- and, on the 25th of the same, the Rest of the
Schoolmasters followed them (excepting Jacob Fowler who was detained with a
View, if God should open a Door for it, to accompany an English Youth to a yet
more remote Tribe, to learn their Language, and fit for a Mission among them)
and carried with them some present Supply for Mr. Kirtland.

This Board of Correspendents in the Colony of Connecticut, commissioned for
Indian Affairs by the honorable Society in Scotland for propagating Christian
Knowledge, was formed July 4th, 1764.

Donations received between Nov. 27th, 1764, and May 27th, 1765, are as follow:
Sterling. Collected by the Rev. Mr. Whitaker, and my Son Radulphus, in their
Journey to Portsmouth, about the Beginning of Dec. 1764. From the Honorable
General Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, 36 l. -- lawful
Money, is 27 0 0 From the Honorable London Commissioners in Boston, 10l. -- L.
M. is 7 10 0 Public Collection at Concord, 8 l. 14 is 6 10 6 Public Collection
at Newbury, 23 l. 10 s. 8 d. L M -- is 17 13 0 Public and private Collections
at Portsmouth, 36 l. 2 s. 3 d. is 27 1 8 Sundry Articles of Clothing, etc.
from sundry charitably disposed Persons in Newbury, amounting to 41 l. os. 2, L
M. of which no Charge has been made to the School -- 0 0 0 From Messieurs
Jonathan Williams and Samuel Austin, of Boston 9 3 9 From Mr. William Dickson,
of Edinburgh 20 0 0 From Mr. Walter Scot, of Edinburgh, a Legacy of 5 0 0 From
Benjamin Pemberton, Esquire of Roxbury 10 0 0 From the Hon. Robert Hooper, Esquire of
Marble head 9 0 0 Private Donations from several Quarters 6 18 4 Interest of
Subscriptions 3 l. 19 s. lawful Money, is 2 19 3 To which add,
Several Articles of the Goods received from Newbury, which were not needed for
the School, I have disposed of 4 9 3 153 5 10 Balance referred to Account in
the next Page 211 13 2 L. 364 19 0 Sterling. L. s. d. May 27th, 1765. Then due
to me from the School agreeable to the foregoing Account 211 13 2 Disbursements
for the School from May 27th to September 3d, 1765, including the fitting out
of the Missionaries and Schoolmasters with Money, Horses, Saddles, etc. and
paying Part of Mr. Chamberlain's Debts at College, and Money for the Relief of
Mr. Occom, and to support his short Mission to the Six Nations this Summer. 254
7 9 466 0 11 September 3d, 1765. Balance due at this Time from me to the
School, Errors and Omissions excepted 30 12 0 L. 496 12 11

And as these Accounts may likely go where Gentlemen will likely be in no
Capacity to judge of the Reasonableness of the Charges I have made therein, I
thought it might therefore be satisfactory to have them examined, and the
Reasonableness of them certified by Gentlemen of most public and established
Characters among us; and accordingly have submitted them to three of the
Honorable His Majesty's Council in this Vicinity for that Purpose; whose
Certificate is as follows:

CONNECTICUT -- Lebanon, 6th September, 1765.
THESE certify, that on the Desire of the Reverend Mr. Eleazar Wheelock, Pastor
of the Second Church of CHRIST in Lebanon, we the Subscribers examined his
Accounts relative to the Charity-School for Indians, etc. under his Care and
Direction, from the 27th of November, 1762, to the 3d Day of this Instant,
September; and are of Opinion, that the Charges made therein for Board,
Tuition, Clothing, and other Necessaries, are just and reasonable, and could
not have been obtained at a lower Price in this Place, during said Time.

JONATHAN TRUMBULL, Assistant. HEZEKIAH HUNTINGTON, Assistant. ELIPHALET DYER.
Assistant.



Donations received between May 27th and Sept. 3d, 1765, are as follow:
Sterling. Received in my Journey to Portsmouth, etc. about the Beginning of
June, 1765. From John Philips, Esquire of Exeter 100 Dollars 22 10 0 From Lady
Pepperrell of Kittery 20 Dollars 4 10 0 From a Lady in England, unknown 100 0 0
From Mr. Samuel Savage Merchant, in London 20 0 0 From the Hon. London
Commissioners in Boston, 10 l. L. M. is 7 10 0 From the Hon. General Assembly
of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, 72 l L. M. is 54 0 0 Collected by the
Reverend Mr. Whitaker and myself. Public and private Collections at Salem, 36
l. 1 s. 6 d. L. M is 27 1 1 Public Collections at 2 Societies in Ipswich, 16 l.
11 s. 8 d. is 12 8 9 Public Collection at Rowley, 15 l. is 11 5 0 Public and
private Collections at Newbury, 80 l. 5 s. 2 is 60 3 11 Public and private
Collections at Portsmouth, 43 l. 10 s. is 32 12 6 Public Collection at York, 9
l. 2 s. 4 d. is 6 16 9 Public Collection at Stratham, 7 l. 10. is 5 12 6 Public
Collection at Exeter, 22 l. is 16 10 0 Private Donations from various quarters
16 1 6 397 2 0 From several Gentlemen in Philadelphia, 18 l. 5 s. Philadelphia
Currency, is 10 19 0 From the reformed Protestant Dutch Church in New York, a
Collection of 88 l. 6 s. 6 s. New York Currency, received June 18th, being the
Day before the Missionaries sat out on their Journey 49 13 8 Received of the
Treasurer of the Colony of Connecticut, some of the Collections made in a few
Societies, pursuant to a Brief granted by the Hon. General Assembly of said
Colony in Favor of this School, before the late unhappy Rupture with the
Indians, gave such a Turn to the Minds of People, that it was thought prudent
to suspend any further Collections 'til a more favorable Opportunity should
appear, when it is hoped something generous will be done, 33l. 17s. 1 is 25 7
10 Private Donations 2 16 6^ Interest of Subscriptions, 3 l 6 s. L. M. 2 9 6
488 8 7 To which add,
Several Articles of the Goods received from Newbury, together with several
Articles of Goods bought at Boston, which were not needed for the School, and I
have disposed of 8 4 4 L. 496 12 11

About L.26. -- lawful Money of the Donations mentioned in the foregoing
Account, has not yet come into my Hands, though it he well secured; which, with
what has been taken up upon my Credit, and not bro't into the foregoing
Account, because the Sums cannot yet be precisely known, being at a great
Distance, do more than equal the Balance mentioned in Page 10, as due from me
to the School: so that there is at present nothing in Stock, more than the
small Supply for a few Month's which the Missionaries have with them, to
support all the Expense of three Missionaries, one Interpreter, and eight
Schoolmasters, in the Wilderness, at the Distance of three, four, and five
hundred Miles from hence; besides what must be done for the Assistance of Mr.
Occum, who has a Wife and 7 Children.

The Missionaries and Schoolmasters being authorized by the Board of
Correspondents, sat out as beforementioned; Mr. Smith for Onohokwage,
agreeable to the Desire of the Indians there, which they sent in Writing to
this Board March 12th, by good Peter (otherwise called Gwedelhes
Agwirondongwas) their Messenger. This Place is on Susquehanna-River, where
several Missionaries have heretofore been; and especially the Rev. Mr. Hawley,
who labored among them for several Years, with good Evidences of the saving
Effects of his Labors, in several Instances. -- To this Party the Rev. Mr.
Forbes and Mr. Rice were sent by the Honorable corresponding Scotch
Commissioners in Boston, and gathered a Church consisting of 12 or 14 Members
in 1762. But the last Spring the Famine prevailed in that Place before Mr.
Smith could get there, so that the Indians were obliged to remove and disperse,
in order to get a living, 'til their Corn should be fit to eat. And
accordingly, Mr. Smith, with Mr. Gunn his Interpreter, went to the largest
Party of them, who were for the present set down by the Lake Utsage, at the
Head of Susquehanna-River; where he put Moses, one of the aforementioned Mohawk
Boys, into a small School, instead of Joseph Woolley who was appointed
Schoolmaster to that Tribe, but was then sick at Cherry-Valley. The Account of
this School I give in the Words of Mr. Smith's Letter, dated at said Lake,
August 3d 1765. -- I am every Day diverted and pleased with a View of Moses and
his School; as I can sit in my Study, and see him and all his Scholars at any
Time, the School-House being nothing but an open Barrack. And I am much pleased
to see 8, 10, or 12, and sometimes more Scholars sitting round their Bark
Table, some Reading, some Writing, We have found it useful to put them to
Writing as soon as they can spell.
and others a Studying; and all engaged, to appearance, with as much
Seriousness and Attention as you will see in almost any worshipping Assembly:
and Moses at the Head of them with the Gravity of a Divine of Fifty or
Threescore. How agreeable such a Sight would be to you, is not hard to guess! I
expect this School will be much larger when it comes to Onohokwage, as there
are but a few here, and many of those that are, upon the Account of the present
Scarcity, are obliged to employ their Children. The School at Onohokwage will
doubtless be large enough for Joseph and Moses both. --

Joseph Woolley lived with this Party of Indians at Onohokwage last Winter, in
order to teach their Children, and learn their Language. But there were not
many of them inclined to send their Children to learn English. The Chief Sachem
said, they might learn enough in Indian; which Notion, I suppose, he and that
Party imbibed from some white People who had been there. But after Peter's
return to them from hence in the Spring, they seemed unanimously inclined to
have an English School set up; and are much engaged to introduce Agriculture
among them, and have lately petitioned earnestly to be assisted therein by the
English, and desire to have Mills built, and a Blacksmith settled with them,
and so many of the English to settle among them, as shall be necessary to
instruct them in these Affairs. They promise they will observe and obey to
their utmost, all the Advice and Instruction sent them by Peter last Spring. --
They have promised to build a House for Joseph Woolley, and help him fence some
Lands for Tillage, and for keeping Cows, etc. and to do all on their Part, and
within their Power, to enable him to govern and teach their Children. And I
hope soon to hear, that he and Moses are settled in a large School at that
Place. This is a remarkable Alteration in their Disposition. The like also,
David Fowler informs me, appears in the Indians at Oneida, about a hundred
Miles distant from thence.

Mr. Chamberlain, after he had settled several Indian Boys in Schools in
several Indian Towns in the Mohawk Country; viz. Hezekiah Calvin in a School of
24 Scholars, Abraham Primus in one of 16, and Abraham Secundus in one of 11;
was about to go with the Oneidaes, on their return to their Country, which they
also had been obliged to leave, on account of the Famine there. At that Place
he purposed to spend the most of his Time this Year; and takes Johannes with
him for his Interpreter, who has hitherto served him in that Capacity; and at
proper Seasons to visit the Schools which he has erected.

David Fowler met with a kind Reception among the Indians at Oneida; and set up
a School among them in May, consisting of 26 Scholars, and continued in it some
Weeks. He also taught a singing School, in which the Indians made great
Proficiency, and had learned well to carry three Parts to several Tunes. They
promised to build him a House, and began to prepare Materials, (i.e.
HemlockBark) to build it. They also promised him a free Use and Improvement of
their Lands, and to assist him in clearing and fencing them; and were many ways
exerting themselves to set up Husbandry, and desired him to instruct them
therein. But by reason of the Famine which prevailed among them, they were
obliged to remove with their Children 'til their Corn should be fit to eat; and
desired David to come down to New England, and procure a Carpenter, who might
be able to build them Houses, make Ploughs, Carriages, etc. for them; and
desired he would return to them when they should be able to subsist in their
Country; which he has also done. They also promised to send their Children to
School, and suitably encourage him in governing them, etc. He yet finds
difficulty in communicating to them the Things of Religion, not being
sufficiently Master of their Language, and having no skilful Interpreter with
him. But he hopes this will be soon remedied by his becoming complete Master of
their Tongue.

Mr. Kirtland, who went among that savage and brutish Tribe, the Senecas, last
Fall, soon after the Peace was settled with them, to learn, their Language, and
fit himself, and prepare the Way for a Mission among them, was obliged, on
account of the Famine which prevailed in that Country, to come to Mohawk-River,
two Hundred Miles, last June, for Supplies; and brought with him 13 Seneca
Boys, to assist him in carrying his Provisions to that Country. Soon after they
came down, 12 of the Boys were taken sick with a Dysentery, and four of them
died. The rest recovered, and are returned with Mr. Kirtland.

Mr. Kirtland has surprisingly insinuated himself into their Affection and
Esteem. Their Jealousies of him, which at first were very strong, are now
removed. They are fond of his continuing with them; and he hoped, soon on his
return to them, to be able to set up a large School among them. And as soon as
he is become sufficiently Master of their Language, they expect to hear great
Things from him. And if God shall mercifully preserve this Youth to accomplish
the Plan laid for him, on which there has evidently been the Smiles of Heaven
hitherto, it will perhaps be esteemed, when it shall be fully known in all the
Circumstances of it, to have been as extraordinary an Undertaking of this kind,
as has ever been in this Land.

His Excellency Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, (whose Understanding and Influence in
Indian Affairs, is, I suppose, greater than any other Man's, and for whose
indefatigable and successful Labors to settle and secure a Peace with the
several Tribes who have lately been at War with us, our Land and Nation are,
under God, chiefly indebted) has not been wanting in his Care and Endeavors for
Mr. Kirtland's Safety and Usefulness among them.

But these Affairs are many of them yet so new, and my Distance from the
Missionaries so great, and no Post to keep up a Correspondence with them, that
my Accounts at present must needs be very imperfect: Nor am I yet able any
further to ascertain the Number of Indian Children now at the several Schools
in the Wilderness. However, all Accounts I have yet received, agree, that there
is an unusual Desire of Knowledge among those who have got a little
Understanding of Christianity; and a great Willingness, and, in many Instances,
a Desire to have their Children taught. -- Their Jealousies of the English,
seem more than ever to be removed. -- Missionaries and Schoolmasters are
received and treated with more Respect and Kindness than usual. -- And among
some Parties, such a Desire and Engagedness to introduce Agriculture, and
depend upon that, instead of rambling and hunting, for a Living, as has never
been before known: and a Motive hereto with many of them seems to be, that they
and their Children may be in a better Capacity to receive Instruction, than is
possible while they are on their fishing and hunting Marches hundreds of Miles
together.

And by the Way I would observe, that if only here and there a Tribe were
civilized, christianized, and Husbandry introduced among them, what agreeable
Places of Retreat might these be for our Missionaries! And what a Saving of the
great Expense for their Support, which cannot be avoided, so long as their
Provisions are to be transported such a great Distance! Besides the many useful
Intelligences they will have from a Priscilla and Aquila there, and many
comforting and animating Considerations suggested to encourage and strengthen
them in the Work of the Lord! And I would humbly propose to Consideration,
whether the Advantages we may expect hereby, will not be worth all the Cost and
Pains that will be necessary to assist the poor Creatures to set up Husbandry,
and give them all necessary Instruction in the Practice of it? I conceive the
necessary Expense for this will not be vastly great. And when it is once
introduced into a few Places, they will soon be able to assist their Brethren,
and so carry the Practice still further into other Tribes. I doubt not, the
Thoughts of Gentlemen of Penetration, will at once suggest many and very great
Advantages that may accrue to the general Design hereby.

And as Divine Providence has always from the first prevented me with
seasonable Supplies, before the Case came to extremity, or to be at all
distressing, however threatening the Appearances have often been; so I would
hope in the same Fountain of Goodness to supply these growing Necessities. And
this I think we may do with the more Confidence, as we have endeavored to go
no faster in the Affair, than to observe the Openings, and follow the plainest
Dictates of Providence in every Step that has been taken. And hitherto scarce a
Step has been taken, but God has evidently made it to prosper. If the Cause be
God's, and the Course we steer right, it is safe enough.

But I would humbly propose to Consideration, whether as swift a Progress of
this Work as may be, is not likely to be attended with greater Success
proportionable to the Expense, than a more leisurely Procedure? which will not
have that Tendency to awaken their Attention, convince their Consciences, and
provoke them to Emulation; and which will give the Adversaries to it much more
Opportunity to embarrass the Way.

It seems to me, that the peculiar Circumstance of the Newness of the Thing,
and Resolution of God's People to accomplish it, and to do it by such Means and
Endeavors, as must necessarily appear great and strange to the Savages, is, in
itself, likely to have great Force and Influence to make them hear attentively,
and consider closely, the Nature, Importance, and Evidence of the Things spoken
to them; and to convince them effectually of the Sincerity of our Intentions
toward them, while they see our Practice to be so agreeable to the vast
Importance of the Errand on which we come to them. And while our Endeavors are
used, as they now are, so much by their own Sons, we have a great additional
Advantage to avoid the mischievous Effects of those Jealousies and Suspicions
which they have so long entertained, that, notwithstanding all our Pretentions,
there is a secret Plot laid to get away their Lands, and make a Prey of them.

The Number of Charity-Scholars now belonging to this School, is eighteen;
besides the five Mohawk Boys beforementioned, as employed in the Indian
Country, who are expected to return to the School next Winter. Eleven of these
are Males, [5 English and 6 Indians] and seven Indian Females. Two of these
English and two Indian Boys, are designed to be coupled, an English and an
Indian, and to be sent into some remote Tribes next Spring, if Providence shall
favor it, to learn their Languages, and prepare for a Mission among them.

I am daily expecting two more Delaware Boys, and one from Narraganset; and
before Winter, if they may be well chosen, a Number from the Six Nations, among
which is the Grandson to the Onondaga Sachem. And I have the Pleasure of
thinking, that the Boys I have, are in general, very promising.

It was generally thought, before I had any Boys from the Mohawk Country, that
neither the Parents could be persuaded to send, nor their Children to come to
School, at such a great Distance. And the first three who came, appeared to
come with great Caution and Fear -- brought each of them an Horse with them,
prepared to return in haste, if there should be occasion. But so great is the
Alteration in this Respect, that the Difficulty now is not in procuring what
Number I please; but in obtaining such as are promising, and such as are, on
account of their Families, of greatest Importance to their Tribes.

I would take this Opportunity to renew my Thanks to the kind Benefactors of
this School, for those generous Benefactions, by which it has, through the
Divine Blessing, continued to this Time. And desire the Continuance of their
fervent Supplications at the Throne of Divine Grace, for all that Light,
Direction, and Assistance, which shall be necessary, for all those who are any
way actively concerned in promoting the important Design; and for that Blessing
of God upon all Endeavors, without which the best Plans, and most vigorous
Efforts to put them in Execution, will be to no Purpose. And I persuade myself,
that the growing Prospects of Success, will be a further and very strong
Inducement to that Liberality, which will bear Proportion to the great Expenses
necessary therein. And especially if it be considered, that these young
Gentlemen who are employed in this Business, and are exposed to all the
Hardships and Dangers of the Wilderness, without any comfortable Habitation, or
any Accommodations to indulge the Pleasures of the natural or social Life, have
entered upon this Service, not through any Necessity, or want of any lucrative
and honorable Posts they might desire among their Brethren; but only to serve
the great Designs of advancing the Kingdom of the Redeemer, and the Salvation
of the Souls of Men. And they ask for, and desire no other Reward for all their
Service, but to be supported while they are employed in it. And I am persuaded,
that the Accounts themselves of their Expenses, when Time shall give an
Opportunity to set them in a true Light, will be sufficient Evidence of their
Prudence and Frugality.

FINIS.
The Continuation of Mr. WHEELOCK's Narrative being printed off before a
Receipt of the following by the Printers, they are necessarily obliged to
subjoin it as AN APPENDIX.
LEBANON, Oct. 11. 1765.
The Reverend Mr. Chamberlain returned from his Mission among the Six Nations,
last Friday, (accompanied by two Oneyada Boys, for this School) to procure
another Missionary for one of the Places where he has been preaching among the
Mohawks and Oneyadas; and to get Recruits and Supplies of Necessaries for the
Winter, for himself and the Schoolmasters, who design to winter with the
Indians.

He informs me, that the Indian Schoolmasters have, in general, conducted very
well: are received cheerfully, and treated kindly; and that there are now in
their several Schools, 127 Children; and that he had provided another School of
upwards of 20 Children more, for Peter; but he was taken sick, and could not
enter into it -- which is ready for him, or another, next Spring.

Mr. Chamberlain also informs me, that he has lately made a Tour among the
Onondagas (accompanied with Delegates from the Mohawks and Oneyadas) and
preached to them, where never any Missionary had been before. That the
Representative of that whole Tribe, told him, after a Consultation of two Days
among themselves, that they were all agreed to receive Christianity, and would
have him be easy in his Mind, and know, that from that Day they should be glad
to be instructed; and desired him to tarry and preach to them. And when he left
them he told them he would do his Endeavor that a Minister should be sent to
them next Spring.


