A Plain DISCOURSE FOR Little Children. With a recommendatory PREFACE By the
Reverend Mr. T. JONES, Chaplain of St. SAVIOR, SOUTHWARK.

My little Children, these Things write I unto you.

1 Ep. St. John ii.13. The SEVENTH EDITION. BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by
SAMUEL KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1765.

The PREFACE.
AMONG the various Treatises that have been published for the Improvement and
Assistance of Christians of different Classes, I have often lamented the want
of some truly evangelical Manuel to put into the Hands of the Lambs of the
Flock; who, as they are the Purchase of EMANUEL's Blood, and as their tender
Minds stand in the greatest need of Cultivation, are certainly entitled to all
the Helps we can furnish them with -- As one (and I esteem it an essential)
Part of my Duty, requires me to spend some Time, every Week, with Children of
different Ages and Capacities; I have had great Opportunities of observing in
what Manner, and by what Methods, divine Truths may be conveyed to their Minds
so as to give them some Concern about their eternal State: The Reader will
please to observe that I speak here of human Methods only, which it is our Duty
to use looking to the Fountain of Life for a Blessing.

I am convinced from my own Observation, that those Methods under GOD, are the
most likely to answer the salutary Purposes above mentioned, which aim not only
at informing and settling the Judgment of young Persons, but also at affecting
their Hearts, and infusing into them a Desire of experiencing those Comforts,
their Judgment is informed true Religion will produce. In this main Point, viz.
The affecting the Hearts of Children, all the Pieces calculated for their
Instruction, I have hitherto met with, are very defective. The many
Catechitical Tracts published by Divines of our own Church, however useful to
those of riper Years, and maturer Judgments, are but very few of them suited to
the Capacities of Children; which all who have the Care of Youth must observe,
cannot be otherwise instructed than by Precept upon Precept, and Line upon
Line, here a little and there a little. The few that are professedly wrote for
the Edification of Young Ones, if they succeed in the first Part, viz. in
storing the Mind with a Set of Principles, are very deficient in the latter,
viz. in affecting their Hearts. For, however ^trange it may seem to some, yet
Experience shows us, that grown Persons, as well as Children, may have very
orthodox Principles or Notions in their Heads, and yet at the same Time be
destitute of the least Spark of Grace in their Hearts. To kindle this divine
Flame in young Breasts, i^ the Work of the Spirit of GOD. But as in his
ordinary Operations he makes use of Means, those Methods of Instruction, which,
at the same Time they inform the Judgment are levelled at the Heart, seem to
hid the fairest f^^ being Instrumental in the Hands of this divine Agent.

As I have met with nothing of this Sort from any Writers of our own Church,
neither have I, as yet, obtain^^ the Satisfaction I wanted in this Particular,
from any on^ of our dissenting Brethren.

The seraphick Dr. WATTS, indeed, has succeeded the best of any I have ever
seen. His short Catechisms* Part fir^ and second, contain in them, a Fund of
useful Instruction wrote in a plain familiar Style and Manner, and ad^pt^ to
the meanest Capacities. The Principles of the Christian Religion are proposed,
and clearly represented to the Min^ But then (it must be owned) that even Dr.
WATTS, h^ failed in the main Point, I mean the applicatory Part which it is
much to be lamented, that great Man never attempte^ since no one seemed so
fitted for such a Task as himself.

Mr. JANEWAY's Token for Children is indeed a very rich Treasure for Christian
Jewels; but I humbly apprehend it would have been still more useful, had an
Address to Children, been prefixed to it, or an Observation added at the End of
each History (like the Moral in Aesop's Fables) tending to convince them that
they likewise must be Partakers of the inestimable Blessings there described,
as ever they would see the Face of GOD.

I say nothing of our excellent Church Catechism, nor of that published by the
Assembly, (both of them excellent Bodies of Divinity) as the generality will
agree with me, that they are not so properly Milk for Babes, as Meat for Men.

Such a Method of Instruction as I have described, having been so long wanting,
I cannot but congratulate my Christian Brethren, on the Publication of the
following DISCOURSE. I have perused it carefully, and think it admirably suited
to the great Ends I have mentioned. The Author (whom I am proud to call my
Friend) has happily discovered the Art of conveying the most interesting and
important Truth in the easiest plainest and most engaging manner. His Style is
familiar, yet affecting; his Descriptions just and lively, his Instructions
weighty, yet so pers^asive, as to be the best suited for those to whom he
offers them. He seems to find his Way to their tender Passions in the most
pathetic Manner, and plays round their Hearts, as though determined not to
leave the Pursuit till they are united to the Redeemer, of whom he speaks. He
writes not for Critics, ^or to win the Praise of Men; but as one who has
tasted that the Lord is gracious; the Language of his Heart is, Come ye
Children, hearken unto me, and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my
Soul; and is ^eady to do for yours also.

The Doctrine of Original Sin, of Justification by Faith, of imputed
Righteousness, and of Sanctification by the Holy Spirit; which distinguish the
Church of England, from that of Rome, are fully, yet plainly deliveered in t^is
little TRACT.

The Author's whole Soul seems engaged in this Work, and so warmly and
affectionately does he press these Points upon young Consciences, that we haeve
Reason to hope they will be signally blessed of GOD.

For my Part, I think it my Duty to recommend the following DISCOURSE, (as I
hereby do to all Parents and Governors of Youth, as the most valuable Present
they can possibly make their respective Charges. I look upon it as a proper
Supplement to Dr. WATTS's shorter Catechisms. The Design of this being to carry
home to the Heart what that venerable Man of God makes clear to their
Understandings.

I would beg Leave in particular, to recommend it to the Parishioners of St
Savior's Southwark, earnestly entreating them to take especial Care of those
tender Plants the Lord has committed to their Trust: Which, that they may be
watered by Divine Grace, preserved by the Holy Spirit in every Blast of
Temptation, and at last be safely housed in the grand Paradise of GOD, is the
sincere and fervent Prayer of their

Affectionate Minister, And ready Servant, for Christ's Sake. T. Jones.
Castle-Street, Jan. 14, 1759.
The Author's Address to the Reader.
OUR dear Savior says of himself, I am the WAY -- no Man comes unto the
Father but by me. An^ after S^ Paul had long sought the wa^ of Sel^
Righteou^ne^s, he counts himself the chief of Sinners; and esteems all things
but Dung and Dross for the Excellency of the Knowledge of jesus Christ; and
positively asserts other Foundation can ^o M^n lay for Pardon, Holiness and
Salvation, than Jesus Christ To Point out Jesus as the only Way* and to promote
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, and to establish Christ as the only sure
Foundation, in the Hearts of Children, is attempted in this ^ittle ^ract. In
the Bowels of Christian Love, I recommend it to Parents, as a Present to their
dear Children: That it may answer these happy Purposes may the God of all Grace
own and accompany it with his loving Spirit to the Hearts of all who read it,
that Christ alone may be exalted -- even so, Lord Jesus. Amen.

A plain Discourse FOR Little Children.
In the 18th Chapter of St. Luke, and the 16th Verse* JESUS says, Suffer
little Children to come unto me.

WHEN our Lord Jesus was upon Earth, he loved little Children, and therefore
spoke these Words; and though our dear Savior does no^ now live i^ this World;
though he is now on his Throne of Glory, in the highest Heavens, ye^ does he not
love little Children still? Yes he does: For Jesus Christ is the some
Yesterday, to Day and for ever, as you read, He^rew^ xiii 8. and his Words are
the same; and all his Wo^ds are Truth: He was always as good as his Word, and
still continues so to this Day, and will ^o for ever and ever; ^^d he still
says, Suffer little Children to come unto me.

But it may be, dear Children, you do not know who Jesus Christ is: Though you
read of Jesus Christ in your Testaments, perhaps you have not considered, or
thought much about Jesus Christ: Therefore you do not know him. You do nor love
him: You never go to him. You never call upon him: You never ask Jesus Christ
to bless you; nor you never thank him, though he loves you so much, so very
much; yes indeed, he does.

O it is a sad Thing for little Children not to know, not to love Jesus Christ.
Don't you remember what the Apolste tells you in 1 Cor. Chap. 16. ver. 22. If
any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be accursed. O it is a thousand
Pities but that you should be told who Jesus Christ is, and how much he loves
little Children, what he has done for them, and how many good Things he every
Day gives them. Surely if we considered this, you would love him. Are you
w^^ling then to hear of Jesus Christ? Do you desire to be told who he is, and
what great Things Jesus Christ has done for little Children? Should you not be
glad to know how you must go to him? For he says, Suffer little Children to
come unto me.

Why then, for the Sake of dear little Children, and because I love them, and
would wish them to know and love Jesus Christ, that they may be happy: I have
made this little Discourse on purpose to tell de^^ Children, who Jesus Christ
i^; and also what he has done for them; and likewise, how they are to go to
Jesus Christ: Which if you do, I will also tell you what good Things, what
great Blessings Jesus Christ will give you; for he says, Come unto me.

But least I should write, and you dear Children should read in vain, let us
pray our dear Lord and Savior, to send his Blessing upon this Work.

O thou kind and loving Lord Jesus, who do not despise the Day of
small-Things; thou dear Savior, who in the Days of thy Flesh, did take
little Children into thine Arms and blessedst them; O do thou now seal
Instruction upon their dear Hearts by thy blessed Spirit; impress their tender
Minds with a sweet Sense of thy Love, and make even this litt^^ Work, a blessed
Means in thy powerful Hands of revealing thy Love, even ^^to Babes! O let thy
Praise be ^l^^^ed from their Lips! and that their little Tongues may lisp thy
Love; O give them to feel it in their Hearts! O do it for thy Mercy's Sake,
thou dear Lamb of God, even so, Lord Jesus, Amen.

SECTION I.
You are told who Jesus Christ is.

DO you ask who Jesus Christ is? I will tell you: He is GOD over all, blessed
for evermore. He is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lord Before you was born
into the World, yea, before ever this World was made, Jesus Christ lived beyond
the Clouds; he dwelt above the starry Sky in the highest Heavens, which he made
by his Power. He made the Earth also. All Things were made by him and without
him was not any Thing made that was made, as you read in St. John, ^hap 1. ver.
3.

So that you (...) Jesus Christ is God, God Almighty, the ever^asting God, the
God of Love. It Is by this Name only you can comfortably know him. O he is very
loving; full of Love to little Children. By him you was made at first to live
with, and enjoy him forever in his Heaven where is all Glory, Happiness and
Pleasure; for this he made Man like himself.

SECTION II.
How God created the first Man Adam, holy and ^ap^^. How he sinned against God,
and bro't Misery and Sorrow upon himself, and all his Children, so that we are
all become m^serable Sinners.

DON'T you remember how you read in God's Book, the Bible, i^ Genesis chap. 1,
ver 26. that God created Man in his own Image; and placed him in Paradise; and
how Adam, who is the Father of us all, the first Man, that God made, how good,
how holy, how happy he was, until that wicked One, the Devil, who is full of
Spite and Malice against Man, came to him, and bid him not believe God, nor be
obedient to do what God had told him; and how he hearkened to the Voice of the
Devil, and so became proud; and instead of loving and fearing the Lord, and
brok^ God's Command; he did what God had told him ^e should not do; he eat the
Fru^^ o^ the Tree which God told him he sh^ul^ not and so Man was changed in a
Moment into the Shape of the wicked One.

He lost his fine Dress, his beau^^^ul Robe of Inn^cence; and the Lord who had
look^d on Man, and said he was very good, now beheld him, and lo he was become
very bad, unfit to live with GOD, because he was unlike to GOD, therefore God
drove him out of his Presence, even the sweet Garden of heavenly Pleasure,
where was nothing but Joy and Happiness and Delight; to wande^ about in a
lonesome, dark, uncom^ortable Place, which is this naughty wicked World, w^ere
you and I now live.

For when Adam sinned against God, and lost the Heaven of God's Love and
Favor, all his Children sinned in him; so that you and I, dear Children, are
become Fellow-Sinners and Fellow Sufferers, by Adam's Fall and Disobedience, so
you read by the Offense of One, we are all made Sinners, and Death entered into
the World by Sin as God's Apostle tells you in the ^th Chap of Romans, ver. 12.

So that, instead of being along with your ^oving Savior, in his holy happy
Place of Glory, where there is no Darkness, no Sorrow ^o Pain, no S^ckness; you
are forced to live here in a wicked, cruel, unkind World where you find a great
deal of Trouble and Sorrow, and are sometimes Sick, and in Pain, and often cry
for many Things you want, and are never truly happy, and are very seldom easy
in your Minds.

O what a sad Thing it was for Adam to Sin against God! O what a miserable
Thing it is that dear little Children are now become Sinners! that they should
Quarrel and Fight with one another; be Angry, and tell lies, and take God's
Name in vain, and not love God, nor fear God, nor pray to God. O dear! What a
sad, what an affecting Thing is this to think of!

But then, when you come to die: For my dear Children you are to live but a
little, little while longer here. O, alas! this is very dreadful! to shut your
Eyes never, never to open them any more! And that dear little Body must be put
into the cold, dark Grave, and Dirt thrown upon it, and the Worms will eat it
up.

But then, O more dreadful still! You have, dear Children, Souls that can never
die, but will live forever and ever. These after your Bodies die, must appear
before the great God the Judge of all men, who will then tell you of, and will
judge you for all your Sins, for every Idle wicked Word, and every evil, sinful
Thought; and then if you have no Friend to take your Part, no dear Savior to
beg for you! O most dreadful of all!

O! methinks I tremble to tell you what Jesus Christ says will bec^me of you!
Read Mat. chap. 14. ver. 41. Oh! are not they terrible Words. Depart from me,
ye cursed, into the everlasting Fire of ^^ll, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: Where there is weeping and ^ailing, and gnashing of Teeth; Where their
tormenting Wo^m of Conscience never dies, nor the burning Fire of Pain, never
goes out; and never never to come out of this Place of Torment! O surely, this
is very affrighting!

O, but now, if I was to tell you of any good Person, who could save you, and
keep you from all these terrible Things, would you not be very glad? Should you
not be vastly delighted to know who it is? Would you not go to him, and pray to
him, Night and Day, to do these Things ^or you? Would you not love him dearly,
most dearly of all? Should you not? Now tell me, my dear Children?

O, yes, I think you say: O if any Body would save me from being naughty, and
from being the ^^vil's Child, save me from going to Hell, I would, indeed I
would love him. Would you so?

O, but suppose I was to tell you of one, who would do a great deal more than
all this, even make you God Almighty's Child, and open the Door of Heaven to
you, that when you come to die, you might be comfortable and glad, yes, and
before you die, you might live holy, happy and joyful; and after Death find all
Joy and Pleasure, and Comfort and Delight, for ever and ever.

Now would not this make your dear little Hearts glad within you? Now would it
not? Yes, surely, it would. But O, where shall we find any one so full of Love
and Goodness! No one is, but Jesus Christ: None but he is able to do this. And
be glad, little Children, to hear what our (...) Savior has done and suffered,
for all that come unto him, which was the next Thing I promised to tell little
Children of

SECTION III.
You are told how Jesus Christ loved the Children of Men, and pitied poor
Sinners, and became their Savior; and what Pains and Sorrows our dear Savior
went through, to save his dear Children from Hell, and to bring them to Heaven.

O Methinks, you long to know. You are eager to hear what Jesus Christ did, and
what Way he takes to save and make happy his dear Children.

You know I told you before, that we are all, of us become so unlike God, by
Reason of Sin, that we are unfit to go to God and Heaven. Well then, Jesus
Christ came down from Heaven to Earth, to fetch us from the Earth to Heaven.

O, what Love is this! as we read in God's Book, 2 Epist. Cor. chap. 8. ver. 9.
of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, though he was rich, yet for your Sake
became poor, that ye through his Poverty might be made rich. How poor did Jesus
become? Why he that was Lord of all became a poor despised outcast Babe. He
took our Nature upon him, and was born into this World.

O he looked down from the Heaven of his Glory; he saw how Sin and Wickedness
had ruined the dear Children of Men, and his loving Heart was set upon them,
and he would come to save them; therefore he was born into this World, under
all the Meanness, Poverty and Disgrace which our Sins had deserved. His Parents
were poor and mean: His Birth, instead of a Palace was a Stable: For a Cradle,
a Manger, where Oxen fed, was the Place where the Lord of Life and Glory was
first laid. O what Love, what Humility is this!

Now all this is to show us what shame is due to Sin. Think of this dear little
Children. See the Shame of Sin. See how low our Savior stooped, how poor he
became. Have you any Reason to be proud, and to love, and desire the great and
grand Things of this World? O learn of your Savior to despise them.

Well, thus our dear Lord appeared in the Flesh, in our Nature, in our Stead.
Thus he became a Child for the Sake of dear little Children, that he might be
their dear Brother and loving Savior.

For your Sakes your Savior begins his Life with Poverty and Disgrace; and as
he grows up, his Sorrows and Sufferings increase with his Years. He had very
few Friends that loved him. A great many Enemies that hated him. Few, very few,
believed on him: He always went about doing Good: And yet he was always
suffering Evil from the Children of Men.

He indeed was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, all his Life for
your Sakes: All that he bore, all that he suffered, was in Love to his dear
Children. His Life was a Life of Holiness and Love; and yet wicked Men agreed
to take away his dear Life, to spill his precious Blood, and to murder this
dear Savior of ours.

O you may read how he is preparing for the Hour, the dismal Hour of his Death
and Sufferings, in St. Luke, chap. 22. ver. 44. see him in the Garden of
Gethsemane, there in great Pain and Sorrow, he prayed to his Father; and what
think you, my dear Children, was the Cause of all his Distress? O he feels the
Load, he bears the Weight of all his dear Children's Sins upon him. He had no
Sin of his own; but he undertook our Cause, and all our Sins were laid upon his
dear and innocent Head.

O this makes him groan, this makes him pray in the greatest Agony; they caused
him to sweat and groan, and bleed; yea to sweat Drops, great Drops of precious
Blood out of his innocent Veins.

O dear little Children, think of this; consider what your loving Savior once
suffered for your Sins, for your Sakes, for your Souls; and this was on a dark
Winter's Night, when the Air was sharp, frosty and cold.

O what great pains must your Sins put your dear Savior to, to make him thus
sweat, as i^ were, great Drops of Blood falling from his Body to the Ground. O
what an Agony, wha^ a grievous Agony of Sorrow and Grief does he feel! O how
well did our Savior love little Children.

But this is not all; no sooner were his Prayers ended, but greater Sorrows,
and more grievous Pains are coming upon him; though he had gone up and down for
near thirty Years, doin^ Good, and was always loving and tenderhearted to all
that came unto him: Yet O how barbarously is he used? for a great Multitude of
rude, wicked Men come with Lanthorns and Staves, to take him.

O the dear, innocent Lamb! How is he delivered up to the Anger and Fury of
Men, who like Lions and Bears, drag him away to the Governor of the City, and
they tied those dear Hands behind him, which had been so often put forth to
give Sight to the Blind, to cure the Sick, to give Life to the Dead, and had
embraced little Children, when he blessed them, and also been very often lifted
up in Prayer to his Father, for his Enemies.

Thus bound he stood before his Judge silent, though they laid many Things to his
Charge, of which he was innocent, he said nothing; O, no: He knew he appeared
in our Stead; we were guilty, and for our Sins he suffered.

But his Sufferings are not at an End yet; O no: Our Sins were laid upon him;
for them he must bleed; for them he is willing to shed every Drop of his
precious Blood. We were sold, all of us, my dear little Children, as Slaves to
Sin and Satan; and nothing but Blood, the Blood of Jesus, the Blood of God,
could buy our Liberty.

Christ freely gave himself for us: he has bought us with his own Blood, and
redeemed us from being Enemies to God, and Slaves to Wickedness.

O then see, mark the Account, which is given of our dear Savior after he was
condemned to die.

His cruel Enemies led him away, and they scourged him with Cords, till they
cut deep Gashes on his naked Body.

Then they made a Crown of Thorns, which were sharp pointed like a Sword. This
they put on his dear sacred Head, and smote upon it, till they forced the
Points into the Temples of his Head; and the Blood trickled down his innocent
Face.

Thus he was wounded from Head to Foot. And why was this done? but on Account
of our sad State and miserable Condition, as God's Prophet Isaiah sets it
forth, chap. 1. ver. 6. our whole Head is sick, our whole Heart is faint; from
the Sole of the Foot, even unto the Head, there is no sound Part in us; but we
are all fu^l of Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores.

So our dear Jesus was wounded from Head to Foot; that by his S^ripes and
Blood, we might be healed of all the Sicknesses of our Souls.

Thus the Blood trickled down from every Part of his innocent Body; and yet
this does not satisfy the cruel Rage of his Enemies; for they spit upon him,
they mocked him, and made Game of him.

O how easy could our dear Savior have looked them dead, and frowned them into
Hell in a Moment; but no, we see he is patient and meek; he opens not his
Mouth, neither does he cry nor complain.

O what Love, what Patience is this! never was the like seen before! But yet
more and more of his Love for Sinners is to be seen, and more of his Sufferings
is still to come.

Die he must. He is condemned: And therefore they drag him away. They lay his
heavy Cross upon his naked, wounded Body, which he carries till he is faint and
tired. All about him were his Enemies laughing, and mocking him, until he comes
in Sight of mount Calvary. Thither he goes up, and his Cross being laid on the
Ground, they stretch out his dear Arms wide. Through the Palms of his holy,
tender Hands* and through his sacred Feet, they drive large Nails, and so fasten
him to the Cross; and then lifted it up from the Ground. Thus the dear Lord
Jesus hangs on the accursed Tree.

Is not this enough to make your dear little Hearts ache, and cause you to weep
and cry, to think of his Pains and Agonies? And yet, O how cruel and hard
hearted are Men! They see him and they wag their Heads. They look on him thus,
in the greatest Pain; and they had no Pity, no Mercy on him; but they still
mocked, still laughed at him. O the Racks and Tortures of his Body! O the Pains
and Sorrows of his Soul, which was now made a^ Offering for his dear Children's
Sins.

Hark! he Groans! Listen to his Prayer. O what does the dear and suffering Lamb
say (...) Does he open his Mouth in Anger, and call for Punishment on his
Enemies! O no: But Father forgive them, for they know not what they do^

O what heavenly Love! what a sweet forgiving Temper was our dear Savior of!
He seems to forget all his own most distressing Pains; and is more concerned
for his very Murderers, than for himself.

O what Pain must it be to hang but a few Minutes on the Cross. But Jesus hung
thu^ in the greatest Pain and Agony, for full three Hours! No Eye pitied him;
no one off^red him any Comfort; no, even God his dear Father, who said, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, now pours forth the Fury of his
Wrath, and fiercest Anger upon him. For in his well beloved Son, he punished
our Sins most severely.

At last, behold a Soldier stabs a sharp-pointed Spear into his precious Side,
so that he shed his dearest Heart's Blood for our Sins.

Thus wearied out with Pain and Sorrow, and Agony, such as Man never felt
before, just before he gave up the Ghost and died, he bowed his Head to the
Earth, as much as to say to us Sinners, behold and see how much I love you! O
was there ever Sorrow, ever Pain, ever Love ^ike mine! And with a loud Voice
Jesus cried, IT IS FINISHED! as much as though he had said, My Sufferings are now
at an End, and the Redemption of Sinners, of all my dear Children, whom I so
love, is now finished and made an End of -- and Jesus died.

And now my dear Children, you have heard of the Kindness and Love of our dear
Savior. Now don't you think he loves you? And are you not very glad to hear of
the great Love of your only Lord and Savior? And are you not sorry and grieved
to know how much Pain, and Agony and Sorrow Jesus suffered for you, and for
your Sins.

O but if I was to tell you no more of Jesus, you would still have the greatest
Reason, to mourn and weep, to think that your only Savior is dead; because you
could never go to him, nor receive any Blessings or Comforts from him.

But I tell you glad Tidings of great Joy; for though Jesus was dead, he is now
alive again. He only lay three Days in the Grave, and then raised himself from
the Dead, and appeared again to comfort his sorrowful Friends and Disciples;
and staid upon Earth forty Days. Then he went up to Glory, where he lives
forever more to receive and pray for all dear Children, that come unto God by
him, and in his Name.

And now, whatever Blessings you want, if you go to Je^us Christ, and tell him,
he will he^r you, and he will give you: For no good Thing will God wi^h-hold
from those Children that go to him. But you may be ready to ask, Ho^ mu^t we go
to Jesus Christ? This was the next Thing I promised to tell you of.

SECTION IV.
You are told, how after our loving Savior bled to Death for our Sins, that he
went up again to his own Place of Glory in Heaven, where h^ lives to receive
all those dear Children who come to him.

THOUGH Christ is in Heaven, and you upon Earth, yet he is God, he is a Spirit,
and is every where present; so that he is about your Path and about your Bed,
and sees all your Ways. You can never hide yourself from his Sight; even
Darkness itself is no Darkness with him, but every Thing is naked and opened to
the Sight of Jesus, as his Word tells, Heb. chap. 4. ver. 14

So that if you tell Lies, if you say wicked Words, if you take the Lord's Name
in vain, when you do any Thing you ought not to do* when you ar^ naughty, God
sees you, God hears you. But I hope, dear Childrens Hearts are so affected with
the Love of Jesus, in dying for their Sins, which I have been telling them of,
that you will be brought to hate all Sin and Wickedness, which put our dear
Savior to so much Smart and Pain, yea to Death itself.

O, if you think of this, and have any Love for your precious Souls, you will
be glad to know, very glad to know how you are to go to Jesus! And you will go
to him often, very often.

You know I have already told you, that Jesus (...) every where present; so
that you need not ^ay, How shall I go up to Heaven to him? No, you need not:
For he is near you, so near (...) to know every Desire of your Heart, and to
^ear every Prayer that goes out of your Lips. Wherever you are, you may come
to Jesus by Prayer; if you come to him, and call upon him, ^e will hear you You
are dear Children, all ^f you Sinners wanting every Thing to make ^ou holy and
happy.

Believe the Lord Jesus to be both able and ^illing to give you every Thing
that is good ^or you. Jesus can do it, and no Body else. He will do it, for he
has so promised to all that ^ome un^o him.

O they are sweet Words, Jesus said, John* ^hap. vi. ver 37. to encourage his
dear Children, ^im that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out that is, I
will lovingly receive him. And ^gain, our Savior says, Matthew. chap. xxi. ver.
22. All Things, whatsoever you ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

Now when you come to Jesus, when you kneel before the Lord, What would you
pray our dear Savior to do for you? Would you ask for Riches? A great deal o
Money that you might have fi^e Clothes, and take (...) great deal of Pleasure
in the World? A (...) C^ildren, all these Things cannot make you happy* But if
they could, i^ you were to have all these Things, and every Thing else in the
World that you could wish or desire, you could not stay long in this World to
enjoy them: For you m^st die very soon.

Don't you remember to read about the rich Man, who was in Purple and fine
Linen, and lived very grand every Day, when upon Earth, and yet, when he died,
he went to Hell, where (...) cried Day and Night for a Drop of Water (...) cool
his Tongue? What was all his Riches to him, when he lifted up his Eyes in
Torments and could have no Ease nor Quiet for ever and ever? Read the Story
which our dear Saviou^ himself tells you in St. Luke Chap. 16.

O but our dear Jesus will save his Children from such a dreadful State, and he
will give great deal better Things than all this World c^ afford, if you come
unto him: Which I pr^mised next to tell you of.

SECTION V.
A very pretty Story of a dear little Child, who loved her Savior; in which
you are told, how good she was, how holy and happy she lived, and how
comfortably she died.

BUt first, let me tell you of your dear School-Fellow: O how soon was she took
sick and died! she came from School on Saturday, well as you be now; the next
Day the Fever seized her; before the Week was ended, Death had laid his cold
Hand upon, and made her a pale, breathless Corpse.

Now you know her Father had a great deal of Money to have given her, and many
fin^ Clothes, but none of these could save her from dying* O but it was happy
for her, she loved her Savior better than a^l these, and she always took more
Delight and Pleasure in going to her Savior, and praying to him than in any
Thing else in all the World: And you would do the some, if you did but love our
Savior, and knew that he loved you. As soon as she got up in the Morning, the
first Thing she did, was to go and pray to her dear Savior, after this Manner:

O my dear and only Savior, my Lord and my God; what Care do thou take of
thy dear little Child? Lord, I thank thee for all thy Love, and for all thy
Goodness to me Dear Jesus give me to know more and more of thy Love! O shed thy
Love abroad in my Heart! O be my Savior! Save me this Day from my own naughty
wicked Heart. Save me from this evil World. Dear Savior, save me from my great
Enemy the Devil. O that I may bate Sin, and love and serve thee all my Days,
till Death comes; and then dear Jesus, after I have thus come unto thee, and
loved thee on Earth, O take my Soul up to thy Self in Glory, to praise thee for
ever and ever.

And when she came from School, when other Children are only minding their
Play; O she was glad to get by herself, and to go to her dear Savior, and pray
to him; and he always heard her and gave her every Thing that she wanted.

O how glad was he when the Lord's Day came that she might go and pray with
God's People, and hear God's Ministers preach about Jesus Christ, and his Love
to poor Sinners! Whenever she saw any poor People in the Streets, that wanted
Victuals and Clothes, her Heart pitied them; and she was glad if she had any
Thing to give them.

She was very dutiful to her Parents, very loving to all her Brothers and
Sisters; yea, she lived in Love with every Body.

Thus she lived happy, for she knew her Savior loved her; she knew he died for
her Sins; she knew she was God almighty's Child, and that he had forgiven all
her Sins; for he had given her to know this by his blessed Spirit in her Heart,
which made her hate Sin, and fear to offend God.

But O when she was sick, and when she came to die, had you, dear Children,
seen how sweet she looked, how she smiled, and was glad to think she was going
to die, that she might go to her dear Savior, and live with him for ever and
ever.

O I think you would have wished to have been in her Place! Just before Death
closed her dear eyes, never, never to open them in this World any more, she
called her Papa and Mama to her Bedside, and said' "Don't you, pray don't you
cry, nor grieve your selves for me; I am only going a little before you: My
dear Savior loves me; I know he does: I feel he does. I shall soon be with
him; he will soon take my dear Soul to himself in Glory."

Then she called to her dear little Brothers and Sisters, and said to them, O,
I charge you to go to my dear Savior, and pray to him to save you. O he has
been a dear and loving Savior to me all my Life! and now I am so del^^hted, so
glad I am going to live with him for ever and ever. She lifted up her dying
Eyes, and as well (...) she was able, she said, "Lord Jesus, receive my
Spirit:" and with a smiling Face she ^ell asleep in the arms of her dear
Savior.

O now would you not desire to live and di^ like her? Why, if you do, the same
Jesus that loved her, and gave her his Grace, and his Blessing, will also give
it you, and to all that come unto him.

SECTION VI.
Little Children are told of their Misery and Danger, what sad Enemies they
have, who will try to keep them from Jesus Christ, their only Friend and
Savior.

FRom what I have before told you, you learnt That you are all Sinners, That
you was born into a naughty World, with a wicked Heart within you, and an
unholy Nature about you* so that you have no Goodness, no Righteousness, no
Strength in your selves; and therefore you are always in danger of being led
into Sin and Wickedness by the Devil, who is your Enemy. He is a wicked Spirit,
and he tries by all Means to tempt dear Children to commit Sin to take God's
Name in vain, to hate one another, to tell lies, to break God's Sabbath? yea
every Thing that God would not have you to do he will tempt you to do. So that
you are told by God's Apostle, 1 Peter, chap. ver. 8 That your Adversary, the
Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

And, above all Things, he will try to hinder you from coming to Jesus Christ:
So that if he but make you love your Play, and love Sin, so much as to keep you
from going to Jesus Christ, then he is sure to keep you sure in his Service,
and his Child all your Life long; and when you come to die, he will seize on
you, and drag your dear, your precious Souls, down to his place of Torment,
where is nothing but Horror, and pain, and Misery, forever and ever.

O then don't you see, dear Children your Danger? Don't you see the Need there
is for you to go to Jesus Christ, who is the only Savior for dear Children,
who are poor, helpless Sinners? O if you have any Desire to be saved, and love
for your dear your precious Souls, if you would be holy and happy; if you want
to be God Almighty's Children, and wish to die in Peace, and go and live with
your Savior in Heaven; surely, surely, you will, dear Children, go to Jesus
Christ now, while you are upon Earth, you will call upon him, and pray to Jesus
Christ after this Manner.

A Prayer for little Children to get by Heart, and use often.
SAve me, Lord Jesus, save me that I perish not! Lamb of God hear me! Son of
God have Mercy upon me! Thou have bid little Children come unto thee, O dear
Savior, let nothing hinder me from coming unto thee. I would come to thee,
Lord help me! I would believe on thee as my Savior, pray give me Faith, pray
give me Love, pray save me. I have no Savior but thee to go to. O deliver me
from my sinful State, save me from the World, and the Devil, that I may love
and serve thee on Earth, and live with, and praise thee for ever and ever in
Heaven.

O dear Children, if you can thus find it in your Hearts to go to Jesus Christ,
our God and Savior will surely give you every good Thing that you can wish or
desire, which was the last Thing I promised to tell you.

SECTION VI.
What good Things, what best of Blessings our God and Savior gives to all his
dear Children You are told the dreadful Condition of all naughty wicked People,
and the happy and blessed State which all God's Children shall enjoy, in the
great and terrible Day of the Lord. Pray read this with Care, and think of it
often.

Y^U know I told you before, you had lost God's Love and Favor, by loosing his
Image and Likeness, and that therefore you are all of you become unfit to live
with God, because you are unlike him, stripped of your Robe of Innocence, and not
having the beautiful Dress of Holiness, Righteousness, and Goodness; but now
Jesus Christ is a Savior to all those dear Children, that come unto him.

O I know a great many dear Children that were once very naughty, wicked
Sinners, and had nothing but Rags, filthy Rags to cover themselves with, and to
hide their Nakedness from the Sight of God; and as soon as they saw and knew
their Poverty, and their Nakedness, O they went to our dear Savior, and prayed
to him, and confessed their Wants, and he gave them a Change of Raiment; he
took away their Rags, and gave them the beautiful Dress, and spotless Robe of
his perfect Righteousness; and as soon as ever they were thus clothed with the
Garment of their elder Brother's Righteousness, then God looked upon them, then
God owned them as his Children.

O what a Comfort is this! Would you not, dear Children, think it a very great
Thing to be the Children of an earthly King. O but how much greater is it to be
Sons and Daughters of the King of Kings, the Lord God Almighty! What, ^o have
God for your Father, to take you and ^wn you, and love you as his own dear
Children! O surely, this is the greatest of all Blessings indeed! What!
Children that are born Children of Wrath, deserving God's Anger and Punishment,
to be taken into God's Love and Favor; to be owned and loved by him as his
dear Children! O tell me, is not this enough to encourage you gladly to come
unto Jesus Christ? O it is our dear Savior that obtained this Blessing for all
his dear Children! though they were Enemies and Strangers to God, yet by his
Blood he has reconciled, and made Peace, and brought them back to God, so that
they receive a New Birth; they are born again of the Spirit of God and become
the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

Indeed, dear Children, without this New Birth, without being made the Children
of God, your Savior himself assures, You cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Joh. Chap. 3. Ye must be born again, says our Savior.

O, I pray you, consider the many and great Blessings and Comforts that are
yours, if you are the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus; why God tells
you, by the Mouth of his beloved Apostle, All Thing are yours. God is yours; he
is your heavenly Father. Christ is yours; he is your loving Brother and
Savior. The Holy Ghost is yours; to comfort and make you holy. Heaven is
yours; the Place so your everlasting Happiness and Joy. And till you get to
Glory the Earth is yours. All Things that you want, that are for your good,
your heavenly Father will give you. So says our Savior. Seek first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all other Things shall be given unto
you, Mat. 6.33.

O dear how rich, how vastly rich are God's Children; the richest King upon
Earth is not half so rich as they are. O this is to be truly rich, truly great
and noble indeed! These are the true Riches, which our Savior bids all his
dear Children covet and pray for: For indeed without this Kind of Riches, the
richest Man upon Earth is as poor as a Beggar, and as miserable as a Slave.

For if any one, be he who he will, Rich or Poor, Young or Old Man, or Woman,
or Child, If any one has not the Spirit of Christ, in his Heart, be is none of
his, says the Word of Truth, Romans Chap. 8. ver. 19. he does not belong to
Christ, nor does God own him as his Child. O then, without Doubt, they are the
Children of the Wicked One; they are led by his Spirit, his Servants and
Children they are. For ou^ Savior says to all such Ye are of your Father the
Devil, and his Works ye will do. Joh. chap. 8. ver. 49.

So that such Men and Women, and Children, who Curse and Swear, get Drunk,
Steal, tell Lies, break God's Sabbaths, and do any such like, Wickedness, it is
because they don't know our Savior, nor pray to him nor believe on him; nor
have they got the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts.

Bu^ it is not so with God's Children; for their Jesus delivers them out of
their fallen sinful State and brings them into a new State of Holiness. Christ
unites them to himself by Faith. and he sends his Holy Spirit into their Hearts.

Yes, you may be sure of this, for Gods Word which is the Word of Truth, tells
you so in Gal. 4.6. Because we are Children of God, God has sent forth his
Spirit into our Hearts, whereby we call God Father, Our Father. His Spirit
bears Witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God.

Yes, dear Children, you shall know this in your own Hearts, if you come to our
Savior, and believe on him; and this blessed Spirit will tell you, that you
are God's dear Children; and assure you of God's Love to you; and now he has
forgiven you all your Sins; ^very Thing you have done amiss; and will also make
you good Children. You will hate all Lying, and Wickedness, and you shall be
happy and comfortable; for God will give you to see and enjoy all these great
and unspeakable Blessing which are yours, as bought for you, by your dear
Savior, even all those good Things which are written in that best of Books,
the Bible.

So that if o her Children beast and brag what fine Clothes they have got, how
very rich their Fathers are, what grand Houses they live in, and how much
Pleasure they take, and what fine Sights they see; O do you be glad, do you be
delighted and rejoice every Day to read in your Bibles, what Treasures, what
vast and never fading Treasures of heavenly Riches are yours.

O the dear Children of God are all Heirs or a Kingdom. Shortly they shall wear
Crown of pure Gold upon their Hearts, and stand before God, their Father, in
long white Robes in that glorious Gity, which is of pure Gold, (Rev. chap. 21.
ver. 18. and 21.) and where all the Street are of pure Gold.

For yet a little while, and the Day of the Lord shall come, in the which the
Heaven shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent Heat, and the Earth also, and all the Works that are therein shall be
burnt up.

Then shall your Savior, your King and your God, appear in his Glory, with all
the heavenly Hosts of Angels and Archangels with him, and every Eye shall see
him.

O but the Wicked, such as never sought him, such as were never delivered from
their sinful State; nor believed on him, nor loved him, when they were upon
Earth; O they will strive to hide themselves from him, but in vain; they will
be ashamed to look on him, when they think how they slighted him, how they
pierced him with their Sins. O it will be a dreadful, terrible Day indeed to
all such.

But all God's dear Children, O they will lift up their Heads with Joy; they
will look (...) with gladness; and their dear Savior will ^mile upon them; he
will own them, and will embrace hem, and fill their happy Souls as full of hi^
Love and glory, and comfort as ever they can h^ld. He will take them up unto
himself, and they shall live and praise, and reign wit^ their God and Savior
for ever and ever.

O, surely dear Children, nothing, no nothing should hinder you from coming to
such a good* such a loving Savior as our Jesus is!

O then do not say, I am not old enough, nor big enough to seek Jesus, and to
know these Things, O dear Children, none of you are to^ young, nor too little
to know and love our Savior; you cannot seek him too soon: If yo^ can but read
this little Discourse, and desir^ Jesus to bless you: indeed it is fit yo^
should go to Jesus. Mind who it is he cal^ and invites, it is CHILDREN, yes,
LITTLE CHILDREN, such as you are, that Jesus bids com^ unto him; and he will
teach you by his Spirit* all Things to make you wise unto Salvation God
Almighty draw your tender Hearts unto himself, I pray God he may; and may all
you^ Hearts j^in with mine, and say AMEN Com^ Lord Jesus, draw us to thy self,
and fill us wit^ thy Love; so be it.

FINIS.

