THE HISTORY OF THE COLONY OF NOVA-CAESARIA, OR NEW JERSEY: CONTAINING, AN
ACCOUNT OF ITS FIRST SETTLEMENT, PROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENTS, THE ORIGINAL AND
PRESENT CONSTITUTION, AND OTHER EVENTS, TO THE YEAR 1721. WITH SOME PARTICULARS
SINCE; AND A SHORT VIEW OF ITS PRESENT STATE.

BY SAMUEL SMITH.

BURLINGTON, IN NEW JERSEY: Printed and Sold by JAMES PARKER: Sold also by
DAVID HALL, in PHILADELPHIA. MDCCLXV.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. A brief view of the discovery of America, and of the present
prevailing opinion respecting the manner it originally became peopled. page 1
CHAP. II. An account of the country on Delaware and the North-River, while the
first was in possession of the Dutch and Swedes. p. 19 CHAP. III. The
particulars of the English conquest, in 1664; and the transactions afterward,
respecting the inhabitants on Delaware: The arrival of Francis Lovelace, as
governor; part of his administration, and description of the Hoarkills. p. 35
CHAP. IV. King Charles the second, and duke of York's grants, whence lord
Berkeley and sir George Carteret became seized of New Jersey: The first
constitution of government under them: The settlement of Bergen, Middletown,
Shrewsbury, and Elizabeth-Town: Philip Carteret appointed governor of Jersey:
The Indian purchase of Elizabeth-Town, by the settlers; and the first general
Indian purchase by the proprietors, etc. p. 59. CHAP. V. Major Andross
appointed governor of New York: Takes possession at Delaware: Arrival of the
first English settlers to West-Jersey, under the duke of York's title: Lord
Berkeley assigns his moiety of New Jersey to Byllinge, and he in trust to
others: Their letter and first commission: New Jersey divided into the
provinces East and West Jersey; and the declaration of the West-Jersey
proprietors. p. 77. CHAP. VI. Arrival of more settlers to West-Jersey: Their
difficulties: Their purchases from the Indians: They lay out a town: Some of
their first sentiments of the country; and an account of the duke of York's two
last grants, being for the provinces East and West New Jersey separately. p. 92
CHAP. VII. Letters from some of the settlers of West-Jersey; and arguments
against the customs imposed at the Hoarkill by the governor of New York. p. 111
CHAP. VIII. The first form of government in West-Jersey under the proprietors:
The first laws they made: The method, of regulating land affairs; and a further
account of the Indians found in the first settled parts of these provinces. p.
12^ CHAP. IX. Another ship arrives at West-Jersey: Proceedings of the general
assembly of West Jersey: Sir George Carteret's death: Conveyances to the twelve
Eastern proprietors: Their proposals and regulations in several respects;
particularly in disposing of lands and building a town at Ambo point: The
twelve proprietors each take a partner, and thence are called the twenty-four;
to whom the duke of York makes a third and last grant: The twenty four
establish the council of proprietors of East-Jersey, on the footing it now is:
A general view of the improvements in East-Jersey in 1682: A compendium of some
of the first laws passed at Elizabeth-Town: Doubts started whether the
government of West-Jersey was granted with the soil: Jenings continued governor
of West-Jersey: And laws now passed there. p. 150 CHAP. X. Robert Barclay
appointed governor of East-Jersey, and T. Rudyard deputy: Letters from Rudyard,
S. Groom, Lawrie, and others, concerned in that settlement. p. 166 CHAP. XI.
Manner of the West-Jersey government in 1684: their unsettled state and
succession of governors: Danger of suffering for want of food in 1687: The
division line run by G. Keith; an agreement between the governors Coxe and
Barclay: Alteration in the manner of locating lands in West Jersey, and the
method now in use fixed: No person in West-Jersey to purchase from the Indians,
without the consent of the council of proprietors: And instructions respecting
deeds and warrants for taking up lands. p. 189 CHAP. XII. A flood at Delaware
falls: Death and character of Thomas Olive, Thomas Gardener and John Woolston:
Commotions in East and West Jersey: Surrender of the two governments to queen
Anne: Her acceptance thereof; and her commission to lord Cornbury. p. 208 CHAP.
XIII. Instructions from queen Anne to lord Cornbury. p. 230 CHAP. XIV.
Observations on lord Cornbury's instructions, and the privileges originally
granted to the settlers; with abstracts of some of them. p. 261 CHAP. XV. Lord
Cornbury convenes the first general assembly after the surrender: His speech,
their address, and other proceedings: Queen Anne's proclamation for
ascertaining the rates of coin: Cornbury dissolves the assembly, and meets a
new one to his mind: Their proceedings and dissolution: A summary of the
establishment and practice of the council of proprietors of West-Jersey:
Another assembly called; who remonstrate the grievances of the province. p. 275
CHAP. XVI. Lord Cornbury's answer to the assembly's remonstrance. p. 296 CHAP.
XVII. The assembly's reply to lord Cornbury's answer to there remonstrance. p.
311 CHAP. XVIII. Memorial of the West-Jersey proprietors residing in England,
to the lords commissioners for trade and plantations: The lieutenant governor,
with some of the council, address the queen: The last meeting of assembly under
Cornbury's administration: They continue their complaints: Samuel Jenings's
death and character. p. 336 CHAP. XIX. Lord Lovelace arrives governor: Convenes
a new assembly; they apply to him for a hearing on the subject of the
lieutenant governor and council's application to the queen: His death; is
succeeded by the lieutenant governor Ingolds^y: The first paper currency:
Arrival of governor Hunter: A short account of the first expedition (...)
Canada: A new assembly chosen: Their first session in Hunter time. p. 355 CHAP.
XX. Representation of the general assembly to governor Hunter, and his answer.
p. 375 CHAP. XXI. A session of general assembly: A second expedition to Canada:
Meeting of a new assembly: They quarrel: Some members designedly absent
themselves: Expelled the house: Several of them again returned, and refused
seats: A fruitful session at Crosswicks: Last session in Hunter's time: An act
passed for running the division line between East and West-Jersey: William
Burnet arrives governor: An uncommon wet harvest: Governor Burnet meets a new
assembly. p. 399 CHAP. XXII. Occurrences since the year 1721. p. 419 CHAP.
XXIII. The present state of Indian affairs in New Jersey, p. 440 CHAP. XXIV. A
short geographical description of the province; and additional view of its
present state. p. 485
APPENDIX.
NUMB. I. The concessions and agreements of the lords proprietors of the
province of New Coesaria, or New Jersey, to and with all and every of the
adventurers, and all such as shall settle or plant there. p. 512 NUMB. II. The
concessions and agreements of the proprietors, freeholders and inhabitants of
the province of West New Jersey, in America. p. 521 NUMB. III. A brief account
of the province of East-Jersey, in America, published by the present
proprietors, for information of all such persons who are or may be inclined to
settle themselves, families and servants, in that country. p. 539 NUMB. IV.
Governor Coxe's narrative relating to the division line, directed to the
council of proprietors of West-Jersey. p. 546 NUMB. V. The council of
proprietors of West-Jersey to governor Burnet. p. 551 NUMB. VI. Reasons and
proposals for an amendment of the quintipartite line, and the act made for the
confirmation thereof. p. 554 NUMB. VII. Minute of the council of proprietors,
held at the city of Perth-Amboy, August 17, 1742. p. 555 NUMB. VIII. The
remonstrance and humble petition of the inhabitants of East New Jersey. p. 558
NUMB. IX. The memorial of the proprietors of East New Jersey. p. 560 NUMB. X.
Opinion and answer to (...) lord commissioners, etc. p. 562 NUMB. XI. Memorial
of the East Jersey proprietors to the lords of trade. p. 564. NUMB. XII. The
petition of the proprietors of East and West Jersey, to the lords justices. p.
565 NUMB. XIII. Representation of the lords of trade to the lords justices. p.
566 NUMB. XIV. The memorial of the proprietors of East and West Jersey. p. 570
THE PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH among the following Papers there are some of consequence in point of
interest to most concerned in the province of New Jersey, several of them were
not to be found on record in the public offices, several were scattered in
different provinces, others could not be easily obtained, some though in print
formerly were in but few hands, some never made public, and many in danger of
being lost; on this account whatever success may attend this undertaking as to
the general design, or disposition of the facts, it is some satisfaction, that
the labor of collecting them cannot be altogether useless.

Whoever will be at the trouble of an enquiry into the general inexperience and
methods of colonizing formerly, especially at the time the settlements here
were first attempted under grants, will find but little reason to doubt, that
views of permanent stability to religious and civil freedom, must have been the
inducement to the original adventurers to think of such a voyage. The
New England governments had before been considerably settled from motives of a
like kind; these, though near forty years later in their removal, were also
protestant dissenters, and involved in the general insecurity, that such with
reason apprehended in the reign of king Charles the second; and the actual
sufferings of many, through the mistaken policy of that time, merely for a free
exercise of their religious sentiments, with their own accounts of their (...),
renders it as to them indisputable; and in this, as they do not appear to have
been charged with any indirect violation of religious integrity, so no instance
occurs of dissatisfaction among themselves, though many of them were remarkably
tender on that head; with the motives above, some of them had without doubt, a
distant prospect also of improving their estates; but this could not be the
case so much at first as afterward.

However smooth the passage may look now, it must be a reasonable supposition,
that persons and families, who lived well (which was the circumstance of many
of the settlers of this province) found it no inconsiderable trial, to unsettle
and remove 3000 miles; besides parting with the usual connections of friendship
and neighborhood, it was in a great measure an unprov'd experiment; and then
much out of the common course of things: The navigation also to this part of
the continent, for want of experience, looked difficult, and the wilderness
formidable; but whatever* were their motives, they successively encountered the
hazards and hardships to which the enterprise was exposed; and, at their own
expense, by the blessing of divine providence on their labor, frugality and
industry, laid the foundation for the present improvement of territory to the
mother country; which, though not in many respects to be compared to colonies of
greater extent and growth, is nevertheless a link in the chain of some
considerable importance.

That a century should pass, and very little appear abroad of what the settlers
here have been doing, is not so much to be wondered at, when their difficulties
in procuring the conveniences of living are considered; but this will hardly
be allowed, when the too general negligence as to particular rights of
individuals, and the reputation of civil policy comes in question: Till very
lately, a variety of matters of that kind, were as much secrets to most of the
inhabitants, as they commonly are to strangers; and yet in many parts of the
province, are justly made the subject of general complaint.

Whether the endeavors here used for bringing these into one historical view,
will sufficiently answer the purposes of a more general information, must now
be submitted to experience; they were undertaken with hopes of service to the
province, and if found but in a small degree contributing to that, the end is
so far answered: With this view, they were several years since designed for the
public, and nearly prepared; but other occasions interfering, necessarily
delayed their appearance much longer than was expected. Being sent to the press
sometime in the last spring, no transaction that has happened since, could be
included, or is in any respect alluded to: On a continuation, these will of
course follow in their places.

To a collection principally intended to consist of a plain sta^e of facts,
much need not be premised; this may with justice be said, that through the
whole, the strictest impartiality has been attended to, and if in other
respects executed according to intention, they are offered to the public, with
as few material omissions, as the present opportunities of collecting would
allow; yet the diffidence attending an attempt from papers in great part not
used before on the like occasion, would plead for some allowances, as a few
mistakes, especially in dates, and other minutioe, among the smaller facts, may
have escaped, notwithstanding an assiduous care to avoid them; but these it is
hoped will not be found so considerable, as to obstruct the service intended.

As nothing is aimed at, more than a fair and candid representation; any
friendly hints, or materials necessary either for correction or improvement,
will be thankfully received, and the first opportunity embraced to apply them
accordingly.

BURLINGTON, 5th October, 1765.
THE HISTORY OF NEW JERSEY.
CHAP. I.
A brief view of the discovery of America, and of the present prevailing
opinion respecting the manner it originally became peopled.
THE first effectual discoverers of America among the moderns, were
Christophoro Colon, or Colombo, and Americo Vespucci, or Vesputius; of these
the former is supposed to have been a Genoese by birth, the other a native of
Florence: From him the new world took its name, yet his history in other
particulars is too intricate to afford much satisfaction. He made two voyages
in 1497 and 1498, in the service of Spain: Another in 1501, in the service of
Portugal: In the first he fell in among the Caribbee islands; and the last with
three ships arrived to and discovered the eastern continent of America, in five
degrees of south latitude.

America is a more common than fitting name, seeing Americus Vespucius the
Florentine, from whom this name is derived, was not the first finder nor author
of that discovery: Columbus will challenge that, and more justly, with whom and
under whom Americus made his first voyage; howsoever after that he coasted a
great part of the continent which Columbus had not seen, at the charges of the
Ca^tilian and Portugal kings; but so it might more rightly be termed Cabotia or
Sebastiana, of Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian, which discovered more of the
continent than they both, about the same time, first employed by king Henry the
seventh of England. -- Columbus yet as the first discoverer deserves the name,
both of the country for the first finding, and of modesty, for not naming it by
himself, seeking rather effects than names of his exploits. Purchas's Pilgrim,
p. 792.


That of the first under the well-known name of Christopher Columbus, Columbus
is readily traced; with him therefore we begin, as the person principally
concerned in the discovery.

He had applied himself to the study of astronomy and geography, and very early
appeared to have a more than common desire to understand the state of all
countries upon the face of the globe, and to make new discoveries; which
probably was his reason for settling at Lisbon, no nation having pushed their
discoveries further than the Portuguese at that time; here he employed himself
in drawing maps and charts, and preparing himself for future enterprises. He
married and settled in Lisbon, was of a good family, a grave and temperate man,
His son who wrote his history, says, he was moderately tall and long visaged,
his complexion a good red and white, that he had light eyes, and cheeks
somewhat full, but neither too fat nor too lean; that in his youth he had fair
hair, which turned gray before he was thirty years of age; that he was moderate
in eating and drinking, affected a plain modest garb or dress; that he was
naturally grave, but affable to strangers, and pleasant frequently among his
domestics, strict and devout in religious matters, and though a seaman, was never
heard to swear or curse.
of competent learning* studious in the mathematics, and from his youth bred
to navigation.

What the particular motives were that induced him to search after this new
world, are not certainly known; some attribute it to informations he had
received, others to his skill in the nature of the globe; that this made him
conclude it probable there must be a great tract of land to the westward of
Spain, that it was not to be imagined the sun when it set in that horizon gave
light to no body: Whatever gave rise to the project, a discovery he resolved to
attempt, and being unable to do it at his own charge, he first offered his
service to the Genoe^e, next to the king of Portugal; not meeting with
encouragement from either, sends his brother Bartho^omew to Henry vii.
he sent his brother Bartholomew to England, to offer his service to Henry the
seventh: King Henry approved his proposals; but the brother on his return being
taken by pirates, and Columbus receiving no answer, left Portugal and went to
Spain: On his application to Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen of Castile
and Arragon, he succeeded so well, that in the year 1492, they provided him
with money, and entrusted him with three small ships for the expedition; he
also obtained a grant from them to be admiral of the western seas; all civil
employments as well as governments in the continent or world to be discovered
were to be wholly at his disposal; and besides the revenues of the posts of
admiral and viceroy, he was to enjoy a tenth of all the profits arising by
future conquests: sails with 90 men.
his little squadron manned only with ninety men set sail from Palos for the
Canaries the third of the month called August, 1492, and arriving at those
islands the twelfth, sailed from thence the first of September, upon his grand
design: he had not sailed a fortnight to the westward before his men began to
mumur at the enterprise; they observed the wind constantly set from east to
west, and apprehended there would be no possibility of returning if they missed
the land they were made to expect; on the nineteenth observing birds to fly
over their ships, and on the twenty-second weeds driving by them, they began to
be better satisfied, concluding they were not far from land: they continued
their course several days farther westward, and meeting with no land, the
seamen mutinied to that degree, that they were almost ready to throw the
admiral overboard, and return home, when happily for him they saw more birds,
weeds, pieces of boards, canes, and a shrub with the berries upon it, swim by
them, which made them conjecture there must be islands thereabouts: It was on
the eleventh of October, about ten at night, that the admiral first discovered
a light upon the island of Guanahani, His first discovery,
A bay or harbor of sea or water.
or St. Salvador, as he named it, in consideration that the sight of it
delivered him and his men from the fear of perishing: It is one of the Bahama
islands, about fifteen leagues long, in the north latitude of 15 degrees. All
that is commonly remembered of the sailor who first discovered land, is, that
expecting some great reward from the king of Spain, and disappointed, he took
it in his head in a rage to renounce Christianity, and turned Mohammedan.
Day appearing, the ships came to anchor very near the island; the natives
crowded the shore, and beheld the ships of these new comers with astonishment,
taking them for living creatures. One of the River Indians, in his speech at
the treaty of Albany, 1754, relates the surprise of their forefathers at the
sight of the first ship that came up the North river in the same manner: his
speech so far as relates to this subject was as follows: FATHERS, we are
greatly rejoiced to see you all here; it is by the will of heaven that we are
met here, and we thank you for this opportunity of seeing you altogether, as it
is a long while since we had such a one: FATHERS who sit present here, we will
just give you a short relation of the long friendship which has subsisted
between the white people of this country and us: our forefathers had a castle
on this river; as one of them walked out he saw something on the river, but was
at a loss to know what it was; he took it at first for a great fish; he ran
into the castle, and gave notice to the other Indians; two of our forefathers
went to see what it was, and found it a vessel with men in it; they immediately
joined hands with the people in the vessel, and became friends.
The admiral believing there was no great danger to be apprehended from them,
went ashore in his boat, with the royal standard, as did the other two
captains, with their colors flying, and took possession of the country in the
name of the king and queen of Spain with great solemnity; the Indians mean
while stood gazing at the Spaniards without attempting to oppose them. The
admiral ordered strings of glass beads, caps and toys to be distributed among
the natives, with which they seemed much pleased: The principal ornament about
them was a thin gold plate in the form of a crescent, hanging from the nose
over the upper lip; the admiral demanding by signs, whence they had their gold
plates, they pointed to the south and south-west; he rowed in his boats about
the island, to discover if there was any thing worth his settling there,
followed by the natives every where, who seemed to admire him and his people as
something more than human: From this island coasting southward 180 leagues, he
arrived at another, which he called Hispaniola, where his own ship striking on
a hidden rock was lost; discovers Hispaniola.
he and his crew were taken on board one of the other vessels; landing here,
the natives, instead of behaving as the others had done, fled from him; but
taking one of their women, treating her kindly, and then letting her go back
among them, she brought numbers to traffic, who seemed very peaceably
disposed; and by some means or other finding there were gold mines in this
island, Columbus, aided by the natives, built a fort, left thirty-nine men,
with provisions for a year, seeds to sow, and trinkets to trade with the
natives: After discovering a good part of the north and east coast of
Hispaniola, trading with the Indians in diverse places, and near three months
stay in the island, returns,
he bent his course homewards, and arrived at Palos, in Andalusia, early in the
spring 1492, 3; having performed the voyage in seven months and eleven days:
Here the people received him with a solemn procession and thanksgiving for his
return, most of his seamen belonging to that port; the king and queen of Spain
being at Barcelona, when the admiral drew near the city, the court went out to
meet him; he was received with the honors due to a sovereign prince: Having
given an account of his voyage, he begged to be equipped according to the
dignity of his character of admiral and viceroy* that he might plant colonies
in the places he had thus discovered, which was readily granted; and he
afterward made diverse other voyages to America. He died in the city of
Validolid in Spain, in the spring 1506, and was buried in the cathedral of
Seville, with this inscription on his tomb, that Columbus had given a new world
to Castile and Leon.


The fame of the discovery, and of the rich cargoes brought to Old Spain at
several times from thence, being spread through other nations, gave rise to
other adventurers. The next attempt was made by Sebastian Cabot, Cabot's
a Venetian by extraction, but born in England, and being much given to the
study of navigation, and well skilled in cosmography, he believed there might
be a passage found by the north-west to the East Indies shorter than that
lately discovered by the Cape of Goodhope; he made Interest with Henry the
seventh of England, who fitted out two ships to make the discovery.

In 1497, Cabot sailed from Lisbon, in the beginning of summer, and steering
his course north-west, came up with land about 60 degrees north latitude,
adventure.
supposed to have been Greenland; finds Greenland
This country is considered as part of the American continent, both by Horni^s
and Grotius. Grotius apud Horn. de orig. Gent. American, Lib. Iii. c. 5, 6, pa.
149, 162. ut et ipse Horn. ibid.
but perceiving the land still run north, he changed his course, in hopes of
finding a passage in less latitude. About the 50th degree he saw that which is
now well known by the name of Newfoundland: and Newfoundland
Here he took three of the natives, and coasted southward to the latitude of 38
degrees; (about Maryland) his provisions growing scarce, and no supplies there
to be expected, he returned to England, where the natives he brought lived a
considerable time. King Henry vii. commissioned John Cabot (5th of March, in
the eleventh year of his reign) and his three sons, to sail in que^t of unknown
lands, and to annex them to the crown of England; with this clause, which
before this time have been unknown to all christians. His first essay as
related by sir Humphry Gilbert, who was employed in the like service afterward
by queen Elizabeth, was to discover a north west passage to Cathay of China; in
which voyage he sailed very far eastward, with a quarter of the north, on the
north side of Terra de Labrador, till he came into the north latitude of sixty
seven degrees and a half. In his next voyage, which was made with his son
Sebastian, in the year 1497; he steered to the south side of Labrador, and fell
in with the island of Baccal^os, which is Newfoundland, and took possession
both of that island and all the coast of the north east part of America, as far
as Cape Florida; which he also by landing in several parts of it, claimed in
the name of his master, the king of England.

In memory of this discovery, and by way of evidence, there was a map or chart
of the whole coast of North America drawn by Sebastian Cabot himself, with his
picture and this title, Effigies Seb. Caboti Angli, Filii Jo. Caboti,
Venetiani, Militis Aurati, etc. and with the following account of the discovery
abovementioned,

In the year of our Lord 1497, John Cabot, a Venetian, and his son Sebastian
(with an English, fleet) set our from Bristol, and discovered that land, which
no man had before attempted. This discovery was made on the 24th of June about
five o'clock in the morning. This land he called Prima Vi^ta (or the first
seen) because it was that part, of which they had the first sight from the sea.
It is now called Bonavista. The island, which lies out before the land, he
called the island of St. John, probably because it was discovered on the
festival of St. John Baptist.

This map was hung up in his Majesty's privy-gallery at Whitehall; and, it is
to be feared, the nation was deprived of such a valuable testimonial of their
American title to the whole coast of North America, by the fire which destroyed
that gallery in the late King William's reign. Entick's Genesis Hist. of the late
war, Vol. 1. p. 168, etc.


From this voyage and discovery made by Cabot, the English have claimed the
country ever since, from the well known Jus Gentium, LAW OF NATIONS, that
whatever waste or uncultivated country is discovered, it is the right of that
prince who had been at the charge of the discovery. Grotius de jure belli ac
pacis* Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 17. Molloy de jure Mar. 422, 423. Justinian Inst.
Lib. 2. Tit. 1. Sect. 12 and 22.
This from universal suffrage gives at least a right of preemption, and
undoubtedly must be good against all but the Indian proprietors. Lex Market.
156. Molloy ut supra.


We have seen that in the discovery of North and South-America, inhabitants
were found at the places touched at; in all probability they were as
plentifully dispersed throughout the different countries of America; but how
these people originally came there, is a question not easily solved; though it
has for above two centuries, been the subject of much enquiry, it is not yet
arrived at a decision. If we are not astonished (says Voltai^e) that the
discoverers found flies in America; it is absurd to wonder that they should
meet with men. Univ. Hist. If European whites, and African negroes; are not
descended from the same original stock; a supposition confessedly adopted by
the celebrated historian, (it must be allowed) easy to come to a decision in
the present case.
All therefore that can be done, is to give a short view of the most probable
conjectures that have been hitherto offered.

It is not unlikely the new world was known to the Phenicians, even a
considerable time before the days of Plato; Phenicians.
who in all likelihood found but few (if any) inhabitants there; that they
contributed toward the planting of it, we have some reason to believe, as they
are supposed to have made three voyages thither; however that colonies from
other nations crossed the Atlantic, and landed in America, cannot be well
denied; Egyptians and Carthaginians
neither the Egyptians nor Carthaginians are supposed void of some traditional
knowledge of America, since they are believed Perizonius and Cellarius seem to
have inferred from thence, that the new world was not entirely unknown to the
remoter ages of antiquity.
to have communicated such knowledge to other nations; which if we admit, it
follows, that some of the ancient Egyptians and Carthaginians had been there,
and contributed toward peopling the continent, as well as the Phenicians. The
Author of the book de Mirabilibus Audit. supposed to be Aristotle; expressly
asserts the Carthaginians to have discovered an island beyond Hercules's
pillars, abounding with all necessaries, to which they frequently sailed; and
there several of them even fixed their habitations; but the senate, adds he,
would not permit their subjects to go thither any more, le^t it should prove
the depopulation of their own country. Aristot de mund. c. 3. et de Mira^
Audit. Christ. Cellar. ^bi supra, pa. 253. Jacob Perizon in AElion. Var. Hist.
Lib. 111. c. 18.
Several of the original American nations we are told, rent their garments, the
more effectually to express their grief on any malancholly occasion; the
Hebrews, Persians, Greeks, Sabines, and Latins, according to various authors,
did the same; from whence some may possibly imagine, that those Americans
deduced their origin from one or more of those nations; but this is too slender
a foundation for such belief: William Penn, in his letter to the committee of
the free society of traders in London, in 1683; gives a short sketch of his
opinion, touching the origin of the Indians here, whom he imagines to be of the
stock of the Jews, that after the dispersion of the ten tribes emigrated
through the eastermost parts of Asia, to the westernmost of America.
So that Mena^seh Ben Israel, appears to have wrongly concluded from thence,
that the Israelites were the progenitors of the Americans. Theophilus Spizelius
seems to have refuted this opinion: Though the Phenicians, Egyptians and
Carthaginians, might have planted some colonies, yet the bulk of the
inhabitants must certainly have deduced their origin from another part of the
world: Had the Phenicians and Egyptians peopled even a considerable part of
America, it would scarcely have been taken so little notice of by the ancients;
even supposing those nations had industriously endeavored to conceal their
western discoveries* for in such case, there must have been a constant
communication kept open between America, Egypt, and Phenicia, and a very
extensive trade carried on: so that many particulars relating to the new world,
must necessarily have transpired; nor could even the sailors themselves, who
navigated the Phenician ships, have omitted divulging many accounts of what
they observed on this continent; some of which would undoubtedly have been
transmitted to us.

That therefore, the Americans in general, were descended from a people who
inhabited a country not so far distant as Egypt and Phenicia, must be admitted:
Now no country can be pitched upon so proper and convenient for this purpose,
as the north-eastern part of Asia, particularly great Tartary, Siberia, and
more especially the Peninsula of Kamtschatka; Kamtschatka.
that probably was the tract through which many Tartarian colonies passed into
America, and peopled the most considerable part of it. This however, seems the
most prevailing opinion.

There is great reason to believe, that some of the western parts of
North America, must either be continuous to, or at no great distance from the
north-eastern part of Asia; which, we are not yet informed; but it is probable
east of Kamtschatka, there is an immense tract approaching to North America,
and that to this day, there remains at least a kind of communication between
them, by means of a chain of islands; it may also be supposed that Asia and
America, were formerly connected by an isthmus, which might have been destroyed
by an earthquake: such a supposition may be supported by the authority of those
writers who have rendered parallel instances credible, such as the disjunction
of Britain from Gaul, and Spain from the continent of Africa: A communication
between Asia and America, seems agreeable to truth, not only from what has been
advanced by Reland, but from the discoveries made by the Russians; an account
of which we find in the public prints of the year 1737, and since: According
to these, some of the ^zarina's subjects have touched at several islands, which
lie at a distance in the eastern direction from Japan and Kamtschatka, and
consequently between those countries and America. The people of these islands,
in some points, are said to resemble the Japanese, and to use pieces of money
with characters not unlike those of Japan. Leonard Enler, professor of
mathematics, and member of the imperial society at Petersburgh, seems to
imagine, that the north-eastern cape of Asia, discovered by capt. Behring, is
not thirty degrees off the last known head-land of California; but the
ingenious* Dobbs, governor of North Carolina, places them at a much greater
distance: Be that however as it may, that the sea between the most
north-eastern coast of Asia, and the most western part of California, allowing
such a sea to exist, California.
is interspersed with many islands, at no great distance from each other, may
be very naturally supposed; nay, if any credit may be given to the advices
lately received from Petersburgh, the connection of Asia and America, or at
least the communication between them, by means of such islands, is as good as
discovered.

That part of America next to Asia, is said to be much more populous than the
remoter eastern provinces or kingdoms; which is a manifest indication, that
this was first planted, by colonies coming from the nearest parts of Asia; Asia*
who settled here, and afterward spread themselves gradually over the new
world; from whence we may conclude, that the bulk of the Americans are
descended from the Tartars, Siberians, and people of Kamtschatka.

The people inhabiting the extreme north-eastern part of Asia, entirely want
horses, those animals not being able to live in so cold a region; it seems to
be agreed, that no horses were found in America, at the first discovery of it;
for that in several places, the natives used rein deer and large mastiff dogs
Some of the back Indians beyond Detroit, now make use of dogs to draw wood and
other matters on sleds.
instead of them, as many of the posterity of the ancient most northern
Scythians or Tartars did: The Epicerini, a people of Canada, when the Europeans
first came among them, asserted, that very far from them, in a western
direction, there lived a nation, who affirmed that foreign merchants, without
beards, in great ships, frequently visited their coasts: we are also told, that
in Quivira, Quivira.
several ships have been found, whose sterns were adorned with silver and gold,
which was a distinguishing characteristick of the Chinese and Japanese ships,
according to some good authors: That some Chinese vessels of considerable
force, were found wrecked in the Mare del nord, above Florida, which might have
been the same with those seen at Quivira, we learn from Ancosta. In Quatulia
too, a tradition prevailed, intimating that foreign merchants after a long
journey from the westward, arrived there, and that these merchants were
clothed in silk: From whence we may collect, that the Chinese visited America,
and communicated some of their customs to the people of that country, The
people (says M. de Guignes, in a memoir upon the ancient navigations of the
Chinese to America) whom we have always believed to have been confined within
the bounds of their own country, penetrated into America in the year 458 of the
Christian era. That they went thither by Japan and the countries of Ven-chin
and Tahan. By considering what the Chinese geographers say of the distance and
productions of these remote regions, he proves that Ven-chin is Jesso or Yedzo,
and that Ta han is the most eastern part of the north of Asia. From thence the
Chinese sailed toward the east, and fell in with the country of Fou-sang,
which, according to the Chinese distances, should lie to the north of
California. He gives us, from the annals of China, a short account of the
manners of the inhabitants of Fou-sang; he informs us further, that several
islands in the south sea were known to the Chinese; and also that coast which
John de Sama discovered in his passage from China to Mexico. To give a more
exact idea of these navigations, M. de Buache has constructed a chart, on
which he has traced with a great deal of accuracy, the route of the Chinese,
and noted the distances of the several countries. By this chart it appears,
that the geography of these parts, taken from the ancient books of the Chinese,
agrees very well with the late discoveries of the Russians. To this chart is
added part of another ancient chart drawn by the Japonese, in which are laid
down the north of Asia, and all the western coast of America, according to the
knowledge they had of it. This continent there appears entirely terminated on
the side of Asia, and we there see the isles which have been lately known to
the Russians only; and this proves the truth of the former Japonese
discoveries. This chart was brought from Japan by the celebrated Kempfer, and
afterward lodged in the cabinet of the deceased Sir Hans Sloane, president of
the royal society of London, who sent a copy of it to M. de Guignes.

After having determined the situation of all the countries to the east of
China, M. de Guignes remarks, that Chr. Columbus was not the first who
attempted discoveries toward the west: Long before him* the Arabians, whilst
they were masters of Spain and Portugal, enterprized the same thing from
Lisbon; but after having advanced far to the west, they were obliged to put
back to the Canaries; there they learnt, that formerly the inhabitants of these
islands had sailed toward the west for a month together, to discover new
countries. Thus we see, that the most barbarous people, without the knowledge
of the compass, were not afraid to expose themselves to the open sea in their
slight small vessels, and that it was not so difficult for them to get over to
America, as we imagine.

These researches, which of themselves gives us a great insight into the origin
of the Americans, led M. de Guignes to determine the rout of the colonies sent
to this continent. He thinks the greatest part of them passed thither by the
most eastern extremities of Asia, where the two continents are only separated
by a narrow straight, easy to cross. He reports instances of women, who from
Canada and Florida, have traveled to Tartary without seeing the ocean.

The commerce of the Chinese would naturally open a way to America, augment the
number of the inhabitants, and contribute to polish them. On this occasion M.
de Guignes observes, that the most civilized nations of the American continent
are situated on the coast which looks toward China, and that they come
originally from the north of America, i. e. from the neighborhood of those
countries where the Chinese landed, as Quivin and New Mexico, whence the
Mexicans came to settle in Mexico, properly so called, after having expelled
the ancient inhabitants.

M. de Guignes cites some authorities, which give us reason to believe, that
the streights of Magelian were known to the Chinese, and that the Coreans had a
settlement in Terra del Fuego. These navigations of the Chinese, and of the
most uncivilized nations, incline him to believe, that the people dispersed in
the isles to the south of the Indies, after having multiplied, migrated from
island to island, and by means of that chain of islands which reaches almost to
America, insensibly approached that continent. The example of the inhabitants
of the Canaries gives a probability to this conjecture. Gentleman's Magazine,
1753, p. 607.


especially as the Chinese manner of writing in Hieroglyphics, sufficiently
agrees with the American dialect. We learn from Hornius, the Hunns, or at least
a branch of that people, placed in the farthest part of Asia, had the
appellation of Cunadani, or Canadani, from Cunad, a place not far from the sea,
where some of them had their situation; hence we find a city in the upper
Hungary, built by their descendants, denominated Chonod, or Chunad, the
inhabitants of which, and those of the neighboring district, still retain the
name of Chonadi, or Cunadi; from these Hornius believes the natives of Canada
to Canada.
have deduced both their origin and denomination.

No small accession of strength will be brought to the opinion before advanced,
with respect to the peopling of America, by one particular incident, mentioned
in a short narrative of the late discoveries of the Russians. They found
peopled, as should seem, captain Behring's new land before mentioned, above
fifty German miles to the east of Kamtschatka; for coming to the entrance of a
great river, he sent his boats and men ashore, but they never returned, being
probably either killed or detained by the natives; nay, the public prints in
October, 1737, mention some particulars relating to the inhabitants of certain
islands between Kamtschatka, The new history of Kamtschatka, lately published
in the Russian language, and translated into English by J. Grieve, M. D. gives
a particular description of the customs and way of living of the inhabitants
there, which agrees in several particulars, and in the whole manner seems not
very different from the original customs of the North American Indians. For a
brief account of this history, see Monthly Review, vol. 30, p. 282.
Japan, and America, which seem to carry with them an air of authority. This
will amount to a fair presumption, that the islands or continent between
Kamtschatka, Japan, and California; still unknown to the Europeans, are
likewise inhabited; and if so, that those inhabitants must have advanced
gradually, from Tartary, Japan, and Kamtschatka, to the places wherein they are
fixed: From whence we may infer, that even the natives of California, and the
adjacent parts of America, took originally the same route; for that Tartary,
and Japan, must have been peopled before America, as lying nearer to the land
of Shinar, where the whole race of mankind was assembled before the dispersion,
will admit of no dispute; and that America should have received many colonies
from such neighboring countries as Tartary, Japan, and Kamtschatka, whether
they are continuous or contiguous to it, or connected with it, by some
intermediate continent, chain of islands, etc. is very natural to suppose. Vide
a memoir of M. Le Page du Pratz, containing an account of the travels of
Moncacht-ape; a civilized Indian of Louisiania, to the north-west parts of
America, G^nt. Mag. for Sept. 1753.
So that from the tract lately discovered to the east of Japan and Kamtschatka,
and the people settled there, we may infer the probability of America's being
planted in part by colonies drawn from the north-eastern regions of Asia; Asia.
for by such discovery, a nearer approach is made from Japan and Kamtschatka,
to the coast of California; and from this approach, a presumptive argument is
drawn in favor of the opinion here advanced.

But it is time now to proceed to other matters: Such as may incline to see the
subject further discussed, are for brevity's sake, on a point not material
enough to dwell long upon here, referred to the Univ. Hist. Vol. xx, Land.
Edit. 1748, pa. 157.
Whence many of the arguments on this head, are selected; and where the
inquisitive reader, amidst much of the incredible, (with which it has been
usual to load the subject) will find convincing proofs in favor of what is
here proposed.

Although the English had very early made the discovery of North America, a
considerable time elapsed before any advantages accrued: Sir Walter Raleigh, in
1584, was the first Englishman who attempted to plant a colony in it. Sir
Walter Raleigh's patent.
That is a regular colony under grants. -- Sir A^migell Wadd, of Yorkshire,
clerk of the council to Henry viii. and Edward ^i. and author of a book of
travels, was the first Englishman that made discoveries in America. H.
Walpole's a^^^dotes of painting, vol. ii. Catalogue of engravers, p. 18, 19. A
note.
In this year he obtained a patent from Queen Elizabeth, for him and his heirs,
to discover and possess for ever, under the crown of England, all such
countries and lands as were not then possessed by any christian prince, or
inhabited by christian people: -- Encouraged by this grant, Raleigh and other
partners, at diverse times, fitted out ships, and settled a colony at Roanor,
Now Roanoke, in North Carolina.
in Virginia; but notwithstanding various attempts, they met with such
discouragements, that no great improvements were made until some time
afterward.

In the year 1606, King James, without any regard to Raleigh's right, granted a
new patent of Virginia; in which was included New England, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland; from queen Elizabeth's time to the time
of this patent, the whole country bearing that name, which was given it by
Raleigh, in honor of his virgin mistress, as some say; others have it that it
took its rise from the country's not being settled before. The patentees
Patentees,
were sir Thomas Gates, sir George Summers, Richard Hackluyt, clerk, Edward
Maria Wingfield, Thomas Hanham, and Releigh Gilbert, Esqrs, William Parker,
George Popham, L. C. J. of England.
and others: The extent of the land granted, was from 34 to 45 degrees of north
latitude, with all the islands lying within 100 miles of the coast. Two
distinct colonies were to be planted by virtue of this patent, and the property
ascertained in two different bodies of adventurers: The first to belong to
Summers, Hackluyt, and Wingfield, under title of the London adventurers, or the
London company; and was to reach from 34 degrees to 41, with all lands, woods,
mines, minerals, etc. The other colony was to reach from the end of the first,
to 45 degrees, granting the same privileges to Hanham, Gilbert, Parker, and
Popham, under the name of the Plymouth company, with liberty to both colonies
to take as many partners as they pleased; forbidding others to plant within
those degrees, without their license; only reserving the 5th part of all gold
and silver mines, and the 15th part of copper, to the use of the crown. By
virtue of this grant, the London company fitted out several ships with
artificers of every kind, and all things requisite for a new settlement; which
failed for America, and planted a colony there; but in the year 1623, there
were so many complaints made of bad management, that on enquiry a Quo warranto
was issued against the patent; and after a trial had in the king's bench, it
was declared forfeited; Other accounts say, the patent was dissolved by the
king's proclamation, in 1624; and that though a quo warranto was issued against
it, no determination followed in the courts of justice.
since which time Virginia has been under the immediate direction of the crown.

In the same year the patent was granted, the Plymouth company also attempted
to make a settlement; but with no great success, until about the year 1620,
when they sent a fresh recruit from England, under the command of capt.
Standish, who arrived at Cape Cod in the latitude of 42 degrees, and having
turned the cape, found a commodious harbor opposite the point, at the mouth of
the bay, at the entry of which were two islands well stocked with wood: Here
they built a town, Plymouth.
which they called Plymouth. About this time the colonies in New England were
much augmented; multitudes of dissenters thinking this a good opportunity of
enjoying liberty of conscience, offered their service to the Plymouth company;
and the grand patent being delivered up to the king, particular patents were
granted to the lord Musgrave, other patents granted.
the duke of Richmond, the earl of Carlisle, the lord Edward Georges, and new
colonies were planted in diverse places.

CHAP. II.
An account of the country on Delaware, and the North river, while the first
was in possession of the Dutch and Swedes.
FROM what has been said, it is evident that the colonies New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, and Maryland, were included in the great patent, last mentioned;
but that becoming void, the crown was at liberty to regrant the same to others;
but it does not appear that any part of those provinces was settled by virtue
thereof; nor indeed was any distinct discovery of them made, until many years
afterward. New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and other lands adjacent, notwithstanding
the ancient right of the crown of England, deduced as aforesaid, had two
pretenders to them; the Dutch and the Swedes: The claim the former set up, was
under color of a discovery made in the year 1609, Dutch claim.
by Henry Hudson, an Englishman, commander of a ship called the Half Moon,
fitted out from Holland by the East India company, to discover by a north-west
passage, a nearer way to China: In this voyage he sailed up to the place now
New York, and up the river, from him called Hudson's river; and returning
sometime after to Amsterdam, the Dutch pretended to have purchased the chart he
made of the American coast; and having obtained a patent from the states, in
the year 1614, to trade to New England, they settled in New York, which they
called New-Netherland; and kept possession until sir Samuel Argole, governor of
Virginia, disputed their title; alleging that the country having been
discovered by an Englishman, in right of his master, he could not suffer it to
be alienated from the crown, without the king's consent: he therefore compelled
the Dutch colony to submit to him, and to hold it under the English: But
sometime after a new governor coming from Amsterdam, they not only neglected to
pay their usual acknowledgement to the governor of Virginia, but in the year
1623, fortified their colony, by building several forts: One on the Delaware,
(by them called South River) near Gloucester, in New Jersey, which they named
Nassau; a second on Hudson's, (the North River) in the province of New York,
which they named Fort Orange; and a third on Connecticut river, (by them called
the Fresh-River) which they named the Hirsse of Good Hope. Hudson's River lying
near the sea, and the navigation esteemed less difficult than the other, their
settlements were chiefly on both sides of that river; at the entrance of which,
the town by them also called New Amsterdam, was built; so that by the time the
Swedes came into America, which was a few years after, they had wholly quitted
the land adjacent to the river Delaware.

The proceedings of the Dutch in building the forts, and in a manner taking
possession of the country, having been represented to king Charles the first,
his ambassadors at the Hague made such pressing instances to the states, that
they disowned having given any commission for what the Dutch had done, and laid
the blame on their East India company. Upon this king Charles gave a commission
to sir George Calvert, lately made lord Baltimore; About the year 1620, while
George Calvert, afterward lord Baltimore, was secretary of state to James 1st;
he obtained a patent for him and his heirs, to be absolute lord and proprietor
(with the royalties of a count Palatine) of the province of Avalon, in New
foundland, which was so named by him, from Avalon, in Somer^etshire; wherein
Glastonbury stands the first fruits of christianity in Britain; as the other
was in that part of America, there he built a fine house, in Ferryland, and
spent L. 25,000 in advancing this new plantation: after the death of king
James, he went twice in person to Newfoundland: -- finding his plantation very
much exposed to the insults of the French, he was at ^ast forced to abandon it:
whereupon he went over to Virginia, and after having viewed those parts, came
to England, and obtained from king Charles, who had as great a regard and
affection for him as king James) a patent to him and his heirs, for Maryland:
-- that king naming it in honor of his beloved queen Henrietta Maria. Biogr.
Britania, Art. Geo. Calvert.
to possess and plant that part of America, now called Maryland; and to sir
Edmond Loeyden, or Ployden, to plant the northern parts, toward New England.
The Dutch afraid of the power of the English, were willing to compound matters
a second time; offering to leave their plantations, in consideration of L. 2500
to be paid them for the charges they had been at: But soon after, king Charles
being involved in his troubles, was hindered from supporting his colonies; they
therefore not only fell from their first proposals, but as was reported,
furnished the natives with arms, and taught them the use of them, that by their
assistance they might dispossess the English all around them.

Matters thus circumstanced, we shall leave them, in order to trace their
neighbors, the Swedes Swedes.
into America; the first settlement of whom, according to their own account,
was thus occasioned Hist. of Swedeland in America, by Thomas Companius Holm,
printed at Stockholm anno 1702.
In the reign of Gustaphus Adolphus, and in the year 1626, an eminent merchant
named William Useling, gave a great character of this country, applauding it
for fruitful fertile land, abounding with all necessaries of life; and used
many arguments to persuade the Swedes to settle a colony here: These were so
prevalent, that Gustavus issued a proclamation at Stockholm, exhorting his
subjects to contribute to a company associated to the purpose aforesaid, which
was called the West India company, confirmed by that prince: In a general
assembly the year following, sums of money were raised to carry on the intended
settlement, to which the king, the lords of the council, the chief of his
barons, knights, coronets, principal officers in his militia, bishops, clergy,
and diverse of the common people of Swedeland, Finnland and Liffland,
contributed; and responsible persons were chosen to see what was proposed put
in execution, consisting of an admiral, a vice admiral, merchants, factors,
commissaries, etc. and it was concluded to get as many as they thought fit, of
those who would voluntarily ship themselves to America, to settle and cultivate
a colony.

In 1627, the Swedes and Finns accordingly came over hither: Their first
landing was at Cape Inlopen; the sight created a pleasure, and they named it
Paradise Point: Some time after they purchased of some Indians (but whether of
such as had the proper right to convey is not said) the land from Cape Inlopen
to the Falls of Delaware, on both sides the river, which they called
New-Swedeland Stream; and made presents to the Indian chiefs, to obtain
peaceable possession of the land so purchased: But the Dutch continuing their
pretensions, in 1630 one David Pietersz de vries, their countryman, built a
fort within the capes of Delaware, on the west, about two leagues from Cape
Cornelius, at the place now Lewis-Town, then and at present often called by the
name of Hoarkill.

In 1631, the Swedes also built a fort on the west of Delaware, to which they
gave the name the ruins of it yet bears, Christeen. Christeen.
Near Wilmington, it gives name to a noted creek there.
Here a small town was laid out by Peter Lindstrom, their engineer, and here
they first settled; but this settlement was afterward demolished by the Dutch.

On an island called Tennecum, Tennecum
sixteen miles above this town, the Swedes erected another fort, which they
named New Gottemburgh; and John Printz, their governor, built a fine house, and
other suitable accommodations; planted an orchard, and called his settlement
Printz's Hall: The principal freemen had also their plantations on this island.

About this time the Swedes also built forts at Chester, and other places. In
the same year Chancellor Oxestiern, ambassador from Sweden, made application to
king Charles the first, to have the right the English claimed by their being
the first discoverers yielded up: it was, (as they say,) the proof an
uncertainty given up accordingly: They also said they had purchased the
pretense the Dutch claimed by virtue of the prior settlement, and buildings
here; most of which were destroyed before their arrival.

If this be true, the Dutch it seems did not think proper long to abide by
their contract; but gave the Swedes disturbances, by encroaching on their new
settlement; and both of them joined to dispossess the English, who also
attempted to settle the eastern side of Delaware: one Kieft, ^ director under
the states of Holland, assisted by the Swedes, drove the English away, and
hired the Swedes to keep them out: The Dutch complained, that the Swedish
governor judging this a fair opportunity, Elsingburgh.
built fort Elsinburgh on the place from whence the English had been driven,
and from thence used great freedom with their vessels, and all others bound up
the river, making them strike to the fort; from which they also sent men on
board to know whence the vessels came: This the Dutch deemed exercising an
authority in a country not their own. The account here is from a manuscript
copy, said to be printed in Holland, anno 1662, the original in the late sir
Hans Sloane's collection, entitled, A brief accountof New Netherland. -- In
1683 the Dutch had a meeting*place for religious worship at New Castle; and the
Swedes three, one at Christeen, one at Tenecum, and one at Wicoco.
But the Musketoes were so numerous, the Swedes were unable to live here, and
therefore removing, named the place Musketoeburgh.

The Dutch seem to have had a very great opinion of the land near the Delaware,
and were under great apprehensions of being dispossessed by the English, who
they complained had diverse times attempted to settle about that river and
judged if they once got footing, they would soon secure every part, so that
neither Hollander nor Swede would have any thing to say here; in particular
they mention sir Edmond Ploeyden, Ploeyden.
as claiming property in the country, under a grant from king James the first,
who they allege declined any dispute with them, but threatened to give the
Swedes a visit, in order to dispossess them. In 1648, a pamphlet was published,
entitled, A description of the province of New Albion, and a direction for
adventurers with small stock to get two for one, and good land freely; and for
gentlemen and all servants, laborers and artificers, to live plentifully; and
a former description reprinted, of the healthiest, pleasantest and richest
plantation of New Albion in North Virginia, proved by thirteen witnesses;
together with a letter from master Robert Evelin, that lived there many years,
showing the particularities and excellency thereof; with a brief of the charge
of victualling and necessaries, to transport and buy stock for each planter or
labourer there, to get his master L. 50 per annum, or more, in twelve trades,
and at L. 10, charges only a man.

From a few extracts of this pamphlet, the reader will see an account of the
country in some respects more descriptive than is commonly to be found of that
date; he will however, allow for a little more being said than was necessary in
some places.

Now for the full and ample satisfaction of the reader, of his majesty's just
title, and power to grant, enjoy, and possess these countries, as well against
aliens as Indians, which this forty years has not been by print declared, you
may read at large master Hacluit's voyages and discoveries, ma^ter Purchase and
captain Smiths: for when the Spaniard and Portugal discovered and possessed 140
years since the East Indies, Brasill, the south part of America, the Charibees
and Antell isles, and seated Saint John de Porto Rico, Hispaniola, Jamaica and
Cuba, and the fort and port of Havannah, against the gulf and current, Batuana
isles, and point of Florida; then that most powerful and richest king of
Europe, king Henry the seventh of England, sent out an Englishman born at
Bristol, called Ca^ot, granted under his great s^ale to him all places and
countries by him to be discovered, and possessed, who then beginning at Cape
Florida discovered, entered on, took possession, set up crosses, and procured
atturnment and acknowledgement of the Indian kings to his then majesty, as
head, lord and emperor of the south west America, all along that coast both in
Florida from 20 degrees to 35, where old Virginia in 35 and 30 minutes, 65
years since was ^eated by 5 several colonies about Croatan cape, Haloraske, and
Rawley's isle, by sir Walter Rawley, who had from queen Elizabeth that place,
and two hundred leagues from it in all places adjoining; sir Richard
Greenfield, sir Ralph Lane, and master White his partners seating and
fortifying there; the said Ca^ot farther taking possession in 37, of that part
called Virginia and Chisapeack Bay being now his majesty's demesne colony of
Virginia, and of the next great bay in or near 39* called now by the Dutch Cape
Henlopen, the south river, and by us Cape James and Delaware Bay, of the ^aron
of Delawares name, being then governor of Virginia, who by sir Thomas Dale, and
sir Samuel Argoll, 40 years since took possession and atturnm^nt of the Indian
kings, and 60 years since sir Walter Rawley seated and left 30 men, and four
pieces of ordinance, and the creek near Cape James, by the Dutch called
Horekill, by us Roymount, and by the Indians Cui Achomoca; and so the next
river by us called Hudson's river, of the name of Hudson an Englishman, the
discoverer thirty five year since, who sold his discovery, plots and cards to
the Dutch; and so Cabot discovered several rivers and countries all along the
coast North East, now called New England, and divided in nine several
governments, and further discovered Port-Royall, and that part called
New-Scotland, and set up crosses, where you may see in the French book called
New-France, the French found an old cro^se all moss, in an eminent place at the
head of that bay and port, and discovered all that coast and Newfo^ndland, and
that called Terra de Laborador, or New-Britain, as far as the frozen strait of
Davis; shortly after one master Hoar in the reign of king Henry the 8th,
reneued this actual possession, atturnment of the Indian kings, brought home
diverse of the chief Indian kings to England, who gave their homage and oath of
fidelity for these countries to king Henry the eight in person, setting on his
throne in state in his palace hall at Westminster. Then Virginia being granted,
settled, and all that part now called Maryland, New-Albion and New-Scotland,
being part of Virginia, sir Thomas Dale and sir Samuel Argoll, captains and
counselors of Virginia, hearing of diverse aliens and intruders, and traders
without license, with a vessel and forty soldiers, landed at a place called
Mount Desert, in Nova Scotia, near St. John's River, or Twede, posse^t by the
French, there killed some French, took away their guns, and di^mantled the
fort, and in their return landed at Manhatas-Isle in Hudson's river, where they
found four houses built, and a pretended Dutch governor, under the West India
company of Amsterdam share or part; who kept trading boats, and trucking with
the Indians; but the said knights told him, their commission was to expel him
and all aliens, intruders on his majesty's dominions and territories; this
being part of Virginia, and this river an English discovery of Hudson an
Englishman, the Dutchman contented them for their charge and voyage, and by his
letter sent to Virginia and recorded, submitted himself, company and plantation
to his majesty, and to the governor and government of Virginia; but the next
pretended Dutch governor in maps of printed cards, calling this part
New-Netherland, failing in paying of customs at his return to Plymouth in
England, was there with his bever, goods and person attached to his damage of
L. 1500, whereupon at the suit of the governor and council of Virginia, his
now majesty by his ambassador in Holland, complaining of the said aliens
intrusion, on such his territories and dominions, the said lords, the states of
Holland by their public instrument declared, that they did not avow, nor
would protect them, being a private party of the Amsterdam West India company,
but left them to his majesty's will and mercy: whereupon three several orders
from the council table, and commissions have been granted for the expelling
and removing them thence, of which they taking notice, and knowing their
weakness and want of victuals have offered to sell the same for L. 2500, and
lastly taking advantage of our present war and distractions, now ask L. 7000,
and have lately offered many affronts and damages to his majesty's subjects in
New England: and in general endanger all his majesty's adjoining countries,
most wickedly, feloniously, and traitorously, contrary to the marine and
admiral laws of all christians, sell by wholesale guns, powder, shot and
ammunition to the Indians, instructing them in the use of our fights and arms;
insomuch as 2000 indians by them arme^, Mohawks, Raritons, and some of
Long-Isle with their own guns so sold them, fall into war with the Dutch,
destroyed all their scattering farms and boors, enforcing them all to retire to
their up fort, 40 leagues up that river and to Manhatas, for all or most
retreating to Manhatas, it is now a pretty town of trade, having more English
than Dutch: and it is very considerable that three years since Stuy their
governor put out his declaration, confessing that the neighbor English might
well be offended with their selling Indians arms and ammunition, but being but
a few and so scattered, they could not live else there, or trade, the Indians
refusing to trade or suffer the Dutch to plow without they would sell them
guns. The like folly they committed and inconvenience to themselves, and all
English, for eight years since, in their West India fleet, battered by the
Spanish Armado, they brought home forty Swedish poor soldiers; and hearing that
capt. Young and master Evelin, had given over their fort begun at Eriwomeck
within Delawre Bay, there half starved and tottered they left them, who
learning the Indian language, and finding much talk and trials of a gold mine
there, though in truth fifty shillings charges produced of that light sand but
nine shillings in gold, and therefore was of capt. Young that tried it
^lighted; yet one Bagot under the Swedes name and commission, there traded to
cross the Dutch of Manhatas, and to undersell them, and left and seated there,
eighteen Swedes. who proclaiming a gold mine drew more to them, and have gotten
a great trade; and now this last summer fifteen Swedes and fifteen Dutch had a
skirmish; the Swedes pulled down a Dutch trading house, and do both undersell
them and spoiled much their and English trading with the Indians, both striving
to please and side with the Indians, both entertaining and refusing to return
all English fugitives and servants. The Swedes hiring out three of their
soldiers to the Sasquehannocks, have taught them the use of our arms and
fights, and marching with them into the king's own colony of Virginia, have
carried thence the king of Pawtomeck prisoner, and expelled his and eight other
Indian nations in Maryland, civilized and subject to the English crown. Now if
a proclamation of open war be set out against the Dutch and Swedes for this
their villainy, and all English forbid to trade, victual or relieve them, they
must both vanish, especially if those bad English that live, adhere and obey
these ailens in these his majesty's countries, be warned of the statute of king
James of famous memory, in these words: That all subjects giving any obedience
or acknowledgment to any forain prince, state, pope, or potentate, within his
majesty's territories and dominions in England or beyond the sea, is a traitor,
and ought to suffer as a traitor. And certainly all English, and chiefly those
of New England being ready in twenty four hours will join to expel them both to
regain their own trade, to get their seats, and to be rid of the danger of
armed gunning Indians.

Whereas that part of America, or north Virginia, lying about 39 degrees on
Delaware Bay called the province of New Albion, is situate in the best and
same temper, as Italy, between too cold Germany, and too hot Barbary: so this
lying just midway between New England 200 miles north, and Virginia 150 miles
south, where now are settled 8000 English, and 140 ships in trade, is freed
from the extreme cold and barrenness of the one, and heat and aguish marshes
of the other, and is like Lumbardy, and a rich fat soil, plain, and having 34
rivers on the main land, 17 great Isles, and partaketh of the healthiest air
and most excellent commodities of Europe, and replenished with the goodliest
woods of oaks and all timber for ships and masts, mulberries, sweet cypress,
cedars, pines and firres, 4 sorts of grapes for wine, and rai^ins, and with the
greatest variety of choice fruits, fish and fowl, stored with all sorts of
corn, yielding 5, 7 and 10 quarters an acre: silkgras, salt, good mines and
diers ware, 5 sorts of deer, buffes, and huge elks to plow and work, all
bringing 3 young at once. The uplands covered many months with berries, roots,
chestnuts, walnuts, beech and oak mast to feed them, hogs and turkeys, 500 in
a flock, and having near the colony of Manteses 400000 acres of plain mead
land, and mere level, to be flowed and ^ludded by that river for corn, rice,
rapes, flax and hemp. After 17 years trading and discovery there and trial
made, is begun to be planted and stored by the governor and company of New
Albion, consisting of forty four lords, baronets knights and merchants, who for
the true informing of themselves, their friends, adventures and partners by
residents and traders there four several years out of their journall books,
namely, captain Brown, a ship-master, and master Stafford his mate, and by
captain Claybourn 14 years these trading, and Constantine his indian there
born and bred, and by master Robert Evylin, 4 years there, yet by eight of
their hands subscribed and enrolled do testify this to be the true state of
the country, of the land, and Delaware Bay or Charles River, which is further
witnessed by captain Smith and other Books of Virginia and by New Englands
prospect, new Canaan, captain Powels map, and other descriptions of New England
and Virginia.

Master EVELIN's Letter.
Good Madam:
Sir Edmund our noble governor and lord earl Palatine, persisting still in his
noble purpose to go on with his plantation in Delaware or Charles River, just
midway between New England and Virginia, where with my uncle Young I several
years resided, has often informed himself both of me and master Stratton, as
I perceive by the hands subscribed of Edward Monmouth, Tenis Palee, and as
master Buckham, master White, and other Shipmasters, and saylors, whose hands I
know, and it to be true, that there lived and traded with me, and is
sufficiently instructed of the state of the country, and people there, and I
should very gladly according to his desire, have waited on you into Hamshire to
have informed your honor in person, had I not next week been passing to
Virginia. But nevertheless to satisfy you of the truth, I thought good to
write unto you my knowledge, and first to describe you from the north side of
Delaware unto Hudsons river in sir Edmunds patent, called new Albion, which
lies just between New England and Maryland, and that ocean sea, I take it to
be about 160 miles, I find some broken land, isles and inlets, and many small
isles at Egbay: But going to Delaware Bay, by Cape May, which is 24 miles at
most, and is a I understand very well set out, and printed in captain Powels
map of New England, done as is told me by a draught I gave to M. Daniel, the
plot-maker, which sir Edmund says you have at home, on that north side about
five miles within a Port, or rode for any ships called the Nook. and within
lies the king of Kechemeches, having as I suppose about 50 men, and 12 leagues
higher a little above the Bay and Bar is the river of Manteses, which has 20
miles on Charles river, and 30 miles running up a fair navigable deep river all
a flat level of rich and fat black marsh mould, which I think to be 300000
acres: In this sir Edmund intends as he says to settle, and there the king
of Manteses has about 100 bow-men; next above 6 leagues higher is a fair deep
river, 12 mil^s ^avigable, where is freestone, and there over against is the
king of Sikonesses, and next is Asomoches river and king with an hundred men,
and next is Eriwoneck a king of forty men where we sat down, and five miles
above is the king of Ramcock with a hundred men, and four miles higher the King
of Axion with two hundred men, and next to him ten leagues over land an
inland king of Calce^ar, with an hundred and fifty men, and then there is in
the middle of Charles river two fair woody isles, very pleasant and ^it for
parks, the one of a thousand acres, the other of fourteen hundred, or
thereabout. And six leagues higher near a creek called Mosilian, the king
having two hundred men. And then we come to the False, made by a rock of
limestone, as I suppose it is, about sixty and five leagues from the sea, near
to which is an isle fit for a city* all materials there to build; and above the
river fair and navigable, as the Indians inform me, for I went but ten miles
higher. I do account all the Indians to be eight hundred, and are in several
factions and war against the Sasquehannocks, and are (...) extreme fearful of
a gun, naked and unarmed against our sho^punc; ^words, and pikes. I had some
bickering with some of them, and they are of so little esteem, as I dur^t with
fifteen men sit down, or trade in de^^ight of them, and since my return
eighteen Sweeds are settled there, and so sometime six Dutch do in a boat
trade without fear of them.

I saw there an infinite quantity of bustards, swans, gee^e, and fowl, covering
the shoares as within the like multitude of pigeons, and store of turkies, of
which I tried one to weigh forty and six pounds. There is much variety and
plenty of delicate fresh and seafish, and shellfish, and whales or grampus:
elks, dear that bring three young at a time and the woods bestrewed many
months with chestnuts, wall-nuts, and mast of several sorts to ^eed them, and
hogs, that would increase exceedingly. There are barren grounds have four
kinds of grapes and many mulberries with ash, elms, and the tallest and
greatest pines and pitch trees, that I have seen. There are cedars, cypre^se
and sassafras, with wild fruits, pears, wild cherries, pine-apples* and the
dainty parsemenas, And there is no question but almonds, and other fruits of
Spain will prosper, as in Virginia. And (which is good comfort) in four and
twenty hours you may send or go by sea to New England or Virginia, with a
fair wind, you may have cattle, and from the Indians two thousand barrels of
corn, at twelve pence a bushel in truck, so as victuals are there cheaper and
better, then to be transported: Neither do I conceive any great need of a fort
or charge, where there is no enemy.

If my lord Palatine, will bring with him three hundred men (...) more, there
is no doubt but that he may do very well and grow rich, for it is a most pure
healthful air, and such pure wholesome springs, rivers and waters, as are
delightful, of a desert, as can be seen, with so many varieties of several
flowers, trees and forests for swine. So many fair risings and prospects, all
green and verdant: and Maryland a good friend and neighbor, in ^our and twenty
hours ready to comfort and supply.

And truly I believe, my lord of Balta^ore will be glad of my lord Palatines
plantation and assistance against any enemy or bad neighbor. And if my lord
Palatine em^loy some men to sow flax, hemp and rapes in those rich marshes,
or build ship^ and make pipe staves, and load some ships with these wares, or
fish from the northward, he may have any money, ware, or company brought him by
his own ships, or the ships of Virginia or New England all the year.

And because your honor is of the noble house of the Pawlets, and as I am
informed, desire to lead many of your friends and kindred thither, whom as I
honor, I desire to serve, I shall entreat you to believe (...) as a gentleman
and christian, I write you nothing but the truth, and hope there to take
opportunity in due season to visit you, and do all the good offices in
Virginia, my place or friends can serve you in. And thus tendering my service,
I rest,

Madam, Your honors most humble faithful servant, ROBERT EVELIN.


Now since master Elmes letter and seven years discoveries of the lord governor
in person, and by honest ^raders with the Indians we find beside the Indian
kings by him known and printed, in this province there is in all twenty three
Indian kings or chief commanders, and besides the number of 800 by him named,
there is at least 1200 under the two Raritan kings on the north side next to
Hudsons river* and those come down to the ocean about little Egbay and Sandy
Barnegate, and about the South cape two small kings of forty men a piece,
called Tirans and Tiascons, and a third reduced to fourteen men at Roymont, the
Sasquehannocks are not now of the naturals left above 110, though with their
forced auxillaries the Ihon a Does, and Wicomeses they can make 250: these
together are counted valiant and terrible to other cowardly dull Indians, which
they beat with the sight of guns only. --

The eight seat is Kildorpy, near the falls of Charles river, near 200 miles up
from the ocean, it has clear fields to plant and sow and near it is sweet
large meads of clover or honysuckle, no where else in America to be seen,
unless transported from Europe, a ship of 140 tuns may come up to these falls
which is the best seat for health, and a trading house to be built on the
rocks, and ten leagues higher are lead mines in stony hills.

The ninth is called mount Ployden, the seat of the Rariton king on the north
side of this province twenty miles from Sandhay sea, and ninety from the ocean,
next to Amara hill, the retired paradise of the children of the Ethiopian
emperor, a wonder* for it is a square rock, two miles compass, 150 foot high,
a walllike pr^^ipice, a strait entrance, easily made invincible, where he keeps
two hundred for his guard, and under it is a flat valley, all pl^^ to plant and
sow.

The Sasquehannocks new town is also a rare, healthy and rich place, with it a
crystal broad river, but some falls below hinder navigation, and the hook hill
on the ocean with its clear fields near Hudsons river on one side, and a ten
leagues flowing river on the south side is much commended for health and fish,
were i^ not so northerly.

The bounds is a thousand miles compass, of this most temperate ^^ch province,
for our south bound is Maryland north bounds, and ^eginneth at Aquats or the
southermost or first cape of Delaware Bay, in thirty eight and forty minutes,
and so runs by, or through, or including Kent Isle, through Chisapeask Bay
to Piscataway; including the falls of Pawtomecke river to the head or
northernmost branch of that river, being three hundred miles due west, and
thence northward to the head of Hudson's river fifty leagues, and so down
Hudson's river to the ocean sixty leagues; and thence to the ocean and isles
acrosse Delaware Bay, to the South cape fifty leagues; in all seven hundred and
eighty miles. Then all Hudson's river, isles, Long Isle, or Pamunke, and all
isles within ten leagues of the said province being; and note, Long isle alone
is twenty broad, and one hundred and eighty miles long, so that alone is four
hundred miles compass. Now I have examined all former patents, some being
surrenderd, and some adjudg'd void, as gotten on false suggestions, as that at
the council table was at master Gonges suit, of Mantachusets, and as capt.
Clayborn, heretofore secretary and now treasurer of Virginia, in dispute with
master Leonard Calvert alleges; that of Maryland is likewise void in part as
gotten on false suggestions; for as capt. Clayborn, shows the Maryland patent
in the first part declares the king's intention to be to grant a land
thereafter described, altogether dishabited and unplanted, though possessed with
Indians. Now Kent isle was with many households of English by C. Clayborn before
seated, and because his majesty by his privy signet shortly after declared it
was not his intention to grant any lands before seated and habited: and for
that it lies by the Maryland printed card, clean northward within Albion, and
not in Maryland, and not only late seamen, but old depositions in Claybornes
hand, show it to be out of Maryland, and for that Albions privy signet is
elder, and before Maryland patent, Clayborn by force entered, and thrust out
master Calvert out of Kent; next Maryland patent coming to the ocean, says
along by the ocean upon Delaware Bay; that is the first cape of the two most
plain in view, and expressed in all late English and Dutch cards; and note unto
Delaware Bay is not into the Bay, nor farther then that cape heading the Bay,
being in thirty eight and forty, or at most by seven observations I have seen*
thirty eight and fifty minutes: So as undoubtedly, that is the true intended
and ground bound, and line, and no farther, for the words following, are not
words of grant, but words of declaration; that is, Which Delaware Bay lies in
forty degrees where New England ends; these are both untrue, and so being
declarative is a false suggestion; is void, for no part of Delaware Bay lies
in forty. Now if there were but the least doubt of this true bounds, I should
wish by consent or commission, a perambulati^n and boundary, not but there is
land enough for all, and I ^old Kent isle having lately but twenty men in it,
and the mill and fort pulled down, and in war with all the indians near it, not
worth the keeping.




John Printz continued governor of the Swedes from his arrival until about the
year 1654, when he returned to Sweden, having first deputed his son-in law,
John Papegoia, Papegoia.
governor in his stead, who also sometime after returned to his native country,
and left the government to John Rising: Rising.
He renewed the league of friendship with the English and Dutch in the
neighborhood, and formally with the Indians; for this purpose a meeting was
held with the Sachems or Indian chiefs, at Printz's hall, on Tenecum island,
where a speech was made to them in behalf of the queen of Sweden, expressing
the desires the Swedes had to renew their friendship: The Indians had before
made complaint, that the Swedes had introduced much evil amongst them; because
many of the Indians since their coming were dead; but the Swedes now making
them considerable presents, these received and divided amongst them, one of
their chiefs, whose name was Noaman, made a speech rebuking the rest for having
spoken evil of the Swedes, and done them harm; telling them they should do so
no more, that the Swedes were a good people, and thanking them for the
presents, promised for the future, that a more strict friendship should be
observed betwixt them: That as formerly they had been but one body and one
heart, they should be henceforward, as one head, as a token of which he waved
both his hands as if tying a strong knot, promising also that if they heard of
any mischief plotting against the Swedes, although it were midnight, they would
give them notice, and desired the like notice from the Swedes, if they
understood harm was intended them; the Swedes then desiring the Indians in
general would give them some signal that they all assented to what was said;
they gave a general shout of approbation, and in the conclusion were
entertained by the Swedes with victuals and drink; it was observed the Indians
kept this league faithfully: The Swedish ships sent to succor this new colony,
being obstructed in their intended voyage, by the Spaniards; and the Swedes
unable for want of money to keep their forts in repair; gave their more
powerful neighbors the Dutch, opportunity with less danger to make
encroachments upon them. Accordingly, in this year, the Dutch who inhabited
near Virginia and New-Sweden, gave the Swedes disturbance, seeking to regain
the forts they had formerly possessed: But this by means of the Swede governor,
with Peter Stuyvesant, who commanded under the Dutch, at New-Amsterdam, was in
appearance settled; yet in the year following, the Dutch fitted out seven
vessels from New-Amsterdam, with six or seven hundred men; who in the summer,
under the command of Stuyvesant, came up Delaware, and took their first
quarters at Elsingburgh, where they made some Swedes prisoners: Stuyvesant's
expedition.
Next they sailed toward a fort called Holy Trinity; having landed their men
at a point near the place, and entrenched themselves, they soon after went up
to the fort, and demanded a surrender, threatening what they would do in case of
refusal: After which, by treaty or otherwise, they gained possession, gains
possession.
took down the Swedes flag, and hoisted their own, securing all places with
their soldiers, and sending the Swedes they had taken prisoners, on board their
vessels: -- An acquisition deemed considerable, because this fort was looked
upon as the key of New-Sweden.

On the second of September, they besieged Christiana fort and town; and
destroyed New Gottemburgh, with such houses as were without the fort;
plundering the inhabitants of what they had, and killing their cattle; the
Swedes endeavored to persuade the Dutch to desist from these acts of
hostility, but to no purpose: After 14 days ^iege, they (in want of Ammunition)
were obliged to surrender upon terms: Terms.
-- That all the great guns should be restored; to which purpose an inventory
was taken; the Swedes had also the gratification to march out of the fort, with
their arms, their colors flying, and drums beating. The officers and other
principal inhabitants among the Swedes, were carried prisoners to
New-Amsterdam, and thence to Holland; but the common people submitting to the
Dutch, remained in the country.

From this time till the year 1664, New-Sweden, and New-Netherland, continued
in possession, and under government of the Dutch; who, on the island called
Manhattan, at the mouth of Hudson's river, had built the city, which they named
New-Amsterdam (New York); and the river they sometimes called the Great River:
About 150 miles up, they built a fort, and called it Orange, (Albany) from
thence they drove a profitable trade with the Indians, who came over land as
far as from Quebec, to deal with them. The first bounds of New York, were
Maryland on the south, the main land as far as could be discovered westward,
the river of Canada northward, and New England eastward: But the limits of this
province, by the grants afterward, were reduced into a much narrower compass;
that now called New Jersey, in virtue of one of those grants, was probably so
denominated, in compliment to sir George Carteret, one of the proprietors, and
a Jersey man. It is said for some little time at first, to have bore the name
New-Canary.


CHAP. III.
The particulars of the English conquest in 1664, and the transactions
afterward respecting the inhabitants on Delaware: The arrival of Francis
Lovelace, as governor, part of his administration, and description of the
Hoarkills.
KING Charles the second, considering of what ill consequence a Dutch colony
must be in the heart of his dominions, and determining to dispossess them, gave
a patent to his brother the duke of York, for a great part of North America, in
which were included the provinces New York, New Jersey, and all other lands
thereunto appertaining, with powers of government: And though his reign was not
enterprizing, the Duke's concern in this property, and the aversion of both to
the Dutch Vid. Life of E. of Clarendon, Oxford printed at Clar^n^on printing
house. Vol. ii. p. 373, etc.
made the reduction of this country the first military stroke. Before there was
any formal declaration of war with Holland, Sir Robert Carre, Sir Robert Carre,
etc.
was sent to America, with a small fleet and some land forces, to put the Duke
in possession of the country; this appears by the date of the commission given
on this occasion, which was the 26 the of April 1664, and the war with Holland
was not declared till some months after.

Thus the Dutch here, being unprovided for defense against a royal squadron and
land forces, rendered the expedition safe and easy, Carre had joined with him
in commission, col. Richard Nicolls, George Cartwright, and Samuel Meverike.
They arrived at Hudson's River the latter end of 1664, arrives and
at which time the Dutch could have but very little notice The first ^otice
they had was from Thomas Willet, an Englishman, about (weeks before their
arrival.
of the designed rupture: The land forces consisting of three hundred men, were
under the command of col. Nicolls. The Dutch governor, an approved soldier, who
had lost a leg in the service of the states, being unprepared for this attack,
and knowing perhaps the defects of the Dutch (...), dispossesses the Dutch.
at least their present incapacity of defense, was after some time prevailed on
to surrender quietly. The papers and messages that passed between him and the
English on this occasion* will give the reader a full insight into the manner
and terms of this surrender.

When the English arrived at New Amsterdam, a proclamation was made and spread
through the country of the design of their coming, conceived in the terms
following.

By his Majesty's command.

Forasmuch as his majesty has sent us by commission, Proclamation.
under his great seal of England, amongst other things, to expel or to reduce to
his majesty's obedience, all such foreigners as have without his majesty's
leave and consent, seated themselves amongst any of his dominions in America,
to the prejudice of his majesty's subjects and the dimunition of his royal
dignity: We his majesty's commissioners do declare and promise, that whosoever
of what nation soever, will upon knowledge of this proclamation, acknowledge
and testify themselves to submit to his majesty's government, as his good
subjects ought to do, shall be protected by his majesty's laws and justice, and
peaceably enjoy whatsoever God's blessing and their own honest industry have
furnished them with; and all other privileges with his majesty's English
subjects: We have caused this to be published, that we might prevent all
inconveniences to others if it were possible, however, to clear ourselves from
the charge of all those miseries that any way may befall such as live here, and
will not acknowledge his majesty for their sovereign: Whom God preserve.

The Dutch governor Stuyvesant, upon notice of the arrival of the English in
the Bay, dispatched the following letter,

Right honorable Sirs,
Whereas we have received intelligence, that about three days since,
Stuyvesant's letter
there arrived an English man of war, or frigate in the Bay of the North River,
belonging to the New Netherlands, and since that three more are arrived, by
what order or pretense is yet unknown to us; and having received various
reports concerning their arrival upon this coast, and not being apt to
entertain any prejudice intended against us, have by order of the commander in
chief of the New Netherlands, thought it convenient and requisite, to send the
worshipful the bearer hereof, that is to say, the worshipful John Declyer, one
of the chief council, the reverend John Megapolensis, minister, Paul
Leendelvandergrist, mayor of this town, and have joined with them Mr. Samuel
Megapolen^is, doctor in physic, whom by these presents I have appointed and
ordered, that with the utmost respect and civility, they do desire and entr^at
of the commander in chief of the aforesaid men of war or frigates, the intent
and meaning of their approach, and continuing in the harbor of Naij^^^y,
without giving any notice to us, or first acquainting us with their design,
which action has caused much admiration in us, having not received timely
knowledge of the same, which in respect to the government of the place, they
ought, and were obliged to have done; wherefore upon the considerations
aforesaid, it is desired and entreated from the general of the aforesaid men of
war or frigates, as also from our before deputed agents, whom we desire your
honors civily to treat, and to give and render unto them, the occasion of your
arrival here upon this coast, and you will give an opportunity (that after our
hearty salutes and well wishes of your health,) to pray, that you may be
blessed in eternity, and always remain, right honorable sirs, your honors
affectionate friend and servant,

P. STUYVESANT.
By order and appointment of the governor and commander in chief of the council
of New Netherlands, the 19-29 of August, 1664.

CORNELIUS RUYVEN, Secretary.



To this letter col. Nicols sent the answer following.

To the honorable the governor and chief council at the Manhatans. The Indian
name, by which New York island was formerly called.


Right worthy Sirs,
I received a letter by some worthy persons entrusted by you, Nicolls's reply.
bearing date the 19-29th of August, desiring to know the intent of the
approach of the English frigates, in return of which I think ^it to let you
know, that his majesty of Great Britain, whose right and title to these parts
of America is unquestionable, well knowing how much it derogates from his crown
and dignity, to suffer any foreigners how near soever they be allied, to usurp
a dominion, and without his majesty's royal consent, to inhabit in these or any
other his majesty's territories; has commanded me in his name, to require a
surrender of all such forts, towns or places of strength, which are now
possessed by the Dutch under your commands; and in his majesty's name I do
demand the town situate upon the island commonly known by the name of
Manhatoes, with all the forts thereunto belonging, to be rendered unto his
majesty's obedience and protection into my hands: I am further commanded to
assure you, and every respective inhabitant of the Dutch nation, that his
majesty being tender of the effusion of christian blood, does by these
presents, confirm and secure to every man, his estate, life and liberty, who
shall readily submit to his government; and all those who shall oppose his
majesty's gracious intentions, must expect all the miseries of a war which they
bring upon themselves. I shall expect your answer by those gentlemen, colonel
George Cartwright, one of his majesty's commissioners in America, captain
Robert Needham, capt. Edward Groves, and Mr. Thomas Delavall, whom you will
entertain and treat with such civility as is due to them and yourselves, and
you shall receive the same from, worthy sirs, your very humble servant,

RICHARD NICOLLS.
Dated on board his majesty's ship the Guinea, riding before Naijack, the 20-30
of August 1664.

Stuyvesant Stuyvesant (...).
now fully informed of the English general's business from himself, returned in
answer:

That they were so confident of the discretion and equity of his majesty of
Great Britain, that were his majesty truly informed of their right, he would
not have given such an order: That the Dutch came not into these provinces by
any violence, but by virtue of a commission from the states general in 1614,
when they settled the North River, near fort Orange, and to avoid the invasions
and massacres commonly committed by the savages; they built a little fort
there: That afterward in the year 1662, and at the present time, by virtue of
a commission and grant to the governor of the West India company, and another
in the year 1656 of the South River, to the burgomasters of Amsterdam, they had
peaceably governed and enjoyed these provinces: That they were the first
discoverers, had purchased the land of the natives, princes of the country; and
had continued in the uninterrupted possession thereof: That they made no doubt
that if his majesty of Great Britain, were truly informed of these passages, he
was too judicious to give any order that the places and fortresses in their
hands should be given up, especially at a time when so strict a friendship
subsisted between his majesty and the states general: That the offering any act
of hostility and violence against them, would be an infraction of the treaty,
which subsisted between his majesty of Great Britain and the states general:
That as to the threats in the conclusion of general Nicolls's letter, he had
nothing to answer, only that they feared nothing but what God should lay upon
them.

Col. Nicolls, receiving this answer, found nothing was to be done by delay;
and being resolved to assert his masters right in the best manner he could,
directed an order to capt. Hide to this effect:

Whereas the governor and council of the Dutch plantation upon the Manhatoes,
in Hudson's River, have in answer to a summons returned their resolutions to
maintain the right and title of the states general and West India company of
Holland, to their forts, towns and plantations in these parts of America: I do
therefore in prosecution of his majesty's service, recommend to captain Hugh
Hide, commander in chief of the squadron, to prosecute with the advice of the
captains under his command, his majesty's claim and interest, by all ways and
means as they shall think most expedient, for the speedy reducing the Dutch
under his majesty's obedience, and for so doing this shall be their warrant.
Given under my hand the 24th of August 1664, on board his majesty's ship the
Guinea.

RICHARD NICOLLS.'

It appearing by this order, and preparations in consequence of it, that the
English were not come for amusement only; Stuyvesant thought it best before
matters were carried too far, to propose one expedient more; this he did by
letter to col. Nicolls, the 4th September.

My Lord,
Upon our letter the day before yesterday, Stuyvesant's third letter.
and upon the communication by word of mouth, of our deputies, touching the
just right and possession; without dispute of my lords, the states general of
the united provinces, as also of our discovery of the news from Holland; which
makes us not to doubt but that the king of Great Britain, and my lords the said
states, are at this hour agreed upon their limits: this had given us hope my
lord to avoid all dispute; that you would have desisted from your design, or at
least have given time that we might have heard from our masters; from which
expectation we have been frustrated by the report of our said deputies, who
have assured us by word of mouth, that you persist on your summons and letter,
of 20-30 August, upon which we have no other thing to answer, but that
following the order of my lords the states general, we are obliged to defend
our place; however that in regard that we make no doubt, that upon your assault
and our defense, there will be a great deal of blood spilt; and besides it is
to be feared greater difficulty may arise hereafter; we have thought fit to
send unto you, Mr. John de Decker, counselor of state; Cornelius Van Riven,
secretary and (...); Cornelius Steenwick, mayor, and James (...), sheriff; to
the end of finding some means to (...) and prevent the spilling of innocent
blood, which we esteem my lord not to be your intention; ^^aying that you will
please to appoint a place and hour, and send or cause your deputies to meet
there, with full commission to treat and seek out the means of a good
accommodation* and in the mean time (...) cause all hostility to cease: Upon
which, after recommeding you to the protection of God, we remain, my lord, your
thrice affectionate friend and servant,

P. STUYVESANT.

To this col. Nicoll's replied, in a letter directed to the honorable the
governor of the Manhatoes, as follows;

Right worthy sir,
In answer to yours of the 4th of September, new style, by the hands of John de
Decker, counselor of state, Cornelius Van Riven, secretary and receiver,
Cornelius Steenwick, burgo master, and James Causseau, sheriff, I do think it
once more agreeable to the kings intentions, and my duty to his strict
commands, to propose and receive all ways and means of avoiding the effusion of
christian blood; of which sincere intention, I suppose you are already fully
satisfied, and shall have no cause to doubt it for the future; as also that I
do insist upon my first summons and message to you, for a speedy surrender of
the towns and forts now under your command, into his majesty's obedience and
protection. You may easily believe that in respect of greater difficulties
which are ready to attend you, I should willingly comply with your proposition
to appoint deputies, place and time to treat of a good accommodation; but
unless you had also given me to know, that by such a meeting you do intend to
treat upon articles of surrender, I do not see just cause to defer the
pursuance of his majesty's commands, my first demand and my last answer, of
reducing your towns and forts to his majesty's obedience; which, why you call
acts of hostility, I see no reason: However, since you have given yourself and
messengers this new trouble. I shall also take this fresh occasion, to assure
you that I heartily wish health, peace and prosperity, to every inhabitant of
your plantations, and particulary to yourself, as being your affectionate
humble servant,

RICHARD NICOLLS.
Gravesend, 25 th August 1664.
The Dutch governor finding Nicolls grew more resolute in his enterprise, and
the country in general for him, after having tried, in vain, what other
pacisfick expedients he could, at last agreed to a surrender of the fort and
province under his government, and commissioners were authorized to treat upon
the articles; those on the part of the English were, sir Robert Carre, knt.
colonel George Cartwright, Commissioners.
John Winthrop, esquire governor of Connecticut, and Samuel Willis, one of his
council, capt. Thomas Clarke, and capt. John Punctwon, commissioners from the
general court of the Massachusetts, the persons named by governor Stuyvesant
were, John de Decker, Nicholas Varlett, commissary, concerning matters of
traffic, Samuel Megapolen^is, Cornelius Steenwi^k, Stephen Courtland, and
James Coussea.

The articles of this treaty as they are signed and confirmed by col. Nicolls
and governor Stuyvesant, and subscribed by the commissioners, bear date the 27
th of August 1664 old style, and are as follows.

1. We consent that the states general, Articles.
or the West India company, shall freely enjoy all farms and houses, except
such as are in the forts, and that within six months they shall have free
liberty to transport all such arms and ammunition, as now do belong to them, or
else they shall be paid for them.

2. All public houses shall continue for the uses which now they are for.

3. All people shall still continue free dennizens, and enjoy their lands,
houses, goods, ships wheresoever they are within the country, and dispose of
them as they please.

4. If any inhabitant have a mind to remove himself, he shall have a year and
six weeks from this day to remove himself, wife, children, servants, goods, and
to dispose of his lands here.

5. If any officer of state or public minister of state have a mind to go for
England, they shall be transported freight free in his majesty's frigates, when
those frigates return thither.

6. It is consented to that any people may freely come from the Netherlands,
and plant in this country, and that Dutch vessels may freely come hither, and
any of the Dutch may freely return home, or send any sort of merchandise home
in vessels of their own country.

7. All ships from the Netherlands, or any other place and goods therein shall
be received here and sent hence after the manner which they formerly were,
before our coming hither for six months next ensuing.

8. The Dutch shall enjoy the liberty of their consciences, in divine worship
and Dutch discipline.

9. No Dutchman here, or Dutch ship here, shall upon any occasion be pressed to
serve in war against any Nation whatsoever,

10. That the townsmen of the Manhatoes shall not have any soldiers quartered
upon them, without being satisfied and paid for them by the officers, and that
at this present, if the fort be not capable of lodging all the soldiers, then
the burgomaster by his officers, shall appoint some houses capable to receive
them.

11. The Dutch here shall enjoy their own customs concerning their inheritances.

12. All public writings and records, which concern the inheritances of any
people, or the reglement of the church or poor or orphans, shall be carefully
kept by those in whose hands now they are, and such writings as particularly
concern the states general, may at any time be sent to them.

13. No judgment that has passed any judicature here, shall be called in
question, but if any conceive he has not had justice done him, if he apply
himself to the States General, the other party shall be obliged to answer for
the supposed injury.

14. If any Dutch living here, shall at any time desire to travel or traffic
into England, or any place or plantation in obedience to his majesty of
England, or with the Indians, he shall have upon his request to the governor, a
certificate that he is a free Denizen of this place, and liberty it to do.

15. If it do appear that there is a public engagement of debt, by the town of
Manhatoes, and a way agreed on for the satisfying of that engagement, it is
agreed that the same way proposed shall go on; and that the engagements shall
be satisfied.

16. All inferior civil officers and magistrates, shall continue as they now
are, if they please, till the customary time of new election, and then new ones
to be chosen by themselves; provided that such new chosen magistrates, shall
take the oath of allegiance to his majesty of England, before they enter upon
their offices.

17. All differences of contracts and bargains made before this day, by any in
this country, shall be determined according to the manner of the Dutch.

18. If it does appear that the West India company, of Amsterdam, do really owe
any sums of money to any persons here; it is agreed that recognition and other
duties payable by ships going for the Netherlands be continued for six months
longer.

19. The officers military and soldiers, shall march out with their arms, drums
beating, and colors flying, lighted matches; and if any of them will plant
they shall have fifty acres of land set out to them; if any of them will serve
any as servants, they shall continue with all safety and become free Denizens
afterward.

20. If at any time hereafter the king of Great Britain and the States of the
Netherland, do agree that this place and country be redelivered into the hands
of the said states, whenever his majesty will send his commands to redeliver
it, it shall immediately be done.

21. That the town of Manhatans shall choose deputies, and those deputies shall
have free voices in all public affairs.

22. That those who have any property in any houses in the fort of Aurania,
shall if they please, slight the fortifications there, and then enjoy all their
houses as all people do where there is no fort.

23. If there be any soldiers that will go into Holland, and if the company of
West India in Amsterdam, or any private persons here, will transport them into
Holland, then they shall have a safe passport from col. Richard Nicolls, deputy
governor under his royal highness, and the other commissioners, to defend the
ships that shall transport such soldiers and all the goods in them from any
surprizal or act of hostility to be done by any of his majesty's ships or
subjects.

24. That the copies of the king's grant to his royal highness, and the copy of
his royal highness's commission to col. Richard Nicolls, testified by two
commissioners more and mr. Winthrop, to be true copies, shall be delivered to
the honorable Mr. Stuyvesant, the present governor, on Monday next by eight of
the clock in the morning, at the old Milne, and these articles consented to and
signed by col. Richard Nicolls, deputy governor to his royal highness, and that
within two hours after the fort and town called New Amsterdam, upon the island
of Manhatoes, shall be delivered into the hands of the said col. Richard
Nicolls, by the service of such as shall be by him thereunto deputed by his
hand and seal.

The articles agreed on, the fort and city of New-Amsterdam, were surrendered.
Some of the houses were then built of brick and stone, and in part covered with
red and black tile, and the land being high, it made an agreeable prospect to
those that visited it from the sea: Most of the Dutch inhabitants remained, and
took the oaths to the English government; and they and their posterity have
been loyal subjects ever since. In the year 1751, as some workmen were digging
down the bank of the North River, in New York, in order to build a stillhouse,
a stone wall was discovered between four and five feet thick, near eight feet
under ground, supposed to have been the breast work of a battery.


Thirteen days after the surrender of New Amsterdam, col. Nicolls, marched up
the country to Orange fort, Fort Orange.
and having taken it without much resistance, he gave it the name of Albany,
the duke of York's Scotch title: But previous to the taking of this fort, the
colonel and other commissioners sent sir Robert Carre with the ships under his
command, Carre's expedition to Delaware.
on an expedition into Delaware bay and river, to reduce the inhabitants there.
To this end they granted him their commission.

Whereas we are informed that the Dutch have seated themselves at Delaware Bay,
His commission.
on his majesty of Great-Britain's territories, without his knowledge and
consent, and that they have fortified themselves there, and drawn a great trade
thither, and being assured that if they be permitted to go on, the gaining of
this place will be of small advantage to his majesty: We his majesty's
commissioners, by virtue of his majesty's commission and instructions to us
given, have advised and determined to endeavor to bring that place and all
strangers there, in obedience to his majesty, and by these do order and appoint
that his majesty's frigates, the Guinea, and the William and Nicholas, and all
the soldiery which are not in the fort, shall with what speed they conveniently
can go thither, under the command of sir Robert Carre, to reduce the same,
willing and commanding all officers at sea and land and all soldiers to obey
the said sir Robert Carre during this expedition. Given under our hands and
seals, at the fort in New York, upon the isle of Manhatoes, the third day of
September, 1664.

RICHARD NICOLLS, GEORGE CARTWRIGHT, SAMUEL MEVERICK.


With this commission, instructions were delivered Carre, respecting the manner
in which he was to conduct on his arrival in the bay of Delaware.

Instructions for sir Robert Carre, for the reducing of Delaware bay, and
settling the people there, under his majesty's obedience.

When you are come near unto the fort, which is possessed by the Dutch, you
shall send your boat on shore, to summons the governor and inhabitants to yield
obedience to his majesty, as the rightful sovereign of that tract of land; and
let him and them know, that all the planters shall enjoy their farms, houses,
land, goods and chattles, with the same privileges, and upon the same terms
which they do now possess them; only that they change their masters, whether
they be the West India company, or the city of Amsterdam. To the Swedes you
shall remonstrate their happy return under a monarchical government, and his
majesty's good inclinations to that nation, and to all men, who shall comply
with his majesty's rights and titles in Delaware, without force of arms.

That all cannon, arms and ammunition which belongs to the government, shall
remain to his majesty.

That the acts of parliament shall be the rule for future trading.

That all people may enjoy liberty of conscience.

That for six months next ensuing, the same magistrates shall continue in their
offices, only that they and all others in authority must take the oath of
allegiance to his majesty, and all public acts be made in his majesty's name.

If you find you cannot reduce the place by force, or upon these conditions,
you may add such as you find necessary on the place; but if those, not force,
will prevail, then you are to dispatch a messenger to the governor of Maryland,
with a letter to him; and request his assistance, and of all other English who
live near the Dutch plantations.

Your first care (after reducing the place) is to protect the inhabitants from
injuries, as well as violence of the soldiers; which will be easily effected,
if you settle a course for weekly or daily provisions by agreement with the
inhabitants; which shall be satisfied to them, either out of the proffits,
customs or rents belonging to their present master, or in case of necessity
from hence.

The laws for the present cannot be altered, as to the administration of
Justice between the parties.

To my lord Baltimore's son you shall declare, and to all the English concerned
in Maryland, that his majesty has, at his great expense, sent his ships and
soldiers to reduce all foreigners in those parts to his majesty's obedience;
and to that purpose only, you are employed: But the reduction of the place
being at his majesty's expense, you have commands to keep possession thereof
for his Majesty's own behoof and right; and that you are ready to join the
governor of Maryland, upon his majesty's interest on all occasions; and that if
lord Baltimore does pretend right thereto by his patent, (which is a doubtful
case) you are to say, that you only keep possession till his majesty is
informed and satisfied otherwise. In other things, I must leave you to your
discretion, and the best advice you can get upon the place.

In pursuance of this commission, Carre soon set sail, with the ships under his
command. On his arrival against New Castle, New Castle,
(then called New-Amstel) the Dutch and Swedes, following the example of their
capital, New-Amsterdam, capitulated and surrendered their fort. The articles
were signed and sealed by the English commanding officer, and six of the
principal inhabitants of the place, on behalf of themselves, and others.

Articles of agreement between the honorable sir Robert Carre, Articles.
knight, on the behalf of his majesty of Great Britain, and the burgo-masters,
on behalf of themselves, and all the Dutch and Swedes, inhabiting on Delaware
bay, and Delaware river.
1. That all the burge^ses and planters will submit themselves to his majesty,
without any resistance.

2. That whoever, or what nation soever, does submit to his majesty's
authority, shall be protected in their estates, real and personal whatsoever,
by his majesty's laws and justice.

3. That the present magistrates shall be continued in their offices, and
jurisdictions to exercise their civil power as formerly.

4. That if any Dutchman, or other person shall desire to depart from this
river, it shall be lawful for him so to do with his goods, within six months
after the date of these articles.

5. That the magistrates and all the inhabitants (who are included in these
articles) shall take the oaths of allegiance to his majesty.

6. That all people shall enjoy the liberty of their consciences, in church
discipline as formerly.

7. That whoever shall take the oaths, is from that time a free Denizen, and
shall enjoy all the privileges of trading into any of his majesty's dominions,
as freely as any Englishman, and may require a certificate for so doing.

8. That the schout, the burgo-master, sheriff, and other inferior magistrates,
shall use and exercise their customary power, in administration of justice,
within their precincts for six months, or until his majesty's pleasure is
further known.

Dated October 1st 1664.

New-Amsterdam, Orange Fort, and the inhabitants up Delaware, being reduced,
the whole country was in a manner in possession of the English; and things
being in a quiet posture about New York, Nicolls was commissioned the 24th of
October, 1664, by Cartwright and Mevericke, to repair to Delaware bay, for
government of the place, by deputing such officers civil and military, and
taking such other measures as he should think proper, until the kings pleasure
was further known. In the beginning of the year 1665, there was a comet visible
to the people on this continent: It had appeared in the November before, and
continued four months: It rose constantly about one o'clock in the morning, in
the south-east. It was seen likewise in England, and in most other parts of the
world, at the same time.
Thus things rested till 1668; when Nicolls and his council at New York, gave
the following directions for a better settlement of the government on Delaware.
Directions for the government at Delaware.


That it is necessary to hold up the name and countenance of a garrison in
Delaware, with twenty men and one commission officer.

That the commission officers shall undertake to provide all sorts of provision
for the whole garrison, at the rate of 5d. per day, viz. wholesome bread, beer,
pork, pease or beef, that no just complaint be made of either: That the
soldiers, (so far as conveniently they may,) be lodged in the fort, and keep
the Stockadoes up in defense: that the civil government in the respective
plantations be continued till further orders.

That to prevent all abuses or oppositions in civil magistrates, so often as
complaint is made, the commission officer capt. Carre, shall call the scout,
(...) Hans Block, Israel Holme, Peter Rambo, Peter Cock, Peter Aldrick, or any
two of them, as counselors to advise, hear, and determine by the major vote,
what is just, equitable and necessary in the case and cases in question.

That the same persons also, or any two or more of them, be called to advise
and direct what is best to be done in all cases of difficulty, which may arise
from the Indians, and to give their council and orders for the arming of the
several plantations and planters, who must obey and attend their summons upon
such occasion.

That two thirds at least of the soldiers remain constantly in and about
New Castle at all hours.

That the ^ines or preminures and light offenses, be executed with moderation,
though it is also necssary that ill men be punished in an exemplary manner.

That the commission officer capt. Carre, in the determination of the chief
civil affairs, whereunto the temporary beforementioned counselors are ordained
shall have a casting voice where votes are equal.

That the new appointed counselors are to take the oath to his royal highness.

That the laws of the government, established by his royal highness, be showed
and frequently communicated to the said counselors and all others, to the end
that being therewith acquainted, the practice of them may also in convenient
time be established; which conduces to the public welfare and common justice.

That no offensive war be made against any Indians, before you receive
directions from the governor for your so doing.

That in all matters of difficulty and importance, you must have recourse by
way of appeal, to the governor and council at New York.

These instructions bore date the 21 st of April 1668; within two months
afterward, the government at New York received advice, that some of the tribe
of the Mantas Indians, Indian Murders.
nigh Delaware, had murdered the servants of one Tomm. Peter Aldricks and Peter
Rambo, arriving soon after, confirmed that news, and further informed the
government, that the Indians in those parts desired, there should be an
absolute prohibition upon the whole river, of selling strong liquor to the
Indians generally; by which it seems the late murders had probably been the
consequence of a drunken frolic; this is the more likely, as the whole body of
the Indians in the first settled part of the lands on Delaware, afterward
through a long course of experience, manifested an open hospitable disposition
to the English, and were in the general, far from any designs to their
prejudice. The governor and colonel Lovelace wrote to Carre, authorizing him to
convene those joined with him in commission for the management of civil
affairs, and with their advice to make all necessary rules and give orders* for
the government of both christians and Indians; and because those murders, and
the restraining the Indians from strong liquors, might be attended with
difficulties, Carre was ordered, after consulting the Indians on the best
method of proceeding, to send the state of the matter to the council at
New York.

Another disturbance that soon followed, took up their attention for a while,
and seemed likely to prove an affair of some consequence against the
new-establish'd government, but was prevented by the vigilance of the persons
in administration. A Swede at Delaware, who gave out that he was the son of
Coningsmarke, the Sweedish general, went up and down from one place to another,
spreading rumors to the disturbance of civil peace and the laws, intending
thereby to make a party strong enough to raise an insurrection, and if
possible, throw off the English allegiance; to him was associated Henry
Coleman, Henry Coleman.
one of the Finns, and an inhabitant at Delaware: The last left a good
habitation, cattle and corn, and was well versed in the Indian language^ as
they both kept very much among the Indians their designs were the more
suspected. The government however, ordered a proclamation, that if Col^man did
not surrender himself, to answer what should be objected against him in fifteen
days, his estate should be secured to the king's use; whether he he came in
appears not, but the other being a vagrant, more effectual measures were used,
so that he was soon in custody; all the rest who had a hand in the plot, were
by the government at York, bound to give security to answer for their conduct,
and an account of their estates ordered to be taken: The governor in the mean
time tells Carre in his letter upon this occasion, That as for the poor deluded
sort, I think the advice of their own countrymen is not to be despised, who
knowing their temper well, prescribed a method for keeping them in order, which
is severity, and laying such taxes on them as may not give them liberty to
entertain any other thoughts but how to discharge them. -- I perceive the
little Domine has played the trumpeter to this disorder; I refer the quality
of his punishment to your direction.

At a council held at New York, October 18, 1669. PRESENT: The Governor, Thomas
Delaval, Ralph Whitfield, Thomas Willet, secry.


This affair being taken into consideration, it was adjudged that
Conningsmarke, Conningsmarke.
commonly called the long Finne, deserved to die, yet in regard that many
concerned with him in the insurrection, might also be involved in the
praemunire, if the rigor of the law should be extended, and amongst them
diverse simple and ignorant people, it was thought fit to order that the long
Finne should be severely whipped, and stigmatized with the letter R, with
inscription in great letters on his breast, that he received that punishment
for rebellion, and after to be secured till sent to Barbados or some other
remote plantation to be sold: It was further ordered, that the chief of his
accomplices should forfeit to the king, one half of their goods and chattels,
and a smaller mulct laid on the rest to be left at discretion of commissioners,
appointed to examine the matter.

In pursuance of this sentence, the long Finne was brought fettered from
Delaware, and put prisoner in the stadt-house at York, the 20th December, and
there continued a year, when a warrant was signed, and he, in pursuance of it,
transported for sale to Barbados.

At this council also came under consideration, the case of an Indian, who had
committed a rape on a christian woman; An Indian rape.
the council ordered that he should be put to death if he could be found, and
that application be made to the Sachems of his tribe, to deliver him up, that
justice might be executed upon him. He had been once taken and condemned to
death by the commissioners at Delaware, but broke goal.

One Douglass at the Hoarkill, after this, gave the new settlers a considerable
disturbance by seditious practices, Douglass.
but he was taken, sent to gaol, and afterward from thence to York, where he
had his trial, and was sent to the eastward, with a caution not to return into
the government any more.

In the month called February 1669, Governor Lovelace.
Francis Lovelace He succeeded Nicolls in the government of New York, in May
1667, and continued governor till the colony was given up to the Dutch in the
summer, 1673. Nicolls had remained governor since the Dutch surrender till
then, about two years and a half.
being then governor, a commission and letters of instruction were sent to the
Hoarkill, authorizing Hermanus Fredericksen, to be schout, Slander Matson, Otto
Walgast, and William Cleason to be commissaries, who were to keep good orders
there, and to try all matters of difference under 10 l. amongst themselves;
this seems to be intended to save them the trouble of going to New Castle upon
every trifling occasion; but for all matters above 10 l. they were to apply
themselves to New York, and so for all criminals.

Governor Lovelace gave also an order to captain Martin Prieger, to receive the
customs for all European goods imported at the Hoarkill, and on the furrs and
peltry exported from thence, -- viz. 10 l. per cent.

Whereas I am given to understand, Customs at the Hoarkills.
that all European goods imported at the Hoarkill in Delaware bay, did
heretofore pay custom at the rate of 10 l. per cent. and all furrs and peltry
exported from thence at the same rate, which turned to some advantage toward
the support of the government, upon mature advice and consideration had
thereof, I have thought fit to renew the former custom, and do therefore hereby
order and appoint captain Martin Preiger, who is a person well versed in the
trade of those parts, and very well known there both to the christians and
Indians, to be receiver and collector of the customs at the Hoarkill, where by
himself or his deputy he is to receive 10 per cent. of all European goods
imported there, whether coming from this place, New Castle in Delaware, or any
other part; and ten per cent. also for all furrs or peltry exported from
thence, according to former custom and usage on that behalf; and all persons
whatsoever trading thither, or from thence to any other place, are to take
notice thereof, and to obey this my commission, under the penalty of
confiscation of their goods if they shall presume to do otherwise, the said
capt. Prieger standing obliged to be answerable here, for all such customs as
shall be received by himself or deputy there, of which he is to render unto me
a due and exact account.

It was very early to impose such an extraordinary clog upon trade as 10 per
cent. Remarks.
and no doubt hard upon the young settlers to pay it, and the reason given for
doing it (namely that it had been done before) seems not so well calculated to
render the payment easy as might have been contrived; probably the chief cause
was that hinted at in the governor's letter to Carre, to keep them under by
taxes, that they might not have liberty to entertain any other thoughts but how
to discharge them. The daily exigencies of the government in those precarious
times afforded a better present plea, though of no force for continuing it
afterward; but after all, the government then more military than civil,
probably but little thought of a necessity to bestow coloring upon their
proceedings, however extraordinary, to a people whom they could at any time
compel to their measures; hard where that is the case of necessity, but more
hard and arbitrary when continued without that necessity. These precedents
introduced a similarity of taxation, which in time proved intolerable
grievances. But be their reasons to themselves. -- As the Hoarkills to the
Swedes appeared a place of rather more consequence than it is thought since,
their account may be worth observation.

Two leagues (says the manuscript in the British museum,) from cape Cornelius
on the west side of the river near its mouth, Swedes description of the Hoar
kill.
there is a certain creek called the Hoeren Kill, which may well pass for a
middling or small river, for it is navigable a great way upward, and its road
is a fine road for ships of all burdens, there being none like it for safety
and convenience in all the bay, the right channel for sailing up the bay
passing near it.

A certain person who for several years together had been a soldier in the
fort, informed us about the month of June, 1662, being then but lately come
from thence, concerning the Hoern kill or Harlot's creek; that along the sea
shore it was not above two leagues from the cape, and that near the fort which
is at the mouth of it, it is about 200 paces broad and navigable and very deep
to about half a league upwards, the pilots say generally about six feet of
water in going in, but the canoes can go about two leagues higher: There are
two small islands in it, the first very small the last about half a league in
circumference, both overgrown with fine grass, especially the latter, and are
at about half a league distance asunder, and the latter about a league from the
channel's mouth: The two islands are surrounded with a muddy ground, in which
there grows the best sort of oysters, which said ground begins near the first
island, for the mouth of the channel has a sandy bottom, being also very deep,
and therefore there are no oysters there: Near the smaller island and higher up
it is as broad again as at the mouth, near the said fort the channel for a good
way runs at an equal distance from the sea, having the breadth of about two
hundred paces of high downy land lying between them, near the fort there is a
glorious spring of fresh water, a small rill rising in the south east part of
the country, and falling from a rising hill, runs through this downy land into
the mouth of the Hoern kill, or Harlot's creek, is for its goodness and
fertility famed for the very best of New-Netherland. The whole country from
New York to Pennsylvania, being then so called; it is observable, that this
author through the whole, gives the South river greatly the preference.


The name of Hoernkill or Harlot's creek, had as we are informed, its rise from
the liberality of the Indians, for lavishly prostituting, especially at that
place, their maidens and daughters to our Netherlanders: Otherwise it is by
David Pietersz de Uries, who about the year 1630 first endeavored to settle
there, called Swanendal.

The above description however, in the general true at the time it was wrote,
leaves room for a doubt, at least as to the origin of the name. C. Colden in
his history of the five nations pa. 11. relates a custom of the same kind among
them, but there does not appear sufficient foundation to suppose these Indians
originally justly chargeable with such a practice, at least of the tribes
generally; and the relation of the Swedes is not in every instance to be
depended on; bad as the Indians now appear, and have many of them proved, they
were formerly better; in a case doubtful it is perhaps best to err on the
charitable side.
The probability lies that it arose from the creeks winding much in the shape
of a horn; whence the Dutch (and not the Swedes) first took occasion to call it
the Hoernkill; this is the tradition of the inhabitants there. Soon after
English possession, it got the name of Lewis-Town, by which it is mostly
called: It is situate at the mouth of Delaware bay, Alteration in a creek and
channel.
The Delaware probably got it is name from the lord Delaware, who sailed in a
ship of 250 tons, in April 1618, with 200 people for Virginia, but died at sea.
Prince's N. E. Chronology. p, 54.
and is the general resort for pilots, waiting to convoy vessels up the river:
Where the creek is described deep and sandy, is now a mowing marsh: The channel
also by the Hoarkill, then used for vessels to pass, is diminished to about a
hundred yards breadth at the mouth: The two islands, one very small, and the
other but half a league in circumference, are now the first supposed to be ten,
and the last thirty times as large as there described; and this alteration in
about a hundred years.

CHAP. IV.
King Charles the second, and duke of York's grants, whence lord Berkely and
sir George Carteret, became seized of New Jersey: The first constitution of
government under them: The settlement of Bergen, Middle-town, Shrewsbury* and
Elizabeth-Town. Philip Carteret appointed governor of Jersey: The Indian
purchase of Elizabeth-Town, by the setlers; and the first general Indian
purchase by the proprietors, etc.
THE right of the crown of England to these provinces indisputably founded, as
before deduced, K. Charles ii. first grant.
King Charles the second, did by letters patent, bearing date the Twentieth day
of March, 1664, for the consideration therein mentioned, grant unto James, duke
of York, his heirs and assigns, all that part of the main land of New England,
beginning at a certain place, called or known by the name of St. Croix, near
adjoining to New-Scotland, in America; and from thence extending along the sea
coast, unto a certain place called Pemaquie or Pemaquid, and so up the river
thereof, to the furthest head of the same, as it tends northward; and
extending from thence to the river of Kimbequin, and so upwards by the shortest
course, to the river Canada northwards; and also all that island or islands,
commonly called by the several name or names of Matowacks or Long Island,
situate and being toward the west of Cape-Cod, and the narrow Higansetts, a
butting upon the land between the two rivers, there called or known by the
several names of Connecticut and Hudson's river; together also with the said
river called Hudson's river; and all the land from the west side of Connecticut
river, to the east side of Delaware bay; and also several other islands and
lands in the said letters patents mentioned; together with the rivers,
harbors, mines, minerals, quarries, woods, marshes, waters, lakes, fishings,
hawking, hunting and fowling, and all other royalties, profits, commodities and
heriditaments to the said several islands* lands and premises, belonging or
appertaining.

The duke of York being thus seized, did by his deeds of lease and release,
Duke of York's lease and relese.
bearing date the 23 d, and 24 th days of June, 1664, in consideration of a
competent sum of money, grant and convey unto John lord Berkely, baron of
Stratton, one of the kings privy council; and sir George Carteret, of Saltrum,
in the county of Devon, knight, and one of the privy council, Sir George
Carteret was governor of Jersey, and held it for K. Charles ii. in the troubles
of 1649, -- expelled the house of commons, in 1669 for confused accounts, as
chamberlain. Smollet.

Treasurer of the navy, and vice chamberlain of the king's house* hold.
Clarendon.


and their heirs and assigns forever; all that tract of land adjacent to
New England, and lying and being to the westward of Long Island and Manhattas
island; and bounded on the east part by the main sea, and part by Hudson's
river; and has upon the west, Delaware bay or river; and extends southward
to the main occean as far as Cape-May, at the mouth of Delaware bay; and to the
northward as far as the northermost branch of the said bay or river of
Delaware; which is in 41 degrees and 40 minutes of latitude, and crosses over
thence in a straight line to Hudson's river, in 41 degrees of latitude; which
said tract of land is hereafter to be called Nova-Cesaria or New Jersey; and
also all rivers, mines, minerals, woods, fishings, hawkings, huntings, and
fowlings, and all other royalties, profits, commodities, and heriditaments
whatsoever to the said lands and premises, belonging or in any wise
appertaining, with their and every of their appurtenances in as full and ample
manner as the same is granted unto the said duke of York, by the before recited
letters patents.

The lord Berkely, and sir George Carteret, in consequence of this conveyance,
Berkley and Carteret's first constitutions.
now sole proprietors of New Jersey, for the better settlement thereof, agreed
upon certain constitutions of government; which were so well relished, that the
eastern parts of the province were soon considerably peopled. Vide. Appendix,
numb. i.


This was the first constitution of New Jersey, and it continued entire, till
the province became divided in 1676. Sir George Carteret, then the only
proprietor of the eastern division, confirmed and explained the concessions,
with a few additions. The county of Bergen was the first settled place, Bergen.
a great many dutch being already there, when the province was surrendered,
remained under the English government. A few Danes were probably concerned in
the original settlement of this county, whence came Bergen after the capital of
Norway. The manner of originally settling is singular* but small lots where
their dwelling houses are, and these contiguous in the town of Bergen: Their
plantations which they occupy for a livelihood, are at some distance; the
reason of fixing thus, is said to be through fear of the numerous Indians in
the early times of their settlement, about forty or fifty years before the
surrender. The date of the Dutch settlement, will be near^^ ascertained by the
following extract. -- As some unknown country further southward, about Hudson's
river was in their view (meaning the Plymouth colony) when they engaged in this
adventurous voyage* Mr. Morton who published his memorial in 1620 tells us,
(...) had then lately sure intelligence that the Dutch intending to ^ettle a
colony there of their own, privately hired the master of the ship to contrive
delays in England, then to (...) them to these northern coasts, and there under
pleas of shoals and winter to discourage them from venturing farther. --
Agreeable to this, while the English Leydeners (i. e. the said Plymouth
company) were preparing for their voyage, as capt. Do^mer returned from
Virginia to New England, he met certain Hollanders, sailing for Hudson's river,
where they had had a trade for several years. Prince's N. E. Chronol. p. 83, 84.


It was in 1664, that John Bailey, Daniel Denton, and Luke Watson, of Jamaica,
on Long*Island, purchased of certain Indian chiefs, Indian purchase of
Elizabeth Town
inhabitants of Staten-Island; a tract or tracts of land, on part of which the
Town of Elizabeth now stands; and for which (on their petition) governor
Richard Nicolls granted a deed or patent to John Baker of New York, and
Nicoll's patent.
John Ogden, of Northampton, John Bailey, and Luke Watson, and their
associates; dated at fort James, in New York, the second of December. This is
what is commonly called the Elizabeth-Town grant.
This was before lord Berkely's and sir George Carteret's title was known; and
by this means, this part of the province had some few very early settlements,
whether Middletown and Shrewsbury had not Dutch and English inhabitants before,
we are not authorized to say: About this time however, was a great resort of
industrious reputable farmers; the English inhabitants from the west end of
Long Island, almost generally removed to settle hither; and most of them fixed
about Middletown, from whence by degrees, they extended their settlements to
Freehold and thereabouts. Freehold.
To Shrewsbury th^^e came many families from New England: There were very soon
four towns in the province, viz. Elizabeth, Newark, Middletown, and Shrewsbury;
Elizabeth, Newark, Middletown and Shrewsbury.
and these with the country round, were in a few years plentifully inhabited,
by the accession of the Scotch, of whom there came a great many, such settlers
as came from England, those of the Dutch that remained, and those from the
neighboring colonies.

Lord Berkely and sir George Carteret having agreed upon their concessions,
appointed Philip Carteret governor of New Jersey, P. Carteret governor.
and gave him power with the advice of the major part of the council, to grant
lands to all such as by the concessions were entitled thereto, and though there
is no provision in the concessions for bargaining with the Indians, This in
1672 was supplied by particular instructions directing that the governor and
council should purchase all lands from the Indians and be reimbursed by the
settlers, as they made their purchases.
Governor Carteret on his arrival thought it prudent to purchase their rights:
Purchases of the Indians.
This was to be done for sums inconsiderable, in comparison with the damage a
neglect might have occasioned. Richard Hartshorne, a considerable setler at
Middletown, who came over in this year had like to have experienced some
disadvantage from this neglect in the patentees of that town, The Indians says
he came to my house, and laid their hands on the post and frame of the house
and said that house was theirs, they never had any thing for it, and told me if
I would not buy the land, I must be gone. But I minded it not, thinking it was
Davis's land, and they wanted to get something of me; they at last told me they
would kill my cattle and burn my hay, if I would not buy the land nor be gone;
then I went to the Patentees, which were James Grover, Richard Stout, John
Bound, and Richard Gibbons; they told me it was never bought, nor had the
Indians any thing for it. Nicolls desired of them and the Indians also, only to
have leave to set a trading house, and at that time they did not intend any one
should have the land, but keep it for the use of the country, always giving
leave for any man to trade with goods and not otherwise; but I told them I
would not live on those terms, and not only so, but it was dangerous, for the
Indians threatened to kill my cattle; they told me no man had power to buy, but
the patentees, and they would buy it; thus it continued some months. I
considered the thing as well as I then was capable, and went to Gravesend and
bought William Goulder out, and when I came back the Indians were at me and I
did. James Grover, Richard Stout, Samuel Spicer were at Wakecake, when I bought
Wake cake and paid for it, I being then a Patentee as well a^ the rest.
For though the Indians about the English settlements, were not at this time
considerable as to numbers, they were strong in their alliances, and besides of
themselves could easily annoy the out plantations; and there having been before
several considerable skirmishes between the Dutch and them, in which some blood
had been spilt, their friendship on this consideration it was thought stood but
ticklish: Upon the whole, the governor so ordered it, that the comers were
either to purchase of the Indians themselves, or if the lands were before
purchased, they were to pay their proportions: The event answered his
expectation, for as the Indians parted with the lands to their own
satisfaction, they became of a jealous, shy people, serviceable good
neighbors, and though frequent reports of their coming to kill the white
people, sometimes disturbed their repose, no instance occurs of their hurting
them, That is the English here spoken of.
in those early settlements.

In the Dutch skirmishes with the Indians, it is said the English from
Long Island, together with such as were settled among the Dutch, used to join
the latter in frequent excursions up the rivers to annoy or figure among the
Indians: Tradition of the Dutch attacking the Indians.
There is a tradition, that in one of those expeditions up a Jersey river, one
of the company of more curiosity or boldness than the rest, went at some
distance in the country to discover an Indian town, which at last he did, by
coming upon it before he was well aware of his situation; there were many
seated quietly together; at the instant he saw them, they saw him, he was
surprised, but quickly recollecting himself, took a paper out of his pocket,
and with that boldly went up, telling them it was proposals from the government
at York, and read at random such things as came into his head; by this
stratagem he got off unmolested, and discovering at York what he had seen, told
the government, if they would send a party against them he would be their
pilot: A party was accordingly sent, coming upon the Indians in the night, some
of them found means to get in to windward of their little town, and setting
fire to it, burnt the whole down; their wigwams were built close together, and
made of flags, bushes, and other light combustible matter, covered with the
bark of trees, so that the fire burnt with violence; the Indians
notwithstanding their surprise, took to their bows and arrows, and used them
with dexterity and courage, till being overpowered, several of them were
destroyed.

That we may place traditional intelligence of this sort together, we will here
venture at one more little occurrence of that kind; but with this remark, that
we pretend to no greater certainty in either, than what arises from the
probability of facts supported by established credit of persons relating them,
and the known hostilities at times subsisting between the Dutch and Indians in
their early settlement.

While New York was in possession of the Dutch, about the time of the Indian
war in New England, a Dutch ship coming from Amsterdam, was stranded on Sandy
Hook, Other accounts say in Delaware, nigh Christeen, but this is most likely
to be true.
but the passengers got on shore; among them was a young Dutchman who had been
sick most of the voyage; Case of a stranger, remarkably saved among the Indians.
he was taken so bad after landing, that he could not travel; and the other
passengers being afraid of the Indians, would not stay till he recovered, but
made what haste they could to New-Amsterdam; his wife however would not leave
him, the rest promised to send as soon as they arrived: They had not been long
gone, before a company of Indians coming down to the water side, discovered
them on the beach, and hastening to the spot, soon killed the man, and cut and
mangled the woman in such a manner that they left her for dead. She had
strength enough to crawl up to some old logs not far distant, and getting into
a hollow one, lived mostly in it for several days, subsisting in part by eating
the excrescences that grew from it; the Indians had left some fire on the
shore, which she kept together for warmth: having remained in this manner for
some time, an old Indian and a young one coming down to the beach found her;
they were soon in high words, which she afterward understood was a dispute;
the former being for keeping her alive, the other for dispatching: After they
had debated the point a while, the first hastily took her up, and tossing her
upon his shoulder, carried her to a place near where Middletown now stands,
where he dressed her wounds and soon cured her: After some time the Dutch at
New-Amsterdam hearing of a white woman among the Indians, concluded who it must
be, and some of them came to her relief; the old man her preserver, gave her
the choice either to go or stay; she chose the first: A while after marrying to
one Stout, they lived together at Middletown among other Dutch inhabitants; the
old Indian who saved her life, used frequently to visit her; at one of his
visits she observed him to be more pensive than common, and sitting down he
gave three heavy sighs; after the last she thought herself at liberty to ask
him what was the matter? He told her he had something to tell her in
friendship, though at the risk of his own life, which was, that the Indians were
that night to kill all the whites, and advised her to go off for New-Amsterdam;
she asked him how she could get off? he told her he had provided a canoe at a
place which he named: Being gone from her, she sent for her husband out of the
field, and discovered the matter to him, who not believing it, she told him the
old man never deceived her, and that she with her children would go;
accordingly going to the place appointed, they found the canoe and paddled off.
When they were gone, the husband began to consider the thing, and sending for
five or six of his neighbors, they set upon their guard: About midnight they
heard the dismal war-hoop; presently came up a company of Indians; they first
expostulated, and then told them, if they persisted in their bloody design,
they would sell their lives very dear: Their arguments prevailed, the Indians
desisted, and entered into a league of peace, which was kept without violation.
From this woman, thus remarkably saved, with her scars visible, through a long
life, is descended a numerous posterity of the name of Stout, now inhabiting
New Jersey: At that time there were supposed to be about fifty families of
white people, and five hundred Indians inhabiting those parts.

Governor Carteret did not arrive to his government of New Jersey, till the
latter end of the summer, 1665; till which time the province was under
Nicolls's jurisdiction: On the arrival of the former, he summoned a council,
granted lands, and administered the government on the plan of the general
concessions, and took up his residence at Elizabeth-Town, to which it is said
he gave the name, after Elizabeth, wife of sir George Carteret: With him came
about thirty people; some of them servants: They brought goods proper for the
planting a new country; and the governor soon afterward sent persons into
New England, and other places, to publish the proprietors concessions, and to
invite people to settle there; upon which many soon came from thence: some
settled at Elizabeth-Town, others at Woodbridge, Piscattaway and Newark: The
ship that brought the governor, having remained about six months, returned to
England, and the year after made another voyage. Sundry other vessels were from
time to time sent by the proprietors with people and goods, to encourage the
planting and peopling their lands. Thus the province of East-New-Jersey
increased in settlement, and continued to grow till the Dutch invasion in 1673,
when they having got possession of the country, some stop was put to the
English government; but the treaty afterward between king Charles the second,
and the States general at London 1673-4, put all general difficulties of that
kind out of dispute; the sixth article whereof is in these words, That whatever
country, island, town, haven, castle or fortress, has been, or shall be taken
by either party from the other since the beginning of the late unhappy war,
whether in Europe or elsewhere, and before the expiration of the times above
limited for hostility, shall be restored to the former owner in the same
condition it shall be in at the time of publishing this peace.

Though the inhabitants were at variance among themselves, there was also pretty
constantly a resort of settlers between the years 1665 and 1673, and they
increased fast afterward. But the Elizabeth-Town purchasers and others,
setting up a right, differing in some respects from that of the proprietors,
and other incidents falling out, which, though some of them inconsiderable, and
others one would think might then easily have been settled, yet nourished by a
more vindictive spirit on all sides than was immediately necessary, they
occasioned much disturbance. It is not our business to enter particularly into
these disturbances; they went in several instances to disreputable lengths. --
Governor Andros of York, in 1680, undertook to dispute governor Carteret of
Jersey's commission, and sending to Elizabeth-Town an armed force, seized and
carried him prisoner to New York.
Carteret going for England in the summer, Berry.
1672, left capt. John Berry his deputy. He returned in 1674, and found the
inhabitants more disposed to union among themselves, and bringing with him the
king's proclamation, and a fresh commission and instructions from sir George
Carteret, he summoned the people, and had them all published; which for a while
had a good effect toward restoring proprietary authority, and the public
peace: He remained governor till his death in 1682. In his time the general
assemblies and supreme courts sat at Elizabeth-Town, and the councils
generally: Here the secretary's office, and most other public offices were
held; here also most of the officers of the government then resided.

In September 1671, an extraordinary council was held at New York; present,
Governor Lovelace, the mayor and secretary of New York, major Steenwick,
governor Philip Carteret, and captain James Carteret of New Jersey: The
occasion was this, William Tomm and Peter Alricks, Particulars of two murders
by the Indians.
had just arrived from Delaware, with the particulars of the Indian murders
mentioned before, that two christians (Dutch men) had, as there related, been
murdered by some Indians at the island Matinicunk, The upper island situate
partly between Burlington and Bristol, afterward taken up by a proprietary
right, by Robert Stacy, and by him given to Burlington; and in 1682, confirmed
by a proprietary law, for the use of a free school forever. It is detached from
the main by a little channel occasioned by the waters of Essi^cunk creek. When
Gookin, a former governor of Pennsylvania, was about obtaining a grant of the
islands in Delaware, it is said the lords of trade excepted this in their
report to the king and council, as having been already occupied; and not on a
footing with the other islands; it is inconsiderable as to value compared with
many of the others, yet long possession and some improvements, have rendered it
useful to Burlington.
on Delaware: Alricks being present at the council, informed them, the nation
of whom these murderers were, consisted of about fifty or sixty persons, and
that the mischiefs committed on Delaware this seven years, were said to be done
by them: That the Indians their confederates (as it was supposed they would be
if a war should follow) were about a thousand persons, besides women and
children: That two of the saggamores of the nation of the murderers, promised
their best assistance, to bring them in, or procure them to be knocked in the
head, if countenanced by the government; and that many other Indians he met
upon the road, much disallowed of the murder, and were very sorry for it, and
offered their assistance against them. Alricks further related, that it was
proposed by the sachems, as the best scheme to set upon this nation, to cause a
kint^^oy to be held; and that in the midst of their mirth, one should be hired
to knock them in the head; adding, as his own opinion, that the best time to
fall upon them was about the 25th October; because after that their usual
manner was to go a hunting, and then they could not be easily found: But now
the immediate danger was of their destroying the corn and cattle of the
christians, and that the murders were owing to Tashiowycan, who having a sister
dying, expressed great grief for it, and said the Mannetta has killed my
sister, and I will go kill the christians; and taking another with him, they
together executed the barbarous facts.

This information considered, the council concluded, that Thomas Lewis, then
bound with his sloop for New Castle, should be stayed from his voyage, for
three or four days, when Alricks and Henry Courturier, would be ready to go
with him; that in the mean time, general instructions should be drawn to take
along with them: That the Governor of New Jersey, and capt. James Carteret,
(then present) should expeditiously order a general assembly to be called in
that government, (according to their custom upon all emergent occasions) to
know the people's strength and readiness; and how far they were willing to
contribute toward the prosecution of a war against the Indians. That a
frequent correspondence be kept between the two governments, and that nothing
be done in this Indian war, without mutual advice and consent of both the
governors; unless upon extraordinary opportunity, where advantage against the
enemy might suddenly be taken, before notice could be given.

These resolutions taken, the next step was to transmit instructions to William
Tomm, (he was either one of the commissaries appointed by Carre, and the
authority at New Castle, or a kind of deputy under them, up Delaware) that he
might forecast how a war might be prosecuted to the best advantage* and it
requiring time to get things in order, all the frontier scattering plantations,
were immediately to t^resh out or remove their corn, and dispose their cattle,
so as to receive the less damage by the effects of the war: Next he was to
order, that none on pain of death, should presume to sell any powder, shot, or
strong waters to the Indians; and that in the mean time, the inhabitants were
to carry (if such a thing was practicable) a seeming complacency with the
nation of whom were the murderers, either by treaty or traffic, to prevent
suspicion of the designs on foot; but withal it was directed, that if they
would either deliver up the murderers, or their heads; the English were at
liberty to assure them of no disturbance. Lovelace also wrote to Carre upon
this occasion, to be vigilant in making preparations for the war; and as
directions could not be punctual, the whole was left to his prudent management,
with advice of his commissaries. The next council held upon this occasion, was
in November, at Elizabeth-Town; present, the governors Lovelace and Carteret,
and diverse others. Here the season was thought too far advanced, to begin the
war; but the magistrates were authorized to treat with the neighboring
Sasquehana Indians, or others, to join together against the murderers, and such
as harbored them; and to promise a reward as they should think fit; provided
caution was used so as to create no sudden jealousy: But this proved
unnecessary; the Indians uneasy about the murder, were not averse to a full
revenge, as the event proved. In December, a parcel of them meeting at Rambo's,
sent for Tomm and others, and promised within six days to bring in the
murderers, dead or alive: Accordingly two Indians sent by the sachems, to take
them, coming to Tashowycan's wig-wam in the night; one of them his particular
friend; him he asked if he intended to kill him; he answered no, but the
sachems have ordered you to die: He demanded what his brothers said; being told
they also said he must die, he then holding his hands before his eyes, said
kill me: Upon this the other Indian, An Indian shot.
not his intimate, shot him in the breast: They took his body to Wickaco, and
afterward hung it in chains at New Castle: The English gave the sachems for
this, five matchcoats. The other murderer hearing the shot, ran naked into the
woods, and what came of him after, appears not. The Indians upon this death,
summoned many of their young men, and before the English, told them, that now
they saw a beginning of punishment, and all that did the like should be so
served. Thus ended an affair, which while these Indians were a formidable body,
looked discouraging.

The town of New Castle, NewAmstell incorporated.
in the spring, 1672, was by the government at York, made a corporation, to be
governed by a bailiff and six assistants; after the first year the four old to
go out, and four others to be chosen: The bailiff was president, with a double
vote; the constable chosen by the bench; they had power to try causes as far as
ten pounds, without appeal: The English laws were established in the town, and
among the inhabitants on both sides Delaware: The office of Schout was
converted into a sheriff, for the corporation and river, annually chosen; and
they were to have free trade without being obliged to make entry at New York,
as heretofore had been the practice.

About this time happened a considerable disturbance at the Hoarkills:
Disturbance at the Hoarkill.
A party from Maryland, headed by one Jones, made an incursion, and binding the
magistrates, and other inhabitants, carried off what plunder they could; being
joined by Daniel Brown, a planter at the Hoarkills; he was sent to New York,
took his trial and was convicted, but on promises of amendment, and a small
security for future good behavior dismissed. With respect to the Marylanders,
Lovelace's letter to that governor, shows him to have had some spirit, though his
character in general was rather that of an upright, but timid governor and good
natured man:

It is dated the12 th of August, 1672.
To Philip Calvert, Esquire governor of Maryland.
SIR,
I thought it had been impossible now in these portending boisterous times,
wherein all true hearted Englishmen, Governor Lovelace's letter to the governor
of Maryland.
are buckling on their armor to vindicate their honors, and to assert the
imperial interest of his sacred majesty's rights and dominions; that now
without any just grounds, either given or pretended, such horrid outrages
should be committed on his majesty's liege subjects, under the protection of
his royal highness's authority, as was exercised by one Jones, who with a party
as dissolute as himself, took the pains to ride to the Hoarkills, where in
derision and contempt of the duke's authority, bound the magistrates and
inhabitants, despitefully treated them, rifled and plundered them of their
goods; and when it was demanded by what authority he acted, answered in no
other language but a cocked pistol to his breast; which if it had spoke had
forever silenced him. I do not remember I have heard of a greater outrage and
riot committed on his majesty's subjects in America, but once before in
Maryland: You cannot but imagine his royal highness will not be satisfied with
these violent proceedings, in which the indignity rebounds on him: neither can
you but believe it is as easy an undertaking, for me to retaliate the same
affront on Jones's head, and accomplices, as he did on those indefencible
inhabitants: But I rather choose to have first a more calm redress from you; to
whom I now appeal, and from whom may in justice expect that right in the
castigation of Jones cum socies, that your nature and the law has provided for;
otherwise I must apply myself to such other remedies as the exigence of this
indignity shall persuade me to: Thus leaving it to your consideration, I shall
remain your very humble servant,

FR. LOVELACE.

Governor Lovelace also wrote to capt. Carre upon this occasion.

SIR,
The letters you sent by the express over land came safe to my hands, with the
enclosed relation and papers concerning the Hoarkill, Governor Lovelace ^o
Carre.
and the Marylanders forcibly possessing themselves of the place, as also of
the goods and estates of some of the inhabitants, of which we had some rumors
before, but did not give much credit to it; supposing what was done before, to
be the rash action of some private person; not thinking the authority of
Maryland would invade his royal highness's territories, which he has been
possessed of for near eight years, without giving the least overture of it to
me, who am his royal highness's deputy: Their former violent action and force,
upon those poor unarmed people, together with the particulars of their
plunders, I had immediate opportunity of transmitting to his royal highness by
a ship then bound away for London, the which I made use of, and recommended
their case; and I hope it has long ever this arrived to his hands; so that
some directions about it may be expected in a short time; till when I think it
best for the present to leave matters there as they are; but as to the cloud
which likewise hangs over your heads at Delaware, which it is said they are
making preparations to invade; my instructions and orders to you, and the
officers in general, are, that you put yourselves in the best posture of
defense possibly you can, by fitting up the fort in the town, keeping your
companies in arms, both there and up the river; who are to provide themselves
with fitting ammunition; and that all soldiers be at an hour's warning upon any
alarm or order given; and that at the town especially, you make your guards as
strong as you can, and keep a strict watch; and if any enemy comes to demand
the place, that you first desire to know their authority and commission, and
how it comes to pass those of Maryland should now make such an invasion, after
so long quiet possession of those parts by his royal highness's deputies, under
his majesty's obedience, and by other nations before that, several years before
the date of the lord Baltimore's patent, whom they never disturbed by arms, and
whose right is now devolved upon the duke. Stand well upon your guard, and do
not begin with them, but if they first break the peace by firing upon your
guards, or any such hostile action, then use all possible means to defend
yourselves and the place, and command all his majesty's good subjects to be
aiding and assisting to you; who I hope will not be wanting to their abilities:
In all matters of concern, you are to take advice of the chief officers there.

This will come to you by your bailiff, Mr. Peter Alricks, who is hastening
over land, to secure his affairs there, in this portending invasion, and to
give his best help for the safeguard of the place, and his royal highness's
interest upon all occasions: Fail not to send an express to me, by whom I shall
give you such further directions and assistance as will be requisite; and if
occasion should be, will come over myself in person; though the spring would be
more suitable for me than a winter voyage; so recommending all things to your
care and vigilance, of which I expect a good account: I conclude, being your
very loving friend,

Francis Lovelace.
Fort James, in New York, this 7th October, 1672.
The inhabitants at New Castle and the Hoarkills, also suffered considerable
losses, by Dutch privateers plundering their effects. New Castle, etc.
plundered by privateers.
For reparation, they were permitted by the government to lay an imposition,
and power given to the magistrates, to levy and receive upon each anchor of
strong liquors spent or disposed of among them, the value of four guilders in
wampum, Eight white wampum or four black, passed at this time as a stiver,
twenty stivers made what they called a guilder, which was about six pence
present currency. The white wampum was worked out of the inside of the great
conques into the form of a bead, and perforated to string on leather. The black
or purple was worked out of the inside of the mussell or clam-shell, they were
sometimes wove as broad as ones hand, and about two feet long; these the
Indians call belts, and commonly give and receive at treaties, as seals of
their friendship: For lesser matters a single string is given. Every bead is of
a known value, and a belt of a less number is made to equal one of a greater,
by so many as is wanting fastened to the belt by a string.
but this to continue for one year only, as a trial of its utility.

Wampum Wampum
was the chief currency of the country: Great quantities had been formerly
brought in, but the Indians had carried so much away, it was now grown scarce;
and this was thought to be owing to its low value. To increase it, the governor
and council at York issued a proclamation in 1673, that instead of eight white
and four black, six white and three black wampums should pass in equal value as
a stiver or penny; and three times so much the value in silver. This
proclamation was published at Albany, Eusopus, Delaware, Long Island, and parts
adjacent.

Mention was made that sir George Carteret by his instructions to governor
Carteret, confirmed the original concessions with additions and explanations:
These bore date the 13 th of July 1674: Among other things they direct, Sir
George Carteret's instructions.
that the governor and council should allow eighty acres per head, to settlers
above ten miles from the sea, the Delaware, or other river, navigable with
boats; and to those that settled nearer, sixty acres: That the land should be
purchased from the Indians, as occasion required, by the governor and council,
in the name of the proprietors, who were to be repaid by the settlers with
charges: A paragraph of this sort, is also inferted in one of the letters of
instruction from lord Berkely and sir George Carteret, in conjunction, in 1672.
That all strays of beasts at land, and wrecks at sea, should belong to the
proprietor; and that all persons discovering any such thing, should have
satisfaction for their pains and care, as the governor and council might think
fit.

CHAP. V.
Major Andros appointed governor at New York: Takes possession at Delaware:
Arrival of the first English settlers to West-Jersey, under the duke of York's
title: Lord Berkely assigns his moiety of New Jersey to Byllinge, and he in
trust to others: Their letter and first commission: New Jersey divided into the
provinces, East and West-Jersey; and the declaration of the West-Jersey
proprietors.
ABOUT the month of October 1674, major Edmund Andros He was afterward
knighted; he bore the unfavourable character of an arbitrary governor, who made
the will of his despotic master (James ii.) and not the law, the chief rule of
his conduct.
arrived governor, under the duke of York; Major Andros.
he soon after authorized captain Cantwell and William Tomm* to take possession
of the fort and stores at New Castle, for the king's use, pursuant to the late
treaty of peace, and to take such other measures for their settlement and
repose at New Castle, the Hoarkills, and other parts of Delaware, as they
thought best; requiring them to comport themselves toward the neighboring
colonies in an amicable manner: This done, he published a proclamation
Proclamation.
in the words following:

Whereas it has pleased his majesty and his royal highness, to send me with
authority; to receive this place and government from the Dutch, and to continue
in the command thereof under his royal highness, who has not only taken care
for our future safety and defense, but also given me his commands for securing
the rights and properties of the inhabitants, and that I should endeavor by
all fitting means, the good and welfare of this province, and dependencies
under his government; that I may not be wanting in any thing that may conduce
thereunto, and for the saving of the trouble and charge hither, for the
satisfying themselves in such doubts as might arise concerning their rights and
properties upon the change of government, and wholly to settle the minds of all
in general, I have thought fit to publish and declare, that all former grants,
privileges or concessions heretofore granted, and all estates legally possessed
by any under his royal highness, before the late Dutch government, (as also all
legal judicial proceedings during that government, to my arrival in these
parts) are hereby confirmed, and the possessor by virtue thereof, to remain in
quiet possession of their rights: It is hereby further declared, that the known
book of laws formerly established and in force under his royal highness's
government, is now again confirmed by his royal highness, the which are to be
observed and practiced, together with the manner and time of holding courts
therein mentioned as heretofore; and all magistrates and civil officers
belonging thereunto, to be chosen and established accordingly, Given under my
hand in New York, this 9th day of November, in the twenty-sixth year of his
majesty's reign, annoque domini 1674.

Andros being now seated in his government, we shall leave him, and take a view
of other matters: First respecting the arrival of a few passengers from England
to West-Jersey: One moiety or half part of the province of New Jersey, First
arrival to West Jersey.
belonged to the lord Berkeley, and now about was sold to John Fenwick, in
trust for Edward Byllinge and his assigns. Fenwick in 1675, set sail to visit
the new purchase in a ship from London, called the Griffith; arriving after a
good passage, he landed at a pleasant rich spot, situate near Delaware, by him
called SALEM, probably from the peaceable aspect it then bore. He brought with
him two daughters, and many servants, two of which, Samuel Hedge and John
Adams, afterward married his daughters; other passengers were, Edward
Champness, Edward Wade, Samuel Wade, John Smith and wife, Samuel Nichols,
Richard Guy, Richard Noble, Richard Hancock, John Pledger, Hipolite Lufever,
and John Matlock; these, and others with them, were masters of families. This
was the first English ship that came to West-Jersey, and none followed for near
two years, owing probably to a difference between Fenwick and Byllinge.

But this difference being settled to the satisfaction of both parties, by the
good offices of William Penn, Byllinge agreed to present his interest in the
province of New Jersey, to his creditors, as all that he had left, toward
their satisfaction, and desired Penn to join Gawen Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas
(two of his creditors) and they together to be trustees: Penn at first
unwilling, was by the importunity of some of the creditors, prevailed on; and
with the others accepting the charge, they became trustees for one moiety or
half part of the province; which though yet undivided, necessity pressing, they
soon sold a considerable number of shares of their propriety to different
purchasers, who thereupon became proprietors (according to their different
shares) in common with them; and it being necessary that some scheme should be
fallen upon, as well for the better distribution of rights to land, as to
promote the settlement, Western concessions
and ascertain a form of government; concessions were drawn, mutually agreed
on, and signed by some of the subscribers, Appendix numb. ii.
(for they did not all sign at once.) It was next the business of the
proprietors, who held immediately under lord Berkeley, to procure a division of
the province, which after some time was effected; and then as an expedient for
the present well ordering matters, they wrote the following letter to

London, 26th of the 6th month, 1676. Richard Hartshorne.
We have made use of thy name in a commission and instructions, which we have
sent by James Wasse, who is gone in Samuel Groome's ship for Maryland; a copy
of which is here enclosed* and also a copy of a letter we have sent to John
Fenwick, to be read to him in presence of as many of the people that went with
him as may be; and because we both expect, and also entreat, and desire thy
assistance in the same, we will a little show things to thee, that thou may
inform not only thyself, but friends there; which in short is as follows.

1st. We have divided with George Carteret, and have sealed deeds of partition,
each to the other; and we have all that side on Delaware river from one end to
the other; the line of partition is from the east side of little Egg Harbor,
straight North, through the country, to the utmost branch of Delaware river;
with all powers, privileges, and immunities whatsoever: ours is called New
West-Jersey, his is called New East-Jersey.

2d. We have made concessions by ourselves, being such as friends here and
there (we question not) will approve of, having sent a copy of them by James
Wasse; there we lay a foundation for after ages to understand their liberty as
men and christians, that they may not be brought in bondage, but by their own
consent; for we put the power in the people, that is to say, they to meet and
choose one honest man for each propriety, who has subscribed to the
concessions; all these men to meet as an assembly there, to make and repeal
laws, to choose a governor, or a commissioner, and twelve assistants, to
execute the laws during their pleasure; so every man is capable to choose or be
chosen: No man to be arrested, condemned, imprisoned, or molested in his estate
or liberty, but by twelve men of the neighborhood: No man to lie in prison for
debt, but that his estate satisfy as far as it will go, and be set at liberty
to work: No person to be called in question or molested for his conscience, or
for worshipping according to his conscience; with many more things mentioned in
the said concessions.

3. We have sent over by James Wasse, a commission under our hands and seals,
wherein we empower thyself, James Wasse and Richard Guy, or any two of you, to
act and do according to the instructions, of which here is a copy; having also
sent some goods, to buy and purchase some land of the natives.

4. We intend in the spring to send over some more commissioners, with the
friends and people that comes there, because James Wasse is to return in
Samuel Groom's ship for England: for Richard Guy, we judge him to be an honest
man, yet we are afraid that John Fenwick will hurt him, and get him to
condescend to things that may not be for the good of the whole; so we hope thou will balance him to what is just and fair; that John Fenwick betray him not,
that things may go on easy without hurt or jar; which is the desire of all
friends; and we hope West Jersey will be soon planted; it being in the minds of
many friends to prepare for their going against the spring.

5. Having thus far given thee a sketch of things, we come now to desire thy
assistance, and the assistance of other friends in your parts; and we hope it
will be at length an advantage to you there, both upon truth's account, and
other ways; and in regard many families more may come over in the spring to
Delaware side, to settle and plant, and will be assigned by us to take
possession of their particular lots; we do entreat and desire, that thou,
knowing the country, and how to deal with the natives; we say, that thee, and
some other friends, would go over to Delaware side, as soon as this comes to
your hands, or as soon as you can conveniently; and James Wasse is to come to a
place called New Castle, on the other side of Delaware river, to stay for thee,
and any that will go with him; and you all to advise together, and find out a
fit place to take up for a town, and agree with the natives for a tract of
land; and then let it be surveyed and divided in one hundred parts; for that is
the method we have agreed to take, and we cannot alter it; and if you set men
to work to clear some of the ground, we would be at the charges; and we do
intend to satisfy thee for any charge thou art at, and for thy pains: This we
would not have neglected; for we know, and you that are there know, that if the
land be not taken up before the spring, that many people come over there, the
natives will insist on high demands, and so we shall suffer by buying at dear
rates, and our friends that comes over, be at great trouble and charges until
a place be bought and divided; for we do not like the tract of land John
Fenwick has bought, so as to make it our first settlement; but we would have
thee and friends there, to provide and take up a place on some creek or river,
that may lie nearer you, and such a place as you may like; for may be it may
come in your minds to come over to our side, when you see the hand of the Lord
with us; and so we can say no more, but leave the thing with you, believing
that friends there will have a regard to frie^^^ ^ettling, that it may be done
in that way and method, that may be for the good of the whole; rest thy friends,

GAWEN LAURIE, WILLIAM PENN, NICHOLAS LUCAS, E. BYLLINGE, JOHN EDRIDGE, EDMOND
WARNER.


London, the 18th of 6th month called August, 1676.
We whose names are hereunder subscribed, Proprietors instructions to James
Wasse and Richard Hartshorne. etc.
do give full power, commission and authority, unto James Wasse, Richard
Hartshorne and Richard Guy, or any two of them, to act and do for us according
to the following instructions; and we do engage to ratify and confirm
whatsoever they shall do in prosecution of the same.

1. We desire you to get a meeting with John Fenwick, and the people that went
with him, (but we would not have you tell your business,) until you get them
together; then show and read the deed of partition with George Carteret; also
the transactions between William Penn, Nicholas Lucas, Gawen Lawrie, John
Edridge and Edmond Warner, and then read our letter to John Fenwick and the
rest, and show John Fenwick he has no power to sell any land there, without
the consent of John Edridge and Edmond Warner.

2. Know of John Fenwick, if he will be willing peaceably to let the land he
has taken up of the natives be divided into one hundred parts, according to
our and his agreement in England, casting lots for the same, we being willing
that those who being settled and have cultivated ground now with him, shall
enjoy the same, without being turned out, although they fall into our lots:
Always provided, that we be reimbursed the like value and quantity in goodness
out of John Fenwick's lots: And we are also content to pay our ninetieth parts
of what is paid to the natives for the same, and for what James Wasse has
purchased of John Fenwick, and he setting out the same unto him, not being in a
place to be allotted for a town upon a river, but at a distance, and the said
John Fenwick allowing us the like value in goodness in some other of his lots;
we are willing he shall possess the same from any claiming by or under us; and
for the town lots we are willing he enjoy the same as freely as any purchaser
buying of us.

3. Take informations from some that knows the soundings of the river and
creeks, and that is acquainted in the country, and when James Wasse is in
Maryland, he may enquire for one Agustin, who as we hear did sound most part of
Delaware river and the creeks: He is an able surveyor; see to agree with him to
go with you up the river as far as over against New Castle, or further if you
can, so far as a vessel of a hundred tun can go; for we intend to have a way
cut cross the country to Sandy-Hook; so the further up the way, the shorter:
and there, upon some creek or bay, in some healthy ground, find out a place fit
to make a settlement for a town; and then go to the Indians, and agree with
them for a tract of land about the said place, of twenty or thirty miles long,
more or less, as you see meet, and as broad as you see meet. If it be to the
middle, we care not; only enquire if George Carteret, have not purchased some
there already, that so you may not buy it over again.

4. Then lay out four or five thousand acres for a town; and if Agustin will
undertake to do it reasonably, let him do it; for he is the fittest man; and if
he think he cannot survey so much, being in the winter time, then let him lay
out the less for a town at present, if it be but two thousand acres, and let
him divide it in a hundred parts; and when it is done, let John Fenwick, if he
please, be there; however, let him have notice: But however, let some of you be
there, to see the lots cast fairly by one person that is not concerned. The
lots are from number one to a hundred, and put the same numbers of the lots on
the partition trees for distinction.

5. If John Fenwick, and those concerned with him, be willing to join with you
in those things as above, which is just and fair, then he or any of them, may
go along with you in your business; and let them pay their proportion of what
is paid to the natives, with other charges: And so he and they may dispose of
their lots with consent of John Edridge and Edmund, Warner; which lots are, 20,
21, 26, 27, 36, 47, 50, 57, 63, 72.

6. If John Fenwick and his people, refuse to let the land they have taken up
of the natives be divided, and refuse to join with you; you may let the country
know in what capacity John Fenwick stands, that he has no power over the
persons or estates of any man or woman more than any other person.

7. What land you take of the natives, let it be taken, viz. ninety parts for
the use of William Penn, Gawen Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas, and ten parts for
John Edridge and Edmund Warner.

8. After you have taken the land as above, and divided for a town or
settlement, and cast lots for the same as above; then if any have a mind to buy
one or more proprieties, sell them at two hundred pound specie; they taking
their lots as their do; paying to you in hand the value of fifty pounds in part
of a propriety, and the rest on sealing their conveyance in London; and so they
may presently settle. When any of the lots fall to us, that is to say, he that
buyeth a propriety may settle on any one lot of ninety parts; which said
persons that buys, and what lots falls to them, there they may settle, and
acquaint us what numbers they are; and if any will take land to them and their
heirs forever, for every acre taken up in a place laid out for a town,
according to the concessions, they are not to have above what shall fall by lot
to a propriety in a town.

9. What charges James Wasse is at, by taking up the land of the natives, we do
oblige to pay the same unto him again, with what profits is usual there upon
English goods; and he may pitch upon two lots, one in each town; if they be
taken up before he comes away, to his own proper use, for his trouble and
pains: And we do also engage to allow and pay what charges any of our
commissioners shall disburse in executing these our instructions, to them or
their assigns.

10. Let us be advised by the first ship that comes for England, of all
proceedings hereupon, and write to the friends at Sandy-Hook, letting them know
how things are, and that we have divided with George Carteret, and that our
division is all along on Delaware river; and that we have made concessions by
our selves, which we hope will satisfy friends there. If John Fenwick, or any
of the people with him, desire a copy of the deed of partition, let them have
it.

11. We desire that our original deed may be kept in your own custody, that it
may be ready to show unto the rest of the commissioners, which we intend to
send over in the spring, with full power for settling things, and to lay out
land, and dispose upon it, and for the settling some method of government
according to the concessions.

12. If you cannot get Augustine to go with you, or that he be unreasonable in
his demands; then send a man to Thomas Bushroods, at Essex lodge, in York
river, for William Elliot, who writes to Gawin Lawrie this year, and offered
himself to be surveyor, and tell him you had orders from said Lawrie to send
for him, and take him with you. He will be willing to be there all winter, and
will survey and do other things. He had a good character in Virginia, but was
not able to keep it; he is a fair conditioned sober man: Let him stay there all
winter, and order him something to live upon.

13. If the said Elliot go with you, give him directions what to do. If you
cannot stay till a place for a town be surveyed, yet we think you may stay
until you have not only pitched upon a place for a town, but also upon a place
for a second town and settlement, and have marked out the place round about
there, and let William Elliot divide both, which no doubt but he may do before
the spring, that we send over more commissioners and people; and if John
Fenwick be willing to go on jointly with you there, his surveyor may go along
and help ours, and the charges shall be brought in for both proportionably on
all. Mind this, and speak to Richard Guy, or Richard Hartshorne, and leave
orders with them to let William Elliot have provisions for himself till spring,
and we shall order them satisfaction for the same; and if there be no house
near the place you take up for the surveyors to lodge in, then let there be a
cottage built for them on the place, and we will allow the charges.

14. And whereas there is tackling there already, for fitting of a sloop, as we
judge, in the custody of Richard Guy: We also give you power if you see meet,
and that it be of necessary use and advantage for the whole concern, you may
order these ship-carpenters to build a sloop suitable for these materials, and
appoint them some provision for their food, and for the rest of their wages
they shall either have it in a part of the sloop, or be otherwise satisfied in
the spring of the year; the said sloop to be ordered and disposed upon by you
until more commissioners come over with further instructions.

15. For the goods we have sent over with James Wasse are to disposed upon for
purchasing land from the natives or otherwise as need is, giving us account
thereof.

NICHOLAS LUCAS, WILLIAM PENN, EDMOND WARNER* GAWIN LAWRIE, E. BYLLINGE,


The instrument for dividing the province being agreed on by sir George
Carteret on the one part, and the said E. Byllinge, William Penn, Gawen Lawrie,
and Nicholas Lucas on the other, they together signed a Quintipartite deed,
dated the first day of July, 1676. Vid. Grants, concessions, etc. published by
A. Lea^ing and J. Spicer. p. 61, etc.


The line of division being thus far settled, each took their own measures for
further peopling and improving their different shares. Sir George Carteret had
greatly the advantage respecting improvements, his part being (as we have seen)
already considerably peopled: The western proprietors, soon published a
description of their moiety; on which many removed thither: But lest any should
not sufficiently weigh the importance of this undertaking, and for other
reasons, the three principal proprietors published, the following cautionary
epistle.

Dear friends and brethren,
In the pure love and precious fellowship of our Lord Jesus Christ, Epistle.
we very dearly salute you: Forasmuch as there was a paper printed several
months since, entitled, The description of New-West-Jersey, in the which our
names were mentioned as trustees for one undivided moiety of the said province:
And because it is alleged that some, partly on this account, and others
apprehending, that the paper by the manner of its expression came from the body
of friends, as a religious society of people, and not from particulars, have
through these mistakes, weakly concluded that the said description in matter
and form might be writ, printed and recommended on purpose to promp and allure
people, to dis-settle and transplant themselves, as it is also by some alleged:
And because that we are informed, that several have on that account, taken
encouragement and resolution to transplant themselves and families to the said
province; and lest any of them (as is feared by some) should go out of a
curious and unsettled mind, and others to s^un the testimony of the blessed
cross of Jesus, of which several weighty friends have a godly jealousy upon
their spirits; lest an unwarrantable forwardness should act or hurry any beside
or beyond the wisdom and counsel of the lord, or the freedom of his light and
spirit in their own hearts, and not upon good and weighty grounds: It truly
laid hard upon us, to let friends know how the matter stands; which we shall
endeavor to do with all clearness and fidelity.

1. That there is such a province as New Jersey, is certain,

2. That it is reputed of those who have lived and have traveled in that
country, to be wholesome of air and fruitful of soil, and capable of sea trade,
is also certain; and it is not right in any to despise or dispraise it, or
dissuade those that find freedom from the Lord, and necessity put them on going.

3. That the duke of York sold it to those called lord Berkeley, baron of
Stratton, and sir George Carteret, equally to be divided between them, is also
certain:

4. One moiety or half part of the said province, being the right of the said
lord Berkeley, was sold by him to John Fenwick, in trust for Edward Byllinge,
and his assigns.

5. Forasmuch as E. B. (after William Penn had ended the difference between the
said Edward Byllinge and John Fenwick) was willing to present his interest in
the said province to his creditors, as all that he had left him, toward their
satisfaction, he desired William Penn (though every way unconcerned) and Gawen
Lawrie, and Nicholas Lucas, two of his creditors, to be trustees for
performance of the same; and because several of his creditors, particularly and
very importunately, pressed William Penn to accept of the trust for their sakes
and security; we did all of us comply with those and the like requests, and
accepted of the trust.

6. Upon this we became trustees for one moiety of the said province, yet
undivided: And after no little labor, trouble and cost, a division was
obtained between the said sir George Carteret and us, as trustees: The country
is situated and bounded as is expressed in the printed description.

7. This now divided moiety is to be cast into one hundred parts, lots, or
proprieties; ten of which upon the agreement made betwixt E. Byllinge and J.
Fenwick, were settled and conveyed unto J. Fenwick, his executors and assigns,
with a considerable sum of money, by way of satisfaction for what he became
concerned in the purchase from the said lord Berkely, and by him afterward
conveyed to John Edridge and Edmond Warner, their heirs and assigns.

8. The ninety parts remaining are exposed to sale, on the behalf of the
creditors of the said E. B. And forasmuch as several friends are concerned as
creditors, as well as others, and the disposal of so great a part of this
country being in our hands; we did in real tenderness and regard to friends,
and especially to the poor and necessitous, make friends the first offer; that
if any of them, though particularly those that being low in the world, and
under trials about a comfortable livelihood for themselves and families, should
be desirous of dealing for any part or parcel thereof, that they might have the
refusal.

9. This was the real and honest intent of our hearts, and not to prompt or
allure any out of their places, either by the credit our names might have with
our people throughout the nation, or by representing the thing otherwise than
it is in itself.

As for the printed paper sometime since set forth by the creditors, as a
description of that province; we say as to two passages in it, they are not so
clearly and safely worded as ought to have been; particularly, in seeming to
limit the winter season to so short a time; when on further information, we
hear it is sometime longer and sometime shorter than therein expressed; and the
last clause relating to liberty of conscience, we would not have any to think,
that it is promised or intended to maintain the liberty of the exercise of
religion by force and arms; though we shall never consent to any the least
violence on conscience; yet it was never designed to encourage any to expect by
force of arms to have liberty of conscience fenced against invaders thereof.

10. And be it known unto you all, in the name and fear of Almighty God, his
glory and honor, power and wisdom, truth and kingdom, is dearer to us than all
visible things; and as our eye has been single, and our heart sincere to the
living God, in this as in other things; so we desire all whom it may concern,
that all groundless jealousies may be judged down and watched against, and that
all extremes may be avoided on all hands by the power of the Lord; that nothing
which hurts or grieves the holy life of truth in any that goes or stays, may be
adhered to; nor any provocations given to break precious unity.

This am I, William Penn, moved of the Lord, to write unto you, lest any bring
a temptation upon themselves or others; and in offending the Lord, slay their
own peace: Blessed are they that can see, and behold him their leader, their
orderer, their conductor and preserver, in staying or going: Whose is the earth
and the fullness thereof, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. And as we
formerly writ, we cannot but repeat our request unto you, that in whomsoever a
desire is to be concerned in this intended plantation, such would weigh the
thing before the Lord, and not headily or rashly conclude on any such remove;
and that they do not offer violence to the tender love of their near kindred
and relations; but soberly and conscientiously endeavor to obtain their good
wills, the unity of friends where they live; that whether they go or stay, it
may be of good savor before the Lord (and good people) from whom only can all
heavenly and earthly blessings come. This we thought good to write for the
preventing of all misunderstandings, and to declare the real truth of the
matter; and so we commend you all to the Lord, who is the watchman of his
Israel. We are your friends and brethren,

WILLIAM PENN, GAWEN LAWRIE, NICHOLAS LUCAS.


CHAP. VI.
Arrival of more settlers to West-Jersey; their difficulties; their purchases
from the Indians; they lay out a town; some of their first sentiments of the
country, and an account of the duke of York's two last grants, being for the
provinces East and West New Jersey, separately.
AMONG other purchasers of the West-Jersey lands, were two companies, one made
up of some friends in Yorkshire, Thomas Hutchinson, of Beverley in the county
of York, yeoman; Thomas Pierson, of Bonwicke in the said county, yeoman; Joseph
Helmsly, of Great Kelke in the said county, yeoman; George Hutchinson, of
Sheffield in the said county, distiller, and Mahlon Stacy of Hansworth in the
said county, tanner, were all principal creditors to E. Byllinge, to whom
several of the other creditors made assignments of their debts, which together
amounted to the sum of L. 2450, sterling, and who took in satisfaction of the
said sum seven full equal and undivided ninetieth parts of ninety equal and
undivided hundred parts of West-Jersey; and the same was conveyed to them,
their heirs and assigns, by William Penn, Gawen Lawrie, Nich. Lucas and Ed.
Byllinge, by deed bearing date the first of the month called March, 1676: And
by another conveyance of the same date, from and to the same persons, in
satisfaction for other debts to the amount of L. 1050, sterling, three other
full equal and undivided ninetieth parts of the aforesaid ninety equal and
undivided hundred parts of West-Jersey were also conveyed.
(as hinted in the concessions) the other of some friends in London; who each
contracted for considerable shares, for which they had patents. In 1677,
commissioners (agreeable to expectation given) were sent by the proprietors,
with power to buy the lands of the natives; West-Jersey commissioners
to inspect the rights of such as claimed property, and to order the lands laid
out; and in general to administer the government, pursuant to the concessions:
These commissioners were Thomas Olive, Daniel Wills, John Kinsey, John Penford,
Joseph Helmsley, Robert Stacy, Benjamin Scott, Richard Guy and Thomas Foulke.
Richard Guy came in the first ship: John Kinsey, died at Shackamaxon soon after
his landing; his remains were interred at Burlington, in ground appropriated
for a burying-ground, but now a street.
They came in the Kent, Gregory Ma^low, master, being the second ship from
London, to the western parts: After a tedious passage they arrived at
New Castle, the 16th of the 6th month, O. S. King Charles the second, in his
barge, pleasuring on the Thames, came along side, seeing a great many
passengers, and informed whence they were bound, asked if they were all
quakers, and gave them his blessing. They landed their passengers, two hundred
and thirty in number, about Rackoon creek, where the Swedes had some scattering
habitations; but they were too numerous to be all provided for in houses; some
were obliged to lay their beds and furniture in cow stalls, and appartments of
that sort; among other inconveniences to which this exposed them, the snakes
were now plenty enough to be frequently seen upon the hovels under which they
sheltered: Most of the passengers in this ship were of those called quakers;
some of good estates in England. The commissioners had before left them, and
were by this time got to a place called Chygoes From Chygoe, an Indian sachem,
who lived there.
Island, (afterward Burlington) their business being to treat with the Indians
about the land there, and to regulate the settlements, having not only the
proprietors but governor Andros's commission for that purpose; for in their
passage hither, they had first dropped anchor at Sandy-Hook, while the
commissioners went to New York to acquaint him with their design; for though they
had concluded the powers they had from the proprietors, were sufficient to
their purpose; they thought it a proper respect to the duke of York's
commission, to wait on his governor upon the occasion; he treated them civily,
but asked the if they had any thing from the duke, his master? they replied,
nothing particularly; but that he had conveyed that part of his country to lord
Berkeley, and he to Byllinge, etc. in which the government was as much
conveyed, as the soil: The governor replied, all that will not clear me; if I
should surrender without the duke's order, it is as much as my head is worth;
but if you had but a line or two from the duke, I should be as ready to
surrender it to you, as you would be to ask it. Upon which the commissioners,
instead of excusing their imprudence in not bringing such an order, began to
insist upon their right, and strenuously to assert their independency: But
Andros clapping his hand on his sword, told them, that should defend the
government from them, till he received orders from the duke, his master, to
surrender it; he however softened, and told them, he would do what was in his
power, to make them easy, till they could send home to get redress; and in
order thereto, would commissionate the same persons mentioned in the commission
they produced. John Fenwick having neglected this precaution, as to the
government of his tenth, was sent for a prisoner to New York.
This they accepted, and undertook to act as magistrates under him, till
further orders came from England, and proceed in relation to their land
affairs, according to the methods prescribed by the proprietors.

When arrived at their government, they applied to the Swedes for interpreters
between them and the Indians: Indian purchases.
Israel Helmes, Peter Rambo, and Lacy Cock, were recommended: By their help
they made a purchase from Timber Creek to Rankokas Creek, another from Oldman's
Creek to Timber Creek: After this they got Henric Jacobson Falconbre, to be
their interpreter, and purchased from Rankokas Creek to Assunpink* The deed for
the lands between Rankokas creek and Timber creek bears date the 10 th of
September, 1677; that for the lands from Oldman's creek to Timber creek the 27
th of September, 1677, and that from Rankok^s creek to Assunpink the 10 th of
October, 1677: By the consideration paid for the lands between Oldmans and
Timber creek, a judgment may be formed of the rest. It consisted of 30
matchcoats, 20 guns, 30 kettles and one great one, 30 pair of hose, 20 fathom
of du^felds, 30 petticoats, 30 narrow hoes, 30 bars of lead, 15 small barrels
of powder, 70 knives, 30 indian axes, 70 combs, 60 pair of tobacco tongs, 60
scissars, 60 tinshaw looking-glasses, 120 awl-blades, 120 fishhooks, 2 grasps
of red paint, 120 needles, 60 tobacco boxes, 120 pipes, 200 bells, 100
Jew^harps, 6 anchors of rum. In the year 1703, another purchase was made by the
council of proprietors of West-Jersey, of land lying above the falls of
Delaware; another also about that time of lands at the head of Rankokas river,
and several purchases afterward included the whole of the lands worth taking
up in West-Jersey, except a few plantations reserved to the Indians; one of
these in particular ought to be noted in this place, to the honor of John
Wills, sometime one of the council, by whose advice the indian sachem, called
king Charles, laid an English right on a large plantation, at Weekpink,
containing a valuable tract of land, in the county of Burlington, which is so
contrived as to remain unalienable from his posterity, who now enjoy the
benefit of it.

The following are entries from the records of the council of proprietors
relating to the purchases above.

At a meeting of the council of proprietors at Burlington, the second day of
november, anno 1703. PRESENT: George Deacon, president, Samuel Jennings, Thomas
Gardner, Christopher Wetherill, John Reading. ORDERED. That John Wills, William
Biddle, jun. and John Reading, or any two of them, do go up to the Indians
above the Falls, and particularly to Caponockous, in order to have the tract of
land lately purchased of the Indians marked forth, and get them to sign a deed
for the same; as also to receive the residue of the goods as yet unpaid, or so
many of them that can be had, and to give him an obligation for the payment of
the remaining part next spring. Ordered likewise, That the persons abovesaid,
do go to Nimhammoe's wig-wam, in order to treat with him, to see the bounds of
the land lately purchased of him, to mark the same if it may be, and to pay him
what part of the goods is already procured in part toward the said purchase;
and to do what else may be necessary toward perfecting purchases of the
concerns with the said Indians, and completing of the aforesaid; the said
persons also taking with them Thomas Foulke, Andrew Heath, or some other proper
person, to be an interpreter between them and the Indians.

At a meeting of the council of proprietors at Burlington, on the 27th day of
June, anno dom. 1703. PRESENT: Mahlon Stacy, Thomas Gardner, John Wills, George
Deacon, Christopher Wetherill, Samuel Jennings and John Reading. The persons
appointed to treat with the Indians, at the Falls, do make report, that they
accordingly met with the Indians, and made a full agreement with them, that is
to say, with Himhammoe, for one tract of land, adjoining to the division line,
and lying on both sides of Rariton River, for the goods mentioned in a certain
list for that purpose made; and also with C^^^nnockou, for another tract of
land, lying between the purchase; ^ade by Adlord Boude, and the bounds of the
land belonging to Ni^hammoe, fronting upon Delaware river, for the goods
mentioned in a particular list made to that end. Ordered, That public notice
be given to the proprietors within this province, that they meet together at
Burlington, on the 19th day of July next, in order to inform them, that a
purchase is made, upon what terms, and also that all such may deposite their
proportions of the charge, that expect to receive benefit thereby; which paper
of population is in these words.

By the council of proprietors sitting in Burlington, the 28th day of June,
anno dom. 1703. Whereas many of the proprietors of this province have at sundry
times addressed the council of proprietors, that they might be allowed a third
dividend or taking up of land, proportionable to their particular and
respective rights in the said province: Now this may certify, that the said
council having taken into their consideration the request of the said
proprietors, and in order to answer the same, have lately made an Indian
purchase of lands situate above the falls of Delaware; and therefore all
proprietors who are concerned therein, or expect to receive benefit thereby,
are hereby required to meet with the said council at Burlington, on the
nineteenth day of July next, that they may be more particularly informed
concerning the said purchase, and upon what terms and conditions it is made,
and also to deposite their respective proportions of the said purchase, and all
other charge accruing thereby. Given under my hand per order, and on the behalf
of the said council, the day and year above said.

Upon the application of Mahamickwon, alias king Charles, an Indian sachem,
unto the council of proprietors, concerning the bounds of two Indian purchases
formerly made from Rankokas creek to Timber creek, and from Rankokas to
Assunpink, in which deeds is mentioned the bounds to be from the uppermost head
of Rankokas to the uppermost head of Timber creek, and by a right line
extending from the uppermost head of Rankokas to the line of partition of sir
George Carteret, right against the uppermost head of Assunpink; which bounds
were inserted through misunderstanding between the interpreters and the
English, and in truth ought to be according to a line that was afterward
actually run by agreement, made between the English and the Indians, and which
comes lower upon the creek than the uppermost heads thereof; which said line
the said king Charles desires may be allowed, entered and recorded, as the true
and right bounds of said purchase, and that the abovementioned bounds may be
vacated and held utterly void for the future, to which the council assents;
informing the sachem, that they always did and now do acknowledge and own the
last mentioned line to be the true limits of those purchases, and order the
same as actually run and marked by the English and Indians, to be approved and
held only for the true line of the abovementioned purchases; and that the first
mentioned and mistaken bounds be accounted null and void; and also that a
record be accordingly made thereof.

At a meeting of the council of proprietors, the 19th of July, 1703. PRESENT:
Samuel Jenings, Thomas Gardner, George Deacon, Christopher Wetherill, John
Hugg, Isaac Sharp, and John Reading; the president absent. Memorandum, to
inform the proprietors First, that the council have made two Indian purchases,
amounting to, according to our best computation, the number of 150,000 acres at
the least, the cost whereof to the Indians, with other incidental charges, will
amount to about the sum of L. 700. Secondly, That it is the design of the said
council, to give public notice to the proprietors in England and elsewhere,
what purchase is already made, of the opportunity of purchasing more land, that
may be sufficient to allow the number of 5000 acres for each dividend to a
propriety, and of the cost thereof, which by as near an estimation as we can
make, will be about 24 l* propriety for each dividend; and that if the said
proprietors will appoint their agents, and defray their proportionable part of
the charges, on or before the 20th day of July, anno dom. 1704, that then they
shall receive their respective rights, after the same method that the rest of
the proprietors do, at any time after the 18th of October 8, 1704. Thirdly: But
if the said absent proprietors shall neglect or refuse to pay their parts of
the said charge, then that the said Indian purchase already made, shall be
taken up by such proprietary residents in these parts, that shall deposite
their respective parts of the said purchase; which at 5000 for the dividend to
a propriety, will amount to about 30 proprieties, which we judge will nearly
answer all the proprietors who are or have agents in these parts. Fourthly: It
is expected, that all such proprietors who design to be interested for the
Indian purchase, do in some short time, advance their particular parts of the
said costs, in order to pay the Indians off according to agreement made with
them.

Jeremiah Bass, attorney to the West-Jersey Society, made a purchase on their
behalf, in 1693, of the lands between Cohansick creek and Morris's river. [Vid.
Revell's book, secretary's office, Burl. p. 325.] Many other Indian purchases
were before and afterward, from time to time occasionally made, as the lands
were wanted, in both East and West Jersey; they are too numerous to be all
particularized; and one hereafter mentioned, completed the whole that was left.


But when they had agreed upon this last purchase, they had not Indian goods
sufficient to pay the consideration, yet gave them what they had, to (...) the
deed signed; (...) were however obliged to agree with the Indians not to settle
till the remainder was paid: Having traveled through the country and viewed
the land, the Yorkshire commissioners, Joseph Helmsley, William Emley and
Robert Stacy, on behalf of the first purchasers, chose from the falls of
Delaware down, which was hence called the first tenth; the London
commissioners, John Penford, Thomas Olive, Daniel Wills, and Benjamin Scott, on
behalf of the ten London proprietors, chose at Arwaumus, (in and about where
the town of Gloucester now is) this was called the second tenth: To begin a
settlement there, Olive sent up servants to cut hay for cattle he had bought:
When the Yorkshire commissioners found the others were like to settle at such a
distance, they told them, if they would agree to fix by them, they would join
in settling a town, Burlington laid out.
In pursuance of the charter brought with them from England.
and that they should have the largest share, in consideration that they (the
Yorkshire commissioners) had the best land in the woods: Being few, and the
Indians numerous, they agreed to it. The commissioners employed Noble, a
surveyor, who came in the first ship, to divide the spot. After the main street
was ascertained, he divided the land on each side into lots; the easternmost
among the Yorkshire proprietors, the other among the Londoners: To begin a
settlement, ten lots of nine acres each, bounding on the west, were laid out;
that done, some passengers from Wickaco, chiefly those concerned in the
Yorkshire tenth, arrived the latter end of October. The London commissioners
also employed Noble, to divide the part of the island yet unsurveyed, between
the ten London proprietors, in the manner beforementioned: The town thus by
mutual consent laid out, the commissioners gave it the name first of
New-Beverley, then Bridlington, but soon changed it to Burlington. and named
Some of the masters of families that came in the ship last mentioned, and
settled in that neighborhood, were Thomas Olive, Daniel Wills, William Peachy,
William Clayton, John Crips, Thomas Eves, Thomas Harding, Thomas Nositer,
Thomas Fairnsworth, Morgan Drewet, William Pennton, Henry Jenings, William
Hibes, Samuel Lovett, John Woolston, William Woodmancy, Christopher Saunders,
and Robert Powell: John Wilkinson and William Perkins, were likewise with their
families passengers, but dying on the voyage, the latter were exposed to
additional hardships, which were however moderated by the care of their fellow
passengers: W. Perkins
Perkins was early in life convinced of the principles of those called Quakers,
and lived well in Leicestershire; but seeing an account of the country wrote by
Richard Hartshorne, and forming views of advantage to his family, though in his
52d year, he, with his wife, four children and some servants, embarked in this
ship: Among the latter was one Marshall, a carpenter, particularly serviceable
in fitting up habitations for the new comers; but it being late in the fall
when they arrived, the winter was much spent before the work was begun; in the
interim they lived in wigwams, built after the manner of the Indians. Indian
corn and venison, supplied by the Indians, was their chief food: These people
were not then much corrupted with strong liquors, but generally very friendly
and helpful to the English; notwithstanding it was thought endeavors had been
used to make them otherwise, by insinuations that the English sold them the
smallpox in their matchcoats. Thomas Budd, who owned a share of propriety in
West-Jersey, and ancestor to a large family there, who arrived at Burlington in
1768, in a pamphlet describing the country, about nine or ten years afterward,
says, The Indians told us, in a conference at Burlington, shortly after we came
into the country, they were advised to make war onus, and cut us off while we
were but few; for that we sold them the small pox, with the matchcoat they had
bought of us; which caused our people to be in fears and jealousies concerning
them; therefore we sent for the Indian kings to speak with them, who with many
more Indians came to Burlington, where we had a conference with them about the
matter; we told them we came amongst them by their own consent, and had bought
the land of them, for which we had honestly paid them; and for what commodities
we had bought at any time of them, we had paid them for, and had been just to
them, and had been, from the time of our first coming, very kind and respectful
to them; therefore we knew no reason that they had to make war on us; to which
one of them, in behalf of the rest, made this following speech in answer. Our
young men may speak such words as we do not like nor approve of, and we cannot
help that; and some of your young men may speak such words as you do not like,
and you cannot help that: We are your brothers, and intend to live like
brothers with you; we have no mind to have war; for when we have war, we are
only skin and bones, the meat that we eat does not do us good; we always are in
fear, we have not the benefit of the sun to shine on us, we hide us in holes
and corners; we are minded to live at peace. If we intend at any time to make
war upon you, we will let you know of it, and the reasons why we make war with
you; and if you make us satisfaction for the injury done us, for which the war
was intended, then we will not make war on you; and if you intend at any time
to make war on us, we would have you let us know of it, and the reason; and
then if we do not make satisfaction for the injury done unto you, then you may
make war on us, otherwise you ought not to do it; you are our brothers, and we
are willing to live like brothers with you; we are willing to have a broad path
for you and us to walk in, and if an Indian is asleep in this path, the
Englishman shall pass by, and do him no harm; and if an Englishman is asleep in
this path, the Indian shall pass him by, and say, He is an Englishman, he is
asleep; let him alone, he loves to sleep. It shall be a plain path; there must
not be in this path a stump to hurt our feet. And as to the small pox, it was
once in my grandfathers time, and it could not be the English that could send
it to us then, there being no English in the country: And it was once in my
father's time, they could not send it us then neither; and now it is in my
time, I do not believe that they have sent it us now; I do believe it is the
man above that has sent it us.

Some are apt to ask, how we can propose safely to live amongst such a heathen
people, as the Indians, whose principles and practices leads them to war and
bloodshed, and ours on the contrary, to love enemies? I answer: That we settled
by the Indians consent and good liking, and bought the land of them that we
settle on; which they conveyed to us by deeds, under their hands and seals, and
also submitted to several articles of agreement with us, viz. not to do us any
injury: But if it should so happen, that any of their people at any time should
injure or do harm to any of us, then they to make us satisfaction for the
injury done; therefore if they break these covenants and agreements, then in
consequence of them, they may be proceeded against as other offenders, viz. to
be kept in subjection to the magistrate's power, in whose hand the sword of
justice is committed, to be used by him for the punishment of evil doers, and
praise of them that do well; therefore I do believe it to be both lawful and
expedient to bring offenders to justice, by the power of the magistrate's
sword; which is not to be used in vain, but may be used against such as raise
rebellion^ and insurrections against the government of the country, be they
christians or Indians (now that these have so far agreed to abide by the laws
of civil government) otherwise it is in vain for us to pretend to magistracy or
government; it being that which we own to be lawful both in principle and
practice. -- The Indians have been very serviceable to us by selling us
venison, Indian corn, pease and beans, fish and fowl, buck-skins, beaver,
otter, and other skins and furrs; the men hunt, fish and fowl, and the women
plant the corn and carry burdens: There are many of them of a good
understanding, considering their education, and in their public meetings of
business, they have excellent order, one speaking after another; and while one
is speaking all the rest keep silent, and do not so much as whisper one to the
other: we had several meetings with them; one was in order to put down the sale
of rum, brandy, and other strong liquors, to them, they being a people that
have not government of themselves so as to drink in moderation; At which time
there were eight kings [ One of them was Okanickon, a noted friend to the
English; of whom more in the viii th chapter.] and many other Indians. The
kings sat on a form, and we on another over against them; they had prepared
four belts of wampum, (so their current money is called, being black and white
beads made of fish-shell) to give us as seals of the covenant they made with
us; one of the kings, by the consent and appointment of the rest, stood up and
made this following speech. The strong liquor was first sold to us by the
Dutch; and they were blind, they had no eyes, they did not see that it was for
our hurt: The next people that came among us were the Swedes, who continued the
sale of those strong liquors to us; they were also blind, they had no eyes,
they did not see it to be hurtful to us to drink it, although we know it to be
hurtful to us; but if people will fell it to us, we are so in love with it that
we cannot forbear it: when we drink it, it makes us mad, we do not know what we
do, we then abuse one another, we throw each other into the fire. Seven score
of our people have been killed by reason of the drinking it, since the time it
was first sold us: Those people that ^ell it are blind, they have no eyes; but
now there is a people come to live amongst us, that have eyes, they see it to
be for our hurt, and we know it to be for our hurt: They are willing to deny
themselves the profit of it for our good: These people have eyes; we are glad
such a people are come amongst us; we must put it down by mutual consent; the
cask must be sealed up; it must be made fast, it must not leak by day nor by
night, in the light nor in the dark; and we give you these four belts of
wampum, which we would have you lay up safe, and keep by you, to be witnesses
of this agreement that we make with you; and we would have you tell your
children, that these four belts of wampum are given you to be witnesses betwixt
us and you of this agreement.


This distemper was among them, and a company getting together to consult about
it, one of their chiefs said, -- In my grandfather's time the smallpox came:
In my father's time the smallpox came; and now in my time the smallpox is
come. Then stretching his hands toward the skies, said, it came from thence.
To this the rest assented.

Having traced this ship's company into winter quarters, the next in course is
the Willing Mind, John Newcomb commander; she arrived from London, in November,
and dropped anchor at Elsingburgh; brought about sixty or seventy passengers:
Some settled at Salem, others at Burlington; among the former were James
Nevill, Henry Salter, and George Deacon, with their families. In this year also
arrived the FileBoat Martha, of Burlington, (Yorkshire) sailed from Hull the
latter end of summer, with one hundred and fourteen passengers, designed to
settle the Yorkshire tenth: Some masters of families in this ship, were Thomas
Wright, William Goforth, John Lynam, Edward Season, William Black, Richard
Dungworth, George Miles, William Wood, Thomas Schooley, Richard Harrison,
Thomas Hooten, Samuel Tailor, Marmaduke Hor^man, William Oxley, William Ley,
and Nathaniel Luke; the families of Robert Stacy and Samuel Odas; and Thomas
Ellis and John Batts, servants, Many that came servants, succeeded better than
some that brought estates; the first inured to industry, and the ways of the
country, became wealthy, while the others obliged to spend what they had in the
difficulties of first improvements; and others living too much on their
original stock, for want of sufficient care to improve their estates, have, in
many instances, dwindled to indigency and want.
sent by George Hutchinson, also came in this ship. Twenty of the passengers,
perhaps more, were living 45 years afterward.

In one of these ships, John Kinsey, three of that name.
or about this time however, arrived John Kinsey, then a young man; his father
one of the commissioners aforementioned, dying on his arrival, the care of his
family fell to him; he was afterward a man of distinguished services, in
several public stations; and his son after him, of the same name, the late
chief justice of Pennsylvania, must be long remembered by many in both
provinces.

Having landed so many of the settlers, it may not be disagreable to know some
of their first sentiments of the country. John Crips in a letter to Henry,
Stacy, gives the following account of it.

From Burlington, in Delaware river, the 26th of the 8th month, 1677. Dear
Friend,
Through the mercy of God, John Crips letter.
we are safely arrived at New Jersey; my wife and all mine are very well, and
we have our healths rather better here than we had in England; indeed the
country is so good, that I do not see how it can reasonably be found fault
with: As far as I perceive, all the things we heard of it in England, are very
true; and I wish that many people (that are in straits) in England, were here.
Here is good land enough lies void, would serve many thousands of families; and
we think if they cannot live here, they can hardly live in any place in the
world; but we do not desire to persuade any to come, but such as are well
satisfied in their own minds. A town lot is laid out for us in Burlington,
which is a convenient place for trade; it is about one hundred and fifty miles
up the river Delaware; the country and air seems to be very agreeable to our
bodies, and we have very good stomachs to our victuals: Here is plenty of
provision in the country; plenty of fish and fowl, and good venison very
plentiful, and much better than ours in England; for it eats not so dry, but is
full of gravy, like fat young beef. You that come after us need not fear the
trouble that we have had, for now here is land ready divided against you come:
The Indians are very loving to us, except here and there one, when they have
gotten strong liquors in their heads, which they now greatly love: But for the
country, in short, I like it very well; and I do believe, that this river of
Delaware is as good a river as most in the world: It exceeds the river of
Thames by many degrees.

Here is a town laid out for twenty proprieties, and a straight line drawn from
the river side up the land, which is to be the main street, and a market place
about the middle. The Yorkshire ten proprietors are to build on one side, and
the London ten the other side; and they have ordered one street to be made
along the river side, which is not divided with the rest, but in small lots by
itself; and every one that has any part in a propriety, is to have his share
in it. The town lots for every propriety will be about ten or eleven acres,
which is only for a house, orchard and gardens; and the corn and pasture ground
is to be laid out in great quantities.

I am thy loving friend, JOHN CRIPS.

Thomas Hooten to his wife, dated 29th 8th month, 1677.
My dear,
I am this present at the town called Burlington, where our land is; it is
ordered to be a town for the ten Yorkshire and ten London proprietors. I like
the place well; our lot is the second next the water side: It Is like to be a
healthful place, and very pleasant to live in. I came hither yesterday, being
the 28th of October, with some friends that were going to New York. I am to be
at Thomas Olive's house, till I can provide better for myself: I intend to
build a house, and get some corn into the ground: And I know not how to write
concerning thy coming, or not coming hither; the place I like very well, and
believe that we may live here very well: But if it be not made free, I mean as
to the customs and government, The customs were those imposed at New Castle,
upon all comers (of which we shall presently see a more particular account) the
government was yet administered by virtue of governor Andros's commission, both
which were unexpected and disagreable; but these objections were soon removed.
then it will not be so well, and may hinder many that have desires to come:
But if those two things be cleared, thou may take thy opportunity of coming
this summer.

THOMAS HOOTON.

William Clark to the proprietors.
Dear Friends, New Jersey, ^^th 2d month, 1^78.
I doubt not but it will be great satisfaction to you, to hear of mine and the
rest of friends passage to, and safe arrival in New Jersey: We took ship the
sixteenth of November, and made the land of New Jersey in thirty-four days. Now
friends, as to this country, there has been much said by several persons in
commendation thereof, both as to the increase of all sorts of grain and fruits;
as also of the plenty of fish, fowl, deer, swine, etc. that I shall not need to
add any thing to it; but in short, this I have to say, that I do not know any
one thing to fall short of what was reported of this province, but that more
might truly have been said of its pleasant situation, wholesome air, and
general and great increase of all things planted, and especially of Indian
corn, which is a very good and servicable grain many ways; the English wheat
and barley primely good; but rye and pease much better than any I ever saw in
England or Ireland. I doubt not but you have had an account of all other
matters before this (by those who came to Jersey before me) comes to your
hands: And I have no other end in this, than keeping you from the rash censures
of people that know it not; as also for the good and prosperity of this good
country, etc.

Directed for William Penn, Gawen Lawrie, or Edward Byllinge.

WILLIAM CLARK.

John Crips to his brother and sister.
Burlington, in New Jersey, upon the river Delaware, the 19th of 4th month,
called June, 1678. Dear and loving brother and sister.
I have received both your letters, wherein I understand your faith concerning
this country, is much shaken, through several false reports given thereof; which
may ^e proved false under the hands of several good friends; I hope as worthy
to be believed as that reporter; and such as have had more experience of this
place than he had, or could have, in so short a time; besides he came among us
shortly after our coming hither, when things were not settled in that order
amongst us, as now they are; neither indeed did he find such entertainment from
some, as he expected; which I suppose makes him speak the worst he can devise
of this place: But I question not but this report will in a short time be wiped
away, some of which in my knowledge, is grossly untrue, as well as
contradictions to his own words; for I remember when I traveled with him
through part of New Jersey, he confessed that much of this land was as good or
better than the land in Rhode Island: And it is really my judgment, that those
people that cannot be contented with such a country, and such land as this is,
they are not worthy to come here: And this I can truly tell you, if I were now
in England with you (and which I should be very glad to see) yet if all I had
in the world would but bring me hither, I would freely leave you and my native
country, and come to New Jersey again; which I have said many a time
heretofore, but now write it under my hand, and it is really the truth, whether
you will believe it or not; and farther, I can truly tell you, that I desire
not, nor dare to write the least untruth, to draw you, nor any others to this
place: But I am resolved, if I never see your faces more, to leave you to your
own freedom. But I hope you are not insensible of my love and desires for you;
though I am, I say, constrained to forbear persuading you, or any one else
against their own freedoms; yet I think it my duty to let you, and all men know
the truth of things as near as I can. Your letter says, it is reported the
water is not so good as in England. I do not remember that ever I tasted better
water in any part of England, than the springs of this place do yield; of which
is made very good beer and ale; and here is also wine and cider. And whereas
your letter to me says, several have come back from this country to England.
Two or three I suppose; there are lazy idle persons that have done so; but on
the other hand, here are several persons, men of estates, that have been here,
and have gone back to England, and sold their estates and returned with their
whole families, hither again; which methinks should take many of these scruples
out of the way, if nothing else were said or done in praise of this country:
But I suppose there are many in England, that desire to hear ill of this place,
because they would keep their friends there with them; and they think we never
write enough of the bad properties of the country, and vermin in it. Now this I
may say, in short, that here are bears, wolves, foxes, rattle snakes, and
several other creatures, (I do believe because I see the Indians have such
skins to sell) but I have traveled several hundreds of miles, to and fro, and
I never to my knowledge, saw one of those creatures, except two rattle snakes,
and I killed them both: I suppose the fear of those creatures in England, is
far worse to some there, than the hurt of them is here; and as for the musketto
fly, we are not troubled with them in this place; our land for the most part,
lying high and healthy, and they for the most part, are in a low boggy ground.
Thomas Budd and his family are arrived; the ship lies before this town, that
brought them: I wish you have not cause to repent that you came not along with
them; they had a very good passage, and so had the London ship; they are both
in the river at this time. I understand by Thomas Budd, that he did satisfy you
as near as he could, of the truth of things here; and you had as much reason to
believe him, as that other person, and more too; for Thomas had far more
experience of this place, than he could have in the short time he was among us;
so of these things I shall forbear to write any further at present.

JOHN CRIPS.
To the truth of the contents of these things, we subscribe our names;

Daniel Wills, Thomas Olive, Thomas Harding, Thomas Budd, William Peachy.




In the 10th month O. S. 1678, arrived the Shield, from Hull, The ship Shield.
Daniel Towes commander, one of the ships mentioned in the above letter, and
dropped anchor before Burlington, being the first ship that came so far up
Delaware: Against Coaquanock The Indian name of the place where Philadelphia
now stands.
being a bold shore, she went so near in turning, that part of the tackling
struck the trees; some on board then remarked it was a fine spot for a town: A
fresh gale brought her to Burlington: She moored to a tree, and the next
morning the people came a shore on the Ice, so hard had the river suddenly
frozen. In her came William Emley, the second time, with his wife, two
children, one born by the way, two men and two women servants; Mahlon Stacy,
his wife, children and several servants, men and women; Thomas Lambert, his
wife, children and several men and women servants; John Lambert and servant;
Thomas Revell, his wife, children and servants; Godfrey Hancock, his wife,
children and servants; Thomas Potts, his wife and children; John Wood and four
children; Thomas Wood, his wife and children; Robert Murfin, his wife and two
children; Robert Schooly, his wife and children; James Pharo, his wife and
children; Susannah Fairnsworth, her children and two servants; Richard
Tattersal, his wife and children; Godfrey Newbold, John Dewsbury, Richard
Green, Peter Fretwell, John Fretwell, John Newbold, one Barns, a merchant from
Hull, Francis Barwick, George Parks, George Hill, John Heirs, and several more.

In this year also arrived a ship from London, which brought John Denn, Thomas
Kent, John Hollinshead, with their families; William Hewlings, Abraham
Hewlings, Jonathan Eldridge, John Petty, Thomas Kirby, with others: The first
of these settled about Salem, the rest at Burlington. About this time, and a
few years afterward, arrived at Burlington, the following settlers from
England, viz. John Butcher, Henry Grubb, William Butcher, William Brightwin,
Thomas Gardner, John Budd, John Bourten, Seth Smith, Walter Pumphrey, Thomas
Ellis, James Satterthwaite, Richard Arnold, John Woolman, John Stacy, Thomas
Eves, Benjamin Duffeld, John Pain, Samuel Cleft, William Cooper, John Shinn,
William Biles, John Skein, John Warrel, Anthony Morris, Samuel Bunting, Charles
Read, Francis Collins, Thomas Mathews, Christopher Wetherill, John Dewsbury,
John Day, Richard Ba^nett, John Antrom, William Biddle, Samuel Furnace, John
Ladd, Thomas R^pet, Roger Huggins and Thomas Wood. Several of these have died
within a few years past; whether any but Wood are yet living, cannot here be
told.


Some hint has been given respecting the Dutch conquest of New York and
New Jersey, The accounts of that affair, though sufficient to authenticate the
facts, are defective: Sir George Carteret in a public declaration to the
inhabitants, dated July 31, 1674, asserts it positively. The ingenious author
of the history of New York, says, ( p. 29, 30, 31.) A few Dutch ships arrived
the 30th of July 1673, under Staten-Island, at the distance of a few miles from
the city of New York. John Manning a captain of an independent company, had at
that time the command of the fort, and by a messenger sent down to the
squadron, treacherously made his peace with the enemy. On that very day, the
Dutch ships came up, moored under the fort, landed their men, and entered the
garrison, without giving or receiving a shot. A council of war was afterward
held at the S^adt-House, at which were present, Cornelius Evertse, jun. and
Jacob Benkes, commodores, and Anthony Colve, Nicholas Boes, Abraham Ferd. Van
Zyll, captains. All the magistrates and constables from East-Jersey, Long
Island, Esopus and Albany, were immediately summoned to New York; and the major
part of them swore allegiance to the States General, and the prince of of
Orange. Col. Lovelace was ordered to depart the province, but afterward
obtained leave to return to England with commodore Benkes. It has often been
insisted on, that this conquest did not extend to the whole province of
New Jersey; but upon what foundation I cannot discover: From the Dutch records
it appears, that deputies were sent by the people inhabiting the country, even
so far westward as Delaware river, who in the name of their principals, made a
declaration of their submission; in return for which, certain privileges were
granted to them, and three judicatories erected at Niewer Am^^el, Upland, and
Hoarkill, -- The Dutch governor enjoyed his office but a very short season, for
on the 9th of February 1674, the treaty of peace between England and the States
General was signed at Westminster; the sixth article of which restored this
country to the English.
and that in 1673, they were yielded to king Charles the second, by the general
article of the treaty of peace: It was to prevent any disputes that might arise
upon a plea of the property being thus alienated from the first purchasers,
that that king did, by his letters patent bearing date the 29 th day of June,
1674, grant unto the duke of York, his heirs and assigns, the several tracts of
land in America, which by the former letters patent had been granted to him; of
which New Jersey was part. In this year, upon the application of the assigns of
lord Berkely, the duke made them a new grant of West New Jersey; and in like
manner by an instrument bearing date the 10th of October, granted the eastern
moiety of New Jersey, to the grandson of sir George Carteret.

CHAP. VII.
Letters from some of the settlers of West-Jersey; and arguments against the
customs imposed at the Hoar Kill by the governor of New York.
SOME letters from the first settlers of West-Jersey, with accounts of their
situation and sentiments of the country, have already been introduced; more
might be added, but the following may suffice in this place.

Abstract of Mahlon Stacy's letter to his brother Revell, and some others,
dated the 26th of the 4th month 1680.
But now a word or two of those strange reports you have of us and our country;
I affirm they are not true, and fear they were spoke from a spirit of envy: It
is a country that produces all things for the support and sustenance of man,
in a plentiful manner; if it were not so, I should be ashamed of what I have
before written; but I can stand, having truth on my side, against and before
the face of all gainsayers and evil spies: I have traveled through most of the
places that are settled, and some that are not, and in every place I find the
country very apt to answer the expectation of the diligent: I have seen
orchards laden with fruit to admiration, their very limbs torn to pieces with
the weight, and most delicious to the taste, and lovely to behold; I have seen
an apple tree from a pippin kernel, yield a barrel of curious cider; and
peaches in such plenty, that some people took their carts a peach-gathering; I
could not but smile at the conceit of it: They are a very delicate fruit, and
hang almost like our onions that are tied on ropes: I have seen and known this
summer, forty bushels of bold wheat of one bushel sown; and many more such
instances I could bring; which would be too tedious here to mention: We have
from the time called May until Michaelmass, great store of very good wild
fruits, as strawberries, cranberries and hurtleberries, which are like our
bilberries in England, but far sweeter; they are very wholesome fruits: The
cranberries much like cherries for color and bigness, which may be kept till
fruit come in again; an excellent sauce is made of them for venison, turkeys,
and other great fowl, and they are better to make tarts than either goosberries
or cherries; we have them brought to our houses by the Indians in great plenty.
My brother Robert had as many cherries this year as would have loaded several
carts: It is my judgment by what I have observed, that fruit trees in this
country destroy themselves by the very weight of their fruit: As for venison
and fowls, we have great plenty: We have brought home to our houses by the
Indians, seven or eight fat bucks of a day; and sometimes put by as many;
having no occasion for them; and fish in their season very plenteous: My cousin
Revell and I, with some of my men, went last third month into the river to
catch herrings; for at that time they came in great shoals into the shallows;
we had neither rod nor net; but after the Indian fashion made a round pinfold,
about two yards over, and a foot high, but left a gap for the fish to go in at,
and made a bush to lay in the gap to keep the fish in; and when that was done,
we took two long birches and tied their tops together, and went about a stone's
cast above our said pinfold; then hawling these birche's boughs down the
stream, where we drove thousands before us, but so many got into our trap as it
would hold, and then we began to hawl them on shore as fast as three or four of
us could, by two or three at a time; and after this manner, in half an hour, we
could have filled a three bushel sack of as good and large herrings as ever I
saw; and as to beef and pork, here is great plenty of it, and cheap; and also
good sheep: The common grass of this country feeds beef very fat: I have killed
two this year, and therefore I have reason to know it; besides I have seen this
fall, in Burlington, killed eight or nine fat oxen and cows on a market day,
and all very fat: And though I speak of herrings only, lest any should think we
have little other sorts, we have great plenty of most sorts of fish that ever I
saw in England; besides several other sorts that are not known there; as rocks,
cat-fish, shads, sheeps-heads, ^turgeons; and fowls plenty; as ducks, geese,
turkies, pheasants, partridges, and many other sorts that I cannot remember,
and would be too tedious to mention. Indeed the country, take it as a
wilderness, is a brave country, though no place will please all. But some will
be ready to say, he writes of conveniences, but not of inconveniences: In
answer to those, I honestly declare, there is some barren land, as (I suppose)
there is in most places of the world, and more wood than some would have upon
their lands; neither will the country produce corn without labor, nor cattle
be got without something to buy them, nor bread with idleness; else it would be
a brave country indeed: And I question not, but all then would give it a good
word; for my part I like it so well, I never had the least thought of returning
to England, except on the account of trade.

MAHLON STACY.

In a letter to William Cook of Sheffield, M. Stacy.
and others, Stacy wrote thus:

This is a most brave place; whatever envy or evil spies may speak of it, I
could wish you all here; Burlington will be a place of ^rade quickly; for here
is way for trade: I, with eight more, last winter, bought a good ketch of fifty
tons, freighted her out at our own charge, and sent her to Barbados, and so to
sail to Saltertugas, to take in part of her lading in salt, and the rest in
Barbados goods as she came back; which said voyage she has accomplished very
well, and now rides before Burlington, discharging her lading, and so to go to
the West Indies again; and we intend to freight her out with our own corn. We
have wanted nothing since we came hither, but the company of our good friends
and acquaintance; all our people are very well, and in a hopeful way to live
much better than ever they did; and not only so, but to provide well for their
posterity: They improve their lands and have good crops; and if our friends and
countrymen come, they will find better reception than we had by far at first,
before the country was settled as now it is. I know not one among the people,
that desires to be in England again; I mean since settled: I wonder at our
Yorkshire people, that they had rather live in servitude, and work hard all the
year, and not be three pence the better at the year's end, than stir out of the
chimney corner and transport themselves to a place where, with the like pains,
in two or three years, they might know better things.

I never repented my coming hither, nor yet remembered thy arguments and outcry
against New Jersey with regret. I live as well to my content, and in as great
plenty as ever I did, and in a far more likely way to get an estate. Though I
hear some have thought I was too large in my former, I affirm it to be true;
having seen more with mine eyes in this time since, than ever yet I wrote of.
The inhabitants of West-Jersey, had hitherto either pounded their corn or
ground it with hand mills; but about this time Olive had built his water mill
on his plantation, nigh Rankokas creek; and in this year Stacy finished his
mill at Trenton: This last having been rebuilt, continues good: These two were
the only mills that ground for the country several of the first years after
their arrival.


MAHLON STACY.
From the Falls of Delaware, in West-New-Jersey, the 26th of the 4th month,
1680.
Abstract of a letter from Daniel Wills to William Biddle, in
Bishop's-gate-Street, London. William and Sarah Biddle, with their family,
removed for West-Jersey, in the summer, 1681.


Dear friend,
Let every man write according to his judgment, and this is mine concerning
this country; D. Wills*
I do really believe it to be as good a country as any man need to dwell in;
and it is much better than I expected every way for land I will assure thee;
here is as good by the judgment of men, as any in England; and for my part I
like the country so well, and it is so pleasant to me, that if I had a good
estate in land in England, I should not come to live upon it; for through
industry here will be all things produced that are necessary for a family as in
England, and far more easy, I am satisfied: When I am walking alone, and the
sense of the Lord's good dealings is brought before me; I cannot but admire him
for his mercies, and often in secret bless his name, that ever he turned my
face hitherward, and gave me confidence in himself, and boldness by faith, to
oppose all gainsayers; though never so strong: Although then I could not say,
it seemed so clear to leave the land of my nativity, yet now it is to me a
certainty, that my removal was right, and in what I did, I had peace; and in
all my exercises by sea and land, I never felt the least matter in me, as to
desire I had not come forward, but rather rejoiced in the midst of all. Though
my removal was not ordinary, because of the largeness of my family, yet blessed
be God, all is well to our content; if thou heeds every objection, it will be
work enough: My resolutions were, and my sayings to several opposers, that I
would come; if God hindered me not, no man should. I have writ to John Mulline^
and Edward Cooper largely, concerning the country, and refer to that letter.
Now my near and ancient acquaintance, William and Sarah Biddle, my love you may
feel beyond expression; and if you have clearness to come to New Jersey, let
nothing hinder; but if you have a stop within yourselves, let not any thing
farther you until the way clears to your full satisfaction. In this advice I
deny myself; if I might I would forward you to the utmost, but I dare not; if a
man cannot live here, I believe he can hardly live in any place in the world;
the place being, as I thought, set before me, by him who gives length of days;
I will wait his good pleasure, and see what he will afford me in it. The last
ship that came to New York, brought several passengers, some of which came to
see this country, and liked it well; so dear friends, you may stand against all
opposers concerning the land, for it is good.

DANIEL WILLS.
Burlington, 6th of 11th month, 1679-80.
Though the passengers who had already come to West-Jersey, were well satisfied
with the country, things in general answering beyond their expectation; yet
they were under one great inconveniency. We have seen, that the governor of
New York, had very early imposed ten per cent. on all goods imported at the
Hoar Kill; and on exports, something in kind still subsisted: Five per cent
being demanded of the settlers at arrival, or afterward, at the officer's
pleasure; and that not according to the neat cost of the goods, but upon the
foot of the invoice, as shipped in England: This was evidently an arbitrary
act; neither West-Jersey nor the Hoarkill was legally under their jurisdiction;
the settlers from the first complained of the hardship, but bore it with
tolerable patience, till about 1680; when they had it redressed by the
interposition of their friends in England, who applying to the duke of York, he
referred the matter to council; there it rested for a considerable time; but at
last, by the diligence of W. Penn, Geo. Hutchinson, and others, was reported in
their favor: Sir John Werden, on the duke's behalf, wrote to have it
discontinued. The arguments used against this duty or impost, may be seen by
the following.

To those of the duke's commissioners, whom he has ordered to hear, and make
report to him, concerning the customs demanded in New West-Jersey, in America,
by his governor of New York.
1st. Arguments against the customs at the Hoarkills.
The king has granted to the duke of York, a tract of land in America,
consisting of several Indian countries, with such powers and authorities as are
requisite to make laws, and to govern and preserve the territory when planted:
But with this restriction twice expressed, and several times referred to, viz.
So always as the said statutes, ordinances; and proceedings, be not contrary,
but as near as may be, agreeable to the laws, statutes, and government of this
our realm of England. In another place thus; And further, it may be lawful for
our dearest brother, his heirs and assigns, by these presents, to make, ordain,
and establish all manner of orders, laws, directions, instruments, and forms of
government, and magistrates fit and necessary for the territory aforesaid: But
still with this limitation; so always as the same be not contrary to the laws
and statutes of this our realm of England, but as near as may be agreeable
thereto.

2. The duke of York, by virtue of this grant from the king to him, for a
competent sum of money, (paid by the lord John Berkely and sir George Carteret)
granted and sold to them, a tract of land, called now by the name of
New-Cesarea, or New Jersey; and that in as ample manner as it was granted by
the king to the duke.

Thus then we (...) to buy that moiety which belonging to lord Be^^^ley, for a
valuable consideration; and in the conveyance he made us, powers of government
are expressly granted; for that only could have induced us to buy it; and the
reason is plain, because to all prudent men, the government of any place is
more inviting than the soil; for what is good land without good laws; the
better the worse: And if we could not assure people of an easy and free, and
safe government, both with respect to their spiritual and worldly property;
that is, an uninterrupted liberty of conscience, and an inviolable possession
of their civil rights and freedoms, by a just and wise government, -- a mere
wilderness would be no encouragement; for it were a madness to leave a free,
good and improved country, to plant in a wilderness; and there adventure many
thousands of pounds, to give an absolute title to another person to tax us at
will and pleasure: This single consideration, we hope, will excuse our desire
of the government; not asserted for the sake of power but safety; and that not
only for ourselves, but others; that the plantation might be encouraged.

3. The lord Berkeley and sir George Carteret, considering how much freedom
invites, that they might encourage people to transport themselves into those
parts, made and divulged certain concessions, containing a model of government:
Upon these several went, and are there planted; the country was thus possessed,
and the said government uninterruptedly administered by the said lord Berkely
and sir George Carteret, or their deputy, for several years; during which time
no custom was demanded.

4. We dealt with the said lord Berkeley, upon the sight of these concessions,
and the presumption that neither he nor sir George Carteret, would attempt to
act any thing they had not power to do; much less, that they or either of them,
would pretend to sell a power they never had; since that would not only be a
cheat to the people that dealt with them for it, but an high affront to the
duke.

5. The moiety of New-Caesarea, or New Jersey, thus bought of the said lord
Berkeley, we dispose of part of our interest to several hundreds of people,
honest and industrious; these transport themselves, and with them such household
stuff and tools, as are requisite for planters to have: They land at Delaware
bay, the bounds of the country we bought; the passage God and nature made to
it; at their arrival they are saluted with a demand of custom, of five per
cent. and that not as the goods may be there worth, but according to the
invoice as they cost before shipped in England; nor did they take them as they
came, but at pick and choose, with some severe language to boot. This is our
grievance; and for this we made our application to have speedy redress, not as
a burden only, with respect to the quantum or the way of levying it, or any
circumstances made hard by the irregularity of the officers, but as a wrong;
for we complain of a wrong done us; and ask yet with modesty, quo jure? Tell us
the title by what right or law are we thus used; that may a little mitigate our
pain? -- Your answer hitherto has been this, "That it was a conquered country;
and that the king, being the conqueror, he has power to make laws, raise money,
etc. and that this power jure regale, the king has vested in the duke, and by
that right and sovereignty, the duke demands that custom we complain of." But
suppose the king were an absolute conqueror in the case depending, does his
power extend equally over his own English people, as over the conquered? Are
not they some of the letters that make up the word conqueror? Did Alexander
conquer alone, or Caesar beat by himself? No. Shall their armies of countrymen
and natives lie at the same mercy as the vanquished, and be exposed to the same
will and power with their captive enemies? The Norman duke, more a conqueror of
England, by his subjection to our laws, and pretense to a title by them, than
of heraldry by his arms, used not the companions of his victory so ill: Natural
right and humane prudence, oppose such doctrine all the world over; for what is
it but to say, that people free by law under their prince at home, are at his
mercy in the plantations abroad; and why? because he is a conqueror there, but
still at the hazard of the lives of his own people, and at the cost and charge
of the public: We could say more, but choose to let it drop. But our case is
better yet; for the king's grant to the duke of York, is plainly restrictive to
the laws and government of England, and that more than once, as is before
expressed. Now the constitution and government of England; as we humbly
conceive, are so far from countenancing any such authority, as it is made a
fundamental in our constitution and government, that the king of England cannot
justly take his subjects goods without their consent: This needs no more to be
proved, than a principle; it is jus indigene, an home-born right, declared to be
law by diverse statutes; as in the great charter, chapter 29, and 34 Ed. 3, chapter 2;
again, 25 Ed. chapter 7. Upon this were many of the parliament's complaints
grounded; but particularly that of the same king's reign, as is delivered by
Mat. Westminster, in these words: The manuscript copy whence this is taken, is
here defaced: It contains a number of authorities from Bracton, Forte^que, the
petition of right, etc.
-- To give up this (the power of making laws) is to change the government, to
sell, or rather resign ourselves to the will of another; and that for nothing:
For under favor we buy nothing of the duke, if not the right of an undisturbed
colonizing, and that as Englishmen with no dimunition, but expectation of some
increase of those freedoms and privileges enjoyed in our own country; for the
soil is none of his, it is the natives, by the Jus gentium, by the law of
nations; and it would be an ill argument to convert to christianity, to expel
instead of purchasing them out of those countries: If then the country be
theirs, it is not the duke's; he cannot sell it; then what have we bought? We
are yet unanswered in this point, and desire you to do it with all due regard
to the great honor and justice of the duke: If it be not the right of
colonizing there, which way have we our bargain, that pay an arbitrary custom,
neither known to the laws of England, no^ the settled constitution of New York,
and those other plantations? To conclude this point, we humbly say, that we
have not lost any part of our liberty, by leaving our country; for we leave not
our king, nor our government, by quitting our soil; but we transplant to a
place given by the same king, with express limitation to erect no polity
contrary to the same established government, but as near as may be to it; and
this variation is allowed but for the sake of emergencies; and that latitude
bounded with these word^, for the good of the adventurer and planter; which
that exaction of custom can never be: In that it not only varies to the
discouragement and prejudice of the planter, but contradicts his native laws,
rights and liberties, and lays a foundation for another sort of government than
that which was only known to his fathers; unto the just defense of which he is
engaged by nature and municipal laws: So far the point of law.

We shall now insist upon the equity of our case;

First, This very tax of five per cent. is a thing not to be found in the
duke's conveyances, but an after-business; a very surprise to the planter! and
such an one, as could they have foreseen, they would have sooner taken up in
any other plantation in America. In the next place,

2. New Jersey never paid custom before last peace, and that peace re-invests
every proprietor by articles. Now we bought it when free, since which time this
imposition is born; must we be subjected to the payment of one tax, of greater
value than the country? This in plain English, is under another name, paying
for the same thing twice over; ^ay, had the soil been purchased of the Indians,
by those of whom we bought it, and given us; it had been dearly accepted, upon
this condition, and with this encumbrance; but it was bought by us, and that
for a valuable consideration here; and is now purchased again of the natives
there too; this makes our case extreme hard, and we pray relief.

3. Custom in all governments in the world, is laid upon trade, but this upon
planting is unprecedented: Had we brought commodities to these parts to sell,
made profit out of them, and returned to the advantage of traders; there had
been some color or pretense for this exaction; but to require and force a
custom from persons for coming to their property, their own terra firma, their
habitations; in short, for coming home, is without a parallel; this is paying
custom not for trading, but landing; not for merchandising, but planting; in
very deed for hazarding; for there we go; carry over our families and estates;
adventure both for the improvement of a wilderness, and are not only told we
must pay hereafter out of our gains and improvements, but must pay out of our
poor stock and principal, (put into goods) five pounds in the hundred; and not
as they are there worth, but as they here cost; and this for coming to plant:
So that the plain English of the tragedy is this; we twice buy this moiety of
New Jersey, first of lord Berkeley, and next of the natives; and what for? the
better to mortgage ourselves and posterity to the duke's governors, and give
them a title to our persons and estates, that never had any before: But pray
consider, can there be a house without a bottom; or a plantation before a
people? if not, can there be a custom before a trade? Thus much for the
equitable part of our plea; the next and last, is the prudential: We do offer
several things in point of prudence, why the duke should desist from the
exaction: First, there can be no benefit to a prince in America, there can be
no trade, without a people; there will be no people where there is no
encouragement; nor can there be any encouragement where people have not greater
privileges by going than staying; for if their condition be not meliorated,
they will never forego the comfort of their kindred they must leave behind
them, nor forsake their native country, run the hazard of the seas; nor lastly,
expose themselves to the wants and difficulties of a wilderness; but on the
contrary, if they have less privileges there than at home, it is every way to
worst themselves to go; for they do not only pay custom here for going, but
there for arriving; which is not done in any other plantation, even when our
men go to merchandise and not to plant, which is our case: Besides there is no
end of this power; for since we are by this precedent, assessed without any
law, and thereby excluded our English right of common assent to taxes; what
security have we of any thing we possess? we can call nothing our own, but are
tenants at will, not only for the soil but for all our personal estates; we
endure penury and the sweat of our brows, to improve them at our own hazard
only: This is to transplant, not from good to better, but from good to bad;
this sort of conduct has destroyed government, but never raised one to any true
greatness; nor ever will in the duke's territories, whilst so many countries
equally good in soil and air, surrounded with greater freedom and security:
Whereas if the duke please to make all planters easy and safe in their liberty
and property, such a just and free government will draw in other places,
encourage persons to transplant into his country, and his disbursments will
soon be at an end; his revenues, with satisfaction to the people, presently
visibly augmented: Next this encouragement shipping and seamen, which not only
takes off abundance of idle people, but our native growth and manufacture, and
the export of them; and the import of the produce of these plantations, in a
little time over^low and advance the revenue of the crown: Virginia and
Barbados are proofs undeniable in the case.

Lastly, the duke's circumstances, and the people's jealousies considered, we
humbly submit it, if there can be in their opinion, a greater evidence of a
design to introduce an unlimited government, than both to exact such an
unterminated tax from English planters, and to continue it after so many
repeated complaints; and on the contrary, if there can be any thing so happy to
the duke's present affairs, as the opportunity he has to free that country
with his own hand, and to make us all owers of our liberty, to his favor and
justice: So will Englishmen here know what to hope for, by the justice and
kindness he shows to Englishmen there; and all men to see the just model of his
government in New York, to be the scheme and draught in little, of his
administration in Old England at large, if the crown should ever devolve upon
his head. The conclusion is this, that for all these reasons in law, equity and
prudence, alleged; you would please to second our request to the duke, that
like himself, he would void this taxation, and put the country in such an
English and free condition, that he may be as well loved and honored, as
feared by all the inhabitants of his territory; that being great in their
affections, he may be great by their industy; which will yield him that wealth,
that parent of power, that he may be as great a prince by property as by title.

That this custom was now taken off, will, among other things, appear by the
following letter from Samuel Jenings, He with his family, removed from Coals
hill, the upper side of the county of Bucks, about the third month, 1680.
directed to William Penn, Edward Byllinge, or Gawen Lawrie.

Dear friends,
This may give you an account of mine and my families safe arrival in
New Jersey, Jenings to Penn, etc.
with all the rest that came with us. I might say something concerning our
passage at sea, but I wave it for want of time, and in fine may observe all was
well; for which I bless God; and the Lord keep us all sensible of it, with the
rest of his mercies forever.

Dear friends, about six weeks since, we arrived in Delaware river, where I
expected to have met with a combat, in the denial of customs: In our passage at
sea, I had communicated to all that had any considerable cargo on board, the
opinion of council, concerning the illegal demand thereof, with what else I
thought might be for their information; which thus far prevailed, that most if
not all concerned, seemed resolved to deny the paying of custom here; having
paid all the king's duties in England. In good time we came to anchor in
Delaware, where one Peter Alrick came aboard, and brought a handsome present to
our commander, and sent for me into the round-house, where they both were, and
Peter told me he had nothing to say to us relating to customs; He used to
collect the customs.
he had no commission for it, nor did he know of any body that had; so we had
all our goods safely landed after this unexpected easy manner.

In pursuance of the trust committed to me after my arrival, I acquainted those
nominated in the commission with me of it; but in a short time after I received
your letters, giving an account of a new grant obtained, wherein the customs
are taken off, a free port confirmed, and the government settled on Edward
Byllinge; which I doubt not will be very acceptable to every honest man; but as
yet I have not had time to let the people in general know it: And now seeing
the ports are made legally free, and the government settled, I would not have
any thing to remain as a discouragement to planters: Here are several good and
convenient settlements already, and here is land enough and good enough for
many more.

SAMUEL JENINGS.
New Jersey, the 17th of October, 1680.
CHAP. VIII.
The first form of government in West-Jersey, under the proprietors: The first
laws they made: The method of regulating land affairs; and a further account of
the Indians found in the first settled part of these provinces.
THE western part of New Jersey, was now become populous, Jenings deputy
governor.
by the accession of many settlers. Jenings, who arrived last year, about this
time, received a commission from Byllinge, (whom the proprietors in England, as
mentioned before, had chosen governor) to be his deputy: He called an assembly,
and with them agreed upon certain fundamentals of government, as follows.

Province of West-New-Jersey, in America, the 25th of the 9th month called
November, 1681.
Forasmuch as it has pleased God to bring us into this province of
West-New-Jersey, Fundamentals.
and settle us here in safety, that we may be a people, to the praise and
honor of his name, who has so dealt with us, and for the good and welfare of
our posterity to come: We, the governor and proprietors, freeholders and
inhabitants of West-New-Jersey, by mutua^ consent and agreement, for the
prevention of innovations and oppression, either upon us, or our posterity, and
for the preservation of the peace and tranquillity of the same; and that all may
be encouraged to go on cheerfully in their several places; we do make and
constitute these our agreements, to be as fundamentals to us, and our
posterity, to be held inviolable; and that no person or persons whatsoever,
shall or may make void or disannul the same, upon any pretense whatsoever.

1. That there shall be a general free assembly for the province aforesaid,
yearly and every year, at a day certain, chosen by the free people of the said
province, whereon all the representatives for the said province shall be
summoned to appear, to consider of the affairs of the said province, and to
make and ordain such acts and laws as shall be requisite and necessary for the
good government and prosperity of the free people of the said province; and (if
necessity shall require) the governor for the time being, with the consent of
his council, may and shall issue out writs to convene the assembly sooner, to
consider and answer the necessities of the people of the said province.

2. That the governor of the province aforesaid, his heirs or successors, for
the time being, shall not suspend or defer the signing, sealing and confirming
of such acts and laws as the general assembly (from time to time to be elected
by the free people of the province aforesaid) shall make or enact for the
securing of the liberties and properties of the said free people of the
province aforesaid.

3. That it shall not be lawful for the governor of the said province, his
heirs or successors, for the time being, and council, or any of them, at any
time or times hereafter, to make or raise war upon any account or pretense
whatsoever, or to raise any military forces within the province aforesaid;
without the consent and act of the general free assembly, for the time being.

4. That it shall not be lawful for the governor of the said province, his
heirs or successors, for the time being, and council, or any of them, at any
time or times hereafter, to make or enact any law or laws for the said
province, without the consent, act and concurrence of the general assembly: And
if the governor for the time being, his heirs or successors, and council, or
any of them, shall attempt to make or enact any such law or laws, of him or
themselves, without the consent, act and concurrence of the general assembly;
that from thenceforth, he, they, or so many of them, as shall be guilty
thereof, shall upon legal conviction, be deemed and taken for enemies to the
free people of the said province; and such act so attempted to be made, to be
of no force.

5. That the general free assembly, from time to time, to be chosen as
aforesaid, as the representatives of the people, shall not be prorogued or
dissolved; before the expiration of one whole year, to commence from the day of
their election, without their own free consent.

6. That it shall not be lawful for the governor of the said province, his
heirs or successors, for the time being, and council, or any of them, to levy
or raise any sum or sums of money, or any other tax whatsoever; without the
act, consent and concurrence of the general Assembly.

7. That all officers of state or trust, relating to the said Province, shall
be nominated and elected by the general free assembly for the time being, or by
their appointment; which officer and officers, shall be accountable to the
general free assembly, or to such as the said assembly shall appoint.

8. That the governor of the province aforesaid, his heirs or successors, for
the time being, or any of them, shall not send ambassadors, or make treaties,
or enter into alliances, upon the public account of the said province, without
the consent of the said general free assembly.

9. That no general free assembly hereafter to be chosen by the free people of
the province aforesaid, shall give to the governor of the said Province for the
time being, his heirs or successors, any tax or custom for longer time than for
one whole year.

10. That liberty of conscience, in matters of faith and worship toward God,
shall be granted to all people within the province aforesaid, who shall live
peaceably, and quietly therein; and that none of the free people of the said
province, shall be rendered incapable of office in respect of their faith and
worship.

Upon the governor's acceptance and performance of the proposals herein before
expressed, we the general free assembly, proprietors and freeholders of the
province of West New Jersey aforesaid, do accept and receive Samuel Jenings, as
Deputy Governor. In testimony whereof I have hereunto put my hand and seal, the
day and year above written,

Samuel Jenings, Deputy Governor.
Subscribed also 'Thomas Olive; Speaker.'



This assembly was held from the 21st till the 28th of November, Laws.
and passed six and thirty laws (beside the above) many of which were repealed
in a few years afterward: Some of them were in substance; -- That it should be
the business of the governor and commissioners to see that all courts executed
their offices, and to punish such officers as should violate the laws: -- That
lands legally taken up and held* planted and possessed seven years, should not
be subject to alteration: -- That all officers of trust should subscribe to do
equal right and justice: -- That no person should be condemned or hurt, without
a trial of twelve men; and that in criminal cases, the party arraigned to
except against thirty-five, or more upon valid reasons: -- That in every court,
three justices or commissioners at least, to sit and assist the jury, in cases
of law; and pronounce the judgment of the jury: -- That false witnesses be
fined, and disabled from being after admitted in evidence, or into any public
office in the province: -- That persons prosecuting for private wrong (murder
treason and theft excepted) might remit the penalty or punishment either before
or after condemnation: -- That juries should be summoned by the sheriff, and
none be compelled to fee an attorney to plead his cause: -- That all wills
should be first proved and registered, and then duly performed: -- That upon
persons dying inte^^ate, and leaving a wife and child, or children, the
governor and commissioners for the time being, were to take security, that the
estate should be duly administered, and the administrator to secure two thirds
for the child or children, the other to the widow; where there was no children,
one moiety or half the estate, was to go to the next of kin, the other half to
the widow; always provided, such estate exceeded one hundred pounds; otherwise
the widow to have the whole; and in cases of leaving children, and no
provision, the charge of bringing them up, to be paid out of the public stock:
-- That felons should make restitution fourfold, or as twelve of the
neighborhood should determine; and such as hurt or abuse the person of any, be
punished according to the nature of the offense: -- That whosoever presumed,
directly or indirectly, to sell any strong liquors, to any Indian or Indians,
should forfeit for every such offense, the sum of three pounds: -- That ten men
from Burlington, and ten from Salem, should be appointed to lay out and clear a
road from Burlington to Salem, at the public expense: -- That two hundred
pounds should be equally levied and appropriated for the charges of government,
upon the several tenths, twenty pounds each; every man to be assessed according
to his estate; and all handicrafts, merchants and others, at the discretion of
the assessors: Persons thinking themselves aggrieved, had the liberty of
appealing to the commissioners of the tenth they belonged to. These and other
laws agreed on, the commissioner^ next fixed the following method for
regulation of lands.

The methods of the commissioners for settling and regulation of lands.
We whose names are hereunder written, commissioners nominated, Regulation of
lands.
elected and chosen by the general free assembly, proprietors and freeholders
of the province of West-New-Jersey, the 23d day of November last part, for the
settling and regulating of lands, and other concerns within the said province;
do by and with the approbation and consent of the governor of the said
province, and council, in pursuance of the said trust in us reposed, hereby
fully agree upon these rules and methods herein after following: (that is to
say)

1. That the surveyor shall measure the front of the river Delaware, beginning
at Assunpink creek, and from thence down to Cape May, that the point of the
compass may be found for the running the partition lines betwixt each tenth.

2. That each and every tenth, or ten proprieties, shall have their proportion
of front to the river Delaware, and so far back into the woods as will make or
contain sixty-four thousand acres for their first settlement, and for the
sub-dividing the Yorkshire and London two tenths.

3. To allow three thousand and two hundred acres where the parties concerned
please to choose it within their own tenth; to be taken up according to the
rules or methods following, viz. One eighth part of a propriety, and so for
smaller parts, to have their full proportion of the said land in one place (if
they please) and greater purchasers or shares not to exceed five hundred ^^res,
to one settlement.

4. All lands so taken up and surveyed, shall be seated within six months after
it is so taken up; and if the same shall not be seated within the said time,
then such choice and survey shall be void, and the same lands shall be free for
any other purchaser to take up; provided he or they so taking up the same, do,
or shall seat it, within one month after it is so taken up.

5. That no person or persons shall take up lands on both sides of a creek, to
one settlement, except the commissioners for the time being, shall see good
cause for their so doing.

6. That no person or persons shall have more than forty perches front to the
river, or navigable creek, for each and every one hundred acres, except it fall
upon a point, so that it cannot otherwise be avoided; and in such cases it
shall be left to the discretion of the commissioners then for the time being.

7. That all lands be laid out on straight lines, that no vacancies be left
between lands, but that they be joined one seat to another, except the
commissioners then for the time being, shall for good causes order it otherwise.

8. That all persons shall take their just proportions of meadow, which shall
be laid forth at the discretion of the commissioners then for the time being.

9. That all persons who are already seated, shall have liberty to make his
settlement his choice, if he please; provided he or they observe and follow the
rule or method herein prescribed.

10. That every proprietor shall have four hundred acres to a propriety, and so
proportionably to lesser quantities for their town lot, over and above their
aforesaid three thousand two hundred acres; which may be taken any where within
their own tenth, either within or without the town bounds.

11. That no person or persons who have already taken up a town lot, shall have
liberty to leave it, and take a lot elsewhere, but shall keep the same he has
taken up, as his town lot.

12. That Thomas Wright shall keep his settlement, containing four hundred
acres; and that the commissioners for Yorkshire side, shall allow to the town
bounds, three hundred acres, to be taken up adjoining to the town bounds, on
Lazy Point, in lieu thereof.

13. That no purchaser shall take up more land within the town bounds, than
belongs to his town lot, by virtue of his purchase.

14. That no person or persons (who are not purchasers to whom town lot or lots
are given) shall dispose of, or sell his or their said lot or lots of land,
from their house or houses respectively; and that if any such person or persons
as aforesaid, shall dispose of, or sell such said lot or lots apart from his or
their said house or houses, then such said sale of lot or lots shall be voi^
and of no effect; and the same lot or lots shall from thence become forfeit, to
the use of the town of Burlington, to be disposed of therein, at the discretion
of the commissioners then for the time being.

15. That no person or persons from hence forward, shall take up any land,
without special order from two or more of the commissioners for the time being,
first had and obtained.

16. That all and every settlement and settlements already made, which are not
consonant and agreeable to the rules and methods aforesaid, shall be liable to
regulation, according to the said rules and methods.

17. That the proprietors who are yet remaining in England, shall have notice,
that we find it necessary for the speedy settlement of this province, and for
the interest of all concerned therein, to allow to every propriety as
aforesaid, three thousand two hundred acres for our first choice; and in case
much people shall come, as may be reasonably expected, who have purchased no
land in England, and desire to settle amongst us; that then we reserve liberty
to take up so much land more as shall fall to every propriety, not exceeding
five thousand and two hundred acres, which was allowed to us for our first
settlement: Provided nevertheless, that none shall take up any proportion of
land, but as they shall settle it, or cause it to be settled; which is to be
done after the aforesaid three thousand two hundred acres shall be justly taken
up and settled.

18. That all public highways shall be set forth, at any time or times
hereafter, at the discretion of the commissioners for the time being, in or
through any lands taken up, or to be taken up; allowing the owners of such
lands where such public highways shall be laid forth, reasonable satisfaction
at the discretion of the commissioners, in lieu thereof.

19. Yet nevertheless, it is hereby commended and agreed by the authority
aforesaid, that the rules and methods herein before agreed on, shall not make
void or disannul, all or any settlement or settlements heretofore made, in the
Yorkshire tenth, who have seated according to a former agreement, viz. Not
having taken up more than fifty perches for each and every hundred acres on the
river or navigable creek, and having kept their due breadth and bounds from the
river or creek.

Signed and sealed the 5th December, 1681, by Samuel Jenings, governor, Thomas
Olive, Thomas Budd, Robert Stacy, Benjamin Scott, Thomas Gardener, Daniel
Wills, Mahlon Stacy, Thomas Lambert.

20. That all persons who have already taken up any lands, within the first and
second tenth in this province, shall bring in their deeds or writings, to show
their title to such lands as they have taken up, to Benjamin Scott, Robert
Stacy, Thomas Budd, and Thomas Gardener, on or before the twelfth day of this
instant January, next ensuing the day of the date hereof.

21. That all person or persons hereafter to take up land within the said first
and second tenth, shall first make application to the said Benjamin Scott,
Robert Stacy, Thomas Budd, and Thomas Gardener, or any two of them; and shall
also before the said commissioners solemnly declare and aver, upon the penalty
of the law of perjury, to pass against them, that the quantity or portion of
land contained in their respective Deeds or other Writings, do really and in
good conscience, belong and appertain to him or them so requiring a warrant or
warrants, for laying forth his or their land; so as the said commissioners may
be thereby satisfied with the justness of his or their title thereto; then, and
not before, the said commissioners, or any two of them, shall and may grant out
a warrant to the surveyor or his deputy, to lay out and survey the respective
proportion of land to him or them due and appertaining, as aforesaid; enjoining
the surveyor or his deputy, to make return of his said warrant and survey, at
the next court after such warrant granted, to be held at Burlington; that the
same may be registered by order of the said court.

22. That all proprietors and purchasers, within the said first and second
tenths, shall and may have liberty to take his and their full proportions of
land as before within is agreed upon, of the first and second choice in one
place; provided he or they so doing take not up more than five hundred acres of
land in one settlement.

Witness our hands and seals, the 14th day of the eleventh month, 1681. SAMUEL
JENINGS, Governor. THOMAS OLIVE, ROBERT STACY, THOMAS BUDD, DANIEL WILLS,
THOMAS GARDENER, BENJAMIN SCOTT.


It would be vain to pretend to give a particular account of all the different
tribes or nations of Indians that inhabited these provinces before the
Europeans came among them, there being probably a tribe in some parts, for
every ten or twenty miles, which were commonly distinguished by the names of
creeks or other noted places where they resided; Indians.
thus, there were the Assunpink, St^ny Creek.
the Rankokas, Lamikas, or Chichequas, was the proper Indian name; they did not
pronounce the r at all.
the Mingo, Indian knowledge about the weather were received topics of
conversation; some of their maxims have been found as generally true, as things
of that kind commonly are. If Jacob Taylor's intelligence be right, they also
predicted: A sachem of this tribe (he says) being observed to look at the great
con^ent, which appeared the first of October 1680, and asked, what he thought
was the meaning of that prodigious appearance? answered gravely, It signifies
that we Indians shall melt away, and this country be inhabited by another
people. How this Indian came by his knowledge without the learned Whiston's
astronomical tables, or whether he had any knowledge, is not so material. He
will however be allowed as good a right to pretend to it, when the event is
considered, as the other had in his conjectures concerning the cause of Noah's
flood: This at least till the regularity of the comets motions are better
known. But we see greater names have had their prognosticating sentiments
concerning of Job, where the almighty challenges the patriarch on the weakness
of man,

Who drew the comet out to such a size
And poured his flaming train over half the skies?
Did the resentment hang him out, does he
Glare on the nations, and denounce from thee?

the Andastaka, the Neshamine, and the Shackamax^n Indians; and those about
Burlington were called the Mantas; Frogs, a creek or two in Gloucester county,
are called Manta or Mantau, from a larger tribe that resided there; the Indians
were probably both of the same Stock.
but these and others were all of them distinguished from the back Indians, who
were a more warlike people, by the general name of the Delawares: The nations
most noted from home, that sometimes inhabited New Jersey, and the first
settled parts of Pennsylvania, were the Naraticongs, on the North side of
Rariton river, the Capitinasses, the Gacheos, the Munseys; the Pomptons, the
Senecas and the Maquaas; The Five*Nations before the sixth was added; but few
of these had their residence in New Jersey: They are supposed to have been
sometimes in fishing seasons among the others here; the Dutch called them
Mahakuase.
this last was the most numerous and powerful: Different nations were
frequently at war with each other, of which husbandmen sometimes find remaining
marks in their fields: A little below the falls of Delaware on the Jersey side;
at Point*no*point in Pennsylvania, and several other places, were banks that
have been formerly thrown up for intrenchments, against incursions of the
neighboring Indians, who in their canoes used sometimes to go in warlike
bodies from one province to another.

It was customary with the Indians of West-Jersey, when they buried their dead,
to put family utensils, bows and arrows, and sometimes money (wampum) into the
grave with them; Indian customs.
as tokens of their affection. When a person of note died far from the place of
his own residence, they would carry his bones to be buried there; they washed
and perfumed the dead, painted the face, and followed singly; left the dead in
a sitting posture, and covered the grave pyramidically: They were very curious
in preserving and repairing the graves of their dead, and pensively visited
them; did not love to be asked their judgment twice about the same thing: They
generally delighted in mirth; were very studious in observing the virtues of
roots and herbs, by which they usually cured themselves of many bodily
distempers, both by outward and inward applications: They besides frequently
used sweating, and the cold bath. The manner was to first enclose the patient
in a narrow cabin, in the midst of which was a red hot stone, this frequently
wet with water, occasioned a warm vapor; the patient sufficiently wet with
this and his own sweat, was hurried to the next creek or river, and plunged
into it; this was repeated as often as necessary, and sometimes great cures
performed. But this rude method at other times killed, notwithstanding the
hardy natures of the patients; especially in the small pox and other European
disorders.
They had an aversion to beards, and would not suffer them to grow; but plucked
the hair out by the roots: The hair of their heads was black, and generally
shone with bear's fat, particularly that of the women, who tied it behind in a
large knot; sometimes in a bag. They called persons and places, by the names of
things remarkable, or birds, beasts, and fish; as Pea-hala, a duck; Cau-hawuk,
a goose; Quink-Quink, a tit; Pulluppa, a buck; Shingas, a wild-cat; and they
observed it as a rule, when the rattle-snake gave notice by his rattle before
they approached, not to hurt him; but if he rattled after they had passed, they
immediately returned and killed him. They were very loving to one another; if
several of them came to a christian's house, and the master of it gave one of
them victuals and none to the rest, he would divide it into equal shares
amongst his companions; if the christians visited them, they would give them
the first cut of their victuals; they would not eat the hollow of the thigh of
any thing they killed. Their chief employment was hunting, fishing, and
fowling; making canoes, bowls, and other wooden and earthen ware; in all which
they were, considering the means, ingenious: In their earthen bowls they boiled
their water. Their women's business chiefly consisted in planting Indian corn,
parching or roasting it, pounding it to meal in mortars, or breaking it between
stones, making bread, and dressing victuals; in which they were sometimes
observed to be very neat and cleanly, and sometimes otherwise: They also made
mats, ropes, hats and baskets, (some very curious) of wild hemp and roots, or
splits of trees: Their young women were originally very modest and shame-faced,
and at marriageable ages distinguished themselves with a kind of worked mats,
or red or blue bays, interspersed with small rows of white and black wampum, or
half rows of each in one, fastened to it, and then put round the head, down to
near the middle of the forehead: Both young and old women would be highly
offended at indecent expressions, unless corrupted with drink. The Indians
would not allow of mentioning the name of a friend after death: They sometimes
streaked their faces with black, when in mourning; but when their affairs went
well, they painted red: They were great observers of the weather by the moon;
delighted in fine clothes; were punctual in their bargains, and observed this
so much in others, that it was very difficult for a person who had once failed
herein, to get any dealings with them afterward. In their councils they seldom
or never interrupted or contradicted one another, till two of them had made an
end of their discourse; for if ever so many were in company, only two must
speak to each other, and the rest be silent till their turn: Their language was
high, lofty, and sententious: Their way of counting was by tens, that is to
say, two tens, three tens, four tens, etc. when the number got out of their
reach, they pointed to the stars, or the hair of their heads. They lived
chiefly on maze, or Indian corn roasted in the ashes, sometimes beaten and
boiled with water, called homine; they also made an agreeable cake of their
pounded corn; and raised beans and pease; but the woods and rivers afforded
them the chief of their provisions: They pointed their arrows with a sharpened
^^inty stone, and of a larger sort, with withs for handles, cut their wood;
both of these sharpened stones are often found in the fields. Their times of
eating were commonly morning and evening; their seats and tables the ground:
They were naturally reserved, apt to resent, to conceal their resentments, and
retain them long; they were liberal and generous, kind and affable to the
English: They were observed to be uneasy and impatient in sickness for a
present remedy, to which they commonly drank a decoction of roots in spring
water, forbearing flesh, which if they then eat at all, it was of the female.
They took remarkable care of one another in sickness, while hopes of life
remained; but when that was gone, some of them were apt to neglect the patient.
Their government was monarchical and successive, and mostly of the mother's
side, to prevent a spurious issue. That is, the children of him now king, will
not succeed, but his brother by the mother* or children of his sister, whose
sons (and after them the male children of her daughters) were to reig^; for no
woman inherited.
They commonly washed their children in cold water as soon as born; and to make
their limbs straight, tied them to a board, and hung it to their backs when
they traveled; they usually walked at nine months old: Their young men married
at sixteen or seventeen years of age, if by that time they had given sufficient
proof of their manhood, by a large return of skins: The girls married about
thirteen or fourteen, but stayed with their mothers to hoe the ground, and bear
burdens, etc. for some years after marriage: The women, in traveling,
generally carried the luggage: The marriage ceremony was sometimes thus; the
relations and friends being present, the bridegroom delivered a bone to the
bride, she an ear of Indian corn to him, meaning that he was to provide meat,
she bread: It was not unusual notwithstanding, to change their mates upon
disagreement; the children went with the party that loved them best, the
expense being of no moment to either; in case of difference on this head, the
man was allowed the first choice if the children were divided or there was but
one. Very little can be said as to their religion; much pains were taken by the
early christian settlers, and frequently since, to inform their judgments
respecting the use and benefit of the christian revelation, and to fix
restraints; but generally with unpromising success, though instances have now and
then happened to the contrary: They are thought to have believed in a God and
immortality, and seemed to aim at public worship; when they did this, they
sometimes sat in several circles one within another; the action consisted of
singing, jumping, shouting and dancing; but mostly performed rather as
something handed down from their ancestors, than from any knowledge or enquiry
into the serious parts of its origin: They said the great king that made them,
dwelt in a glorious country to the southward, and that the spirits of the best
should go there and live again: Their most solemn worship was the sacrifice of
the first fruits, in which they burnt the first and fattest buck, and feasted
together upon what else they had collected; but in this sacrifice broke no
bones of any creature they eat; when done, they gathered and buried them very
carefully; these have since been frequently ploughed up: They distinguished
between a good and evil man-etta, or spirit; worshipped the first for the good
they hoped; and some of them are said to have been slavishly dark in praying to
the last for deprecation of evils they feared; but if this be true in a general
sense, some of the tribes much concealed it from our settlers: They did justice
upon one another for crimes among themselves, in a way of their own; even
murder might be attoned for by feasts, and presents of wampum; the price of a
woman killed was double, and the reason, because she bred children, which men
could not do. -- If sober they rarely quarrelled among themselves; they lived
to sixty, seventy, eighty, and more, before rum was introduced, but rarely
since: Some tribes were commendably careful of their aged and decrepid,
endeavoring to make the remains of life as comfortable as they could; it was
pretty generally so except in desperate decays; then indeed as in other cases
of the like kind, they were sometimes apt to neglect them. Strict observers of
property, yet to the last degree, thoughtless and inactive in acquiring or
keeping it: None could excel them in liberality of the little they had, for
nothing was thought too good for a friend; a knife, gun, or any such thing
given to one, frequently passed through many hands: Their houses or wig-wams
were sometimes together in towns, but mostly moveable, and occasionally fixed
near a spring or other water, according to the conveniences for hunting,
fishing, basket making, or other business of that sort, and built with poles
laid on forked sticks in the ground, with bark, flags or bushes on the top and
sides, with an opening to the south, their fire in the middle; From the years
1300 to 1500, in the towns of France, Germany, and England, they had scarce any
but thatched houses; and the same might be said of the poorer towns in Italy:
And although those countries were overrun with woods, they had not as yet
learned to guard against the cold, by the means of chimneys, (the kitchen
excepted) an invention so useful and ornamental to our modern apartments. The
custom then was, for the whole family to sit in the middle of a smoaky hall,
round a large stove, the funnel of which passed through the cieling. Anderson's
hist. and chronological deduction of commerce.
at night they slept on the ground with their feet toward it; their clothing
was a coarse blanket or skin thrown over the shoulder, which covered to the
knee, and a piece of the same *tied round their legs, with part of a deer skin
sewed round their feet for shoes; as they had learned to live upon little, they
seldom expected or wanted to lay up much: Sir William Temple somewhere says, an
Indian once put the question to a christian, to give him a reason, why he
should labor hard all his days to make his children idle all theirs?
They were also moderate in asking a price for any thing they had for sale:
When a company traveled together, they generally followed each other in
silence, scarcely ever two were seen by the side of one another; in roads the
man went before with his bow and arrow, the woman after, not uncommonly with a
child at her back, and other burdens besides; but when these were too heavy,
the man assisted. To know their walks again, in unfrequented woods, they heaped
stones or marked trees.

In person they were upright, and strait in their limbs, beyond the usual
proportion in most nations; their bodies were strong, but of a strength rather
fitted to endure hardships than to sustain much bodily labor, very seldom
crooked or deformed; their features regular; their countenances sometimes
fierce, in common rather resembling a jew than christian; the color of their
skin a tawny reddish brown; the whole fashion of their lives of a piece; hardy,
poor and squalid: Uncultivated as these people are, in many of their practices,
when it is considered how others have refined from circumstances equally low
and fordid, if not quite so savage; it seems to open a door of hope with regard
to some of these. If we look into Europe, we shall find that even in their
present state, they are not an absolutely singular character. Vid. Hist. of
Ireland, by F. Warner, L. L. D. lately published, etc.
When they began to drink, they commonly continued it as long as the means of
procuring it lasted. In drink they often lay exposed to all the inclemencies of
weather, which introduced a train of new disorders among them: They were grave,
even to sadness upon any common, and more so upon serious occasions; observant
of those in company, and respectful to the old; of a temper cool and
deliberate* never in haste to speak, but waited for a certainty, that the
person who spoke before them had finished all he had to say: They seemed to
hold European vivacity in contempt, because they found such as came among them,
apt to interrupt each other, and frequently speak all together: Their behavior
in public councils, was strictly decent and instructive, every one in his turn
was heard, according to rank of years or wisdom, or services to his country:
Not a word, a whisper, or a murmur, while any one spoke; no interruption to
commend or condemn; the younger fort were totally silent. They got fire by
rubbing wood of particular sorts, (as the ancients did out of the ivy and bays)
by turning the end of a hard piece upon the side of one that was soft and dry;
to forward the heat they put dry rotten wood and leaves; with the help of fire
and their stone axes, they would fall large trees, and afterward scoop them
into bowls, etc. From their infancy they were formed with care to endure
hardships, to bear derision, and even blows patiently; at least with a composed
countenance: Though they were not easily provoked; it was generally hard to be
appeased whenever it happened: Liberty in its fullest extent, was their ^uling
passion; to this every other consideration was subservient; their children were
trained up so as to cherish this disposition to the utmost; they were indulged
to a great degree, seldom chastised with blows, and rarely chided; their faults
were left for their reason and habits of the family to correct; they said these
could not be great before their reason commenced; and they seemed to abhor a
slavish motive to action, as inconsistent with their notions of freedom and
independency; even strong persuasion was industriously avoided, as bordering
too much on dependence, and a kind of violence offered to the will: They
dreaded slavery more than death: They laid no fines for crimes; for they had no
way of exacting them: The atonement was voluntary: Every tribe had particulars
in whom they reposed a confidence, and unless they did something unworthy of it
they were held in respect: What were denominated kings, were sachems
distinguished among these; the respect paid them was voluntary, and not exacted
o^ looked for, nor the omission regarded: The sachems directed in their
councils, and had the chief disposition of lands. To help their memories in
treaties, they had belts of black and white wampum; with these closed their
periods in speeches, delivering more or less according to the importance of the
matter treated of; this ceremony omitted, all they said passed for nothing:
They treasured these belts when delivered to them in treaties, kept them as the
records of the nation, to have recourse to upon future contests; governed by
customs and not by laws, they greatly revered those of their ancestors, and
followed them so implicitly, that a new thought or action but seldom intruded.
They long remembered kindnesses, families or particulars that had laid
themselves out to deal with, entertain and treat them hospitably, or even
fairly in dealings, if no great kindness was received, were sure of their
trade: This also must undoubtedly be allowed, that the original and more
incorrupt, very seldom forgot to be grateful, where real benefits had been
received. And notwithstanding the stains of perfidy and cruelty, which in 1754,
and since, have disgraced the Indians on the frontiers of these provinces, even
these by an uninterrupted intercourse of seventy years, had on many occasions,
given irrefragable proofs of liberality of sentiment, hospitality of action,
and impressions Witness the first reception of the English, the purchases
afterward, their former undeviating candor at treaties in Pennsylvania, and
other incidents.

Extract of a letter from C. W. Indian interpreter of a neighboring
government, to C. S. printer.

I write this to give an account of what I have observed amongst the Indians,
in relation to their belief and confidence in a divine Being, according to the
observations I have made from 1714, in time of my youth, to this day. If by the
word religion, people mean an assent to certain creeds, or the observance of a
set of religious duties, as appointed prayers, singing, preaching, baptism,
etc. or even heathenish worship; then it may be said, the Five Nations and
their neighbors have no religion; but if by religion, we mean an attraction of
the soul to God, whence proceeds a confidence in, and hunger after the
knowledge of him; then this people must be allowed to have some religion
amongst them, notwithstanding their sometimes savage deportment. For we find
amongst them some tracts of a confidence in God alone, and even sometimes
(though but seldom) a vocal calling upon him: I shall give one or two instances
of this, that fell under my own observation.

In the year 1737, I was sent, for the first time, to Onondago, at the desire
of the governor of Virginia; I set out the latter end of February, very
unexpectedly, for a journey of 500 English miles, through a wilderness where
there was neither road nor path, and at such a time of year, when creatures
could not be met with for food, there were a Dutchman and three Indians with
me. When we were 150 miles on our journey, we came into a narrow valley, about
half a mile broad, and thirty long, both sides of which were encompassed with
high mountains, on which the snow lay about three feet deep; in it ran a stream
of water, also about three feet deep, which was so crocked that it always
extended from one side of the valley to the other; in order to avoid wading so
often through the water, we endeavored to pass along on the slope of the
mountain; the snow three feet deep, and so hard froze on the top, that we could
walk upon it: We were obliged to make holes in the snow, with our hatchets,
that our feet might not slip down the mountain; and thus we crept on. It
happened that the old Indian's foot slipped, and the root of a tree by which he
held, breaking, he slid down the mountain as from the roof of an house; but
happily was stopped in his fall, by the string which fastened his pack hitching
to the stump of a small tree. The two Indians could not come to his aid, but
our Dutch fellow traveller did; and that not without visible danger of his own
life: I also could not put a foot forward* till I was helped; after which we
laid hold of the first opportunity to go down again into the valley; which was
not till after we labored hard for half an hour, with hands and feet: We had
observed a tree that lay directly off from where the Indian fell; and when we
were come down into the valley again, we went back about one hundred paces,
where we saw, that if the Indian had slipped four or five paces further, he
would have fell over a rock one hundred feet perpendicular, upon craggy pieces
of Rocks below. The Indian was astonished, and turned quite pale, then with out
stretched arms and great earnestness, spoke these words, I thank the great lord
and governor of this world, in that he has had mercy upon me, and has been
willing that I should live longer; which words I at that time sat down in my
journal: This happened the 25th of March, 1737.

The 9th of April following, while we were yet on the journey, I found myself
extremely weak, through the fatigue of so long a journey, and the cold and
hunger I had suffered; and there having fallen a fresh snow of about twenty
inches deep, also being yet three days journey from Onondago, in a frightful
wilderness; my spirit failed, my body trembled and shook; I thought I should
fall down and die; I stepped aside, and sat me down under a tree, expecting
there to die: My companions soon missed me; the Indians came back, and found me
sitting there: I told them in one word, I would go no further, I would die
there. They remained silent a while, at last the old Indian said, My dear
companion, thou have hitherto encouraged us, will thou now quite give up?
Remember that evil days are better than good days; for when we suffer much we
do not sin; and sin will be drove out of us by suffering; but good days cause
men to sin, and God cannot extend his mercy to them; but contrariwise, when it
goes evil with us, God has compassion upon us. These words made me ashamed; I
rose up, and traveled on as well as I could.

The next year I went another journey to Onondago, in company with Joseph
Spanhenberg, and two others. It happened that an Indian came to us in the
evening, who had neither shoes, stockings, shirt, gun, knife, nor hatchet; in a
word, he had nothing but an old torn blanket, and some rags. Upon enquiring
whither he was going? He answered to Onondago. I knew him, and asked how he
could undertake to go a journey of three hundred miles, so naked and
unprovided; having no provisions, nor any arms to kill creatures, for his
sustenance? He answered, he had been amongst enemies, and had been obliged to
save himself by flight, and so had lost all. This was true in part; for he had
disposed of some of his things amongst the Irish, for strong liquors. Upon
further talk, he told me very cheerfully; that God fed every thing which had
life, even the rattle-snake itself, though it was a bad creature; and that God
would also provide in such a manner, that he should come alive to Onondago; he
knew for certain that he should go there; that it was visible God was with the
Indians in the wilderness, because they always cast their care upon him; but
that contrary to this, the Europeans always carried bread with them. He was an
Onondago, his name was Anontagketa: The next day we traveled in company; and
the day following* I provided him with a knife, hatchet, flint, and tinder,
also shoes and stockings, and sent him before me to give notice to the council
at Onondago, that I was coming; which he truly performed; being got thither
three days before us.

Two years ago I was sent by the governor to Shamokin, on account of the
unhappy death of John Armstrong, the Indian trader: After I had performed my
errand, there was a feast prepared, to which the governor's messengers were
invited: There were about one hundred persons present, to whom (after we had in
great silence devoured a fat bear) the eldest of the chiefs made a speech, in
which he said, that by a great misfortune, three of their brethren the white
men, had been killed by an Indian; that nevertheless the sun was not set,
(meaning there was no war) it had been only somewhat darkened by a small cloud,
which was now done away; he that had done evil was like to be punished, and the
land to remain in peace; therefore he exhorted his people to thankfulness to
God; and thereupon began to sing with an awful solemnity, but without
expressing any words; the others accompanied him with their voices: After they
had done, the same Indian, with great earnestness, spoke these words, Thanks,
thanks be to thee, thou great lord of the world, in that thou have again caused
the sun to shine, and have dispersed the dark cloud; the Indians are thin^.


that seemed to promise a continuation of better things: But of them enough at
present.

Among a people so immediately necessary to each other, where property was
little, and the anxiety of increasing it less; the intercourse naturally became
free and unfettered with ceremony: Hence every one had his eye upon his
neighbor; misunderstandings and mistakes were easily rectified. No ideas of
state or grandeur; no homage of wealth, office, birth, rank or learning; no
pride of house, habit, or furniture; very little emulations of any kind to
interrupt; and so much together, they must be friends, as far at least, as that
term could be properly applied to them; this was general in some of the tribes:
Attachments of particulars to each other were constant and steady; and in some
instances far exceeding what might be expected. Companies of them frequently
got together to feast, dance, and make merry; this sweetened the toils of
hunting; excepting these toils, and the little action before described, they
scarcely knew any: A life of dissipation and ease, of uncertainty and want, of
appetite, satiety, indolence and sleep, seemed to be the sum of the character,
and chief that they aimed at.

Notwithstanding their government was successive, it was, for extraordinary
reasons, sometimes ordered otherwise; of this there is an instance in the old
king Ockanickon, who dying about this time at Burlington, declared himself to
this effect:

It was my desire, that my brother's son Iahkur^oe, should come to me, and hear
my last words; for him have I appointed king after me.

My brother's son, this day I deliver my heart into your bosom; and mind me. I
would have you love what is good, and keep good company; refuse what is evil
and by all means avoid bad company.

Now having delivered my heart into your bosom, I also deliver my bosom to keep
my heart in; be^ure always to walk in a good path, and if any Indians should
speak evil of Indians or christians, do not join in it, but look at the sun
from the rising of it to the setting of the same: In speeches that shall be
made between the Indians and the christians, if any wrong or evil thing be
spoken, do not join with that; but join with the good: When speeches are made,
do not you speak first; be silent and let all speak before you, and take good
notice what each man speaks, and when you have heard all, join to that which is
good.

Brother's son, I would have you cleanse your ears, and take all foulness out,
that you may hear both good and evil, and then join with the good and refuse
the evil; and also cleanse your eyes, that you may see good and evil, and where
you see evil, do not join with it, but join to that which is good.

Brother's son, you have heard what has passed; stand up in time of speeches;
stand in my steps, and follow my speeches; this do, and what you desire in
reason, will be granted: Why should you not follow my example? I have had a
mind to be good and do good, therefore do you the same: Sheoppy and Swampis
were to be kings in my stead, but understanding by my doctor, that Sheoppy
secretly advised him not to cure me, and they both being with me at John
Hollinshead's house, I myself saw by them, that they were given more to drink,
than to take notice of my last words; for I had a mind to make a speech to
them, and to my brethren, the English commissioners; therefore I refuse them to
be kings after me, and have now chosen my brother's son Iahkur^oe in their
stead to succeed me.

Brother's son, I advise you to be plain and fair with all, both Indians and
christians, as I have been; I am very weak, otherwise I would have spoken more.

After the Indian had delivered this counsel to his nephew, T. Budd, one of the
proprietors, being present, took the opportunity to remark, that there was a
great God, who created all things; that he gave man an understanding of what
was good and bad; and after this life rewarded the good with blessings, and the
bad according to their doings: He answered, it is very true, it is so; there
are two ways, a broad and a straight way; there are two paths, a broad and a
straight path; the worst and the greatest number go in the broad, the best and
fewest in the straight path. This king dying soon afterward, was attended to
his grave in the Quakers burial place in Burlington, with solemnity by the
Indians in their manner, and with great respect by many of the English
settlers; to whom he had been a sure friend.

CHAP. IX.
Another ship arrives at West-Jersey: Proceedings of the general assembly of
West Jersey: Sir George Carteret's death: Conveyance to the twelve eastern
proprietors: Their proposals and regulations in several respects; particularly
in disposing of lands and building a town at Ambo Point: The twelve proprietors
each take a partner, and thence are called the twenty-four; to whom the D. of
York makes a third and last grant: The twenty-four establish the council of
proprietors of East Jersey, on the footing it now is: A general view of the
improvements in East Jersey, in 1682: A compendium of some of the first laws
passed at Elizabeth-Town: Doubts started whether the government of West Jersey
was granted with the soil: Jenings continued governor of West Jersey; and laws
now passed there.
IN the year 1682, A large ship with passengers to West-Jersey.
a large ship of 550 tuns burden, arrived at West Jersey, which got a-ground
in Delaware bay; where, after laying eight days, by a favorable wind and tide,
got off; and coming up the river, landed her passengers, being three hundred
and sixty in number, between Philadelphia and Burlington on the Jersey shore:
Their provisions being nigh gone, they sent ten miles to an Indian town near
Rankokus creek, for Indian corn and pease: The king of this tribe being then
there, treated them kindly, and directed such Indians as had provisions, to
bring it in next morning, who accordingly brought plenty; which being delivered
and put in bags, the messengers took leave of the king; who kindly ordered some
of the Indians to carry their bags for them to their canoes.

The assembly of West-Jersey having, Meetings of the West-Jersey Assembly.
at their last sitting, adjourned to the first of second month this year, met;
but not being a full house, they adjourned to the fourteenth, and then
dissolved themselves without doing any business: Another being called, sat from
the second to the eleventh of the first month following; the members returned
by the sheriff for the respective tenths, to serve in this assembly, were,
Thomas Olive, speaker, Mahlon Stacy, Joshua Wright, John Lambert, Thomas
Lambert, William Emley, Godfrey Hancock, Daniel Leeds, Thomas Wright, Samuel
Borden, Robert Stacy, Thomas Budd, Daniel Wills, sen. Thomas Gardener, John
Crips, John White, John Chaffin, Bernard Davenish, Isaac Marriott, William
Peachy, William Cooper, Mark Newby, Thomas Thackery, Robert Zane, James Nevil,
Richard Guy, Mark Reeves, Richard Hancock, John Smith, John Pledger, Edward
Wade, George Deacon, and Samuel Hedge: Hitherto the members had been chosen by
the electors from all the tenths indiscriminately; but this assembly declared
it their judgment, and the judgment of those they represented, that the most
regular method for preserving the liberty and property of the people by a free
assembly, was, that such of the ten proprieties, as were now peopled, should
each choose ten representatives (and the others also as they became peopled) and
resolving, that twenty-four, the speaker one, should make the quorum, they
chose the council, justices, commissioners for laying out land, and other
officers. Those now chosen were,

Counselors.
Thomas Olive, Robert Stacy, Mahlon Stacy, William Biddle, Thomas Budd, John
Chaffin, James Nevill, Daniel Wills, Mark Newby, Elias Far.
Justices for Burlington.
William Biddle, Robert Stacy, Elias Far, Mahlon Stacy, John Chaffin, Thomas
Budd, Benjamin Scott, John Cripps, Thomas Thackery.
For Salem.
James Nevill, George Deacon, Richard Hancock, Edward Wade.
Commissioners.
Elias Far, William Biddle, Thomas Budd, Thomas Gardener, Mark Newby, James
Nevill, Thomas Olive, Robert Stacy, Benjamin Scott, William Cooper.
Sheriff for Burlington.
John White.
For Salem.
Thomas Woodruffe.
Provincial clerk and recorder, for Burlington.
Thomas Revel.
For Salem.
Samuel Hedge.
Surveyor.
Daniel Leeds.
Constables for Yorkshire tenth.
Robert Schooley, John Pancoak.
For London tenth.
John Bourten, William Brightwen.
For the third tenth.
Thomas Sharp.



This done, the governor, council and assembly, passed sundry laws; some of
which were in substance, that each of the ten proprietors should have liberty
to sell as far as five hundred acres of land, within their respective tenths,
or take such other expedient as they should judge fit, for defraying public
charges, for the tenths respectively; to which purpose, Mahlon Stacy and Thomas
Lambert were appointed within the first or Yorkshire tenth; Thomas Budd and
Thomas Gardener, for the second or London tenth; William Cooper and Mark Newby
for the third or Irish tenth, and Samuel Jenings and Thomas Budd, within the
remaining six tenths: As for J. Fenwick, who owned the other tenth, they seem
here to have left him to his own concerns.
That the three pounds fine, formerly imposed on such as ^old rum or other
strong liquor to the Indians, should go one half to the informer, the other to
the public stock, where the offense was given; and that every foreigner
offending herein, should forfeit five pounds, to be disposed of in like manner:
-- That for the more convenient payment of small sums of money, Mark Newby's
coppers, called Patrick's halfpence, These were Irish halfpence, a parcel of
which New by had brought in with him.
should pass as halfpence current pay; provided he gave security to the
speaker, for the use of the general assembly for the time being, that he, his
executors and admistrators would change them on demand, and provided none were
obliged to take more than five shillings in one payment: -- That for preventing
clandestine and unlawful marriages, justices should have power to solemnize
them, the parties having first published their intentions fourteen days in some
public place appointed for that purpose; any justice presuming to marry
without the consent or knowledge of parents or trustees (if such consent could
be reasonably obtained) was to be fined at the discretion of the general
assembly; of which marriage the register was to make public entry of the day
it was solemnized; the births of children, and decease of all persons, were
also to be entered in the public register of the respective tenths; and for
preventing differences between masters and servants, where no covenants were
made, all servants were to have, at the expiration of their service, according
to the custom of the country, ten bushels of corn, necessary apparel, two hoes
and an ax: -- That all servants of full age, coming into the province without
indentures, or other agreements, should serve four years, from the ships entry,
(to take which entries custom house officers were before appointed) and that
all under the age of one and twenty years, who came without indentures, should
within three months after arrival, be brought to the court, in the district
where the party resided; which court was to appoint the time of servitude: --
That for preventing deceits, lands should pay debts, where personal estates
were insufficient: -- That for encouragement of building a saw-mill, one
thousand acres should be sold to William Frampton, to accomodate him with land
for that purpose; and more as the governor and commissioners should judge
convenient: -- That for better settling and confirmation of lands, six of the
commissioners, with the governor, should (where there was occasion) make an
inspection into such as were or should be taken up; that on finding these
legally located, they might after public notice in the court, and no just
reason to the contrary, confirm the same at the next court: -- That there
should be four courts of session held at Burlingtom and Salem yearly: -- That
the twenty pounds formerly granted the governor, the five pounds formerly
granted the governor, the five pounds to the speaker, and the five pounds to
the clerk, should be raised by tax; nine pounds six shillings and eight pence
by the Yorkshire, London and Salem tenths each, and forty shillings by the
third tenth; the whole, being thirty pounds, was to be delivered to Thomas Budd
and Thomas Gardener, in skins, corn or money; and the remainder of the two
hundred pounds, formerly directed to be raised to defray the charges of
government, to be a debt due from the other proprieties.

The Representatives of West-Jersey continued to be annually chosen, 'till the
surrender of the proprietary government, in 1702. In 1699, a law passed for
reducing the number of representatives to ten for each of the counties of
Burlington and Gloucester, five for Salem, and three for Cape May; but this
occasioning dissatisfaction, was repealed, and the number enlarged as formerly,
viz. Burlington, 20. Salem, 10. Gloucester, 20. Cape May, 5.
The council (who were justices ex officio) justices of peace, and inferior
officers of government, were chosen by them; the governor was appointed by the
proprietors, who governed them by a deputy, till the succeeding year; when the
assembly understanding, that Byllinge, for some selfish reasons, inclined to
turn Jenings out, who had hitherto been deputy governor, to the general
satisfaction of the governed; they undertook, by their choice, to continue him
governor of the province, pretending a right to do this, because in the
constitutions, power was given to six parts in seven of the assembly, to make
such alterations for the public good, (the laws of liberty of conscience, of
property, of yearly assemblies, of juries, and of evidence, excepted) as they
found necessary; and that no advantage might be taken of such judicial
proceedings, as had not been exactly agreeable to the concessions, they
confirmed and ratified them all.

About this time, the settlers in many parts were distressed for food;
Distressed for food.
several got the chief of what they eat by the gun; which, as powder and shot
were sometimes very scarce, was at best a precarious supply. Instances of their
wants are many, and the supplies sometimes unexpected; the family of John
Hollinshead, who lived near Rankokas, being unprovided with powder and shot,
were in distress, when Hollinshead the younger, then a lad about 13, going
through a corn field, saw a turkey; throwing a stick to kill it, a second came
in sight; he killed both, and carried them home: Soon after, at the house of
Thomas Eves, he saw a buck; and telling Eves, he set his dogs, who followed it
to Rankokas river, then frozen; the ^uck running on the ice, slid upon his
side; the dogs seized it; Hollinshead coming up with a knife, eagerly jumped
upon it; the buck rose with him on his back and sprung forward, his feet
spreading asunder, slipped gently down on his belly, and gave Hollinshead a
respite from danger, and opportunity of killing him: By these means two
families were supplied with food to their great joy. These, and such like
instances, in a new settled country, show, with the distress, the relief that
sometimes unexpectedly attends it.


Sir George Carteret, sole proprietor of East-Jersey, dying in 1679, by will,
ordered that province to be sold, to pay his debts; which was done accordingly,
His will is dated December 5, 1678, he devises to Edward ^arl of Sandwich, John
earl of Bath, Bernard Grenville, sir Thomas Crew, sir Robert Atkins, and Edward
Atkins, esquire and their heirs, among other lands, all his plantation of
New Jersey, upon trust and confidence that they, and the survivors and survivor
of them, and the heirs and executors of the survivor of them, should make sale
of all the said premises; and out of the money that should upon such sale
arise, pay and discharge debts, etc. as therein mentioned.
by his widow and executors, by indenture of lease and release, bearing date
the 1 st and 2 d of February, 1681 -- 2, to William Penn, Robert West, Thomas
Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, of London,
goldsmiths, Ambrose Rigg, John Haywood, Hugh Hartshorne, Clement Plumsted, and
Thomas Cooper, their heirs and assigns; who were thence called the twelve
proprietors: Proposals of the 12 proprietors.
They being together so seized, in this year published an account of their
country, a fresh project for a town, and method of disposing of their lands.
Vid. Appendix. Numb. iii.


Their plan was popular, and took much, especially among the Scotch, of whom
many had already arrived: In this and some of the immediately succeeding years,
came many more: Among them was George Keith, who some time after became
surveyor general, and was accounted very skilful in the business.

The twelve proprietors did not long hold the province to themselves, they take
12 partners.
but by particular deeds, took each a partner; their names were, James Earl of
Perth, John Drummond, Robert Barclay, Robert Gordon, Aarent Sonmans, Gawen
Lawrie, Edward Byllinge, James Brain, William Gibson, Thomas Barker, Robert
Turner, and Thomas Warn; these with the other twelve, are since called the
twenty-four proprietors: To them the duke of York made a fresh grant of East
New Jersey, bearing date the 14 th of March, 1682. The grants being already in
the hands of the public, were not thought necessary to be reprinted here: See
grants, concessions, etc. published by A. Leaming, and J. Spicer.


This was the duke's third and last grant of East-Jersey; More full and express
than any that went before.
soon after which, the twenty-four proprietors, by an instrument under most of
their hands, established a council of proprietors; East-Jersey council of
proprietors.
and gave them power to appoint, oversee, and displace all officers necessary
for the management of their property; to take care of all lands belonging to
the general proprietors; to demise them for terms of years, and to appoint
dividends thereof; to examine the rights of the particular proprietors who
demanded their shares of those dividends, and to grant warrants to the surveyor
general (whom they choose themselves) for the appropriating the quantity of
acres due to such share; to ^ue trespassers upon the general proprietors land;
and in general, to manage the affairs which relate to the said general
proprietors: This council always to consist of at least one third of the
general proprietors, or their proxies; and to have two general meetings yearly,
at Perth-Amboy; which were held immediately after the supreme courts there,
Time of meeting.
but lately altered to the first Tuesday in April, and second in September. In
this manner have the lands in East-Jersey been disposed: Since the purchase of
the twenty-four, the constitution as well as the management continues the same.

The province of East New Jersey being now well settled for the time; its
situation reduced to a general view, from the accounts then published by
secretary Nicolls of New York, appears to be thus:

Shrewsbury, near Sandy-Hook, adjoining the river or creek of that name, was
already a township, consisting of several thousand acres, Shrewsbury.
with large plantations contiguous; the inhabitants were computed to be about
400. Lewis Morris, of Barbados, had iron works and other considerable
improvements here.

Middletown was supposed to consist of 100 families; Middletown.
several thousand acres allotted for the town, and many thousands for the
several out plantations: John Bowne, Richard Hartshorne, and Nicholas Davis,
had each well improved settlements here; a court of sessions was held twice or
thrice a year, for Middletown and Piscataway, and their jurisdictions: Several
plantations were settled on the north side of Rariton river, below Piscataway;
several also higher up Rariton, and about the Falls; among which John Palmer,
of Staten-Island, Thomas Codrington, John Robinson, White and company, and
Edsal and company, of New York, and capt. Cor^en, had settlements: Some land
was likewise located by Millstone river, up Rariton, supposed to be near the
division line.

Woodbridge had several improved plantations in it, Woodbridge.
and the country round; Delaplairs, the surveyor general, was one of the
settlers here: This town claimed more privileges than others; was incorporated
by charter, and had erected a court house and prison (such as they were.) There
were here about one hundred and twenty families; From several erroneous
computations, first published in Nicolls's account, but here omitted, there may
be some reason to doubt others: what is here left, appeared probable; but if
there should be thought any mistakes in names, number or situation; it must be
remembered, that it is given only as Nicolls's account of this year,
a large quantity of land in the town, and for the plantations round, many
thousand acres; of which plantations there were several on the north side of
the river that divides Elizabeth-Town and Woodbridge.

At the entrance of the creek, on the north side, called Carteret's Point,
north of Staten-Island, were other plantations, from Elizabeth-Town to the
bounds of New York: Within Elizabeth-Town claim, was a settlement in
partnership between the proprietor Carteret, and governor P. Carteret; the
latter had built a house and resided here; the town was supposed to consist of
one hundred and fifty families.

On the north of Milford or Newark river, Second River.
is a large tract belonging to Kingsland and Sanfoord: Higher up the river,
another to capt. Berrie; who dividing it, several plantations were soon settled
on it: Still further up the river, an island belonging to Christopher Hoogland,
of Newark; above that again* was a large tract owned by Jacques Cartelayne, and
partners; who, now made some settlement: These tracts were within the
jurisdiction of Newark. Newark was then said to be a compact town, consisting
of about one hundred families.

Near the mouth of the bay, upon the side of Overprook creek, adjacent to
Hackinsack river, several of the rich valleys were then settled by the Dutch;
and near Snakehill was a fine plantation, owned by Pinhorn and Eickbe; for half
of which, Pinhorne is said to have paid 500 l. There were other settlements on
Hackinsack river; and on a creek near it, Sarah Kiersted of New York, had a
tract given her by an old Indian sachem, for services in interpreting between
the Indians and Dutch, on which several families were settled: John Berrie had
a large plantation, two or three miles above, where he then lived, and had
considerable improvements; as had also near him, his son in law Smith, and one
Baker from Barbados: On the west side of the creek, opposite to Berrie, were
other plantations; but none more northerly. There was a considerable settlement
on Bergen Point, then called Constable Hook, and first improved by Edsall, in
Nicolls's time. Other small plantations were improved along Bergen neck, to the
east, between the point and a little village of twenty families: Further along
lived sixteen or eighteen families; and opposite New York, about forty families
were seated; southward from this, a few families settled together at a place
called the Duke's Farm; and further up the country, was a place called Hobuck,
formerly owned by a Dutch merchant, who, in the Indian wars with the Dutch, had
his wife, children and servants murdered by the Indians, and his house and
stock destroyed by them; That there were such wars or skirmishes between the
Dutch and Indians, we see is confirmed by concurring accounts: See before a
note, p. 24, etc. and p. 64, 65.
but it was now settled again, and a mill erected there: Along the river side,
to the north, were lands settled by William Lawrence, Samuel Edsal and capt.
Beinfield; and at Haversham, near the High Lands, governor Carteret had taken
up two large tracts; one for himself, the other for Andrew Campyne and company*
which were now but little improved: The plantations on both sides of the Neck,
to its utmost extent, as also those at Hackinsack, were under the jurisdiction
of Bergen town, situate about the middle of the Neck; where was a court held by
select men or overseers, consisting of four or more in number, as the people
thought best, chose annually to try small causes, as had been the practice in
all the rest of the towns at first: Two courts of sessions were held here
yearly, from which, if the cause exceeded twenty pounds, the party might appeal
to the governor, council and court of deputies or assembly.

Bergen a compact town, had been fortified against the Indians, contained about
seventy families; its inhabitants chiefly Dutch, Bergen.
some of whom had been settled there upwards of forty years. Upon the whole
there were at this time supposed to be about seven hundred families settled in
the towns of East-Jersey; which, reckoning five to a family, were three
thousand and five hundred inhabitants; besides the out plantations, which were
thought to contain half as many more, though these could not be so well guessed
at.

P. Carteret continued governor of East-Jersey after the quinty partite
division, till about the year 1681. His salary was generally 50 l. a year, paid
in country produce, at prices fixed by law, and sometimes four shillings a day
besides, to defray his charges while a sessions was held; the wages of the
council and assembly during their sitting in legislation, was, to each member
three shillings a day: The rates for public charges were levied at two
shillings per head for every male above fourteen years old.
His council in 1668, consisted of six, viz.

Nicholas Verlet, Robert Bond, Robert Vanquellin, Daniel Pierce, Samuel Edsall,
William Pardon.

The assembly then consisted of twelve; the first members were,

Casper S^eenmets, Baltazar Bayard, for Bergen. John Ogden, sen. John Brackett,
for Elizabeth-Town. Robert Treat, Samuel Swarne, for Newark. John Bishop,
Robert Dennis, for Woodbridge. James Grover, John Bound, for Middletown.

The same for Shrewsbury.

The sessions were mostly held at Elizabeth-Town, but sometimes at Woodbridge,
and once or more at Middletown and Piscataway: Some of the first laws as
published by the legislature at Elizabeth-Town, were in substance: That persons
resisting authority, should be punished at the discretion of the court: -- That
men from 16 to 60 years of age, should provide themselves with arms, on penalty
of one shilling for the first week's neglect, and two for every week after: --
That for burglary or highway robbery, the first offense, burning in the hand,
the second, in the forehead, in both, to make restitution; and for the third
offense, death: -- For stealing, the first offense, treble restitution, and the
like for the second and third offense, with such increase of punishment, as the
court saw cause, even to death, if the party appeared incorrigible; but if not,
and unable to make restitution, they were to be sold for satisfaction, or to
receive corporal punishment: -- That conspiracies or attacks upon towns or
forts, should be death: -- That undutiful children, smiting or cursing their
father or mother, except provoked thereunto for self-preservation, upon
complaint of, and proof from their parents, or either of them, should be
punished with death: -- That in case of adultery, the party to be divorced,
corporally punished or banished, or either, or all of them, as the court should
judge proper: -- That for nightwalking and revelling after the hour of nine,
the parties to be secured by the constable or other officer till morning, and
then not giving a satisfactory account to the magistrate, to be bound over to
the next court, and there receive such punishment as should be inflicted: --
That the meeting of the assembly should be always on the first Tuesday in
November, yearly, and oftener, if the governor and council thought necessary;
and that they should fix the governor's salary; the deputies of each town to be
chosen on the first of January, according to the concessions; any deputy
absenting himself at such times, was to be fined forty shillings for every
day's absence: -- That thirty pounds should be levied for provincial charges,
i. e. 5 l. to be paid by each town, in winter wheat at five shillings a bushel,
summer wheat at four and six pence, pease at three shillings and six pence,
Indian corn at three shillings, rye at four shillings, barley at four
shillings, beef at two pence half penny per pound, and pork at three pence
halfpenny: -- That no son, daughter, maid or servant, should marry without the
consent of his or their parents, masters or overseers, without being three
times published in some public meeting or kirk, near the party's abode, or
notice being set up in writing at some public house near where they lived, for
fourteen days before; then to be solemnized by some approved minister, justice
or chief officer; who, on penalty of twenty pounds, and to be put out of
office, were to marry none who had not followed those directions: -- That
fornication should be punished at the discetion of the court, by marriage, fine
or corporal punishment; and that no life should be taken but by virtue of some
law, and the proof of two or three witnesses.

There being doubts started, whether the government of West New Jersey, Doubts
as to the government of West-Jersey.
had been granted with the soil, and reports industriously spread up and down
the province, as well as in England, to the prejudice of the possessors title,
as they thought; the assembly in the spring, this year, thought it their
business to obviate this, and other points, by unanimously resolving, as to the
first, That the land and government of West New Jersey, were purchased
together: And that as to the question, Whether the concessions agreed upon by
the proprietors and people, and subscribed in London and West-Jersey, were
agreed upon to be the fundamentals and ground of the government of
West-New-Jersey, or not? Resolved in the affirmative, nemine contradicente:
only John Fenwick excepted his tenth; which he said, at that time was not under
the same circumstances; but now freely consents thereto. Proprietary records,
secretary's office, Burlington.


Jenings was at this assembly chosen governor, as hinted before, He had for
salary this year a right to take up six hundred acres of land above the Falls.
having hitherto acted as Byllings's deputy: The commissioners and other
officers of government, Jenings.
being also chosen, they severally took their qualifications; Respectively as
follows.

I Samuel Jenings, being elected governor of the province of West-Jersey, by
the general free assembly thereof, sitting at Burlington, the eleventh day of
the third month, in the year 1683, do freely and faithfully promise (according
to the best of my ability) to act in that capacity according to the laws,
concessions, and constitutions, as they are now established in the said
province.

SAMUEL JENINGS, Governor.

The engagement and promise of the council elected by the assembly.
We underwritten being elected and chosen by the general free assembly, members
of council, to advise and assist the governor in managing the affairs of the
government, do solemnly promise every one for himself, that we will give our
diligent attendance from time to time, and him advise and assist to the best of
our skill and knowledge, according to the laws, concessions, and constitutions
of this province; and do further promise not to reveal or disclose any secret
of council, or any business therein transacted, to the prejudice of the public.
Witness our hands the 15 th day of the third month, Anno 1683.

Thomas Budd, John Skeen, John Gosling, Thomas Olive, William Biddle, Thomas
Gardener, Henry Stacy* James Nevill, Elias Far.


The engagement and promise of the commissioners, justices, and other officers,
elected as aforesaid.
We whose names are hereunderwritten, being by the general free assembly,
chosen to officiate in our several trusts, commissions and offices for the year
ensuing; do hereby solemnly promise, that we will truly and faithfully
discharge our respective trusts, according to the laws, concessions and
constitutions of the said province, in our respective offices and duties, and
do equal justice and right to all men, according to our best skill and
judgment, without corruption, favor or affection. Witness our hands this 15th
of the third month, 1683.

Justices.
Thomas Olive, Richard Guy, Andrew Wade, Andrew Thompson.
Commissioners.
William Biddle, John Gosling, John Skeen, Mahlon Stacy, Thomas Olive, James
Nevill, Francis Collins, Thomas Budd, Thomas Gardener, Mark Newby.
Recorder.
Thomas Revell.
Sheriff.
Benjamin Wheat.
Surveyor.
Daniel Leeds.



and having agreed, that the governor should be chairman, or speaker; that he
should sit as a member with them, and they together with the council; and that
the chairman should have a double vote; passed sundry laws, among which was the
following.

And whereas it has pleased God, A West-Jersey law.
to commit this country and province into the hands of such who (for the
generality of them) are fearing God, and painful and industrious in the
promoting and improving the said province; and for the better preventing of
such as are profane, loose and idle, and scandalous, from settling amongst us,
who are, and will be, not only unserviceable, but greatly burdensome to the
province: It is therefore hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
person and persons, who shall transport him or themselves into this province,
shall, within eighteen months after he or they shall arrive in the said
province, procure and produce a certificate, under the hands of such of that
religious society to whom he or they did belong, or otherwise from two
magistrates (if procurable) or two constables or overseers of the poor, with
three or more creditable persons of the neighborhood, who inhabit or belong to
the place where he or they did last reside, as may give satisfaction (that is
to say) that he or they came not clandestinely or fraudently away; and if
unmarried, that he or she are clear from former engagements in that particular;
and also, that he or she are such as live soberly and honestly, to the best of
their knowledge; and that no justice shall presume to marry any such person or
persons, who shall come into this province, before such certicate be produced;
or that it be laid before the governor or two justices, and give them
sufficient satisfaction concerning their clearness; and that all such person
and persons who shall settle in the said province, and shall refuse or neglect
to produce such certificate as aforesaid, within the said eighteen months,
shall be fined at the discretion of the governor and council of the said
province, not exceeding twenty pounds; the same to be levied by distress and
sale on the offender's goods, and to be paid into the hands of the treasurer of
the said province.

CHAP. X.
Robert Barclay appointed governor of East-Jersey; and T. Rudyard deputy:
Letters from Rudyard, S. Groom, Lawrie and others, concerned in that
settlement.
WE have seen that the Scotch had a considerable share in the settlement of
East-Jersey, many of them and a number that arrived afterward, fixed about
Amboy, and up Rariton: The twelve proprietors appointed Robert Barclay, Robert
Barclay governor.
(author of the apology) governor for life; His commission.

The proprietors of the province of East-New-Jersey. To our trusty and well
beloved fellow proprietor, Robert Barclay, sends greeting:

Whereas the powers of government of the province of East-New-Jersey, is
devolved upon us, and assigned to us, by James duke of York, with power to
constitute and appoint such governor and commissioners, for the well governing
of the said province, as we shall see meet; and we having heretofore, out of
the confidence we had of Robert Barclay, his skill, prudence and integrity,
constituted and appointed him governor of the said province, to appoint a
deputy during his absence therefrom, to be approved by sixteen of the
proprietors: Upon the same reason and considence, we do hereby confirm to him
the government of the said province, during all the days of his life; as to
have the power of the government of all the said province, and of all isles,
rivers, islands and seas within the same, or belonging thereto; to do all and
every thing or things, which to the charge and office of a governor does
appertain; commanding all inferior officers to obey him as their governor,
according to this our commission, and the powers hereby given him, and
according to the laws and cons^itutions made or confirmed by us, or to be made;
which he himself is to observe and follow; as unto his duty and office does
appertain. And whereas we have agreed, and are satisfied, for certain good
reasons and considerations moving us thereunto, to commit this trust unto him,
and to give him this character, without laying any necessity upon him to repair
to the said province; so likewise we have, and do hereby give him power, from
time to time as need shall be, during his absence, to name and constitutes and
grant commission, to a deputy governor to serve in the said province; he being
always approved by sixteen of us the proprietors, and following the orders he
receives from us, according to the laws and constitutions of the said province.

Given under the seal of the said province, and signed by our hands; dated at
London, the 17th of the fifth month called July, in the year of our lord,
according to the English account, 1683.

R. Barclay died the third of October, 1690, and had continued governor till
1685, when lord Neil Campbell, uncle to the D. of Argyle, was appointed
governor, and came over hither. -- In School, sir Thomas Lane was governor of
East-Jersey.


and Thomas Rudyard, (a lawyer or attorney in London, noted for his assistance
at the trial of Penn and Mead Vid. the trial, and Sewel's hist. p. 504.
) deputy governor; which last arrived at his government, the latter end of
last, or beginning of this year: His account of the country soon after his
arrival, may not be unacceptable.

East-Jersey, the 30th of the 3d month called May, 1683.
Dear B. G.
To be as particular in my turn, were but thy due; yet I cannot promise so
much; however I may give thee some general account of the province, and of our
satisfaction with our present lot, the short time I have experenced this: But
to give thee also, as thou desires, a character of Pennsylvania, and
West-Jersey, that will be a task I must be excused to undertake, left I give
offense, or at least bring me under censure as partial: Were I not concerned in
any of the provinces, I might satisfy thy curiosity; but being chiefly
interested in this, I Will be very cautious meddling with my neighbors, more
than here, one with another; so I may use my freedom with my neighbors, which
they take not ill, but not write what may be taken otherways. They lie so near
adjacent, that they may be said in a sense, to be but one country; and what is
said for one, in general may serve for all. I have been at Burlington, and at
Pennsylvania, as far as Philadelphia; which lies about twenty miles below
Burlington: That journey by land, gave me some view of all the provinces; and
made me considerably to estimate this of East-Jersey, having some conveniences
esteemed by me, which the others are not so plentifully furnished withal, viz.
fresh and salt meadows, which now are very valuable; and no man here will take
up a tract of land without them, being the support of their stock in winter;
which other parts must supply by store, and taking more care for English grass:
But know, where salt marshes are not, there is no musketoes, and that manner of
land the more health; and this was often answered me, when I have been making
comparisons. I must tell thee, their character in print, by all that reads it
here, is said to be modest, and much more might have been said in it is
commendation: We have one thing more particular to us, which the others want
also, which is vast oyster banks, which is constant fresh victuals, during the
winter, to English, as well as Indians; of these there are many all along our
coasts, from the sea, as high as against New York, whence they come to fetch
them; so we are supplied with salt fish at our doors, or within half a tide's
passage; and fresh fish in abundence, in every little brook, as perch, trout,
eels, etc. which we catch at our doors. Provisions here are very plentiful, and
people generally well stocked with cattle: New York and Burlington have
hitherto been their market; few or no trading men being here in this province:
I believe it has been very unhappy heretofore, under an ill managed
government; and most of the people are such who have been invited from the
adjacent colonies, by the goodness of it is soil, and convenient situation: At
Amboy we are now building some small houses, of 30 feet long, and 18 feet
broad; sitting to entertain workmen, and such who will go and build larger: The
stones lie exceeding well and good, up the Rariton river a tide's passage; and
oyster shells upon the point, to make lime withal; which will wonderfully
accomodate us in building good houses cheap, warm for winter, and cool for
summer; and durable covering for houses are shingles, oak, chestnut, and cedar;
we have plentiful here of all; the last endures a man's life, if he lives to be
old: There is five or six sawmills going up here this spring; two at work
already, which abates the price of boards half in half; and all other timber
for building; for although timber costs nothing, yet workmanship by hand, was
London price, or near upon it, and sometimes more; which these mills abate; we
buy oak and chestnut boards no cheaper than last year: My habitation with Samuel
Groom, is at Elizabeth-Town, and here we came first; it lies on a fresh small
river; with a tide ships of 30 or 40 tuns, come before our doors. Throughout
this town is good English grass, and bears a very good burden: We cannot call
our habitations solitary; for what with the public employ, I have little less
company at my house daily, than I had in George Yard; although not so many passes
by my doors: The people are generally a sober professing people, wise in their
generation, courteous in their behavior, and respectful to us in office among
them: As for the temperature of the air, it is wonderfully situated to the
humors of mankind; the wind and weather rarely holding in one point, or one
kind, for ten days together; it is a rare thing for a vessel to be wind bound
for a week together, the wind seldom holding in a point more than 48 hours; and
in a short time we have wet and dry, warm and cold weather; which changes, we
often desire in England, and look for before they come; yet this variation
creates not cold, not have we the tenth part of the colds we have in England: I
never had any since I came; and in the midst of winter and frosts, could endure
it with less clothes than in England; for generally I go with the same clothes
I used to wear in summer with you; but warm clothes hurt not. I bless the Lord,
I never had better health, nor my family; my daughters are very well improved
in that respect, and tell me they would not change their place for George Yard,
nor would I. People here are generally settled where the tide reaches; and
although this is good land, and well timbered, and plentifully supplied with salt
marsh; yet there is much better land up higher on the river, where they may go
up with small boats, where many now are settling. There Is extraordinary land,
fresh meadows overflowed in the winter time, that produces multitudes of winter
corn; and it is believed will endure 20, 30, or 50 years ploughing, without
intermission, and not decay: Such land there is at Esopus, on Hudson's river,
which has bore winter corn about 20 years, without help, and is as good as at
first, and better. William Penn took a view of the land, this last month, when
here; and said he had never seen such before in his life: All the English
merchants, and many of the Dutch, have taken, and are desirous to take up
plantations with us: Our country here, called Bergen, is almost Dutchmen; at a
town called Newark, seven or eight miles hence, is made great quantities of
cider; exceeding any we can have from New England, Rhode Island, or
Long Island. I hope to make 20 or 30 barrels out of our orchard next year, as
they have done who had it before me; for that, it must be as providence orders.
Upon our view and survey of Amboy point, we find it extraordinary well situate
for a great town or city, beyond expectation; at low water, round about the
point, are oysters of two kinds, small as English, and others two or three
mouthfulls, exceeding good for roasting and stewing; the people say, our
oysters are good, and in season all summer; the first of the third month I eat
of them at Amboy very good: The point is good lively land, ten, some places
twenty foot above the water mark. About it are several coves, where vessels may
lay up conveniently; besides great ships of any burden, may all ride before
the town, land locked against all winds; there Rariton river runs up, or rather
down 50, far larger; some say 100 miles, for small boats. I saw several vines
upon the point, which produces, as they say, good grapes in their season; this
country is very full of them; but being not present profit, few regard them
more, than to pick them as they lay in their way, when they are ripe. We have
store of clams, esteemed much better than oysters; on festivals the Indians
feast with them; there are shallops, but in no great plenty: Fish we have great
store, as our relation sets forth; but they are very good when caught (as the
proverb is.) I have several barrels by me now, which are good for our table,
and for sale. I brought a sea net over with me, which may turn to good account;
sea nets are good merchandise here; mine cost me about four or five pounds, and
can have twenty pounds for it, if I would sell it now. I may write of many such
matters in our province, which may invite persons here; but so am resolved to
conclude, knowing that in probability, there is not an industrous man, but by
God's blessing, may not only have a comfortable, but plentiful supply of all
things necessary for this life; with the salutation of my true affection to
all, etc.

I rest thy affectionate friend, THOMAS RUDYARD.

Samuel Groom, one of the proprietors, and surveyor general of East-Jersey,
also wrote to his fellow proprietors, as follows.

Friends and fellow proprietors. East-Jersey, the 11th of August, 1683.
Since my last I have now sounded the channel from Amboy to Sandy Hook, and
find it to be a broad and bold channel, in no place less than three fathom at
high water, in ordinary tides four, or five, or six fathom except in one short
place: Rariton river is a good river, and has a good tide of flood
overpowering the freshes about thirty miles above Amboy; after it is flood, the
tide has no force against the freshes, which come out of several branches of
Rariton, and joins in one, forty or fifty miles above Amboy. I have spent a
considerable time in making discovery: I have not as yet, had time to lay out
much land for you, only about seventeen or eighteen thousand acres in one
tract, good upland, near Elizabeth-Town. I have now seen the tract of land
against or nigh Amboy point, formerly laid out by Vanquillin; it is on the west
sideof a creek called Chingerorus, about eight thousand acres, and I intend
shortly to lay as much, or twice as much more to it; but first we must talk
with the natives about that, and other tracts of land, that they are not yet
paid for: The last day of this month is appointed to treat with several
Indians, to buy several exceeding good tracts, nigh the head of Rariton.

The tenth of next month is also appointed to treat with other Indians, to buy
other tracts of choice meadowing and upland, that lies about twelve or
thirteen miles up into the country, which I have seen; and when we have
accomplished these two things, we shall be able to lay out for you much land;
and when I have been up in the country toward, and at Barnagat, and agreed
with the Indians thereabout, for such land as we may see occasion to purchase
presently, in order to a settlement there; for here are many both of
New England, New York, and some parts of this province, stands ready to sit
down in that part of the country, not only for the sake of the good upland and
meadows, which report says is much thereabout, but also for the sake of the
whale trade, and other fishing trade, which is like to be there shortly:
New-England-men and others, were a tampering with the Indians, to have
purchased there, before and since we came; but now they are out of hopes of
coming in at that door; so now they make their addresses to us, and would have
us to purchase and let them come in our tenants; or otherways as we may agree:
I intend to attempt these things this fall: I have not been much on the south
side of Rariton, only upon some upland at several places, and upon the tract of
eight thousand three hundred and twenty acres of yours aforementioned, and also
on the meadowing that lies on the south side of Rariton above Amboy, a year or
two since purchased of the Indians, in the name of Dame Carteret, though it was
never intended for her, nor for any proprietor; but as it fell out, they
quarrelled about disposing and sharing thereof; so it is now without
controversy yours. Now know, that Rariton river is accommodated on both sides
with salt and fresh meadows; salt as far as the salt sea water flows, or
predominates; and fresh above, as the river Thames: We have above three
thousand acres of meadowing butting on the river; I hope it will never hurt
Amboy town: Besides, report says, that the upland next adjoining to this
meadowing, beginning over against Amboy, and so up ten or twelve miles, to a
river that strikes out of Rariton south, and is called South River, is but mean
land.

It may be well, if you would agree to take each one a twenty fourth part of
lands as we lay them out, whether it be more or less, or else take five hundred
acre lots, and let these lots be cast when twenty four times five hundred acres
is laid out; and where we can make greater lots, we may. We have now got up
three houses at Amboy, and three more ready to be set up, but workmen are
scarce, and many of them base; the best will work but when they can spare time
out of their plantations: If no help comes, it will be long ^'er Amboy be built
as London is; housing will bring a trade to that place: The Indians come
thither to get fish, fowl, oysters, clams, mussels, etc. (as people go to
market for things they want) and these Indians bring at seasons, great
quantities of skins down Rariton, so by Amboy and to New York; where they have
a continual supply of things they want.

Well, here is a brave country, the ground very fruitful, and wonderfully
inclinable to English grass; as clover, etc. It predominates over the more wild
grass, very little barren, much dry upland, and good meadow: Some fenny, swampy
land, and small running brooks and rivers, throughout all the parts of the
country I have seen; and these fenny and swampy lands bear great burdens of
grass; in short, the land is four times better than I expected. We must needs
be out of some money at present to purchase lands of the Indians, but that will
be soon got in with profit, as people come to inhabit and take up land, and
pay, as always they have done, their part of purchase from the Indians: Here is
great talk of the braveries of the place and land: Barnagat I intend to see
shortly after the season is fitting to go by land and water to it; I intend to
go by water in a sloop, to see how convenient it is by water, and from thence
come by land; so then I shall tell you more: Ye must expect to be at charges
for doing these and such other things: I purpose shortly to write to, and
demand of all places the quit rents and arrears; they generally say they will
pay: Capt. Berrie is two or three hundred pounds behind in arrears, as is said;
because his case differs from others a little, I Will (God permitting) begin with
him first of all about his rent, etc. and either have rent, or land: What you
write concerning building and repairing, shall be observed: I wish I were
fairly rid of all the goods I have of yours, and my own, at twenty eight per
cent. excepting such as are for the Indian trade: These parts of America are
accommodated with English goods; nevertheless when I pay workmen and laborers,
I pay them goods rated cent. per cent. New York money; but then I must pay them
two or three parts silver; which I procure with goods as well as I can.

The houses at Amboy are thirty feet long, and sixteen wide, ten feet betwixt
joint and joint, a double chimney made with timber, and clay as the manner of
this country is to build, will stand in about fifty pound a house; this pay
procured here for twenty five in goods the first cost. I shall make you no
return this year, seeing we are about purchasing and surveying; all which will
run out money in this place, where men are so scarce to be had; on such
accounts, I must as well as I can, turn your goods into money, provision and
goods for Indians, I have laid out Amboy into one hundred and fifty lots, and
have sent home a draught of it.

S. GROOM.

Gawen Lawrie arriving this year deputy governor of East-Jersey, under Robert
Barclay, chose a fresh council; Richard Hartshorne one of them: There having
been considerable disturbances in the province, especially about Middletown and
Woodbridge, relating to town affairs; In one of these disturbances, Lewis
Morris, afterward governor of New Jersey, being a party, was taken prisoner
and confined in a log house; his partisans prized up the logs high enough for
him to creep out.
their prudent conduct contributed to the quiet of the province: The two
following letters, wrote soon after Lawrie's arrival, contain, as well his
sentiments of the country, as some of the principal transactions of those times.

Gawen Lawrie, to the proprietors at London.

Elizabeth-Town, 1 Month 2d, 1684.
I took up several days with countrymen, and others, to view the ground and
water; at last I pitched upon a place, where a ship of 300 tun may ride safely
within a plank length of the shore, at low water; adjoining thereto is a piece
of marsh ground, about twelve perches broad, and twenty perches long, and high
land on each side like our keys by London bridge; this may be easy cut quite
round, for small vessels to come to the key, and lie safe; round this island I
set out lots one acre apiece, viz. four pole at the key, and forty pole
backward; from thence along the river near half a mile: I laid out the like
lots very pleasant for situation, where they can see the ships coming in the
bay of sandy hook, for near twenty miles; the ships may ride along by the town,
as safe as at London, just at the point by the town: Rari^on river runs up by
the country, a great way; there boats of forty tuns may go; and the river by
the town, goes to New York, Hudson's river, Long Island, Staten-Island, and so
to New England: There is no such place in all England, for convenience and
pleasant situation; there are sixty lots upon the river, and forty backward
between those and the river; and those backward, have a high way 100 foot
broad; where I have laid out a place for a market, with cross streets from the
river to the market; where the town houses are to be built: When this was done,
I laid out 400 acres, to be divided into forty-eight parts, viz. thirty-six to
each proprietor; and those who have lots in the town, I grant them half lots in
this; to pay for the lots in the town, twenty pounds; or if a half lot of
thirty-six acres, forty pounds. I laid 400 acres to lie until the proprietors
agree to divide it, as people comes over. There is sixteen lots taken up by the
Scotch proprietors; and eight lots by the proprietors that are here: There are
twenty lots taken up in the town, by other people. I engage all to build a
house of thirty feet long, and eighteen broad, and eighteen feet high to the
raising; to be finished within a year; to pay for laying out, forty shillings a
lot, and four pence pet annum, quit-rent: There are several begun already to
build. I have laid out forty or fifty acres for the governor's house: The
highway and wharff, between the river 100 feet broad; and to leave a row of
trees along upon the river, before the houses, for shade and shelter, exceeding
pleasant. I have agreed for two houses of like dimensions, to be built for the
proprietors; and also a house for the governor, of sixty-six feet long, and
eighteen broad; if the quit rents come in, I intend three or four houses more,
for the proprietors: I can easily let them. This work took me up five weeks:
After I had finished it, I set the people to work, Scottish and English, about
fifty persons; some preparing for building, others to clearing ground to get
corn sown this spring: Then came in a boat privately to Elizabeth-Town the 12th
past: Next morning I went to New York to visit the governor; staid there two or
three days; he was very kind, and promised a fair correspondence; so I did not
publish my commission until this day, before the council; they have been kind
and courteous. Now is the time to send over people for settling; there are
30,000 acres of land in several places, belonging to the proprietors, formerly
taken up by Carteret: So here is land enough. The Scots and William Dockwras
people coming now and settling, advance the province more than it has been
advanced these ten years: Therefore proprietors, send over some families and
servants; I shall presently set them out land, and it will bring them in
considerable profit, in a few years: Here wants nothing but people. There is
not a poor body in all the province, nor that wants; here is abundance of
provision; pork and beef at ^wo pence per pound; fish and fowl plenty: Oysters
I think would serve all England: Wheat four shillings sterling per bushel;
Indian wheat two shillings and six pence per bushel; it is exceeding good for
food every way, and two or three hundred fold increase: Cider good and plenty,
for one penny per quart. Good drink that is made of water and molasses, stands
in about two shillings per barrel, wholesome like our eight shilling beer in
England: Good vennison plenty, brought us in at eighteen pence the quarter:
Eggs at three pence per dozen, all things very plenty; land very good as ever I
saw: Vines, walnuts, peaches, strawberries, and many other things plenty in the
woods. The proprietors have 150 or 200 acres, three miles from the town, up
Rariton river salt marsh, where I intend to let the people of Amboy cut grass
for hay, until we otherwise order it by lots to them: I reckon there is laid
out for the town, governor's house, and public highways, near or about 200
acres; so there rests 1800 acres. I laid out 400 acres, as I said; the rest to
lie in common until divided: I have put two houses in repair, upon the river,
called the point, two miles from Elizabeth Town; have let one of them, with ten
acres of pasture ground, and ten acres of woody ground, for seven years, at
twenty-six pounds per annum; the man to clear the ten acres of woody ground,
and make it fit for ploughing or pasture. I intend to let the other also, with
some land: All the houses were like to drop down; all the land lying without
fence; and a barn quite fallen down, and destroyed* another without any cover;
and that other next to the house where I dwell, all to pieces; and all the
fences and outhouses were down, but repaired before I came. I am setting up a
ferry boat at Perth, for men and horses, to go and come to Burlington and
Pennsylvania, and New York: Also I am treating with one, to set up a house mid
way to Burlington, to entertain travelers, and a ferry boat to go to New York;
all which is for promoting Perth, that being the center: Also you should give
me power to set out a line, between the governor of New York and us; he calls
on me for it, because several plantations on the river are settled, and we know
not yet on what side they will fall; so I cannot at present mention all
particulars, which you must supply, by some general clauses or words; for it is
not possible for you to understand what is for the good of the province, as I
do, that am here; and be not sparing to send over people, it will bring you it
again, with large profits; for here is a gallant plentiful country, and good
land. I have given you a large account of the little time I have been here: I
have none to write for me, but you must send a copy of this to Scotland; and
with it your further instructions, to be signed and sent me forth with: I will
be bound till it come; I rest your friend, sic subscribitur,

GAWEN LAWRIE.

The same to a friend in London.

East-Jersey, 1st month 26th, 1684.
I promised to write but had not time till now; I shall give thee a brief
account of the country, no fiction, but truth: It is beyond what I expected; it
is situate in a good air, which makes it healthy; and there is great
convenience for traveling from places through and about the province, in boats
from a small canoe* to vessels of thirty, forty or fifty tun, and in some
places one hundred in the bay coming up to Amboy-point, where the town of Perth
is now in building, a ship of three hundred tun may easily ride close to the
shore within a planks length of the houses of the town, and yet the land there,
nor other in the province is not low* swampy, marshy ground, but pretty high
ground, rising from the water side at Amboy-point. The bank of the river is
twenty foot, in some places thirty, and in some forty foot high; and yet has
many conveniences for landing goods: The soil is generally black, in some
places a foot deep, bears great burdens of corn, and naturally brings forth
English grass, two years ploughing the ground is tender, and the ploughing is
very easy: The trees grow generally not thick, but some places ten, in some
fifteen, in some twenty-five or thirty upon an acre; this I find generally, but
in some particular places there is one hundred upon an acre; but that is very
rare: The trees are very tall and straight, the general are oak, beech, walnut,
chestnuts and acorns lie thick upon the ground, for want of eating; peaches,
vines, strawberries and many other sorts of fruit grow commonly in the woods;
there is likewise gumtree, cedar, whitewood like our fir tree, walnuts,
chestnuts and others lie thick on the ground; there is great plenty of oysters,
fish, fowl; pork is two pennies the pound, beef and venison one penny the
pound, a whole fat buck for five or six shillings; Indian corn for two
shillings and six pence per bushel, oats twenty pence, and barley two shillings
per bushel: We have good brick earth, and stones for building at Amboy, and
elsewhere: The country farm houses are built very cheap: A carpenter, with a
man's own servants, builds the house; they have all materials for nothing,
except nails, their chimnies are of stones; they make their own ploughs and
carts for the most part, only the iron work is very dear: The poorer sort set
up a house of two or three rooms themselves, after this manner; the walls are
of cloven timber, about eight or ten inches broad, like planks, set one end to
the ground, and the other nailed to the raising, which they plaster within;
they build a barn after the same manner, and these cost not above five pound a
piece; and then to work they go: Two or three men in one year will clear fifty
acres, in some places sixty, and in some more: They sow corn the first year,
and afterward maintain themselves; and the increase of corn, cows, horses,
hogs and sheep comes to the landlord: Several merchants of New York have left
their several plantations there, to come to East-Jersey, two or three may join
together, with may be twelve, fifteen or twenty servants, and one overseer,
which cost them nothing for the first year, except some shoes, stockings and
shirts: I have been to see these plantations, and find they have a great
increase by them, they maintain their families at New York with all provisions,
and sell a great deal yearly; and for servants, our English people are far
better husbandmen than the New-Englandmen; the servants work not so much by a
third as they do in England, and I think feed much better; for they have beef,
pork, bacon, pudding, milk, butter and good beer and cider for drink; when they
are out of their time, they have land for themselves, and generally turn
farmers for themselves: Servants wages are not under two shillings a day,
besides victuals; and at Amboy-point two shillings and six pence per day: At
Amboy we have one setting up to make malt, but we want a brewer; I wish thou
would send over some to set up a brewhouse, and a bakehouse to bake bread and
biscuit; for a biscuit maker we must have, to vend our meat to the plantations:
Send over some husbandmen and country fellows that plough, sow, reap, thresh,
and look after cattle; a carpenter or two, and a smith for ploughs and horses;
and a cooper which we want very much: If thou will send a dozen of servants,
most of them countrymen; I will set thee out a gallant plantation of five
hundred or one thousand acres, on a river side; but thou must send over some
goods to stock it withal: I desire thee to encourage some of our friends,
especially the proprietors, to send over some servants to stock some land; and
when they have cleared it, if they have a mind to let it, here are tenants to
take it, and if they will sell it, here are also purchasers: There is one man
since I came here, sold his plantation for fifteen hundred pound; the whole was
sixteen hundred or eighteen hundred acres, whereof only one hundred and twenty
acres were cleared; upon which he had a house, garden, and orchard, and barn
planted: I know several men who let cleared land at six shillings and eight
pence, and at ten shillings the acre, yearly rent; which is a good
encouragement for sending over servants to plant: I write not this as an idle
story, but as things really and truly are: I have sent for servants myself to
settle a farm; for if the proprietors will not do so, I see not what they can
expect. The Scots have taken a right (...), they have sent over many servants,
and are likewise sending more; they have likewise sent over many poor families,
and given them a small stock; and these families, some for seven, some for ten
years, give the half of their increase to the landlord, except the milk, which
the tenant has to himself. I have set them out land and they are at work: I
believe they will have forty acres cleared this spring and this summer: I am to
set them out more, so that in a short time they will have a great increase
coming in: This will raise the price of the land here, and is the reason that
several from New York bounds come to me to take up land, for they believe now
this province will be improving, and our land is better than theirs; that every
proprietor's sending over ten people, will also be a great advantage to
himself; encourage others to take up land and bring all the division that has
been here, to an end; for these men seeing that they shall be balanced, are
already more compliant than they were; now I have laid these things before
thee, and desire thee to impart them to some of the proprietors and other
friends, that they may consider of the same. I am thy loving friend sic
subscriptur.

GAWEN LAWRIE.

From John Barclay, Arthur Forbes, and Gawen Lawrie, to the Scots proprietors,
of the same date.

Knowing you expect from us an account of this country; we have for your
encouragement, and for the encouragement of all our countrymen, who may be
inclineable to come into this country, given you this brief and true account of
it, according as we have seen and are credibly informed; for having seen
little, yet save the winter season, we must write what is to be seen in summer
upon information, which we have just ground to believe to be true; because
whatever we have seen already in it (notwithstanding all we heard of it before
we came) surpasses our expectation in many things. The air in this country is
very wholesome, and though it alters suddenly, sometimes being one day hot and
another cold; yet people are not so subject to catch cold or be distempered by
it as in our country of England. The land lies for the most part pretty high,
but on the river and creek sides, are many meadows which lie low, from which
the country people get their hay, whereby their stocks are maintained in the
winter season. Provisions here are plentiful and cheap; there is beef, pork,
venison, mutton, fowl and fish, abundance to be had at easy rates; and for
drink they have good beer and cider; and those that are desirous, may have wine
of several sorts and other kinds of strong liquors; so that we see little
wanting that a man can desire; and we are here sure that a sober and
industrious people might make this a rich country, and enrich themselves in it;
especially poor people, who are hard put to it to gain bread at home,
notwithstanding the excessive labor; for we see that people here want nothing,
and yet their labor is very small; they work not so hard by one half as the
husbandmen or farmers in our country; and many of these who have settled here
upwards of sixteen years, have lived upon the product of the land, they cleared
the first two years after they came (and cleared none since) which produces
not only corn to maintain their own families, but sell every year; and the
increase of their bestial, whereof they have good store of several sorts; cows,
oxen, horses, sheep and swine, yields them other provisions, and to sell
besides; yet there be some more industrous among them, who have continued
clearing and improving land; and these have got estates, and would not sell
their plantations for several hundred pounds. We have been lately up a little
way on the Rariton river, but could not go so far as we intended, being
prevented by rainy weather; but so far as we went, was very rich land, and yet
that above it is said to be richer; a great deal of it is naturally clear of
wood, and what is not so, is easily cleared, the trees being but small and at a
good distance from one another; so that the land yet untaken up, so far as we
can understand, is easier to clear, than that which is taken up. The towns that
are already seated, being in woodiest places: The merchants in New York, both
Dutch and English, have many of them taken up land, and settled plantations in
this country; and several from that colony are desiring to come and take up
land among us; though they might have land in their own colony without paying
quit-rents. The wood here is not so hard to clear as many think, they do not
pull it up by the roots, but cut them about a foot or more from the ground, and
one man may cut down many in a day; four of our men the first day they began,
cut down seventy the best trees they could find fit for building: There are not
many of great trees, but straight and tall, and there be many sorts, oak,
walnut, chestnut, cedar, poplar, gum-trees, firrs, pines, birch and beech, and
other sorts, which we remember not at present. There are many good orchards of
fruit trees, and they make abundance of good cider, especially at one town
called Newark, which is esteemed at New York and other places, where it is sold
beyond any that comes from New England: There are peaches and vines grow wild
about the river sides, which in season bear good fruit, and grapes; and there
are strawberries over all the woods, and many other kind of good fruits, and at
Amboy point and several other places; there is abundance of brave oysters;
there will be many houses built there quickly, for many have taken up lots, and
all that have taken are obliged to build within a year: There is good
encouragement for tradesmen to come over; such as carpenters, masons, and
bricklayers, for they build not only of wood, but also of stone and brick; yet
most of country houses are built of wood, only trees split and set up one end
in the ground, and coverings to their houses, are mostly shingles, made of oak,
chestnut and cedar wood, which makes a very neat covering; yet there are some
houses covered after the Dutch manner, with panticles. The towns are all
settled upon rivers where vessels of thirty or forty tuns may come up to their
doors, and the out plantations generally upon some brook or rivulets, which are
as plenty here as in our own country, and curious clear water, and in many
places are good spring wells, but in the towns every man for the most part has
a well dug on his own land: Among all the towns that are settled, none lies
so convenient for trade as New-Perth; for ships of great burden may come up
close to the houses, and may come up in any time in the winter: There came a
ship of three hundred tuns in there this winter, in the hardest frost we had
and lay hard by the town, so near that she was tied to a tree. The land here
brings forth most sorts of English grain, and great increase; wheat, rye,
barley, oats and other sorts of grain, such as Indian corn, which is very good
and wholesome kind of grain; and also buck-wheat; and those corns are to be had
at easy rates, either for money or goods, and those that have not money or
goods may have abundance for their work: We shall now answer as far as we are
capable, your queries.

To the first we cannot possitively give an account of the whole length and
breadth of the province; but we are informed that it is a great deal broader
than ye expected; for those that have traveled from the extent of our bounds
on Hudson's river, straight over to the Delaware say it is 100 miles, or
upwards; we shall know that certainly after a while; for the line betwixt us
and New York, is to be run straight over to Delaware river, about three weeks
hence; and after that the line betwixt us and West-Jersey; after which we shall
be able to give a true account of the bounds of that province.

2. When the bounds is so exactly laid out, we can the easier guess at the
number of acres, and by that time may be able to give an account what number of
acres is already taken up; but there is no fear of want of land.

3. The quantity of meadow ground, we cannot determine, having traveled as
yet, but little in the province; but the way we have traveled there is meadow
in abundance, both on the water sides and on the upland.

4. There is also other good ground in some places, great quantities free of
wood, which is fit either for corn or grass; and the ground all over brings
forth good English grass naturally, after it is ploughed.

5. There are also commons upon the country, but what quantity we cannot tell;
there is little kept in them save wild horses, which the people take up when
they have occasion: there is also land fit for pasturage for sheep; and there
is sheep in the country, but what number the ablest planters have we know not,
but some we see have good flocks.

6. An exact map of the country is not yet drawn, nor can you quickly expect
it, for it will take up a great deal of time, charge and pains to do it.

7. There are also hills up in the country, but how much ground they take up we
know not; they are said to be stony, and covered with wood; and beyond them is
said to be excellent land.

8. To the eighth we cannot answer as yet.

9. There be people of several sorts of religions, but few very zealous; the
people, being mostly New England men, do mostly incline to their way; and in
every town there is a meeting house, where they worship publicly every week:
They have no public laws in the country for maintaining public teachers, but
the towns that have them, make way within themselves to maintain them; we know
none that have a settled preacher, that follows no other employment, save one
town, Newark.

10. The method of building their houses is mentioned already.

11. There are not many out plantations that are not within the bounds of some
town; yet there be some, and those are the richest; what number there are we
know not; some have great quantities of land, and abundance cleared.

12. The richest planters have not above eight or ten servants; they will have
some of them a dozen cows; yea, some twenty or thirty; eight or ten oxen;
horses more than they know themselves; for they keep breeding mares; and keep
no more horses at home than they have occasion to work; the rest they let run
in the wood both winter and summer, and take them as they have occasion to use
them: Swine they have in great flocks in the woods; and sheep in flocks also;
but they let them not run in the woods, for fear of being destroyed by wolves:
Their profit arises from the improvement of their land, and increase of their
bestial.

13. There will be in most of the towns already settled, at least 100 houses,
but they are not built so regular as the towns in our country; so that we
cannot compare them with any town we know in Scotland: Every house in the town
has a lot of four acres lying to it; so that every one building upon his own
lot, makes the town irregular and scattered: Their streets are laid out too
large, and the sheep in the towns are mostly maintained in them; they are so
large that they need no trouble to pave them.

14. Betwixt Sandy-Hook and Little Egg-Harbour, lie two towns, Middletown and
Shrewsbury: There is no land taken up that way, but what is (now) in the bounds
of these two towns; what kind of land it is we know not, having never traveled
that way: Barnagat or Burning-Hole, is said to be a very good place for
fishing; and there is some desiring to take up land there, who inform that it
is good land, and abundance of meadow lying to it.

15. There are no fishermen that follow only that trade, save some that go a
whaling upon the coasts; and for other fish there is abundance to be had every
where through the country, in all the rivers; and the people commonly fish with
long sives or long nets, and will catch with a sive, one, sometimes two barrels
a day of good fish, which they salt up mostly for their own use, and to sell to
others.

16. There are no ships belonging to this province particularly, or built here,
save one which Samuel Groom built here the last summer, which stands yet on
the stocks; (a stop being put to it by his death) there is convenience enough
to build ships: The ships in this part trade mostly to the West India islands,
and some to Newfoundland, where the provisions of this country vends.

17. There is land here in several places, after it is cleared and brought into
a farm, set out for rents, as in our country, at five, eight, and ten shillings
per acre, according to the goodness and situation of the said land; and those
that will be at the charge to clear land, may get tenants to take upon these
terms; but whether it will turn to good account or not, because little
experienced as yet, with the charge of clearing of land, I will not positively
inform.

18. There are several places of the country fit for mills; and several, both
corn and saw mills already set up, and good encouragement to set up more.

19. The acres are here reckoned according to the English account; sixteen feet
to the rood, twenty long, and eight broad makes an acre: One English butt of
wheat, which is eight English gallons, or Scots quarts, commonly sows an acre;
two bushels of barley also an acre; and two bushels of oats an acre and half:
English peck, which is four English quarts or Scots shopeus of Indian corn,
plants one acre.

20. There are but few Indian natives in this country, their strength is
inconsiderable, they live in the woods, and have small towns in some places far
up in the country; they plant a little Indian corn, shoots deer, and other wild
beasts and fowls for their food: They have kings among themselves to govern
them; for religion they have none at all; they do not* refuse to sell lands at
occasion. The prices of grain and other provisions here at present; Indian corn
two shillings and six pence the bushel; wheat four shillings; rye three
shillings; oats one shilling and eight pence; beef one penny; pork two pence;
venison one penny; mutton three pence the pound, this English measure and
weight; but mark, these things being valued in this country money, there is a
fifth part difference betwixt it and sterling money; so that wheat being valued
here at four shillings the bushel, is but three shillings and three pence
sterling, and so of the rest proportionably.

Here you have an account of things, as far as we are capable to give at
present; with which we hope you will be satisfied, while further opportunity
and better experience give us occasion to write more; and so we rest your
friends and well wishers to all our countrymen; sic subscribitur,

Elizabeth-Town, in East-Jersey, the 29th of the first month, called March,
1684. JOHN BARCLAY. ARTHUR FORBES.


This I have heard read, do also subscribe to the truth thereof, and rests

G. L.



CHAP. XI.
Manner of the West-Jersey Government in 1684: Their unsettled state, and
succession of governors: Danger of suffering for want of food in 1687: The
division line run by G. Keith; and agreement between the governors Coxe and
Barclay: Alteration in the manner of locating lands in West-Jersey, and the
method now in use fixed: No person in West-Jersey to purchase from the Indians,
without the consent of the council of proprietors; and instructions respecting
deeds and warrants for taking up lands.
THE assembly of West-Jersey at their meeting the 20th of the third month, this
year chose Thomas Olive governor, and chairman or speaker; in both which
capacities the governor now acted; Olive.
the several branches of the legislature we have seen doing their business in
common together; the peoples choice the foundation of the whole, whose
representatives were distinctly returned from their respective first, second,
third and Salem tenths, (which were all the tenths yet settled) at their first
meetings they chose the governor, council, commissioners to lay out land, and
all the other officers of government.

Olive had been twice governor of West-Jersey before, and continued on the last
choice in that station for a year past; His salary was twenty pounds a year.
but Byllinge having de^i^ted from the claims which the assembly and their
constituents had thought unjust, and which had been the cause of their
undertaking in opposition to him to choose the governor, and he in this year
sending a fresh commission to John Skeine to be his deputy, Skein.
Skein's salary beside the fees, was said to be thirty bushels of rye.
the assembly and people submitted to him, though they had before refused William
Welsh in that capacity, Welsh.
while Byllinge continued the claims aforesaid: Skeine died in the twelfth
month 1687; Dr. Coxe.
but Dr. Daniel Cox, of London, the greatest proprietor of West-Jersey, He
owned twenty-two shares of propriety.
was the September before appointed to succeed him; he continued in that
station till about the year 1690, Governor Coxe soon after his appointment to
that station, wrote the following letter to the council of proprietors of
West-Jersey,

After Mr. Bylling's decease, his heirs were greatly ignorant of his concerns
relating unto West-Jersey, and therefore resolved to sell his interest both in
government and property; and that they had begun to treat with a person who
would probably have made the condition of the proprietors and inhabitants very
uneasy: I and another of the chief proprietors having together a very great
share of the country, applied ourselves for advice unto the lawyers, being
assured by the most eminent that however Bylling's concessions might in
conscience bind him during his life; they were not always obligatory to a
purchaser or successor, because said concessions were made before his right of
government was granted; we thereupon consulted with several proprietors and
others, well wishers to your colony, amongst whom it was agreed and resolved to
be for the good of your country, and our own security, that one amongst us
should purchase from the heirs of Mr. Byllinge, all his, and their interest in
property and government; and because my proportion of land was greater, or that
they apprehended me capable of serving them, or to have more money at command,
or because they had ever perceived me to be zealous and active to promote the
good of the province: I was earnestly pressed and requested to make a purchase
of the government and properties annexed thereunto, wherewith having complied,
that I might demonstrate the disenterestedness of my undertaking; and that I
did primarily propose the welfare and benefit of the people, and prefer it to
my private advantage. I did many times proffer Mr. Penn, Mr. Ford and others,
who pretend to understand most of your minds, what was for your good, and to be
as it were kind of trustees for you: That if they would contrive any method,
whereby the government might be legally and severally invested in the
proprietors, or people without a governor; or if they would find any person
more fit to discharge the office of government, or who might prove more
acceptable to the people than myself; I was willing to consign or reconvey all
my estate, power, authority as I had received it and upon the same condition,
not desiring the least advance beyond what they all know I had disbursed; but
not finding any proposal to meet with any other return, than an invitation to
proceed, and good *wishes that I might therein prove successful; and finding
that all the proprietors in or near London, whom I could convene, were greatly
satisfied with my conduct, encourageing me to expect they would meet with like
acceptance from the proprietors and inhabitants of West-Jersey: I thereupon
thought fit to recommunicate unto you the whole transaction of this affair; as
likewise what I expect from you the proprietors and inhabitants of West-Jersey;
and what you may reciprocally challenge from me: I do therefore hereby give you
to understand, that whereas all the gentlemen of the law, who have been
hitherto consulted, do unanimously agree, that the government of the province
of West-Jersey, is legally in me as full as Pennsylvania in Mr. Penn, or
East-Jersey in the proprietors there: I thereupon assumed the title of
governor, and lay claim to the powers and authority thereunto annexed; and I am
resolved by the assistance of Almighty God, to exercise the jurisdiction by his
royal highness, his last deed or grant unto me conveyed, with all integrity and
faithfulness and diligence, for the benefit and welfare of those, over whom
divine providence has constituted me (under our sovereign) superintendant or
chief overseer; always prefering public ^molument, before my own private
advantage; and may I succeed in may undertakings, well or ill, according as I
pursue or violate this resolution and engagement; and I am contented this my
declaration be recorded, that it may continually reproach and condemn me if I
ever recede, theref^om. And whereas Mr. Byllinge, in his former concessions,
has given his consent, and ratified diverse laws in the said grant, styled
fundamentals; the first concerning liberty of conscience, the second, that no
person shall be deprived of life, limb, estate, property, privilege, freedom,
franchises, without a due trial and judgment, passed by a jury of twelve good
and lawful men in the neighborhood; the person excepting, if he please,
against thirty-five without any reason rendered, and more if he assign a just
cause: I hereby declare, that I do in my heart highly approve the said
fundamental laws and concessions, and am ready to confirm them; and withal, I
do faithfully promise, that to the utmost of my ability, I will cause them to
be most inviolably observed, as also those three fundamentals after mentioned.
If your assembly shall desire the continuance of them, and that it appears,
nothing is therein contained contrary to the laws of England, which extend to
our colony; by the breach whereof, we inevitably expose ourselves unto the
forfeiture of our charter, which, next to the blessing of God, and protection
of our prince, is our greatest comfort and security; and that you may all
become fully satisfied: I do not intend to arrogate unto myself any absolute
despoti^ power, I have thought fit to add, that whereas it is generally
acknowledged by all intelligent disinterested persons, the government of
England by a sovereign prince, upon weighty considerations of making or
repealing laws, levying taxes, consulting with his parliament, is the best of
constitutions, and diverse of our English plantations, having in imitation
hereof joined with the governor an assembly or parliament: I do hereby declare
my full and free approbation of such constitution in your province, and I shall
confer upon your assembly, all the powers and privileges consistent with the
ends of good government, the redressing grievances, and promoting the peace and
prosperity of the province; and I make my request you would with all convenient
speed, transmit unto me your proposals, both in order unto the establishing a
regular and durable method of convening assemblies, and what power you desire
should be entrusted with them: And because assemblies have been hitherto
convened only annually, except upon some solemn urgent occasion, it has been
customary for the governor or his deputy, to act in affairs of importance
during the recess of assemblies, with the advice of a council, I would desire
you to give me to understand, how you expect and desire such council shall be
chosen; whether you will acquie^ce in the governor's nomination, or whether you
desire the assembly should have any share in their election, also in case of
succession upon decea^e or misbehaviour; and whether the council shall be
annual, biennial or triennial, or during life; if understanding, faithful and
diligent in discharging of their trust: I shall in all these, and any other
particulars, which shall manifes^ly appear to make for public utility, not
only have a great deference for your opinion and advice, but readily comply
with all your just reasonable expectation and requests. -- Thus having without
reserve or dis^uise, declared unto you my sentiments concerning government, I
proceed to affairs of another nature; but of little less moment: It is the
fixed persuasion of diverse intelligent persons, that your province has deeply
suffered, and is stinted in its growth for want of ascertaining its limits, and
fixing a boundary between it, East Jersey, and New York; that thereupon a
subdivision might be made of the country, into one hundred proprietaries, as
was originally agreed, thereby appropriating unto every good purchaser his
portion in specialty; I have enclosed an account of my transactions with the
proprietors of East Jersey, many of whom being persons before well affected
unto me* I have highly disobliged, upon my refusal to comply with their claim,
upon the last pretended agreement; all which, and much more, if like occasion
should require, I shall readily conflict with, and cheerfully undergo, for the
good our little, yet unto me, dear community, which I shall love, cherish, and
endeavor to support and maintain, as if they were members of my own private
family: Lastly, I do confirm all those persons who were appointed by Mr.
Byllinge, or chosen by the people in their respective places and employments,
until I further learn from you the state of your colony, unless by some new
advice and very extraordinary motives I should be obliged to make an
alteration, which should it happen, you may all rest assured, I shall have a
tender regard unto your welfare and satisfaction: And now nothing remains
besides our supplicating with united minds, the all wise God, to grant us the
wisdom which is pure and peaceable, to enable us methodically to order our
affairs with discretion; that we may act industriously, regularly, cheerfully,
in the several stations and employments his divine providence has allotted us,
considering we are one body, and members ^ne of another; that no injury can
happen to a part which will not redound in some to the hurt of the whole: For
my own particular, I can appeal unto the searcher of hearts, that I do
sincerely and primarily design the prosperity of your province, in its peace,
security and plenty; and that it may be so settled, as that you may not only
live happily during my administration, but that it may not be in the power of
any future governor, deriving from me, even to hinder the due execution, much
less to repeal those laudable constitutions, which with your advice and
assistance I hope to establish: And on your parts, I expect and promise myself
a ready compliance with whatsoever shall be proposed for the public good: That
instead of factions and divisions, there be a generous emulation amongst you,
who shall promote the welfare of our community: That you be mutually tenderly
affectioned one toward the other; and though you may differ in opinions,
concerning things of lesser moment, yet continue united in affection, as being
servants to the same God, subject to the same prince, and having one common
interest; often remembering, that by unanimity and concord, diverse nations
have been advanced from contemptible beginnings, unto great wealth and power;
whereas by discord, mighty empires have been broken and ruined, without the
accession of external force: That the God of peace and love would unite,
preserve and prosper you, is the frequent, fervent, and shall continue to be,
the constant request, of your most affectionate friend,

DANIEL COXE.
September the 5th, 1687.

having appointed pointed Edward Hunloke his deputy; sometime afterward a
commission was sent to John Tatham, who being a jacobite; and as such by
principle disqualified, him the assembly rejected; on which the proprietor sent
a commission in 1692, Hamilton.
to Andrew Hamilton His salary in 1695 and 1696, was two hundred pounds a year
as governor of West-Jersey; but the salary in both East and West-Jersey seems
in some periods, to have been rather occasional: In the latter province in
1697, provision was made for two hundred pounds by a law, with the following
preamble, Being sensible of the many great services done by our present
governor, Col. Andrew Hamilton, since his accession to the administration of
the government of this province; and taking also into our consideration, the
great charge that must attend any person in that post, and how little has yet
been done by us answerable to his merit and station; we find ourselves obliged
in point of gratitude, and in testimony, of our affection to him, and as a
demonstration thereof, to offer as is hereafter expressed; and pray our
governor's acceptance thereof from a poor people, whose good will and regard to
him is not to be measured by the value of our offering, but integrity of the
offerers. The salary of the governor of East-Jersey in 1694, 1695, and 1696,
was one hundred and fifty pounds per annum.
He was accepted and continued governor of West-Jersey, while it remained under
the proprietary jurisdiction, though with some interruption in School, of which
hereafter; being also some part of the time governor of both East and
West-Jersey, and Pennsylvania.

The year 1686, seems to have been a dangerous one in East-Jersey, Law against
swords. etc.
if the law then passed against wearing swords was properly founded: According
to that, several persons had received abuses, and were put in great fear from
quarrels and challenges; to prevent it for the future, none by word or message,
were to make a challenge, upon pain of six months imprisonment without bail or
mainprize, and a ten pound fine; whoever accepted or concealed the challenge,
was also to forfeit ten pounds; no person was to wear any pocket pistols,
skeins, stilladers, daggers or dirks, or other unusual weapons, upon pain of
five pounds forfeiture for the first offense, and for the second to be
committed; and on conviction imprisoned for six months, and moreover to pay a
fine of ten pounds; no planter was to go armed with sword, pistol, or dagger,
upon penalty of five pounds. Officers, civil and military, soldiers in service,
and strangers traveling upon lawful occasions, were excepted. This law for any
thing that appears, is yet in force.

The settlers in both West Jersey, and Pennsylvania, about the year 1687, were
put to difficulties on account of food; their crops having in great part
failed; Food scarce.
several families had already spent their last, and were forced to subsist on
what was spared by such of their neighbors as were better provided; these were
few in proportion to the mouths to be filled: Some nigh the rivers had lived
weeks upon fish, others were forced to put up with herbs; but unexpectedly to
many arrived a vessel from New England to Philadelphia, laden with corn, which
proved an agreeable supply; this vessel meeting with a good market others soon
followed; so that the settlers were not afterward exposed to the like
necessity for want of food.

In this year, George Keith, surveyor-general of East-Jersey, Keith's line.
by order of the proprietors there, attempted to run the division line between
East and West-Jersey; pursuant to an award on the terms established in the
quintipartite deed. See this deed, vol. i. of laws, p. 63, etc.
He began with a line from little Egg Harbor, north by west and three degrees
five minutes more westerly, as the compass then pointed for a part; the line he
run sixty miles in length, till he fell upon the corner of Dobie's plantation,
on the south branch of Rariton: This, by order of the council of proprietors of
West-Jersey, in or about the year 1721, was traversed by John Chapman,
Travers^d by Chapman,
esteemed a careful surveyor; upon the computation it appeared, that the line
at the time of his traverse, was north sixteen degrees and forty three minutes
west, which leaves a variation of two degrees and twenty three minutes in that
thirtyfour years. The remaining part of Keith's line was from Dobie's
plantation, along the rear of that and other tracts and plantations, as they
were before patented and surveyed in right of the proprietors of the eastern
division of New Jersey, until it intersects that part of the north branch of
Rariton river, which descends from a fall of water, commonly called and known
by the Indian name of Allamitung, then running from that point intersection up
the branch or stream of the fall of Allamitung.

Upon the original running this line, the western proprietors thought too much
of their best lands were surveyed to the eastward; and were uneasy with it.

In the fall 1688, the governors of East and West-Jersey, on behalf of each
division, entered into the following agreement.

London, September 5, 1688.
It is agreed this day, by Dr. Daniel Coxe, governor of the province of
West-Jersey, Agreement between the governors Coxe and Barclay.
on behalf of himself, and all the rest of the proprietors of that province, on
the one part; and Robert Barclay, governor of the province of East-Jersey, on
behalf of himself and all the rest of the proprietors of that province, on the
other part; as follows, viz.

For the final determination of all differences, concerning the deed of
partition; and all other disputes and controversies about dividing the lands,
and settling the bounds between East and West-Jersey,

1. The line of partition run strait from little Egg-Harbour, to the most
westerly corner of John Dobie's plantation, as it stands on the south branch of
Rariton river, shall be the bounds so far between East and West-Jersey, and
shall not be altered; but remain as it stands, on a printed draught of the
proprietors lands, surveyed in East-Jersey, and drawn by John Reid, and since
printed here.

2. From thence to run along the back of the adjoining plantations, until it
comes to James Dunda^s his plantation; and from thence, at the most north
westerly part thereof, a line to lie down with a line on the back of those
plantations, and so to run north eastward, till it touch the north branch of
Rariton river, as it is struck upon the map already; but saving the plantations
already laid out, to be within the line, if they happen to stand a little more
westerly than that line is marked.

3. From the north end of the line, where it touches Rariton north branch;
thence forward the largest stream or current of water belonging to the said
north branch, shall be the bound or partition; and so continuing along the
same, unto the north end thereof, for the bounds so far.

4. From the said north end of the branch, a short strait line to run to touch
the nearest part of Pa^^aick river; and so following the course of that river,
continuing Poquanick river, so long as it runs northerly or north westerly;
those rivers still to be the bounds between both provinces; and if Poquanick
river do not run far enough to the latitude of forty one degrees; then from the
said river, a straight line to be run northward to the latitude; and that to be
the utmost north partition point, and from the said point in a strait line due
east to the partition point on Hudson's river, between East-Jersey and
New York: Provided always, that all plantations and tracts of land, laid out
and surveyed, before this agreement arrives in East-Jersey, shall remain to the
parties concerned; and the partition shall so run as to include them within
East-Jersey bounds.

Lastly, Dr. Coxe does covenant and promise, to make good the agreements above
written, and warrant the title and quiet possession of all the lands so to be
appropriated to the proprietors of East-Jersey, according to the limits and
bounds abovementioned, against all persons that shall or may pretend, or claim
any interest to any of the said lands, as West-Jersey proprietors: And Robert
Barclay, does covenant and promise, to make good the agreement above written,
and warrant the title and quiet possession of lands, so to be appropriated, to
the proprietors of West-Jersey, according to the limits and bounds
abovementioned, against all persons that shall or may pretend or claim any
interest to any of the said lands, as East-Jersey proprietors: For performance
of all and every the respective articles and covenants herein mentioned; they
do mutually bind themselves, each to the other, in the sum of five thousand
pounds, to be well and truly paid on the breach of any of the clauses and
covenants, herein before mentioned. In witness whereof, they have
interchangeably set their hands and seals, the day and year first above
written. See the consent of many western proprietors, to the agreement made
with East-Jersey, in the line of division by Dr. Daniel Coxe. (...) book. B.
Secretary's-Office, Burlington, p. 233.


Sealed and delivered in the presence of DAVID HEWLING. STEPHEN LUCOCK. ROBERT
BARCLAY.

Notwithstanding this agreement, and that the parties have at several times
seemed desirous the line should be properly run out and fixed; the necessary
preliminaries could never yet be sufficiently settled; those of East-Jersey
being thought by the western proprietors to have the advantage in every step
hitherto taken; while they on the contrary, have not been wanting to allege
their reasons. To trace the proceedings relating to this line minutely, will be
a task proper for those immediately concerned; they are voluminous: To give an
account of some more of the steps hitherto taken, a few papers are added in the
appendix, Vid. appendix, Numb. iv. v. vi. vii.


In order to keep the transactions relative to the division line together, we
are necessarily brought forward in course of time, with respect to the manner
of locating the proprietors lands in West-Jersey; the divisions and
sub-divisions of shares had multiplied demands, and introduced a necessity for
other measures than had been hitherto in practice; accordingly in 1687, the
proprietors found it expedient to enter into the following agreement.

Whereas by experience it has been found, New method of locating lands.
that the concerns particularly relating to the proprietors of the province of
West New Jersey, by reason of the great difficulty of getting them together,
upon several emergent occasions, have been greatly detrimental not only to the
carrying on and progress of the same necessary and public concerns, but also
very chargeable and burdensome to the said proprietors, especially those of
them who live at a great distance; and also complained of by the members of the
general assembly, as taking up a great part of their time, in an affair
particularly relating to the proprietors; and finding that the affair touching
the public concerns of the said proprietors, may be carried on with far less
charge and burden to the whole, and with more effect by such number of
persons, as by the proprietors shall be esteemed fit and qualified on their
behalf, to transact and agitate their public affairs as proprietors: We
therefore, underwritten proprietors of the province aforesaid, being met
together at Burlington, in the same province, this fourteenth day of the
twelfth month, anno 1687, by a general appointment of the same proprietors, do
therefore unanimously agree together as follows* (viz.) That eleven
proprietors within the said province, shall be yearly and every year,
nominated, elected and chosen, by and amongst the said proprietors, to be
commissioners and trustees at a day certain; six whereof in the county of
Burlington, and five within the county of Gloucester, in the province
aforesaid; who shall be, and are empowered to act and plead in all such
affairs, as do, and shall generally concern the body of the said proprietors of
the same province, as fully and effectuallyas if the whole body of the same
proprietors were together* and should personally do, and conclude the same;
which act and acts, thing and things, by the same commissioners and trustees
for the time being, so from time to time to be done and performed as aforesaid,
we the said proprietors do hereby ratify, establish and confirm; and we do
hereby nominate and appoint our trusty friends Samuel Jenings, Thomas Olive,
William Biddle, El^as Far, Mahlon Stacy, Francis Davenport, Andrew Rob^son,
William Royden, John Reading, William Cooper, and John Wills, commissioners and
trustees for the year next ensuing, to do, act and officiate in the affair
aforesaid, until the tenth day of the second month, anno domini 1688; and we do
hereby agree and appoint, that each and every of the said commissioners and
trustees now elected and chosen, and from time to time hereafter to be elected
and chosen, shall have and be allowed two shillings per day, for each and every
day they shall be concerned to act in the affair aforesaid; the same to be paid
by the proprietors of the province proportionably to their respective shares of
the said province. In testimony whereof, we the proprietors of the province
aforesaid, have to this ^instrument, in this and the schedule hereunto affixed,
put our hands, dated the fourteenth day of the twelfth month called February,
anno domini 1687.

At a meeting of the proprietors at Burlington, this sixth of the seventh
month, in the year 1688; it is agreed, that five of the commissioners shall be
a quorum in all their meetings, and shall have power to act in as full manner
as if the whole number of eleven were present; and it is further agreed, that
the said commissioners shall meet at least once a quarter, the day after each
quarter sessions.

Thomas Hutchison, Christopher Wetherill, Thomas Butcher, John Pancoast, Henry
Grubb, John (...), Thomas Barton, John Woolston, Robert Turner, Thomas Budd,
George Hutchinson, John Days, John Shinn, Henry Wood, John Kay, Thomas
Matthews, Thomas Sharp, Isaac Marriot, Bernard Devonists, Samuel Oldale, Thomas
French, Percival (...), Frncis Collins, Thomas Gardener, Daniel Wills, William
Myers, Anthony Elton, John Hugg, Richard H^rritage, William Bate, William
Alberson.

An instrument of the same form and date, signed in Gloucester county, by

Woolla Dalbo, William Cooper, William Alberson, John Ladd, John Hugg, jun.
John Wills, Thomas Sharp, John Rambo, Robert Zane, James Atkinson, Francis
Collins, Thomas Thackera, John Hugg.

Indorsed on the back side.

We the within subscribers, do approve of, ratify and confirm the persons
within mentioned, to serve as our representatives for the year ensuing, with
these alterations following, viz. instead of Mahlon Stacy and Francis
Davenport, that John Tatham and George Hutchinson, be elected and serve in
their stead; and in place of William Cooper, Thomas Gardener, jun. is elected
to serve in his stead; and that instead of eleven trustees, there shall be but
nine for the year ensuing; five of which shall make a quorum:

All which is consented to, concluded, and agreed upon, this first of the first
month, at Gloucester, anno 1688, by the proprietors within subscribed.



On this agreement with some little variations afterward, is founded the
present constitution of the council of proprietors of West-Jersey; the
following minutes, being some of their first proceedings thereafter, shows
their method and practice for some time after the establishment of the said
constitution.

At a meeting of several proprietors of West-Jersey, at Burlington, on the
sixth day of the seventh month, anno domini 1688.

It was then and there debated, and being put to the vote, Minutes of W. Jersey
council of proprietors.
agreed by the proprietors then present, that every proprietor, and every
person interested in proprieties, shall pay to the use of Daniel Coxe, to any
person appointed to receive it, as a reimbursement for the money laid out by
him, in the Indian purchase lately made in the lower counties, the sum of
twelve shillings and six pence for every thousand acres, and so proportionably
to be taken up out of that purchase; the first year to begin the first day of
April last past, and from that time twelve months, to advance eighteen pence
upon every year ensuing, until the time that the money aforesaid be paid for;
the land to be laid out within the bounds of the same purchase, as
consideration for the moneys disbursed by the said Daniel Coxe in the said
Indian purchase of the whole tract, which, by the surveyor Andrew Robeson, is
computed to be three hundred thousand acres of good land, capable and worthy of
improvements; which money being paid, the party so paying shall be acquitted of
all other payments on the consideration aforesaid.

2. That the surveyor for the time being, be engaged not to set out any land
within the limits of this Indian purchase, until the money abovementioned be
paid and secured as abovesaid.

3. And it is further agreed, that for the land taken up by order of the said
Dr. Coxe, above the falls of Delaware, every proprietor taking up any part
thereof, shall pay to Dr. Coxe, or his order, the sum of twenty-five shillings
per thousand acres, and two shillings and six pence yearly consideration, till
the money be paid.

At a meeting of the council of proprietors, being nominated, elected and
constituted by the proprietors of the province of West-Jersey, to negotiate
their affairs for the year ensuing, held at Burlington, the eighteenth day of
September, anno domini 1688.

Elected, Thomas Olive, Andrew Robeson, Samuel Jenings, Francis Davenport,
William Biddle, Mahlon Stacy, William Roydon, William Cooper and John Reading;
five of which shall make a quorum.

Present at this meeting, these persons; Thomas Olive, Andrew Robeson, Samuel
Jenings, William Biddle, Francis Davenport, William Roydon, William Cooper.
Thomas Olive, president.

Imprimis, It is agreed, ordered and concluded by authority of the council
abovesaid, That Samuel Jenings be, and is hereby appointed commissioner, to
examine all deeds, taking a minute of the same, and issue warrants to the
surveyor general, for the surveying and taking up of lands; keeping a record of
the same, and this for the inhabitants within the county of Burlington, or to
any others as occasion shall require.

2. It is likewise agreed and ordered, that John Reading shall perform the same
service, for the inhabitants within the county of Gloucester; and to all others
as occasion shall require.

3. And it ordered and appointed, that for the support of their service, every
warrant for land under one hundred acres, shall pay the sum of one shilling;
and one hundred acres and above, under one thousand, shall pay the sum of
eighteen pence; and one thousand acres and upwards, shall pay the sum of two
shillings and six pence.

4. And it is farther ordered, that the said Samuel Jenings and John Reading,
shall, upon demand of this council, at any time, deliver into them a copy of
their said minutes by them taken from time to time.

5. And it is ordered and appointed by the authority aforesaid, that Andrew
Robeson, the surveyor general, shall from time to time, upon demand of this
council, make return to them of all warrants executed by him, that have not
been returned before.

6. And it is likewise ordered and apponted by this council, That Mahlon Stacy,
John Day, William Wood and John Hollinshead, shall be rangers for the county of
Burlington and upwards; and John Kay, Thomas Sharp and Israel Helm, jun. shall
be rangers for the county of Gloucester, for the year ensuing.

7. It is also concluded and ordered, that no person or persons whatsoever,
shall presume to purchase any land from the Indians, without the consent of
this council first obtained, otherwise to be prosecuted as our common enemy.

The council adjourns until the fourth day of November next.

At a meeting of the council of proprietors in Burlington, upon the tenth day
of eighth month, anno 1688.

Present in council, Thomas Olive, president.

Andrew Robeson, William Biddle, Samuel Jenings, William Royden, John Reading.

Imprimis, whereas John Skene is appointed by the secretary and register
general of the dominion and territories of New England, to receive the records,
rolls and papers from Thomas Revel and John Reading, who has already demanded
the same; and the said Thomas Revel and John Reading, making their application
to the council, to know their pleasure therein.

The council have, and do order, that all records relating to government, may
be delivered according to the secretary's order; but such as relate to lands,
they judge to be the proprietors property, and that they ought to abide and
remain with them, and hope the governor is already satisfied therewith.

The council adjourns till the sixth hour in the morning, on the 11th day.

The eleventh of the eighth month.

Agreed and concluded, that all deeds granted only by Edward Byllinge, in and
before the year 1682, shall be adjudged and esteemed insufficient for the
commissioners to grant warrants upon.

The form of the commissioners commission.

A. B. thou art hereby authorized, by the power and order of the council of
proprietors, to be commissioner for the county of (...) for the examining of
deeds, and granting warrants, for the taking up of lands within the province of
West-Jersey; well and faithfully in all things discharging thy said office; and
the trust in thee reposed, according to the instructions herewith sent; to the
best of thy skill, and understanding. Given under my hand and seal, the etc.

Instructions for the commissioners to observe and follow, in their examining
of deeds, and granting of warrants for the taking up of lands.

1. Agreed and ordered by the council aforesaid, that the commissioners grant
no warrants, but upon the producing of good deeds, authentic copies, of an
extract of the record of such deed under the register's hand, etc.

2. That all deeds granted only by Edward Byllinge, in and before the year
1682, shall be accounted insufficient for the commissioners to grant warrants
upon.

3. That there shall be given a particular warrant for every several deed, or
particular purchase.

4. That the president of the council for the time being, shall, from time to
time, grant warrants for the commissioners, for the taking up of their own
lands.

5. That the commissioners shall not direct their warrants to the
surveyor-general for the laying forth of his own lands, but to some other
person, at the discretion of the commissioner that gives forth the warrant.

6. That every proprietor coming for a warrant, shall first sign to an
instrument, to be presented to them, for their compliance, to pay his, and
their respective and proportionable share of such incident charge, for the
management of the proprietors affairs; as in the said instrument here
following, may further appear.

The form of the instrument to be signed by the proprietors before they have
warrants granted for the taking up of their lands.

We the subscribers having taken into consideration the necessity of the
incident charges, that will attend the council of proprietors, in the employ
and concern wherein we have placed, and constituted them, for the carrying on,
and discharging of those inevitable charges that will follow upon the
prosecution of our affairs; we do therefore hereby bind, and oblige ourselves;
each for himself, and not for one another, to comply with, and pay our
proportions respectively of the aforesaid charges, as our said council shall
from time to time give us an account of, and find needful to be raised: In
witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands, the etc.

The council adjourns till the 7th hour in the morning, being the 12th day of
October, Anno 1688.

The 12th day of the 8th month.

The council being met, they ordered the writing of a letter to the governor,
to request the secretary to permit the records of lands to rest in the same
hands they have formerly been; forasmuch as they conceive they properly belong
to the proprietors.

The council likewise order another letter to the secretary, to signify the
receipt of his warrant, by Thomas Revell and John Reading, for the delivery of
all records, rolls, etc. and do desire the secretary, that the records of lands
may still remain in the said Thomas Revell and John Reading's hands: But for
other records that relate to government, may be disposed of according as he
shall appoint.

We have before given a summary of some of the first laws published in the
eastern and western divisions, while under proprietary management; from that
time forward, till the surrender of the government, many others were passed in
both; but being either framed to particular occasions, or afterward in part
repealed or supplied, and most of them of no great public concernment now,
further repetition of them here was thought unnecessary.

In the year 1691, Dr. Coxe conveyed the Government of West-Jersey and
territories, to the West-Jersey society, Dr. Coxe to the W. Jersey society.
consisting of the following persons: Sir Thomas Lane, knt. Michael Watts,
Edward Harrison, Thomas Skinner, James St. John's, Nicholas Hayward, Mordecai
Abbot, Nicholas Battersby, Robert Curtis, John Jurin, Richard Bramhall, Robert
Mitchell, Charles Mitchell, James Boddington, John Gunston, Arthur Shallet,
John Lamb, William Wightman, Joseph Brooksbank, William Thompson, Henry
Harrington, John Love, Thomas Phipps, Isaac Cocks, John Sweetable, Thomas
Bromfield, John Norton, Robert Hackshaw, John Bridges, Joseph Paise, Edward
Richier, William Dunk, Edward Habberdfield, John Alberson, Edward West, Edward
Pauncefort, Obadiah Burnet, Francis Michel, Benjamin Steel, John Slaney,
Nehemiah Erwing, John Wilcocks, Richard Mayo, Jonah Netteeway, William Brooks,
Tracey Pauncefort, Joseph Allen, and Richard Greenaway. Vid. the instrument,
Revell's Book, B. Secretary's office Burlington. P. 298.

CHAP. XII.
A flood at Delaware falls: Death and character of Thomas Olive, Thomas
Gardener, and John Woolston^ Commotions in East and West-Jersey: Surrender of
the two governments to queen Aune: Her acceptance thereof; and her commission
to lord Cornbury.
THE first settlers of the Yorkshire tenth in West-Jersey, had several of them
built upon the low lands, nigh the falls of Delaware, where they had now lived,
and been improving near sixteen years; they had been told by the Indians, their
buildings were liable to be damaged by freshes, and the situation of the place
must have made it probable: Flood in D^laware.
They had however, got up several wooden tenements and outhouses, which in the
spring were accordingly generally demolished: The s^ows suddenly melting above,
caused an uncommon overflow of the river; there have been many great floods
since; but none quite so high; it came upon them so unexpectedly, that many
were in their houses surrounded with water, and conveyed to the opposite shore,
by neighbors from thence, in canoes: The water continued rising till it
reached the upper stories of some of their houses, then most, or all of them
gave way, and were dashed to pieces; many cattle were drowned; beds, kettles,
and other furniture, were picked up on the shores below; the frights and
damages were considerable; two persons in a house, carried away by the sweeping
torrent, lost their lives before they could be got out. This accident taught
the the owners here to fix their habitations on higher ground, and was what is
commonly called the great flood at Delaware falls.

It was in the spring this year that the proprietors of West-Jersey first
appointed col. Andrew Hamilton to be their governor. See his commission in book
B. Secretary's office, Burlington, p. 287.


About this time also died Thomas Olive, T. Olive.
who since the first settlement of West-Jersey, had been a man of importance
there; he came over one of the London commissioners in 1677, was sometime
governor, in which station he behaved with great circumspection and prudence;
while a common magistrate he had a ready method of business, often doing it to
good effect in the seat of judgment on the stumps in his meadows; he contrived
to postpone sudden complaints, till cool deliberation had shown them to be
justly founded, and then seldom failed of accommodating matters without much
expense to the parties: He had been imprisoned and otherwise a sufferer for
religion in England; and by his preaching and writing as well as other public
and private conduct, had gained general love and esteem, which he merited to
the last.

In September 1694, died Thomas Gardener; T. Gardener.
he arrived early at Burlington* went through several public stations in
West-Jersey with a good character, had considerable knowledge in variety of
business, and was an exemplary member of society, civil and religious.

In the beginning of School, died John Woolston; J. Woolston.
one of the first settlers at Burlington, who had now for upwards of twenty
years, through the fatigues of a new settlement, proved himself a ready friend
and neighbor, and valuable member of society.

We are now come to the year 1701; a memorable era in New Jersey, Commotions.
on account of the disturbances and confusions that violently agitated several
parties, and the change of government that followed in consequence of them:
Each province had many and different proprietors, who promoted separate schemes
and interests; these sometimes interfered: To facilitate particular purposes,
one party would have the choice and management of a governor, while another
refused any but of their own nomination; and a third objected to proposals from
either: Moderate councils could not be heard; a contaminating spirit of party
and discord took place of order and peace; every expedient to restore union and
regularity, proved unsuccessful; faction prevailed, and particular animosities
were nourished to that degree, that the delays of time seemed only to give
opportunity of accumulating fresh occasions of disgust and uneasiness; a detail
of particulars, would be an ungrateful, we hope an unnecessary task; a few
facts may suffice as specimens of the whole: To come at these, we must go back
to the spring School.

Jeremiah Bass, J. Bass.
under a pretense of a commission he had received from some of the proprietors
of East-Jersey, with the king's approbation, superceded Andrew Hamilton, A.
Hamilton.
the then governor of both East and West Jersey; but in the next year it
appeared, that Bass had not obtained the king's approbation of his commission,
nor was it granted by enough of the proprietors to make it valid, which induced
great numbers of the inhabitants to refuse obedience to him, and to the
magistrates and officers by him appointed; some persons being imprisoned for
refusing obedience, it was resented by others with great indignation, and feuds
and confusion followed: To accommodate matters for the present, Andrew Hamilton
was again appointed governor, by a fresh commission from some of the
proprietors; but a great number refused obedience to him, and the magistrates
and officers under him, in like manner, and for the same reasons as they had
refused Bass and those he appointed. The disorders in the Eastern division
during this time, Long before, according to the representation of the lords of
trade, October 2, 1701. the proprietors (say they) of East-New-Jersey, did
surrender their pretended right of government to king James, in the month of
April, 1688; which was accordingly accepted by him.
made such an impression on the minds or many of the people, that they readily
hearkened to overtures made for a surrender of government. A considerable part
of West-Jersey was also, for similar reasons, disposed to a resignation: The
commotions in both, which had been increasing for some years, now seemed to be
got to a crisis, and all things tended to a surrender of the powers of
government; which was at length brought about in the beginning of the next year.

Mean while diverse petitions and remonstrances were sent home, Remonstrances.
complaining loudly of their grievances and confusions; and praying redress:
These and the proceedings in consequence of them, show the principal matters
now to be found relating to the surrender and the measures they took to reserve
their privileges. Vid. Appendix, numb. viii. ix. x, xi, xii, xiii, xiv.


In 1702 the surrender was made by the following instrument.

Surrender from the proprietors of East and West-New-Jersey, Surrender
of their pretended right of government to her majesty.
WHEREAS his late majesty king Charles the second, by his letters patents under
the great seal of England, bearing date at Westminster, on or about the twelfth
day of March, in the sixteenth year of his reign; did give and grant to James,
then duke of York, his heirs and assigns, all that part of the main land of
New England, beginning at a certain place called or known by the name of Saint
Croix, next adjoining to New-Scotland, in America; and from thence extending
along the sea coast unto a certain place called Pemaquod or Pemaquid, and so up
the river thereof to the furthest head of the same, as it tends northward; and
extending from thence to the river of Kenibique; and so upwards by the shortest
course to the river Canada, northward: And also all that island or islands,
commonly called by the several name or names of Manowacks, or Long Island,
situate, lying and being toward the west of Cape Codd, and the Narrohigansets,
abutting upon the main land between the two rivers there, called or known by
the several names of Connecticut and Hudson's river; together also with the
said river called Hudson's river, and all the lands from the west side of
Connecticut river, to the east side of Delaware bay: And also all those several
islands called or known by the names of Martin's Vineyard, and Nantucks, or
Nantucket; together with all the lands, islands, soils, rivers, harbors,
mines, minerals, quarries, woods, marshes, waters, lakes, fishings, hawkings,
hunting and fowling; and all other royalties, profits, commodiand h^editaments
to the several islands, lands and premises, belonging and appertaining, with
their and every of their appurtenances, TO HAVE AND TO HOLD all and singular
the said lands, islands, hereditaments, with their and every of their
appurtenances, to the said James duke of York, his heirs and assigns forever;
to be held of the said king, his heirs and successors, as of his manor of East
Greenwich in Kent, in free and common socage, and not in capite or by knight's
service; yielding and rendering therefore yearly and every year, forty
beaverskins when demanded; or within ninety days after. And by the same letters
patents, the late king Charles the second, for himself, his heirs and
successors, did give and grant to the said James duke of York, his heirs,
deputies, agents, commissioners and assigns, full and absolute power and
authority, to correct, punish, pardon, govern and rule all such subjects of the
said king, his heirs and successors, as should from time to time adventure
themselves into the parts and places aforesaid, or that should at any time then
after inhabit within the same, according to such laws, orders, ordinances,
directions and instructions, as by the said duke of York, or his assigns,
should be established; and in defect thereof, in case of necessity, according
to the good directions of his deputies, commissioners, officers or assigns
respectively, as well in all causes and matters, as well capital and criminal,
as civil, both marine and others; so always as the said statutes, ordinances
and proceedings, were not contrary, but as near as might be, agreeable to the
laws and statutes and government of the realm of England; saving and reserving
to his said majesty, his heirs and successors, the receiving, hearing and
determining, of the appeal and appeals of all, or any other person or persons
of, in or belonging to the territories or islands aforesaid, in or touching any
judgment or sentence to be there made or given; and further, that it should and
might be lawful to and for the said duke of York, his heirs and assigns, from
time to time, to nominate, constitute, ordain and confirm such laws as
aforesaid, by such name or names or styles, as to him or them shall seem good;
and likewise to revoke, discharge, change and alter as well all and singular
governors, officers and ministers, which then after should be by him or them
thought fit or needful to be made or used within the aforesaid parts and
islands; and also to make, ordain, and establish, all manner of orders, laws,
directions, instructions, forms and ceremonies of government and magistracy,
fit and necessary for and concerning the government of the territories and
islands aforesaid, so always as the same were not contrary to the laws and
statutes of the realm of England, but as near as might be, agreeable thereunto;
and the same at all times then after to put in execution or abrogate, revoke or
change, not only within the precinct of the said territories or islands, but
also upon the seas in going and coming to and from the same, as he and they in
their good direction should think to be fittest for the good of the adventurers
and inhabitants there: And the late king did thereby grant, ordain and declare,
that such governors, officers, ministers, as from time to time should be
authorized and appointed in manner and form aforesaid, should and might have
full power and authority to use and exercise martial law, in cases of
rebellion, insurrection and mutiny, in as large and ample manner as the
lieutenants of his said majesty in his counties of the realm of England had, or
ought to have, by their commissions of lieutenancy, or any law or statute of
the said realm of England. And the said late king did thereby also for himself,
his heirs and successors, grant to the said James duke of York, that it should
and might be lawful for him, his heirs and assigns, in his or their
discretions, from time to time, to admit such and so many person or persons to
trade and traffic unto and within the territories and islands aforesaid, and
into every or any part or parcel thereof, and to have process and enjoy any
lands and hereditaments in the parts and places aforesaid, as they should think
fit, according to the laws, orders, constitutions and ordinances by the said
James duke of York, his heirs, deputies, commissioners and assigns, from time
to time to be made and established, by virtue of and according to the true
intent and meaning of the said letters patents, and under such conditions,
reservations and agreements as the said James duke of York, his heirs and
assigns, should set down, order, direct and appoint; and not otherwise, And by
the said letters patents, the said king did for himself, his heirs, and
successors, grant to the said James duke of York, his heirs and assigns, and to
all and every such governor and governors, or other officers and ministers, as
by the said James duke of York, his heirs or assigns, should be appointed, with
power and authority of government and command in or over the inhabitants of the
said territories or islands, that they and every of them should, or lawfully
might, from time to time, and at all times then after or for ever, for their
several defense and safety, encounter, expulse, repel and resist by force of
arms, as well by sea as by land, and all ways and means whatsoever, all such
person or persons as without the especial license of the said James duke of
York, his heirs or assigns, should attempt to inhabit within the several
precincts and limits of the said territories and islands; and also all and
every such person and persons whatsoever, as should enterprise or attempt at
any time then after, the destruction or invasion, detriment or annoyance to the
parts, places or islands aforesaid, or any part thereof; as by the said recited
letters patents duly enrolled, relation being thereunto had, more at large may
appear. AND WHEREAS the estate, interest, right and title of the said James
duke of York, in and to the provinces of East-Jersey and West-Jersey; part of
the premises by the said recited letters granted, are by mean conveyances and
assurances in law, come unto and vested in or claimed amongst others, by Sir
Thomas Lane, Paul Dominique, Robert Mitchell, Joseph Brooksbank, Michael Watts,
Edward Richier, John Norton, Ebenezer Jones, John Whiting, John Willcocks, John
Bridges, Thomas Skinner, Benjamin Steel, Obadiah Burnet, Joseph Micklethwait,
Elizabeth Miller, Benjamin Levy, Francis Minshall, Joseph Collier, Thomas
Lewis, Jo. Bennet, John Booker, Benjamin Nelson, James Wasse, Richard Harrison,
John Jurin, Richard Greenaway, Charles Mitchell, Francis Mitchell, Tracy
Paunceford, William Hamond, Ferdinando Holland, William Dockwra, Peter Sonmans,
Joseph Grimston, Charles Ormston, Edward Antill, George Willocks, Francis
Handcock, Thomas Barker, Thomas Cooper, Robert Burnet, Miles Foster, John
Johnstone, David Lyell, Michael Hawdon, Thomas Warn, Thomas Gordon, John
Barclay, Clement Plumstead, Gilbert Mollison, and Richard Hasell, the present
proprietors thereof; and they also have claimed, by virtue of the said letters
patents and mean conveyances, to exercise within the said provinces for the
governing the inhabitants thereof, all the powers and authorities for
government granted by the said letters patents to the said duke and his heirs
and assigns; but her majesty has been advised, that they have no right nor can
legally execute any of the said powers; but that it belongs to her majesty in
right of her crown of England, to constitute governors of the said provinces,
and to give directions for governing the inhabitants thereof, as her majesty
shall think fit: And the said proprietors being desirous to submit themselves
to her majesty, are willing to surrender all their pretenses to the said powers
of government, to the intent her majesty may be pleased to constitute a
governor or governors of the same provinces, with such powers, privileges and
authorities for the government thereof, and making of such laws there, with the
consent of the assembly of the said provinces, and her majesty's subsequent
approbation thereof, as her majesty in her great wisdom shall think fit and
convenient. WE THEREFORE the said Sir Thomas Lane, Paul Dominique, Robert
Michell, Joseph Brooksbank, Michael Watts, Edward Richeir, John Norton,
Ebenezer Jones, John Whiting, Clement Plumstead, John Willcocks, John Bridges,
Thomas Skinner, Benjamin Steel, Obadiah Burnet, Joseph Micklethwait, Elizabeth
Miller, Benjamin Levy, Francis Minshall, Joseph Collier, Thomas Lewis, Jo.
Bennet, John Booker, Benjamin Nelson, James Wasse, Richard Harrison, John
Jurin, Richard Greenaway, Charles Mitchell, Francis Mitchell, Tracy Paunceford,
William Hamond, Ferdinando Holland, Willam Dockwra, Peter Sonmans, Joseph
Grimston, Charles Ormston, Edward Antill, George Willocks, Francis Handcock,
Thomas Barker, Thomas Cooper, Robert Burnett, Miles Foster, John Johnstone,
David Lyell, Michael Hawdon, Thomas Warn, Thomas Gordon, John Barclay, Gilbert
Mollison, and Richard Hasell, etc. the present proprietors of the said
provinces of East-Jersey and West-Jersey, for the considerations and to the
intent aforesaid, have surrendered and yielded up, and by these presents for us
and our heirs, do surrender and yield up unto our sovereign lady ANNE, by the
grace of God, queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the
faith, etc. her heirs and successors, all these the said powers and authorities
to correct, punish, pardon, govern and rule, all or any of her majesty's
subjects or others, who now inhabit, or hereafter shall adventure into or
inhabit within the said provinces of East-Jersey and West-Jersey, or either of
them; and also to nominate, make, constitute, ordain and confirm any laws,
orders, ordinances and directions and instruments for those purposes, or any of
them; and to nominate, constitute or appoint, revoke, discharge, change, or
alter any governor or governors, officers or ministers, which are or shall be
appointed, made or used within the said provinces or either of them; and to
make, ordain and establish any orders, laws, directions, instruments, forms or
ceremonies of government and magistracy, for or concerning the government of
the provinces aforesaid, or either of them; or on the sea in going and coming
to or from thence; or to put in execution, or abrogate, revoke or change such
as are already made for or concerning such government, or any of them; and also
all those the said powers and authorities to use and exercise martial law in
the places aforesaid, or either of them, and to admit any person or person to
trade or traffic there, and of encountering, repelling and resisting by force
of arms, any person or persons attempting to inhabit there without the license
of us the said proprietors, our heirs and assigns, and all other the powers,
authorities and privileges of or concerning the government of the provinces
aforesaid, or either of them, or the inhabitants thereof, which were granted or
mentioned to be granted by the said recited letters patents, and every of them.
IN WITNESS whereof, the persons abovenamed, have hereunto set their hands and
seals, this fifteenth day of April, in the year of our lord one thousand seven
hundred and two; and in the first year of her majesty's reign.

For the eastern division.

Peter Sonmans, Joseph Ormston for myself, and as proxy for Charles Ormston,
Edward Antill, and George Willocks, and representative of Francis Hancock;
Thomas Lane, Paul Dominique, Robert Mitchel, Joseph Brooksbank, E. Richier.
Michael Watts, Clement Plumstead, Lewis Morris in the behalf of Robert Burnet;
Miles Foster, John Johnstone, Michael Hawdoh, John Barclay, David Lyell, Thomas
Warn, Thomas Gordon, Thomas Barker, Thomas Cooper, Gilbert Mollison, Henry
Adderly for Richard Hasel, of Barbados; William Dockwra.

For the western-division.

John Booker, John Whiting John Willcocks, John Bridges, Thomas Skinner,
Benjamin Steel, Obadiah Burnet, Joseph Micklethwait, Thomas Lamb, Paul
Dominique, Francis Mitchel, Joseph Brooksbank, Michael Watts, Ed. Richier, John
Norton, Eben. Jones, Benjamin Nellson, James Wasse, Richard Harrison, John
Jurin, Richard Greenaway, Charles Mitchel, Francis Mitchel, Francis Paunceford,
William Hamond, Ferd. Holland, Elizabeth Miller, Benjamin Levy, Francis
Minshall, Joseph Collins, Thomas Lewis, Jo. Bennet.

Sealed and delivered by T. Lane, P. Dominique, R. Michell, J. Brooksbank, M.
Watts, E. Rich^er, J. Norton, E. Jones, J. Whiting, J. Willcocks, J. Bridges,
T. Skinner, B. Steel, O. Burnett, J. Micklethwait, E. Miller, B. Levy, F.
Minshall, J. Collier, T. Lewis, J. Bennet, J. Booker, B. Nelson, J. Wasse, R.
Harrison, J. Jurin, R. Greenaway, C. Mitchel, F. Mitchel, T. Pauncefort, W.
Hamond, F. Holland. And for the interest the proprietors of West-Jersey, have
in East-Jersey, T. Lane, P. Dominique, R. Mitchel, J. Brooksbank, E. Richier,
and M. Watts. Sealed and delivered by the aforesaid persons in presence of us,
L. Morris, Jonathan Greenwood.

Sealed and delivered by William Dockwra, Peter Sonmans, Joseph Ormston, Thomas
Barker, and Thomas Cooper, proprietors of East-Jersey, in the presence of us,
Richard Bouts, Nathaniel Welsh.

Sealed and delivered by Gilbert Mollison, in presence of us, Daniel Wild,
Gilbert Falconer.

Sealed and delivered by Clement Plumstead, in presence of us, John Askew,
Samuel Hannington.

Sealed and delivered by Henry Adderly, in presence of us, John Blackall,
Thomas Gage,

Sealed and delivered by Lewis Morris, in presence of, Aug. Graham, Richard
Bibby.

The QUEEN'S acceptance of the surrender of government.
At the court at St. James's, the 17th day of April, 1702.
PRESENT: The QUEEN'S most excellent majesty.

His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark, Lord Keeper, Lord President, Earl
of Bradford, Lord Steward, Queen's acceptance.
Duke of Bolton, Duke of Schomberg, Duke of Leeds, Lord Great Chamberlain, Earl
Marshal, Lord High Admiral, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Dorset, Earl of
Manchester, Earl of Stamford, Earl of Burlington, Earl of Radnor, Earl of
Berkely, Earl of Rochester, Earl of Marlborough, Earl of Romney, Earl of
Ranelagh, Lord Ferrers, Lord Godolphin, Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,
Mr. Secretary Vernon, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Lord Chief Justice, Sir
Charles Hedges, Mr. Smith.
This day the several proprietors of East and West New Jersey, in America, did
in person, present a deed of surrender by them executed under their hands and
seals, to her majesty in council, and did acknowledge the same to be their act
and deed; and humbly desire her majesty to accept the same, that it might be
enrolled in the court of chancery, whereby they did surrender their power of
the government of those plantations: Which her majesty graciously accepted, and
was pleased to order, as it is hereby ordered, that the same be enrolled in her
majesty's said high court of chancery; and the said instruments are to be
delivered to Mr. Attorney General, who is to take care that the same be
enrolled accordingly.

Directly after the surrender, Edward lord viscount Cornbury, Lord Cornbury
grandson to the great chancellor Clarendon, was appointed governor of
New Jersey; his commission was as follows:

ANNE, by the grace of God* of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Queen,
defender of the faith, etc. To our trusty and well beloved Edward Hyde,
esquire, commonly called lord Cornbury, greeting: Whereas in the government of
that country, which was formerly granted by king Charles the second, under the
name of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, and which has since been subdivided by
the proprietors, and called East New Jersey, and West-Jersey, such miscarriages
have happened, that the said country is fallen into disorder and confusion;
which has accordingly been represented to our dearest brother the late king, in
several petitions, memorials and other papers, signed by the general
proprietors, and by great numbers of the inhabitants; and by means of that
disorder the public peace and administration of justice, whereby the
properties of our subjects should be preserved there, is interrupted and
violated, and the guard and defense of that country so totally neglected, that
the same is in imminent danger of being lost from the crown of England: And
whereas the aforesaid proprietors being sensible that the said country, and our
good subjects the inhabitants thereof, cannot be defended and secured by any
other means then by our taking the government of the same under our immediate
care, have excuted and made a formal and entire surrender of their right, or
pretended right and title to the government of that country unto us: We
therefore, reposing especial trust and confidence in the prudence, courage and
loyalty of you the said lord Cornbury, out of our especial grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, has thought fit to constitute and appoint, and by
these presents do constitute and appoint you the said lord Cornbury, to be our
captain general and governor in chief, in and over the aforesaid country of
Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, viz. the division of East and West New Jersey, in
America, which we have thought fit to reunite into one province, and settle
under one entire government: And we do hereby require and command you, to do
and execute all things in due manner that shall belong unto your said command,
and the trust we have reposed in you, according to the several powers and
directions gran^ed or appointed you by this present commission, and the
instructions and authorities herewith given you, or by such further powers,
instructions or authorities as shall at any time hereafter be granted, or
appointed you under our signet and sign manual, or by our order in our privy
council, and according to such reasonable laws and statutes as shall be made
and agreed upon by you, with the advice and consent of the council and assembly
of our said province, under your government, in such manner and form as is
hereafter expressed. And our will and pleasure is, that you the said lord
Cornbury, having after the proclamation of these our letters patents, first
taken the oaths appointed by act of parliament to be taken instead of the oath
of allegiance and supremacy, and the oath mentioned in an act, entitled, An act
to declare the alteration in the oath appointed to be taken, by the act,
entitled, An act for the further security of his majesty's person, and the
succession of the crown in the protestant line, and for the extinguishing the
hopes of the pretended prince of Wales, and all other pretenders and their open
and secret abettors, and for the declaring the association to be determined; as
also the test mentioned in the act of parliament made in the twenty fifth year
of the reign of king Charles the second, entitled, An act for preventing
dangers which may happen from popish recusants; together with the oath for the
due execution of the office and trust of our captain general and governor in
chief, in and over our said province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, as well
with regard to the equal and impartial administration of justice, in all causes
that shall come before you, as otherwise; and likewise the oath required to be
taken by governors of plantations, to do the utmost that the laws relating to
the plantations be observed; all which our council in our said province, or any
three of the members thereof, have hereby full power and authority, and are
required to administer unto you; and in your absence our lieutenant governor,
if there be any upon the place; you shall administer unto each of the members
of our said council, as also to our lieutenant governor, if there be any upon
the place, as well the oath appointed by the act of parliament to be taken
instead of the oath of allegiance and supremacy, and the oath mentioned in the
said act, entitled, An act to declare the alteration in the oath appointed to
be taken by an act, entitled, An act for the further security of his majesty's
person, and the succession of the crown in the protestant line, and for
extinguishing the hopes of the pretended prince of Wales, and all other
pretenders, and their open and secret abettors, and for declaring the
association to be determined; as the forementioned test, and the oath for the
due execution of their places and trusts. And we do hereby give and grant unto
you, full power and authority, to suspend any of the members of our said
council from sitting, voting, and assisting therein, if you shall see just
cause for so doing: And if it shall at any time happen, that by the death,
departure out of our said province, or suspension of any of our said
counselors, or otherwise, there shall be wanting in our said council, any
three whereof we do appoint to be a quorum, our will and pleasure is, that you
signify the same unto us, by the first opportunity, that we may under our
signet and sign manual, constitute and appoint others in their stead; but that
our affairs may not suffer at that instant, for want of a due number of
counselors, if ever it should happen that there should be less than seven of
them residing in our said province, we do hereby give and grant unto you the
said lord Cornbury, full power and authority to choose as many persons out of
the principal freeholders, inhabitants thereof, as will make up the full number
of our said council to be seven, and no more; which persons so chosen and
appointed by you, shall be to all intents and purposes counselors in our said
province, until either they shall be confirmed by us, or that by the nomination
of others by us, under our sign manual and sign our said council shall have
seven or more persons in it. And we do hereby give and grant unto you, full
power and authority, with the advice and consent of our said council from time
to time, as need shall require, to summon and call general assemblies of the
freeholders and planters within your government, in manner and form as shall be
directed in our instructions which shall be given you, together with this our
commission. Our will and pleasure is, that the persons thereupon duly elected,
by the major part of the freeholders of the respective counties and places so
returned, and having before sitting, taken the oaths appointed by act of
parliament to be taken instead of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and
the oath mentioned in the aforesaid act, entitled, An act to declare the
alteration in the oath appointed to be taken by the act, entitled, An act for
the further security of his majesty's person, and the succession of the crown
in the protestant line, and for extingnishing the hopes of the pretended prince
of Wales, and all other pretenders, and their open and secret abettors, and for
declaring the association to be determined; as also the aforementioned test:
Which oath you shall commissionate fit persons under our seal of Nova-Caesaria,
or New Jersey, to administer unto them, and without taking of which oaths and
subscribing the said test, none shall be capable of sitting though elected,
shall be called and held the general assembly of that our province, and that
you the said lord Cornbury, by and with the advice and consent of our council
and assembly, or the major part of them respectively, shall have full power and
authority to make, constitute and ordain laws, statutes and ordinances, for the
public peace, welfare and good government of our said province, and of the
people and inhabitants thereof, and such others as shall resort thereto, and
for the benefit of us, our heirs and successors, which said laws, statutes, and
ordinances are not to be repugnant, but as near as may be, agreeable unto the
laws and statutes of this our kingdom of England; provided that all such laws,
statutes and ordinances, of what nature or duration soever, be within three
months or sooner* after the making thereof, transmitted to us, under our seal
of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, for our approbation or disallowance of them,
as also duplicates thereof by the next conveyance* or in case any or all of
them being not before confirmed by us, shall at any time be disallowed and not
approved, and so signified by us, our heirs or successors, under our or their
sign manual and signet, or by order of our or their privy council, unto you the
said lord Cornbury or to the commander in chief of our said province for the
time being, then such and so many of them as shall be disallowed and not
approved shall from henceforth cease, determine, and become utterly void and of
none effect, any thing to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And to the end
that nothing may be passed or done by our said council or assembly, to the
prejudice of our heirs and successors, we will and ordain, that you the said
lord Cornbury, shall have and enjoy a negative power in the making and passing
of all laws, statutes and ordinances as aforesaid. And that you shall and may
likewise from time to time, as you shall judge it necessary, adjourn, prorogue
and dissolve, all general assemblies. Our will and pleasure is, that you shall
and may use and keep the public seal of our province of Nova-Caesaria, or
New Jersey, for sealing all things whatsoever that pass the great seal of our
said province under your government. And we do further give and grant unto you
the said lord Cornbury, full power and authority, from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, by yourself, or by any other to be authorized by you in that
behalf, to administer and give the oaths appointed by act of parliament,
instead of the oath of allegiance and supremacy, to all and every such person
and persons as you shall think fit, who shall at any time or times pass into
our said province, or shall be resident or abiding there. And do further give
and grant unto you, full power and authority, with the advice and consent of
our said council, to erect, constitute and establish such and so many courts of
judicature and public justice within our said province under your government,
as you and they shall think fit and necessary, for the hearing and determining
of all causes as well criminal as civil, according to law and equity, and for
awarding execution thereupon, with all reasonable and necessary powers,
authorities, fees and privileges belonging unto them; and also to appoint and
commissionate fit persons in the several parts of your government, to
administer the oaths appointed by act of parliament to be taken instead of the
oath of allegiance and supremacy, and the oath mentioned in the aforesaid act,
entitled, An act to declare the alteration in the oath to be taken by the act,
entitled, An act for the further security of his majesty's person, and the
succession of the crown in the protestant line, and for the extinguishing the
hopes of the pretended prince of Wales, and all other pretenders, and their
open and secret abettors, and for declaring the association to be determined;
as also the test unto such persons as shall be obliged to take the same. And we
do hereby authorize and empower you, to constitute and appoint judges, and in
cases requisite commissioners of oyer and terminer, justices of the peace, and
other necessary officers and magistrates in our said province, for the better
administration of justice, and putting the laws in execution, and to
administer, or cause to be administered unto them, such oath or oaths as are
usually given for the due execution and performance of offices and places, and
for the clearing of truth in judicial causes. And we do hereby give and grant
unto you, full power and authority, where you shall see cause, or judge any
offender or offenders in criminal matters; or any fines or forfeitures due unto
us, fit objects of our mercy, to pardon all such offenders, and to remit all
such offenses, fines and forfeitures, treasons and wilful murder only excepted;
in which case you shall likewise have power upon extraordinary occasions, to
grant reprieves to the offenders, until and to the intent our royal pleasure
may be known therein. And we do by these presents, authorize and empower you to
collate any person or persons to any churches, chapels or other ecclesiacal
benefices within our said province, as often as any of them shall happen to be
void. And we do hereby give and grant unto you the said lord Cornbury, by
yourself, and by your captains and commanders by you to be authorized, full
power and authority to levy, arm, muster, command and employ all persons
whatsoever residing within our said province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey,
and as occasion shall serve, them to transport from one place to another for
the resisting and withstanding of all enemies, pirates, and rebels, both at sea
and land, and to transport such forces to any of our plantations in America, if
necessity shall require, for the defense of the same, against the invasion and
attempts of any of our enemies, pirates and rebels, if there shall be occasion,
to pursue and prosecute in or out of the limits of our said province and
plantations, or any of them; and if it shall please God them to vanquish,
apprehend and take, and being taken, either according to law to put to death,
or keep and preserve alive at your discretion, and to execute martial law, in
time of invasion, insurrection or war, and to do and execute all and every
other thing and things, which to any captain general and governor in chief does
or ought of right to belong. And we do hereby give and grant unto you full
power and authority, by and with the advice and consent of our said council, to
erect, raise and build in our said province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey,
such and so many forts, platforms, castles, cities, boroughs, towns, and
fortifications, as you, by the advice aforesaid, shall judge necessary, and the
same, or any of them, to fortify and furnish with ordinance, ammunition, and
all sorts of arms fit and necessary for the security and defense of our said
province; and by the advice aforesaid, the same or any of them again to
demolish or dismantle as may be most convenient. And forasmuch as many mutinies
and disorders may happen, by persons shipped and employed at sea, during the
time of war; to the end that such may be better governed and ordered, we do
hereby give and grant unto you the said lord Cornbury, full power and
authority, to constitute and appoint captains, lieutenants, masters of ships,
and other commanders and officers, and to grant unto such captains,
lieutenants, masters of ships, and other commanders, and officers, commissions,
to execute the law martial during the time of war, and to use such proceedings,
authorities, corrections, executions, upon any offender or offenders who shall
be mutinous, seditious, disorderly, or any ways unruly at sea, or during the
time of their abode or residence in any of the ports, harbors, or quays of our
said province, as the cause shall be found to require, according to martial
law, during the time of war as aforesaid. Provided, that nothing herein
contained, shall be construed to the enabling you, or any by your authority, to
hold plea or have any jurisdiction of any offense, cause, matter or thing
committed or done upon the high sea, or within any of the harbors, rivers or
creeks of our said province under your government, by any captain, commander,
lieutenant, master, officer, seaman, soldier, or other person whatsoever, who
shall be in actual service and pay, in or aboard any of our ships of war, or
the vessels acting by immediate commission or warrant from our high admiral of
England, under the seal of our admiralty, or from the commissioners for
executing the office of our high admiral of England for the time being; but
that such captain, commander, lieutenant, master, officers, seaman, soldiers,
and other persons offending, shall be left to be proceeded against as the merit
of their offenses shall require, either by commission under our great seal of
England, as the statute of the twenty-eighth of king Henry the eighth directs,
or by commission from our high admiral of England, or from our commissioners
for executing the office of our high admiral of England, for the time being,
according to the act of parliament passed in the thirteenth year of king
Charles the second, entitled, An act for establishing articles and orders, for
the regulating and better government of his majesty's navy, ships of war, and
forces by sea, and not otherwise. PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, that all disorders and
misdemeanors committed on shore by any captain, commander, lieutenant, master,
officer, seaman, soldier, or any other person whatsoever, belonging to any of
our ships of war, or other vessels acting by immediate commission, or warrant
from our high admiral of England, under the seal of our admiralty, or from our
commissioners for executing the office of high admiral of England, for the time
being, may be tried and punished according to the laws and place where any such
disorders, offenses and misdemeanors, shall be committed on shore,
notwithstanding such offender be in our actual service and in our pay on board
any such our ships of war or other vessels, acting by immediate commission or
warrant from our high admiral, or from our commissioners for executing the
office of high admiral for the time being as aforesaid, so as he shall not
receive any protection for the delaying of justice, for such offenses committed
on shore, from any pretense of his being employed in our service at sea. Our
will and pleasure is, that all public money raised, or that shall be raised,
by any act hereafter to be made within our said province, and issued out by
warrant from you, by and with the advice and consent of our council, and
disposed of by you for the support of the government, and otherwise; we do
hereby give you the said lord Cornbury, full power and authority, to order and
appoint fairs, marts, and markets, as also such and so many ports, harbors,
quays, havens, and other places for the convenience and security of shipping,
and for the loading and unloading of goods and merchandise, as by you, with the
advice and consent of our said council, shall be thought fit and necessary. And
we do hereby require and command all officers and magistrates, civil and
military, and all other the inhabitants of our said province, to be obedient,
aiding and assisting unto you the said lord Cornbury, in the execution of this
our commission, and of the powers and authorities herein contained; and in case
of your death or absence out of our said province, to be obedient, aiding and
assisting to such person as shall be appointed by us, to be our lieutenant
governor or commander in chief of the said province, to whom we do therefore by
these presents, give and grant all and singular the privileges and authorities
aforesaid, to be by him executed and enjoyed during our pleasure, or until your
arrival within our said province: And if upon your death or absence out of our
said province, there be no person upon the place commissionated or appointed by
us to be our lieutenant governor, or commander in chief of the said province;
our will and pleasure is, that the then present council of our said province,
do take upon them the administration of the government, and execute this
commission, and the several powers and authorities herein contained, and that
such councellor who shall be at the time of your death or absence, residing
within our said province, and nominated by our instructions to you, before any
other at that time residing there, do preside in our said council, with such
privileges and preheminences as may be necessary in those circumstances, for
the due and orderly carrying on the public service in the administration of
the government as aforesaid, until our pleasure be further known, or until your
return. LASTLY, we do hereby declare, ordain and appoint, that you the said
lord Cornbury, shall and may hold, execute and enjoy the office and place of
captain general and governor in chief, in and over our province of
Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, together with all and singular the powers and
authorities hereby granted unto you, for and during our will and pleasure, from
and after the publication of this our commission. In witness whereof we have
caused these our letters to be made patents: Witness ourself at Westminster,
the fifth day of December, in the first year of our reign.

CHAP. XIII.
Instructions from Queen Anne to Lord Cornbury.
INSTRUCTIONS for our right trusty and well beloved Edward lord Cornbury, our
captain general and governor in chief, in and over our province of
Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, in America. Given at our court at St. James's,
the sixteenth day of November, 1702, in the first year of our reign.
1 WITH these our instructions you will receive our commission under our great
seal of England, Lord Cornbury's instructions.
constituting you our captain general and governor in chief of our province of
New Jersey.

2. You are with all convenient speed to repair to our said province, and being
there arrived, you are to take upon you the execution of the place and trust we
have reposed in you, and forthwith to call together the following persons, whom
we do by these presents appoint and constitute members of our council in and
for that province, viz. Edward Hunloke, Lewis Morris, Andrew Bowne, Samuel
Jenings, Thomas Revell, Francis Davenport, William Pinhorne, Samuel Leonard,
George Deacon, Samuel Walker, Daniel Leeds, William Sandford, and Robert
Quarry, Quarry was said to be of the council for five governments at one time,
viz. New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia; he died about
the year 1712. Beverly in his history of Virginia, p. 92, 96, 97, represents
him as joining with Nicholson, the then governor of that colony, in
unfavourable represe^tations against the colonies.
esquires.

3. And you are with all due solemnity, to cause our said commission under our
great seal of England, constituting you our captain general and governor in
chief as aforesaid, to be read and published at the said meeting of our
council, and to cause proclamation to be made in the several most public
places of our said province, of your being constituted by us our captain
general and governor in chief as aforesaid.

4. Which being done, you shall yourself take, and also administer to each of
the members of our said council so appointed by us, the oaths appointed by act
of parliament to be taken instead of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and
the oath mentioned in an act, entitled, An act to declare the alteration in the
oath appointed to be taken by the act, entitled, An act for the further
security of his majesty's person, and the succession of the crown in the
protestant line, and for extinguishing the hopes of the pretended prince of
Wales, and all other presenders, and their open and secret abettors, and for
declaring the association to be determined; as also the test mentioned in an
act of parliament made in the twenty fifth year of the reign of king Charles
the second, entitled, An act for preventing dangers which may happen from
popish recusants; together with an oath for the due execution of your and their
places and trusts, as well with regard to the equal and impartial
administration of justice in all causes that shall come before you, as
otherwise, and likewise the oath required to be taken by governors of
plantations, to do their utmost, that the laws relating to the plantations be
observed.

5. You are forthwith to communicate unto our said council, such and so many of
these our instructions, wherein their advice and consent are mentioned to be
requisite, as likewise all such others from time to time, as you shall find
convenient for our service to be imparted to them.

6. And whereas the inhabitants of our said province have of late years been
unhappily divided, and by their enmity to each other, our service and their own
welfare has been very much obstructed; you are therefore in the execution of
our commission, to avoid the engaging yourself in the parties which have been
formed amongst them, and to use such impartiality and moderation to all, as may
best conduce to our service, and the good of the colony.

7. You are to permit the members of our said council, to have and enjoy
freedom of debate and vote, in all affairs of public concern, that may be
debated in council.

8. And although by our commission aforesaid, we have thought fit to direct that
any three of our counselors make a quorum, it is nevertheless our will and
pleasure, that you do not act with a quorum of less than five members, except
in case of necessity.

9. And that we may be always informed of the names and characters of persons
fit to supply the vacancies which shall happen in our said council, you are to
transmit unto us, by one of our principal secretary's of state, and to our
commissioners for trade and plantations, with all convenient speed, the names
and characters of six persons, inhabitants of the eastern division, and six
other persons inhabitants of the western division of our said province, whom
you shall esteem the best qualified for that trust; and so from time to time
when any of them shall die, depart out of our said province, or become
otherwise unfit, you are to nominate unto us so many other persons in their
stead, that the list of twelve persons fit to supply the said vacancies, viz.
six out of the east, and six out of the west division, as aforesaid, may be
always complete.

10. You are from time to time to send to us as aforesaid, and to our
commissioners for trade and plantations, the names and qualities of any members
by you put into our said council, by the first convenience after your so doing.

11. And in the choice and nomination of the members of our said council, as
also of the principal officers, judges, assistants, justices and sheriffs, you
are always to take care that they be men of good life, and well affected to our
government, of good estates and abilities, and not necessitous people or much
in debt.

12. You are neither to augment nor diminish the number of our said council, as
it is hereby established, nor to suspend any of the present members thereof
without good and sufficient cause: And in case of suspension of any of them,
you are to cause your reasons for so doing, together with the charges and
proofs against the said persons, and their answers thereunto ( unless you have
some extraordinary reason to the contrary) to be duly entered upon the council
books; and you are forthwith to transmit the same, together with your reasons
for not entering them upon the council books, (in case you do not enter them)
unto us and to our commissioners for trade and plantations as aforesaid.

13. You are to signify our pleasure unto the members of our said council, that
if any of them shall at any time hereafter absent themselves, and continue
absent above the space of two months together from our said province without
leave from you, or from our governor or commander in chief of our said
province, for the time being, first obtained; or shall remain absent for the
space of two years, or the greater part thereof successively, without our leave
given them under our royal sign manual; their place or places in our said
council, shall immediately thereupon become void, and that we will forthwith
appoint others in their stead.

14. And in order to the better consolidating and incorporating the two
divisions of East and West New Jersey, into and under one government, our will
and pleasure is, that with all convenient speed, you call together one general
assembly for the enacting of laws for the joint and mutual good of the whole;
and that the said general assembly do sit in the first place at Perth-Amboy, in
East New Jersey, and afterward the same, or other the next general assembly,
at Burlington, in West New Jersey; and that all future general assemblies do
set at one or the other of those places alternately, or (in cases of
extraordinary necessity) according as you with the advice of our foresaid
council, shall think fit to appoint them.

15. And our further will and pleasure is, that the general assembly so to be
called, do consist of four and twenty representatives, who are to be chosen in
the manner following, viz. two by the inhabitants householders of the city or
town of Perth-Amboy, in East New Jersey; two by the inhabitants householders of
the city and town of Burlington in West New Jersey; ten by the freeholders of
East New Jersey, and ten by the freeholders of West New Jersey; and that no
person shall be capable of being elected a representative by the freeholders of
either division, or afterward of siting in general assemblies, who shall not
have one thousand acres of land, of an estate of freehold, in his own right,
within the division for which he shall be chosen; and that no freeholder shall
be capable of voting in the election of such representative who shall not have
one hundred acres of land of an estate of freehold in his own right, within the
division for which he shall so vote: And that this number of representatives
shall not be enlarged or diminished, or the manner of electing them altered,
otherwise than by an act or acts of the general assembly there, and confirmed
by the approbation of us, our heirs and successors. This clause was soon
altered as follows:

ANNE R.

Additional instructions to our right trusty and well beloved Edward lord
Cornbury, our captain general and governor in chief, in and over our province
of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, in America: Given at our court of St. James's,
the third of May 1705, in the fourth year of our reign.

WHEREAS by a clause in our general instructions to you, for the government of
our province of New Jersey, the representatives for the general assembly of
that province are appointed to be chosen as follows, viz. two by the
inhabitants house holders of the city or town of Perth-Amboy, in East
New Jersey; two by the inhabitants house holders of the city and town of
Burlington, in West New Jersey; ten by the freeholders of East New Jersey, and
ten by the freeholders of West New Jersey: And it having been represented to us
by you our governor, that several inconveniences have arisen from the
aforesaid manner of choosing representatives: it is our will and pleasure, and
you are accordingly to make the same known in the most public manner, that the
method for choosing representatives for the future be as follows, viz. two by
the inhabitants house holders of the city or town of Perth-Amboy, in East
New Jersey, and two by the freeholders of each of the five counties of the said
division of East New Jersey; two by the inhabitants householders for the city or
town of Burlington, in West New Jersey; two by the inhabitants householders of
the town of Salem, in the said division, and two by the freeholders of each of
the four counties in the said division of West New Jersey; which persons so to
be chosen make up together the number of twenty four representatives, as
limited by our former instructions.

And it is our further will and pleasure, that no person shall be capable of
being elected a representative by the freeholders of either division as
aforesaid, or afterward of sitting in general assemblies, who shall not have
one thousand acres of land of an estate of freehold in his own right, within
the division for which he shall be chosen, or personal estate in money, goods
or chattels, to the value of five hundred pounds sterling; and all inhabitants
of our said province being so qualified as aforesaid, are hereby declared
capable of being elected accordingly: And it is likewise our pleasure, that no
freeholder shall be capable of voting in the election of such representatives,
who shall not have one hundred acres of land of an estate of freehold in his
own right, within the county for which he shall so vote, or a personal estate
in money, goods or chattels, to the value of fifty pounds sterling* and all
freeholders in our said province being so qualified as aforesaid, are hereby
declared capable of voting in the election of representatives; which number of
representatives shall not be enlarged nor diminished, or the manner of electing
them thereby directed, altered there, otherwise than by an act or acts of the
general assembly, to be confirmed by the approbation of (...), our heirs and
successors. And whereas it may be inconvenient, that the governor and
lieutenant governor of our said province of New Jersey, for both of them to be
absent from thence at the same time; it is our will and pleasure, that as soon
as the general assembly of our said province shall have provided a house, and
our lieutenant governor with a convenient room for the me^ti^g of our council,
and settled convenient salaries, which you are in our name to press them to do,
that either you or our lieutenant governor, do constantly reside in our said
province, and that yo^ be not both absent at the same time: It is likewise our
will and pleasure, that no fees be exacted or taken by any of the officers
under you, for the grants of lands made by the agents of the proprietors; and
the said agents are to deliver to you in council, duplicate^ of all such grants
to be registered in our council books.




16. You are with all convenient speed to cause a collection to be made of all
the laws, orders, rules, or such as have hitherto served or been reputed as
laws amongst the inhabitants of our said province of Nova-Caesaria, or
New Jersey, and, together with our aforesaid council and assembly, you are to
revise, correct, and amend the same, as may be necessary; and accordingly to
enact such and so many of them, as by you with the advice of our said council
and assembly, shall be judged proper and conducive to our service, and the
welfare of our said province, that they may be transmitted unto us, in
authentic form, for our approbation or disallowance.

17. You are to observe in the passing of the said laws, and of all other laws,
that the style enacting the same, be by the governor, council and assembly, and
no other.

18. You are also as much as possible to observe, in the passing of all laws,
that whatever may be requisite upon each different matter, be accordingly
provided for by a different law, without intermixing in one and the same act,
such things as have no proper relation to each other; and you are especially to
take care that no clause or clauses be inserted in, or annexed to any act,
which shall be foreign to what the title of such respective act imports.

19. You are to transmit authentic copies of the forementioned laws that shall
be enacted, and of all laws, statutes, and ordinances, which shall at any time
hereafter be made or enacted within our said province, each of them separately,
under the public seal, unto us, and to our said commissioners for trade and
plantations, within three months or by the first opportunity after their being
enacted, together with duplicates thereof by the next conveyance, upon pain of
our high displeasure, and of the forfeiture of that year's salary, wherein you
shall at any time, or upon any pretense whatsoever, omit to send over the said
laws, statutes and ordinances as aforesaid, within the time above limited, as
also of such other penalty as we shall please to inflict. But if it shall
happen, that during time of war, no shipping shall come from our said province,
or other our adjacent or neighboring plantations, within three months after
the making such laws, statutes, and ordinances, whereby the same may be
transmitted as aforesaid, then the said laws, statutes and ordinances are to be
so transmitted as aforesaid, by the next conveyance after the making thereof
whenever it may happen, for our approbation or disallowance of the same.

20. You areto take care, that in all acts or orders to be passed within that
our province in any case for levying money or imposing fines and penalties,
express mention be made that the same is granted or reserved to us, our heirs
or successors, for the public uses of that our province, and the support of
the government thereof, as by the said act or orders shall be directed.

21. And we do particularly require and command, that no money, or value of
money whatsoever, be given or granted by any act or order of assembly, to any
governor, lieutenant governor, or commander in chief of our said province,
which shall not according to the style of acts of parliament in England, be
mentioned to be given and granted unto us, with the humble desire of such
assembly, that the same be applied to the use and behoof of such governor,
lieutenant governor, or commander in chief, if we shall so think fit; or if we
shall not approve of such gift or application, that the said money or value of
money, be then disposed of and appropriated to such other uses as in the said
act or order shall be mentioned; and that from the time the same shall be
raised, it remain in the hands of the receiver of our said province until our
royal pleasure shall be known therein.

22. You shall also propose with the said general assembly, and use your utmost
endeavors with them, that an act be passed for raising and settling a public
revenue for defraying the necessary charge of the government of our said
province, in which provision be particularly made for a competent salary to
yourself, as captain general and governor in chief of our said province, and to
other our succeeding captain generals, for supporting the dignity of the said
office, as likewise due provision for the salaries of the respective members of
our council and assembly, and of all other officers necessary for the
administration of that government.

23. Whereas it is not reasonable that any of our colonies or plantations
should by virtue of any exemptions or other privileges whatsoever, be allowed
to seek and pursue their own particular advantages, by methods tending to
undermine and prejudice our other colonies and plantations, which have equal
title to our royal care; and whereas the trade and welfare of our province of
New York, would be greatly prejudiced, if not entirely ruined, by allowing unto
the inhabitants of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, any exemption from those
charges, which the inhabitants of New York are liable to; you are therefore in
the settling of a public revenue as before directed, to propose to the
assembly, that such customs, duties and other impositions be laid upon all
commodities imported or exported in or out of our said province of
Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, as may equal the charge that is or shall be laid
upon the like commodities in our province of New York.

24. And whereas we are willing in the best manner to provide for the support
of the government of our said province, by setting apart sufficient allowances
to such as shall be our governor or commander in chief, residing for the time
being within the same; our will and pleasure therefore is, that when it shall
happen, that you shall be absent from the territories of New Jersey and
New York, of which we have appointed you governor, one full moiety of the
salary and of all perquisites and emoluments whatsoever, which would otherwise
become due unto you, shall, during the time of your absence from the said
territories, be paid and satisfied unto such governor or commander in chief who
shall be resident upon the place for the time being, which we do hereby order
and allot unto him toward his maintenance, and for the better support of the
dignity of that our government.

25. Whereas great prejudice may happen to our service and the security of our
said province under your government by your absence from those parts, without a
sufficient cause and especial leave from us; for prevention thereof, you are
not upon any pretense whatsoever, to come to Europe from your government,
without first having obtained leave for so doing, under our signet and sign
manual, or by our order in our privy council.

26. You are not to permit any clause whatsoever to be inserted in any law for
the levying money, or the value of money, whereby the same shall not be made
liable to be accounted for unto us here in England, and to our high treasurer,
or to our commissioners of our treasury for the time being.

27. You are to take care that fair books of accounts of all receipts and
payments of all such money be duly kept, and the truth thereof attested upon
oath, and that the said books be transmitted every half year or oftener, to our
high treasurer, or to our commissioners of our treasury for the time being, and
to our commissioners for trade and plantations, and duplicates thereof by the
next conveyance; in which books shall be specified every particular sum raised
or disposed of, together with the names of the persons to whom any payment
shall be made, to the end we may be satisfied of the right and due application
of the revenue of our said province.

28. You are not to suffer any public money whatsoever, to be issued or
disposed of otherwise than by warrant under your hand, by and with the advice
and consent of our said council; but the assembly may be nevertheless permitted
from time to time to view and examine the accounts of money, or value of money
disposed of by virtue of laws made by them, which you are to signify unto them
as there shall be occasion.

29. And it is our express will and pleasure, that no law for raising any
imposition of wines or other strong liquors, be made to continue for less than
one whole year; as also that all laws whatsoever for the good government and
support of our said province, be made indefinite, and without limitation of
time, except the same be for a temporary end, which shall expire and have its
full effect within a certain time.

30. And therefore you shall not re-enact any law which shall have been once
enacted there by you, except upon very urgent occasions, but in no case more
than once without our express consent.

31. You shall not permit any act or order to pass in our said province,
whereby the price or value of the current coin within your government, (whether
it be foreign or belonging to our dominions) may be altered, without our
particular leave or direction for the same.

32. And you are particularly not to pass any law or do any act, by grant,
settlement, or otherwise, whereby our revenue, after it shall be settled, may
be lessened or impaired, without our especial leave or commands therein.

33. You shall not remit any fines or forfeitures whatsoever, above the sum of
ten pounds, nor dispose of any escheats, fines or forfeitures whatsoever,
until, upon signifying unto our high treasurer, or to our commissioners of our
treasury for the time being, and to our commissioners for trade and
plantations, the nature of the offense and the occasion of such fines,
forfeitures, or escheats, with the particular sums or value thereof, (which you
are to do with all speed) you shall have received our directions therein; but
you may in the mean time suspend the payment of the said fines and forfeitures.

34. You are to require the secretary of our said province, or his deputy for
the time being, to furnish you with transcripts of all such acts and public
orders as shall be made from time to time, together with a copy of the journals
of the council, to the end the same may be transmitted unto us, and to our
commissioners for trade and plantations as above directed, which he is duly to
perform, upon pain of incurring the forfeiture of his place.

35. You are also to require from the clerk of the assembly, or other proper
officer, transcripts of all the journals and other proceedings of the said
assembly, to the end the same may in like manner be transmitted as aforesaid.

36. Our will and pleasure is, that for the better quieting the minds of our
good subjects, inhabitants of our said province, and for settling the
properties and possessions of all persons concerned therein, either as general
proprietors of the soil under the first original grant of the said province,
made by the late king Charles the second, to the late duke of York, or as
particular purchasers of any parcels of land from the said general proprietors,
you shall propose to the general assembly of our said province, the passing of
such act or acts, whereby the right and property of the said general
proprietors, to the soil of our said province, may be confirmed to them,
according to their respective rights and title; together with all such
quit-rents as have been reserved, or are or shall become due to the said
general proprietors, from the inhabitants of our said province; and all such
privileges as are expressed in the conveyances made by the said duke of York,
excepting only the right of government, which remains in us: And you are
further to take care, that by the said act or acts so to be passed, the
particular titles and estates of all the inhabitants of that province, and
other purchasers claiming under the said general proprietors, be confirmed and
settled as of right does appertain, under such obligations as shall tend to the
best and speediest improvement or cultivation of the same. PROVIDED ALWAYS,
that you do not consent to any act or acts, to lay any tax upon lands that lie
unprofitable.

37. You shall not permit any other person or persons besides the said general
proprietors, or their agents, to purchase any land whatsoever from the Indians
within the limits of their grant.

38. You are to permit the surveyors and other persons appointed by the
forementioned general proprietors of the soil of that province, for surveying
and recording the surveys of land granted by and held of them, to execute
accordingly their respective trusts: And you are likewise to permit, and if
need be, aid and assist such other agent or agents, as shall be appointed by
the said proprietors for that end, to collect and receive the quit-rents which
are or shall be due unto them, from the particular possessors of any parcels or
tracts of land from time to time. PROVIDED ALWAYS, that such surveyors, agents
or other officers appointed by the said general proprietors, do not only take
proper oaths for the due execution and performance of their respective offices
or employments, and give good and sufficient security for their so doing, but
that they likewise take the oaths appointed by act of parliament to be taken
instead of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and the oath mentioned in the
aforesaid act, entitled, An act to declare the alteration in the oath appointed
to be taken by the act, entitled, An act for the further security of his
majesty's person and the succession of the crown in the protestant line, and
for extinguishing the hopes of the pretended prince of Wales, and all other
pretenders, and their open and secret abettors, and for declaring the
association to be determined; as also the forementioned test. And you are more
particularly to take care that all lands purchased from the said proprietors,
be cultivated and improved by the possessors thereof.

39. You shall transmit unto us, and to our commissioners for trade and
plantations, by the first opportunity, a map with the exact description of our
whole territory under your government, and of the several plantations that are
upon it.

40. You are likewise to send a list of officers employed under your
government, together with all public charges.

41. You shall not displace any of the judges, justices, sheriffs, or other
officers or ministers within our said province, without good and sufficient
cause to be signified unto us, and to our said commissioners for trade and
plantations; and to prevent arbitrary removal of judges and justices of the
peace, you shall not express any limitation of time in the commissions which
you are to grant, with the advice and consent of the council of our said
province, to persons fit for those employments, nor shall you execute yourself,
or by deputy, any of the said offices, nor suffer any persons to execute more
offices than one by deputy.

42. Whereas we are given to understand, that there are several offices within
our said province granted under the great seal of England, and that our service
may be very much prejudiced by reason of the absence of the patentees, and by
their appointing deputies not fit to officiate in their stead; you are
therefore to inspect the said offices, and to inquire into the capacity and
behavior of the persons now exercising them, and to report thereupon to us,
and to our commissioners for trade and plantations, what you think fit to be
done or altered in relation thereunto; and you are upon the misbehaviour of any
of the said patentees, or their deputies, to suspend them from the execution of
their places, till you shall have represented the whole matter and received our
directions therein; but you shall not by color of any power or authority
hereby or otherwise granted or mentioned to be granted unto you, take upon you
to give, grant or dispose of any office or place within our said province,
which now is or shall be granted under the great seal of England, any further
than that you may upon the vacancy of any such office or place, or suspension
of any such officer by you as aforesaid, put in any fit person to officiate in
the interval till you shall have represented the matter unto us, and to our
commissioners for trade and plantations as aforesaid, (which you are to do by
the first opportunity) and till the said office or place be disposed of by us,
our heirs or successors, under the great seal of England, or that our further
directions be given therein.

43. In case any goods, money, or other estate of pirates, or piratically
taken, shall be brought in, or found within our said province of Nova-Caesaria,
or New Jersey, or taken on board any ships or vessels, you are to cause the
same to be seized and secured until you shall have given us an account thereof,
and received our pleasure concerning the disposal of the same: But in case such
goods or any part of them are perishable, the same shall be publicly sold and
disposed of, and the produce thereof in like manner secured until our further
order.

44. And whereas commissions have been granted unto several persons in our
respective plantations in America, for the trying of pirates in those parts
pursuant to the act for the more effectual suppression of piracy, and (...) a
commission already sent to our province of New York, you (as captain general
and governor in chief of our said province of New York) are empowered, together
with others therein mentioned, to proceed accordingly in reference to our
provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut; our will and pleasure is,
that in all matters relating to pirates, you govern yourself according to the
intent of the act and commission aforementioned; but whereas accessaries in
cases of piracy beyond the seas, are by the same act left to be tried in
England, according to the statute of the second of king Henry the eighth, we do
hereby further direct and require you to send all such accessaries in cases of
piracy in our aforesaid province of Nova-Caesaria or New Jersey, with the
proper evidences that you may have against them, into England, in order to
their being tried here.

45. You shall not erect any court or office of judicature, not before erected
or established, without our especial order.

46. You are to transmit unto us and to our commissioners for trade and
plantations, with all convenient speed, a particular account of all
establishments of jurisdictions, courts, offices, and officers, powers,
authorities, fees and privileges, which shall be granted or settled within the
said province, by virtue and in pursuance of our commission and instructions to
you our captain general and governor in chief of the same, to the end you may
receive our further direction therein.

47. And you are with the advice and consent of our said council, to take
especial care to regulate all salaries and fees belonging to places, or paid
upon emergencies, that they be within the bounds of moderation, and that no
exaction be made on any occasion whatsoever; as also, that tables of all fees
be publicly hung up in all places where such fees are to be paid; and you are
to transmit copies of all such tables of fees to us, and to our commissioners
for trade and plantations as aforesaid.

48. Whereas it is necessary that our rights and dues be preserved and
recovered, and that speedy and effectual justice be administered in all cases
relating to our revenue, you are to take care, that a court of exchequer be
called and do meet at all such times as shall be needful, and you are to inform
us and our commissioners for trade and plantations, whether our service may
require that a constant court of exchequer be settled and established there.

49. You are to take care that no man's life, member, freehold, or goods be
taken away or harmed in our said province, otherwise than by established and
known laws, not repugnant to, but as much as may be, agreeable to the laws of
England.

50. You shall administer, or cause to be administered, the oaths appointed by
act of parliament to be taken instead of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy,
and the oath mentioned in the aforesaid act, entitled, An act to declare the
alteration in the oath appointed to be taken by the act, entitled, An act for
the further security of his majesty's person, and the succession of the crown
in the protestant line, and for extinguishing the hopes of the pretended prince
of Wales, and all other pretenders, and their open and secret abettors, and for
declaring the association to be determined; as also the forementioned test, to
the members and officers of the council and assembly, and to all judges,
justices, and all other persons that hold any office or place of trust or
profit in the said province, whether by virtue of any patent under our great
seal of England, or otherwise, without which you are not to admit any person
whatsoever into any public office, nor suffer those who have been admitted
formerly to continue therein.

51. You are to permit a liberty of conscience to all persons (except papists)
so they may be contented with a quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the same, not
giving offense or scandal to the government.

52. And whereas we have been informed, that diverse of our good subjects
inhabiting those parts, do make a religious scruple of swearing, and by reason
of their refusing to take an oath in courts of justice and other places, are or
may be liable to many inconveniences; our will and pleasure is, that in order
to their ease in what they conceive to be matter of conscience, so far as may
be consistent with good order and government, you take care, that an act be
passed in the general assembly of our said province, to the like effect as that
passed here in the seventh and eighth years of his majesty's reign, entitled,
An act, that the solemn affirmation and declaration of the people called
Quakers, shall be accepted, instead of an oath in the usual form, and that the
same be transmitted to us, and to our commissioners for trade and plantations
as before directed.

53. And whereas we have been further informed, that in the first settlement of
the government of our said province, it may so happen, that the number of
inhabitants fitly qualified to serve in our council in the general assembly,
and in other places of trust or profit there, will be but small; it is
therefore our will and pleasure, that such of the said people called quakers,
as shall be found capable of any of those places or employments, and
accordingly be elected or appointed to serve therein, may upon their taking and
signing the declaration of allegiance, to us in the form used by the same
people here in England, together with a solemn declaration for true discharge
of their respective trusts, be admitted by you into any of the said places or
employments.

54. You shall send an account unto us, and to our commissioners for trade and
plantations, of the present number of planters and inhabitants, men women and
children, as well masters as servants, free and unfree, and of the slaves in
our said province, as also a yearly account of the increase or decrease of
them, and how many of them are fit to bear arms in the militia of our said
province.

55. You shall also cause an account to be kept of all persons born, christened
and buried, and you shall yearly send fair abstracts thereof to us, and to our
commissioners for trade and plantations as aforesaid.

56. You shall take care, that all planters and christian servants, be well and
^itly provided with arms, and that they be listed under good officers, and when
and as often as shall be thought fit, mustered and trained, whereby they may be
in a better readiness for the defense of our said province under your
government; and you are to endeavor to get an act passed, (if not already
done) for apportioning the number of white servants to be kept by every planter.

57. You are to take especial care, that neither the frequency, nor
unreasonableness of their marches, musters and trainings, be an unnecessary
impediment to the affairs of the inhabitants.

58. You shall not, upon any occasion whatsoever, establish, or put in
execution, any articles of war, or other law martial, upon any of our subjects,
inhabitants of our said province, without the advice and consent of our council
there.

59. And whereas there is no power given you by your commission, to execute
martial law in time of peace upon soldiers in pay, and that nevertheless it may
be necessary that some care be taken for the keeping of good discipline amongst
those, that we may at any time think fit to send into our said province, (which
may properly be provided for by the legislative power of the same) you are
therefore to recommend to the general assembly of our said province, that they
prepare such act or law for the punishing of mutiny, desertion and false
musters, and for the better preserving of good discipline amongst the said
soldiers, as may best answer those ends.

60. And whereas upon complaints that have been made of the irregular
proceedings of the captains of some of our ships of war, in the pressing of
seamen in several of our plantations; we have thought fit to order, and have
given directions to our high admiral accordingly, that when any captain or
commander of any of our ships of war, in any of our said plantations, shall
have occasion for seamen, to serve on board our ships under their command, they
do make their applications to the governors, and commanders in chief of our
plantations respectively, to whom as vice admirals, we are pleased to commit
the sole power of impressing seamen in any of our plantations in America, or in
sight of any of them, you are therefore hereby required upon such application
made to you, by any of the commanders of our said ships of war within our
province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, to take care that our said ships of
war, be furnished with a number of seamen that may be necessary for our service
on board them from time to time.

61. And whereas together with other powers of vice admiralty, you will receive
authority from our dearest husband prince George of Denmark, our high admiral
of England, and of our plantations, upon the refusal or neglect of any captain
or commander of any of our ships of war, to execute the written orders he shall
receive from you for our service, and the service of our province under your
government, or upon his negligent or undue execution thereof, to suspend him,
such captain or commander from the exercise of his said office of captain or
commander, and to commit him into safe custody either on board his own ship or
elsewhere, at your discretion, in order to his being brought to answer for such
refusal or neglect, by commission either under our great seal of England, or
from our high admiral, or our commissioners for executing the office of our
high admiral of England for the time being.

62. And whereas you will likewise receive directions from our said dearest
husband, as our high admiral of England, and of our plantations, that the
captain or commander, so b^ you suspended, shall during such his suspension and
commitment, be succeeded in his said office by such commission or warrant
officer of our said ship, appointed by our said high admiral of England, or by
our commissioners for executing the office of our high admiral of England for
the time being, as by the known practice and discipline of our navy, does and
ought to succeed him next as in case of death, sickness, or other ordinary
disability happening to the commander of any of our ships of war and not
otherwise, you standing also accountable for the truth and importance of the
crime and misdemeanor, for which you shall so proceed to the suspending of such
our captain or commander; you are not to exercise the said power of suspending
any such captains or commanders of our ships of war, otherwise than by virtue
of such commission or authority from our said high admiral; any former custom
or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

63. Whereas it is absolutely necessary, that we be exactly informed of the
state of defense of all our plantations in America, as well in relation to the
stores of war that are in each plantation, as to the forts and fortifications
there, and what more may be necessary to be built for the defense and security
of the same; you are so soon as possible, to prepare an account thereof, with
relation to our said province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, in the most
particular manner, and you are therein to express the present state of the
arms, ammunition, and other stores of war, either in any public magazines, or
in the hands of private persons, together with the state of all places either
already fortified, or that you judge necessary to be fortified for the security
of our said province; and you are to transmit the said account to us, and to
our commissioners for trade and plantations by the first opportunity, and other
like accounts yearly in the same manner.

64. And that we may be the better informed of the trade of our said province,
you are to take especial care, that due entries be made in all ports in our
said province of all goods and commodittes, their species or quantities
imported or exported from thence, with the names, burden, and guns of all ships
importing and exporting the same, also the names of their commanders, and
likewise expressing from and to what places the said ships do come and go, a
copy whereof the naval officer is to furnish you with, and you are to transmit
the same unto us, or our high treasurer, or our commissioners of our treasury
for the time being, and to our commissioners for trade and plantations
quarterly, and duplicates thereof by the next conveyance.

65. And whereas great losses have been sustained by our subjects, trading to
our plantations in America, by ships sailing from those parts without covoy, or
without the company of other ships, which might protect them from our enemies,
by which means many of them have been taken by the French in their return to
England; to the end therefore the ships of our subjects may be the better
secured in their return home, you are to take care that during this time of
war, no ships trading to our province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, be
permitted to come from thence to England, but in fleets, or under the convoy or
protection of some of our ships of war, or at such a time as you shall receive
notice from hence, of their meeting such convoys, as may be appointed for the
bringing them safe to some of our ports in this kingdom; and in case of any
danger, you are to expect directions from hence, what precautions shall be
further necessary for their security.

66. You are likewise to examine what rates and duties are charged and payable
upon any goods imported or exported within our province of Nova-Caesaria, or
New Jersey, whether of the growth or manufacture of the said province or
otherwise, and to use your best endeavors for the improvement of the trade in
those parts.

67. And whereas orders have been given for the commissionating of fit persons
to be officers of our admiralty and customs in our several plantations in
America; and it is of great importance to the trade of this kingdom, and to the
welfare of all our plantations, that illegal trade be every where discouraged.
You are therefore to take especial care, that the acts of trade and navigation
be duly put in execution; and in order thereunto, you are to give constant
protection and all due encouragement to the said officers of our admiralty and
customs, in the execution of their respective offices and trusts within our
territories under your government.

68. You are from time to time to give an account as before directed, what
strength your bordering neighbors have, be they Indians or others, by sea and
land, and of the condition of their plantations, and what correspondence you do
keep with them.

69. You shall take especial care, that God Almighty be devoutly and duly
served throughout your government, the book of common prayer as by law
established, read each sunday, and holy day, and the blessed sacrament
administered according to the rites of the church of England.

70. You shall be careful that the churches already built there, be well and
orderly kept, and that more be built, as the colony shall be God's blessing be
improved; and that besides a competent maintenance to be assigned to the
minister of each orthodox church, a convenient house be built at the common
charge for each minister, and a competent proportion of land assigned to him,
for a glebe and exercise of his industry.

71. And you are to take care, that the parishes be so limited and settled, as
you shall find most convenient for the accomplishing this good work.

72. You are not to prefer any minister to any ecclesiastical benefice in that
our province, without a certificate from the right reverend father in God the
lord bishop of London, of his being conformable to the doctrine and discipline
of the church of England, and of a good life and conversation: And if any
person already preferred to a benefice, shall appear to you to give scandal
either by his doctrine or manners, you are to use the best means for the
removal of him, and to supply the vacancy in such manner as we have directed.

73. You are to give order, that every orthodox minister within your
government, be one of the vestry in his respective parish, and that no vestry
be held without him, except in case of sickness, or that after the notice of a
vestry summoned, he omit to come.

74. You are to enquire whether there be any minister within your government,
who preaches and administers the sacrament in any orthodox church or chapel,
without being in due orders, and to give account thereof to the said lord
bishop of London.

75. And to the end the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the said lord bishop of
London, may take place in our said province so far as conveniently may be, we
do think ^it that you give all countenance and encouragement to the exercise of
the same, excepting only the collating to benefices, granting licenses for
marriages, and probate of wills, which we have reserved to you our governor and
the commander in chief of our said province for the time being.

76. And you are to take especial care, that a table of marriages established
by the cannons of the church of England, be hung up in every orthodox church,
and duly observed, and you are to endeavor to get a law passed in the assembly
of our said province, (if not already done) for the strict observation of the
said table.

77. You are to take care, that drunkenness and debauchery, swearing and
blasphemy, be discountetenanced and punished: And for the further
discountenance of vice, and encouragement of virtue and good living, (that by
such example the insidels may be invited and desire to partake of the christian
religion) you are not to admit any person to public trusts and employments in
our said province under your government, whose ill fame and conversation may
occasion scandal.

78. You are to suppress the engrossing of commodities as tending to the
prejudice of that freedom which commerce and trade ought to have, and to settle
such orders and regulations therein, with the advice of the council, as may be
most conducive to the benefit and improvement of that colony.

79. You are to give all due encouragement and invitation to merchants and
others, who shall bring trade unto our said province, or any way contribute to
the advantage thereof, and in particular the royal African company of England.

80. And whereas we are willing to recommend unto the said company, that the
said province may have a constant and sufficient supply of merchantable
Negroes, at moderate rates, in money or commodities; so you are to take
especial care, that payment be duly made, and within a competent time according
to their agreements.

81. And you are to take care, that there be no trading from our said province
to any place in Africa, within the charter of the royal African company,
otherwise then prescribed by an act of parliament, entitled, An act to settle
the trade to Africa.

82. And you are yearly to give unto us, and to our commissioners for trade and
plantations, an account of what number of Negroes our said province is yearly
supplied with, and at what rates.

83. You are likewise from time to time, to give unto us, and to our
commissioners for trade and plantations as aforesaid, an account of the wants
and defects of our said province, what are the chief products thereof, what new
improvements are made therein by the industry of the inhabitants or planters,
and what further improvements you conceive may be made, or advantages gained by
trade, and in what manner we may best advance the same.

84. You are not to grant commissions of marque or reprisals, against any
prince or state, or their subjects in amity with us, to any person whatsoever,
without our especial command.

85. Our will and pleasure is, that appeals be made in cases of error from the
courts in our said province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, unto you and the
council there; and in your absence from our said province, to our commander in
chief for the time being, and our said council, in civil causes, wherein such
of our said council as shall be at that time judges of the court from whence
such appeal shall be made to you our governor, and council, or to the commander
in chief for the time being, and council as aforesaid, shall not be admitted to
vote upon the said appeal, but they may nevertheless be present at the hearing
thereof, to give the reasons of the judgment given by them, in the cause
wherein such appeal shall be made. PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, that in all such
appeals, the sum or value appealed for exceed one hundred pounds sterling, and
that security be first duly given by the appellant to answer such charges as
shall be awarded in case the first sentence be affirmed.

86. And if either party shall not rest satisfied with the judgment of you, or
the commander in chief for the time being, and council as aforesaid; our will
and pleasure is, that they may then appeal unto us, in our privy council,
provided the sum or value so appealed for unto us, do exceed two hundred pounds
sterling, and that such appeal be made within fourteen days after sentence; and
that good security be given by the appellant, that he will effectually
prosecute the same, and answer the condemnation, as also pay such costs and
damages as shall be awarded by us, in case the sentence of you, or the
commander in chief for the time being, and council, be affirmed. And provided
also, that execution be not suspended by reason of any such appeal to us.

87. You are also to permit appeals to us in council, in all cases of fines
imposed for misdemeanors; provided the fines so imposed, amount to or exceed
the value of two hundred pounds, the appellant first giving good security, that
he will effectually prosecute the same, and answer the condemnation, if the
sentence by which such fine was imposed in our said province of Nova-Caesaria,
or New Jersey, shall be confirmed.

88. You are for the better administration of justice, to endeavor to get a
law passed (if not already done) wherein shall be set the value of men's
estates, either in goods or lands, under which they shall not be capable of
serving as jurors.

89. You shall endeavor to get a law passed for the restraining of any inhuman
severity, which by ill masters or overseers, may be used toward their
christian servants, and their slaves, and that provision be made therein, that
the wilful killing of Indians and Negroes may be punished with death, and that
a fit penalty be imposed for the maiming of them.

90. You are also with the assistance of the council and assembly, to find out
the best means to facilitate and encourage the conversion of Negroes and
Indians, to the christian religion.

91. You are to endeavor with the assistance of the council to provide for the
raising of stocks, and building of public workhouses, in convenient places,
for the employing of poor and indigent people.

92. You are to propose an act to be passed in the assembly, whereby the
creditors of persons becoming bankrupts in England, and having estates in our
aforesaid province of New Jersey, may be relieved and satisfied for the debts
owing to them.

93. You are to encourage the Indians upon all occasions, so as they may apply
themselves to the English trade and nation, rather than to any other of Europe.

94. And whereas the preservation of the northern frontiers of our province of
New York, against the attempts of any enemy by land, is of great importance to
the security of our other northern plantations on the continent of America, and
more especially of our said province of New Jersey, which lies so near
adjoining to our province of New York, and the charge of erecting and repairing
the fortifications, and of maintaining the soldiers necessary for the defense
of the same, is too great to be borne by the single province of New York,
without due contributions from others concerned therein, for which reason, we
have upon several occasions, required such contributions to be made, and
accordingly settled a quota to regulate the proportions thereof; you are
therefore to take further care, to dispose the general assembly of our said
province of New Jersey, to the raising of such other supplies, as are or may be
necessary for the defense of our province of New York, according to the
signification of our will and pleasure therein, which has already been made to
the inhabitants of New Jersey, or which shall at any time hereafter be made to
you our governor, or to the commander in chief of our said province for the
time being.

95. And in case of any distress of any of our plantations, you shall upon
application of the respective governors to you, assist them with what aid the
condition and safety of your government will permit, and more particularly in
case our province of New York, be at any time attacked by an enemy, the
assistance you are to contribute toward the defense thereof, whether in men or
money, is according to the forementioned quota or repartition, which has
already been signified to the inhabitants of our foresaid province under your
government, or according to such other regulations as we shall hereafter make
in that behalf, and signify to you or the commander in chief of our said
province for the time being.

96. And for the greater security of our province of New Jersey, you are to
appoint fit officers and commanders in the several parts of the country
bordering upon the Indians, who upon any invasion may raise men and arms to
oppose them, until they shall receive your directions therein.

97. And whereas we have been pleased by our commission to direct, that in case
of your death or absence from our said province, and in case there be at that
time no person upon the place commissionated or appointed by us to be our
lieutenant governor, or commander in chief, the then present council of our
said province, shall take upon them the administration of the government, and
execute our said commission, and the several powers and authorities therein
contained in the manner therein directed; it is nevertheless our express will
and pleasure, that in such case the said council shall forbear to pass any
acts, but what are immediately necessary for the peace and welfare of our said
province, without our particular order for that purpose. This article was
afterward supplied as follows:

ANNE R.

Additional instruction to our right trusty and well beloved Edward lord
viscount Cornbury, our captain general and governor in chief of our province of
New Jersey, in America, and in his absence to our lieutenant governor and
commander in chief of our said province for the time being. Given at our court
at Kensington, the third day of May, in the sixth year of our reign, 1707.

WHEREAS by a clause in our commission and instruction to you our captain
general and governor in chief of our province of New Jersey, it is directed,
that upon your death or absence, in case there be no lieutenant governor
appointed by us upon the place, that then the council do take upon them the
administration of the government, and that the eldest councellor do preside as
by the said commission and instructions is more particularly set forth; and we
having observed, that this instruction has given occasion of many controversies
and disputes between the president and the counselors, and between the
counselors themselves and otherwise, in several of our plantations, to the
great hindrance of the public business, and the prejudice and disturbance of
our service there; our will and pleasure therefore is, that if upon your death
or absence there be no person upon the place commissionated by us to be our
lieutenant governor or commander in chief, the eldest councellor whose name is
first placed in our said instructions to you, and who shall be at that time of
your death or absence residing within our said province of New Jersey, shall
take upon him the administration of the government and execute our said
commission and instructions, and the several powers and authorities therein
contained, in the same manner and to all intents and purposes, as either our
governor or commander in chief should or ought to do in case of your absence,
or until your return, or in all cases until our further pleasure be known
therein. So we bid you heartily farewell.

By her majesty's command, SUNDERLAND.

The following instruction relates also to the council, and bears date in the
same year.

ANNE R.

Right trusty and well beloved, we greet you well: Whereas we are sensible that
effectual care ought to be taken to oblige the members of our council to a due
attendance therein, in order to prevent the many inconveniences that may
happen from the want of a quorum of the council to transact business as
occasions require; it is our will and pleasure, that if any of the members of
our said council shall hereafter wilfully absent themselves when duly summoned,
without a just and lawful cause, and shall persist therein after admonition,
you suspend the said counselors so absenting themselves till our further
pleasure be known, giving us timely notice thereof; and we hereby will and
require you that our royal pleasure be signified to the several members of our
council in New Jersey, and that it be entered in the council books of our said
province as a standing rule; so we bid you farewell. Given at our court of
Kensington, the twentieth day of November, 1707, in the sixth year of our reign.

By her majesty's command, SUNDERLAND.




98. You are to take care, that all writs be issued in our name throughout our
said province.

99. Forasmuch as great inconveniences may arise by the liberty of printing in
our said province, you are to provide by all necessary orders, that no person
keep any press for printing, nor that any book, pamphlet or other matters
whatsoever be printed without your especial leave and license first obtained.

100. And if any thing shall happen that may be of advantage and security to
our said province, which is not herein, or by our commission to you provided
for, we do hereby allow unto you, with the advice and consent of our council of
our said province, to take order for the present therein, giving unto us by one
of our principal secretary's of state, and to our commissioners for trade and
plantations, speedy notice thereof, that so you may receive our ratification if
we shall approve of the same.

101. PROVIDED ALWAYS, that you do not by any color of any power or authority
hereby given you, commence or declare war, without our knowledge and particular
commands therein, except it be against Indians, upon emergencies, wherein the
consent of our council shall be had, and speedy notice given thereof unto us as
aforesaid.

102. And you are upon all occasions to send unto us by one of our principal
secretary's of state, and to our commissioners for trade and plantations, a
particular account of all your proceedings, and of the condition of affairs
within your government.

103. And whereas the lords spiritual and temporal in parliament, upon
consideration of the great abuses practiced in the plantation trade, did by an
humble address, represent to his late majesty, the great importance it is of,
both to this our kingdom and to our plantations in America, that the many good
laws which have been made for the government of the said plantations, and
particularly the act passed in the seventh and eighth years of his said
majesty's reign, entitled, An act for preventing frauds, and regulating abuses
in the plantation trade, be strictly observed. You are therefore to take
notice, that whereas notwithstanding the many good laws made from time to time,
for preventing frauds in the plantation trade, it is nevertheless manifest,
that very great abuses have been and continue still to be practiced to the
prejudice of the same, which abuses must needs arise, either from the
insolvency of the persons who are accepted for the security or from the
remissness or connivance of such as have been, or are governors in the several
plantations, who ought to take care, that those persons who give bond should be
duly prosecuted, in case of non performance; we take the good of our
plantations and the improvement of the trade thereof, by a strict and punctual
observance of the several laws in force concerning the same, to be of so great
importance to the benefit of this our kingdom, and to the advancing of the
duties of our customs here, that if we shall be hereafter informed, that at any
time there shall be any failure in the due observance of those laws, within our
foresaid province of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey, by any wilful fault or
neglect on your part, we shall look upon it as a breach of the trust reposed in
you by us, which we shall punish with the loss of your place in that
government, and such further marks of our displeasure, as we shall judge
reasonable to be inflicted upon you, for your offense against us, in a matter
of this consequence, that we now so particularly charge you with.

CHAP XIV.
Observations on Lord Cornbury's instructions, and the privileges originally
gr^^ted to the settlers, with abstracts of some of them.
I. IT is apparent, from the whole tenor of the application from the
proprietors, Observations.
that they had constantly in view the reservation of the principal privileges
they enjoyed; and that their meaning was only to part with the powers of
government; accordingly in the instrument of surrender, nothing appears to be
resigned but these; their endeavors therefore to stipulate expressly for a
fresh confirmation of particular privileges, seems to have been owing to an
unnecessary diffidence; they were however so far indulged, that a draught of
the foregoing commission and instructions was prepared and shown to them for
their acquiescence, conformable to what the Lords of trade in their
representation of October 2, 1701, had proposed. Appendix numb. xiii.


II. After the lords commissioners for trade and plantations had prepared a
draught of the commission and instructions for a new governor, they referred it
to sir Thomas Lane, and the proprietors, in the words following;

Sir, Whitehall, November 14, 1701.
I am commanded by the lords commissioners for trade and foreign plantations,
to send you the enclosed draught of a commission and instructions for a
governor for his majesty's province of New Jersey, prepared by order of their
excellencies the lords justices, that you may communicate the same to the
proprietors of both the divisions of East New Jersey, and West New Jersey, for
their observation thereupon; which their lordships desire may be made and
returned to them with all convenient speed, in order to such further
proceedings as shall be found necessary, for the settling that province in a
due form of government.

I am, sir, your most humble servant, WILLIAM POPPLE.
To sir Thomas Lane, Knight and Alderman.



III. The report of the lords of trade to king William King William died
between this and the surrender, having (its said) first nominated lord
Cornbury, governor of New York and New Jersey, on account of the services of
his father; who was among the first officers, that after his landing at Torbay,
came over to him with his regiment.
upon the same occasion, not long before the surrender, was conceived in the
terms following.

To the King's most excellent majesty.
May it please your majesty,
Having been directed by their excellencies the lords justices, upon a
representation, which we humbly laid before them, concerning the disorders in
your majesty's provinces of East and West New Jersey, in America; to prepare
draughts of a commission and instructions for a governor to be sent thither by
your majesty, and to consult therein the proprietors of those provinces, in
order to the surrender of their pretended right to the government of the same:
We humbly lay before your majesty the draughts which we have prepared
accordingly, with such clauses as we conceive proper, to enable the governor,
for whose name we have left a blank, to proceed in settling a government in
that country, conformable (as near as the circumstances of the inhabitants will
permit) to the method of government, settled by your majesty's respective
commissioners in your other American plantations; and withal to prevent the
interfering of that colony with the interest of those other plantations: We
have also in pursuance of their excellencies directions, communicated the said
draughts to sir Thomas Lane, and others, the principal proprietors of West
New Jersey, and to Mr. William Dockwra, secretary, Contriver of the penny-post,
in the city of London: Oldmixon, says, he got his information of New Jersey
from him; and that he, in the name of the Proprietors of East-Jersey, and sir
Thomas Lane (who had purchased the best part of Dr. Coxe's share of propriety)
on behalf of West-Jersey, waited on the queen, and made a formal surrender of
the sovereignty; reserving all their rights.
and others, the principal proprietors of East New Jersey; in behalf of
themselves, and the rest of the proprietors of both those divisions; which
draughts they have unanimously approved; and in confidence that your majesty
will be graciously pleased accordingly to constitute a governor over those
countries, they have declared themselves willing and ready to surrender all
their right, or pretense of right to government, which they have hitherto
claimed; whereupon we humbly request to your majesty, that the reducing these
colonies to an orderly form of government, under a governor constituted by your
majesty's immediate commission, will be of great service to your majesty, in
preventing illegal trade, and the harboring of pirates, and will be of good
influence throughout the other plantations; and we humbly offer, that mr.
attorney general be directed forthwith to prepare a form of a surrender of
their said right, or pretense of right to government, which may be most
effectual to the extinguishing their said pretensions, and present the same to
your majesty.

And whereas they have desired, that the first governor to be thus appointed by
your majesty, may be a person fitly qualified for that service; but cannot
agree in the recommendation of any particular person: We humbly propose, that
when the surrender shall be made, your majesty would be pleased to nominate
some person wholly unconcerned in the factions, which have divided the
inhabitants of those parts, all which nevertheless is most humbly submitted.

Whitehall, Jan. 6th. 1701-2. Wm. Blathwayt, Abr. Hill, Stanford, Ph. Meadows,
John Pollexfen, Mat Prior.


IV. In a memorial hereafter inserted Chap. xviii.
of the proprietors of West-Jersey, to the lords commissioners of trade and
plantations, against lord Cornbury, signed by sir Thomas Lane, and other Every
one of the signers of this, Robert Burrow and William Snelling excepted, had
signed the instrument of surrender.
proprietors, who signed the surrender; we find them recapitulating several
matters, and asserting that they were part of the terms of their surrender, and
placed as such among others in the instructions.

And by the assembly's remonstrance, in 1707, it appears, they thought their
privileges more secure than some of their neighbors, and fully depended on
being protected in the enjoyment of them.

V. Among the instructions to lord Cornbury are to be found, the principal
matters the proprietors pointed out as what they desired to have reserved, the
articles 9, 14, 15, 16, 36, 37, 38, 45, 51, 52, 53, 86, 87, bear evident marks
that they were of this number; these and such of the others as reserve or
reinforce the particular privileges of the proprietors and inhabitants of
New Jersey, were doubtless adopted and continued, in consequence of their
application and the original grants.

VI. If the instructions to all the succeeding governors are copied from those
to lord Cornbury, as it is generally understood; such of them as differ from
what is common to other plantation governors, were intended to be at the time
of the surrender, and which the foregoing sections seem to confirm, it is a
farther evidence that they are esteemed, as to the matter of them, rights and
privileges belonging to the inhabitants of New Jersey; and that it has been and
is the intention of the crown to continue them as such.

VII. There does not appear to have been any design to abridge the privileges
before enjoyed, nor could it perhaps be legally effected, by any of the steps
taken before or in the surrender; for many of the settlers, though they were
actually proprietors, do not seem to have been parties to the surrender, either
by themselves or any legally constituted body for them, except it may be
supposed, their approving the thing without joining in any one public act to
effect it, made them so.

VIII. The proprietors who signed the instrument of surrender, considered as to
the shares of propriety they held, might be thought of importance enough to be
denominated the whole, in barely giving up the government; because they had not
conveyed that: But it no where appears, that they had any legal power to
represent the settlers in general, in matters wherein they had admitted them to
share in their property, whether of land or privilege; and as to numbers, were
but a small part of the proprietors, and a very small part of the settlers.

IX. Every settler who complied with the terms of settlement publicly
established, as well as the purchaser, being entitled to the privileges
purchased or settled under; it could not be lawful, that the act of any fellow
proprietor to the last, or landlord to the other, should deprive them of what,
by the original frame and constitutions of the country, or particular
agreements, they had a share in; and had been the principal inducement of their
removing hither to settle.

X. That the civil and religious privileges subordinate to, and derived from,
but not connected with the powers of government, were the principal inducement
of many of the settlers, to leave good habitations and remove hither, none
acquainted with the state of things in the original settlement can doubt.

XI. If therefore every purchaser and settler had a right to and property in
the privileges conveyed to them, and if the ideas of property in British
subjects are the same in the colonies as in the mother country; according to
these, nothing but their own act by themselves as individuals, or as some way
represented in legislation or otherwise, could deprive them of it; any thing
less would imply an absurdity in the term.

XII. That they had a right, will evidently appear by the following short view
of the premises; first, by right of discovery it became vested in the crown; by
the crown it was granted to the duke of York; by the duke to lord Berkeley and
sir G. Carteret, so to the purchasers immediately under them, and thence
individually to every freeholder, with the right of the natives purchased and
amply confirmed to them; hence it is, if these conveyances were good, that
every freeholder must have a clear incontestable right to his freehold, and
consequently to every privilege conveyed with it, as far as these grants will
warrant.

XIII. In another view the case may be stated thus; the proprietors said to the
people, if you will buy this land, you and your posterity forever shall have
these privileges; for the first you have our hand and seal; for the other our
public declarations and concessions solemnly ratisied under our hands,
recorded in the public offices; and for a more complete security, most of them
also confirmed by laws in the same manner as the title and right to location of
many of the lands are founded; hence a conclusion seems to follow, that the
privileges became a part of the purchase, and that the proprietors in the sale
of their lands, received a consideration for them; and if so, to their
birthright as British subjects must be superadded the right of purchase.

XIV. It may possibly be objected as to West-Jersey, that the proprietors sold
or conveyed the government to Dr. Coxe, and he again conveyed it to several of
those who were parties to the surrender; supposing this to be true, it
concludes nothing in the present case; the question is not as to government,
but privilege in other respects; to bring that into the argument it must be
proved, first, that the proprietors generally concurred in the sale; secondly,
that they had power to sell again that proportion which had before been
conveyed to others; thirdly, that the act of surrender in any respect affects
it; lastly, that the proprietors of the Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, or any
other charter government, may or could by their own act barely, resign so as to
annul or destroy what their predecessors or they have conveyed and confirmed to
the people; till this is done, the other, for similar reasons, must be supposed
impossible: Equally inconclusive must be any argument here as to right of
conquest from what happened in 1673; if the treaty of Westminster had not
restored things to their original footing, the last grants, and laws in
consequence of them, confirming former privileges, and nearly the whole matter
relating to West-Jersey, bear date since.

XV. To argue, that because there is no express clause in the instrument, by
which the government was surrendered, reserving the people's privileges; that
therefore they were not reserved; would be just as reasonable as to argue, that
because the right to the soil is not there particularly reserved, that
therefore it was not reserved at all; and yet it remains to the possessors
without interruption; and the right to every civil and religious privilege not
cancelled in the act of resignation, nor since altered by law, being equally
strong as to the forms of authenticity (however overlooked or forgot in
occasional practice) must be supposed to retain their original validity.

XVI. From what has been said, it seems to be evident, that the proprietors who
signed the instrument of surrender, had it not in their power, and therefore
could not have intended; nor if they had, can the words or meaning of any thing
they appear to have transacted, be legally construed to extinguish any
privilege before derived from the royal grants, either relating to liberty of
conscience, or matters of privilege in other cases; their power of the
government only excepted; See the queen's acceptance: And for the advantage of
a ready view, as to the meaning of the surrender, let the terms used in the
instrument, be here attended to, viz.

All these the said powers and authorities, to correct, punish, pardon, govern,
and rule all or any of her majesty's subjects, or others, who now inhabit, or
hereafter shall adventure into, or inhabit within the said provinces of
East-Jersey and West-Jersey, or either of them; and also to nominate, make,
constitute, ordain, and confirm (...) laws, orders, ordinances and directions,
and instruments for those purposes, or any of them; and to nominate, constitute
or appoint, revoke, discharge, change, or alter any governor or governors,
officer or ministers, which are or shall be appointed, made or used within the
said provinces, or either of them; and to make, ordain, and establish any
orders, laws, directions, instruments, forms or ceremonies of government and
magistracy, for or concerning the government of the provinces aforesaid, or
either of them; or on the sea in going and coming to or from thence; or to put
in execution, or abrogate, revoke or change such as are already made, for, or
concerning such government or any of them, etc.


whether this power was ever in due form of law granted or not, We see the
proprietors themselves seem to give into such a doubt in the instrument of
surrender.
they had enjoyed it near forty years; rightly or even tolerably administered,
it must undoubtedly be considered in the light of a privilege to the
inhabitants in general; as having their immediate rulers on the spot, ready to
see and redress grievances, or prevent the occasions of them; induced to it
both by the strong ties of increasing profit to themselves, and the good of
others; but if we may compare the latter part of these proprietors
administrations with the tranquillity that has ensued for most of the time
since; and to this, add the benefits An act prescribing the forms of
declaration of fidelity, the effect of the abjuration oath, and affirmation,
instead of the forms heretofore required, etc. Confirmed and rendered perpetual
by the king in council, at St. James's, May 4, 1732. A succession of beneficial
paper money acts on loan, confirmed, but now expired. Another for acknowleging
deeds, and declaring how the estate or right of a feme covert may be conveyed
or extinguished. Confirmed and rendered perpetual by the king in council, at
Kensington, August 22, 1746, Another for ascertaining the officers fees, ibid.
at St. James's, November 23, 1749. etc.
derived from royal attention, and thence be allowed to form a judgment; we
shall not perhaps see much cause to regret the change of situation.

XVII. What the original privileges of the inhabitants of New Jersey were, by
the several grants and concessions, and other instruments beforementioned, and
proprietary laws, will at large appear; some of those not immediately connected
with government or land affairs, may be known by the following abstracts.

In East and West-Jersey, before the division.
1. No person swearing or subscribing allegiance to the king, and faithfulness
to the proprietors, to be any ways molested, punished, disquieted, or called in
question, for any difference in opinion or practice, in matters of religious
concernment, who did not disturb the civil peace; but that all such persons
should at all times, freely and fully have and enjoy their judgments and
consciences, they behaving themselves peaceably, and not using this liberty to
licentiousness. Concessions and agreements of the proprietors Carteret and
Berkeley, with the adventurers, Feb. 10, 1664.

2. By legislative act to levy taxes, and not otherwise, and this as should
seem most equal and easy for the inhabitants. ibid.

3. By law to provide for the support of government. ibid.

4. That cattle ranging or grazing on lands not appropriated to particular
persons, shall not be deemed trespassing, but custom not to be plead from
hence, nor any, purposely to suffer their cattle to graze on such lands. ibid.

In East-Jersey, after the quin^ipartite division.

5. That the courts of session and assize, should be established by the
governor, council, and representatives, and that appeals from thence, should be
made to the governor and council, etc. Declaration of sir George Carteret,
dated July 31, 1674.

6. Among the present proprietors, there are several that declare they have no
freedom to defend themselves with arms; and others who judge it their duty to
defend themselves, their wives and children, with arms: It is therefore agreed
and consented to; and they the said proprietors do, by these presents, agree
and consent, that they will not in this case, force each other against their
respective judgments and consciences; in order whereunto it is resolved, that
on the one side, no man that declares, he cannot for conscience sake, bear
arms, whether proprietor or planter, shall be at any time put upon so doing, in
his own person; nor yet upon sending any to serve in his stead; and on the
other side those who do judge it their duty to bear arms for the public
defense, shall have their liberty to do it in a legal way. Fundamental
constitutions of East New Jersey, A. D. 1683.

7. All persons acknowledging one almighty and eternal God, and holding
themselves obliged in conscience to live quietly in civil society; shall no way
be molested, or prejudged for their religious persuasions and exercise in
matters of faith and worship, nor be compelled to frequent and maintain any
place of worship or ministry whatsoever; but none to be admitted to places of
public trust, who do not profess faith in Christ Jesus, and will not solemnly
declare, that he is not obliged in conscience, to endeavor alteration in the
government, nor does not seek the turning out of any in it, or their ruin or
prejudice in person or estate, because they are in his opinion heretics, or
differ in judgment from him; but none under the notion of liberty, by this
article, to avow atheism, irreligiousness, nor to practice profaneness,
murder, or any kind of violence; or indulge themselves in stage plays, masks,
revells, or such like abuses. ibid.

8. No person to be imprisoned or deprived of his freehold, free custom or
liberty, to be outlawed, exiled or any other way destroyed, nor be condemned,
but by lawful judgment of his peers; justice or right to be neither bought nor
sold, deferred or delayed to any person whatsoever; all trials to be by twelve
men, and as near as may be, peers and equals, and of the neighborhood, and
without just exception; twenty four to be returned by the sheriff as a grand
inquest, twelve at least to agree in finding the complaint to be true;
reasonable challenges to be admitted against the twelve or peers who have the
final judgment, or any of them: In all courts, persons of all persuasions to
appear in their own way, and according to their own manner, and personally
plead their own causes, or if unable, by their friends; and no person allowed
to take money for pleading or advice in such cases. This last afterward
altered by an instruction to Basse, while he exercised the office of governor
in East Jersey, and fixed to be, that none should practice without license from
the governor.
ibid.

9. All marriages not forbidden in the law of God to be esteemed lawful, where
the parents or guardians being first acquainted, the marriage is publicly
intimated in such places and manner as is agreeable to men's different
persuasions in religion, and afterward solemnized before creditable witnesses,
and duly registered. Ibid.

10. All witnesses called to testify to any matter or thing in any court, or
before any lawful authority, to deliver their evidence by solemnly promising to
speak the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth; and the punishment
of falsehood to be the same as in cases of perjury; the like in cases of
forgery; and both criminals to be stigmatized. Ibid.

11. Forfeited estates, except for treason or capital crimes, to be redeemed by
the nearest of kin, within two months, by paying to the public treasury, not
above one hundred pounds, nor under five pounds sterling. Ibid.

In West-Jersey.
12. No cattle straying, ranging or grazing on any unlocated grounds, to
subject their owners to damages, but custom of commons not to be pretended to,
nor any person hindered from legally taking up any such lands. Concessions and
Agreements, chap. viii.

13. All taxes to be levied by legislative act. Ibid. chap. xi.

14. As no man or number of men upon earth, have power or authority to rule
over men's consciences in religious matters; no person or persons whatsoever,
at any time or times hereafter, shall be any ways, upon any pretense
whatsoever, called in question, or in the least punished or hurt in person,
estate or privilege, for the sake of his opinion, judgment, faith, or worship
toward God in matter of religion. Ibid. chap. xvi.

15. No person to be deprived of life, limb, property, or any ways hurt in his
or their privileges, freedoms or franchises, upon any account whatsoever,
without a due trial and judgment passed by twelve good and lawful men of his
neighborhood first had; persons arraigned allowed to except against any of the
neighborhood, without rendering a reason, not exceeding thirty-five, and with
valid reasons against every person nominated for that service. ibid. chap. xvii.

16. In all causes, civil and criminal, proof to be made by the solemn and
plain averment of at least two honest and reputable persons; upon false
evidence, the party in civil causes liable to the penalty due to the person or
persons he or they bear witness against; in criminal causes to be severely
fined, and for the future disabled from being admitted an evidence or to any
public employment. ibid. chap. xx.

17. Persons preferring in dictments or informations against others for
personal injuries, or matters criminal (treason, murder and felony excepted;)
to be masters of their own process, and have power to remit or forgive as well
before as after judgment and sentence. ibid. chap. xxi.

18. All causes, civil and criminal, to be decided by the verdict of twelve men
of the neighborhood, to be summoned by the sheriff, and no person compelled to
fee an attorney; but to have free liberty to plead his own cause; and that no
person imprisoned upon any account whatsoever, should be obliged to pay any
prison fees. ibid. chap. xxii.

19. All jurisdictions and their powers to be established by legislative act.

20. In courts of justice for trial of causes civil or criminal, all
inhabitants to come freely into, and attend and hear any such trials, that
justice may not be done in a corner, nor in any covert manner; being intended
and resolved by the help of the Lord, and by these our concessions and
fundamentals, that all and every person or persons inhabiting the said
province, shall, as far as in us lies, be free from oppression and slavery.
ibid. chap. xxiii.

21. The proprietors and freeholders to have liberty to give their
representatives instructions, and to represent their grievances; and any of the
electors upon complaint made of failure of trust or breach of covenant, to
remonstrate the same to the Assembly.

22. In every meeting of general Assembly, liberty of speech to be allowed; and
none to be interrupted when speaking: All questions to be stated with
deliberation, and liberty for amendment, with power of entering reasons of
protest; and to have the member's yeas and no's registered: The doors of the
house to be set open; and liberty given to hear the debates: The assembly to
have power of enacting laws, provided they be agreeable to the fundamental laws
of England, and not repugnant to the concessions. Concessions aforesaid. See
also the first acts of Assembly of West-Jersey.

CHAP. XV.
Lord Cornbury convenes the first general assembly after the surrender: His
speech, their address, and other proceedings: Queen Anne's proclamation for
ascertaining the rates of coin: Cornbury dissolves the Assembly, and meets a
new one to his mind: Their proceedings and dissolution: A summary of the
establishment and practice of the council of proprietors of West-Jersey:
Another assembly called; who remonstrate the grievances of the province.
THE distinction of the two Provinces East and West-Jersey, being henceforth as
to all matters of government laid aside, and both united in one under the name
of Nova-Caesaria, or New Jersey; we now enter upon a more uniform method of
proceeding.

Contrary to the expectation of those concerned in the surrender, we soon find
them jointly struggling for the preservation of their privileges against the
encroachments of a governor, who, if his abilities had been equal to his birth
and interest, must be allowed to have been as formidable an antagonist in that
capacity as any that have come to the colonies; besides being the son of a
family that had merited highly in the revolution, he was first cousin to queen
Anne: With such an interest and a disposition to have studied harmony and
concord, instead of listening to the votaries of faction, and meanly trumpeting
their animosities, he had a fair opportunity of singular service in restoring
the public quiet, and laying a foundation of prosperity to the province; but
that, afterward became the business of another.

Lord Cornbury arrived in New Jersey in the month called August, 1703: Having
published his commission at Amboy and Burlington, he returned to his government
of New York; Lord Cornbury convenes the assembly.
but soon came back and convened the general assembly to meet him at
PerthAmboy, the tenth of November. The names of the first members of council
after the surrender are in lord Cornbury's instructions. The first
representatives were,

For the eastern Division.
Obadiah Bown, Jedediah Allen, Michael Howden, Peter Va^ Este, John Reid, John
Harrison, Cornelius Tunison, Richard Hartshorne, col. Richard Townly,

For the western Division.
Thomas Lambert, William Biddle, William Stevenson, Restore Lippincott, John
Kay, John Hugg, jun. Joseph Cooper, William Hall, John Mason, John Smith.

For the town of Burlington.
Peter Fretwell, Thomas Gardener. City of Perth-Amboy. Thomas Gordon, Miles
Forster.




They chose Thomas Gardener, Son of him whose death is mentioned before.
speaker, he was presented and accepted, and then, conformable to the practice
of parliament, made a demand of the particular privileges of assemblies, as
follows: That the members with their servants, may be free from arrests or
molestation during the sessions.

That they have free access to your excellency's person, when occasion requires.

That they may have liberty of speech, and a favorable construction of all
debates that may arise among them.

That if any misunderstanding shall happen to arise between the council and
this house, that in such a case a committee of the council may be appointed to
confer with a committee of this house for adjusting and reconciling all such
differences. And,

That these our requests may be approved of by your excellency and council, and
entered in the council books.



The governor, in answer told them, he granted the three first as the just and
undoubted right of the house; but rejected the fourth as an innovation, and
accordingly ordered an entry of the same in the council books; this done, he
made a speech to the council and general assembly.

Gentlemen,
The proprietors of East and West New Jersey, Speech.
having upon very mature consideration, thought fit to surrender to her most
sacred majesty the great queen of England, my mistress, all the powers of
government which they supposed were vested in them; the queen has been pleased
to unite these formerly two provinces now into one, under the name of
NovaCaesaria or New Jersey; her majesty has been pleased graciously to honor
me with the trust of this government, and has commanded me to assure you of her
protection upon all occasions; and you may assure yourselves, that under her
auspicious reign, you will enjoy all the liberty, happiness and satisfaction,
that good subjects can wish for; under a most gracious queen, and the best laws
in the universe, I mean the laws of England, which all the world would be glad
to partake of, and none are so happy to enjoy, but those whose propitious stars
have placed under the most happily constituted monarchy: I will not question,
but that you on your parts, will do all that can be expected from faithful
subjects, both for the satisfaction of the queen, the good and safety of your
country; which must be attended with general satisfaction to all people.

In order to attain these good ends, I must earnestly recommend it both to you,
gentlemen of her majesty's council, and you gentlemen of the assembly, to apply
yourselves heartily and seriously to the reconciling the unhappy differences
which have happened in this province; that as the queen has united the two
provinces, so the minds of all the people may be firmly united in the service
of the queen, and good of the country; which are all one, and cannot be
separated without danger of destroying both.

Gentlemen, you are now met in general assembly, on purpose to prepare such
bills to be passed into laws, to be transmitted into England for her majesty's
approbation, (...) may best conduce to the settling of this province upon a
lasting foundation of happiness and quiet, only I must recommend it to you,
that the bills you shall think fit to offer, may not be repugnant to the laws
of England, but as much as may be, agreeable to them.

I must recommend to you, gentlemen, in the wording of your Bills, to observe
the style of enacting by the governor, council and assembly; and likewise, that
each different matter may be enacted by a different law, to avoid confusion.

In all laws whereby you shall think fit to grant money, or to impose any fines
or penalties, express mention may be made, that the same is granted or reserved
unto her majesty, her heirs or successors, for the public use of this
province, and the support of the government thereof.

Gentlemen, I am farther commanded by the queen, to recommend it to you, to
raise and settle a revenue for defraying the necessary charges of the
government of this province, in order to support the dignity of it.

I am likewise commanded to recommend to your care, the preparing one or more
bill or bills whereby the right and property of the general proprietors to the
soil of this province may be confirmed to them, according to their respective
titles, together with all quit rents and all other privileges as are expressed
in the conveyances made by the duke of York; except only the right of
government, which remains in the queen.

Now, Gentlemen, I have acquainted you with some of those things which the
queen is desirous to have done: I shall likewise acquaint you, that her majesty
has been graciously pleased to grant to all her subjects in this province,
(except papists) liberty of conscience. I must further inform you, that the
queen has commanded me not to receive any present from the general assembly of
this province; and that no person who may succeed me in this government, may
claim any present for the future, I am commanded to take care, that her
majesty's orders may be entered at large in the council books, and the books of
the general assembly.

Now, gentlemen, I have no more to offer to you at this time, only I recommend
to you dispatch in the matter before you, and unanimity in your consultations,
as that which will always best and most effectually conduce to the good of the
whole.

The governor's speech being read in the house, produced the following address,
Address.
N. C. D.

May it please your excellency,
I am commanded by this house, to return your excellency our hearty thanks for
your excellency's many kind expressions to them, contained in your excellency's
speech; and it is our great satisfaction, that her majesty has been pleased to
constitute your excellency our governor.

We are well assured the proprietors, by their surrender of their rights to the
government of this province, have put us in circumstances much better than we
were in under their administration, they not being able to protect us from the
villainies of wicked men; and having an entire dependence on her majesty, that
she will protect us in the full enjoyment of our rights, liberties and
properties, do thank your excellency for that assurance you are pleased to give
us of it, and think our stars have been very propitious in placing us under the
government and direction of the greatest of queens, and the best of laws: And
we do entreat your excellency to believe, that our best endeavors shall not be
wanting to accomplish those things which shall be for the satisfaction of the
queen, the general good of our country, and (if possible) to the universal
satisfaction of all people: With our prayers to the God of Heaven, we shall
join our utmost endeavors, to unite our unhappy differences; and hope with the
assistance of your excellency and council it will not be impossible to
accomplish that blessed work. We shall follow the directions given in your
excellency's speech, with what dispatch the nature of the things require; and
hope, that all our consultations may conduce to the best and greatest ends.

Memorandum, that all the members of this house do agree to the subject matter
above written, though several of them dissent from some of the expressions
therein contained.

This address presented, the assembly, after regulating elections complained
of, prepared several bills; but one only received the governor's assent: This
related to the purchasing of lands of the Indians, was prepared pursuant to an
article in Cornbury's instructions, and prohibits purchases or gifts of lands
being made or received from the Indians without license of the proprietors, Law
regulating Indian purchases.
after the 1st December, 1703, under penalty of forseiting forty shillings per
acre; it also retrospects and makes void all Indian bargains, gifts, lea^es or
mortgages, without an English title, unless covered with a propriety right in
six months thereafter. This law is yet in force.

The governor put an end to this session, December 13, by observing to the
assembly, that the season being far advanced, it was absolutely necessary to
conclude business: That he wished the several bills before himself and them
could have been dispatched; but that the matters contained in them, were of so
great moment, the difficulties so many, and the time so short, that it was
impossible to finish: That being now acquainted with the nature of those
difficulties, they should come prepared in the spring to remove them, and
provide such good laws as might effectually ascertain the rights of the several
proprietors, and fully secure every man's property. These being the points
which would most conduce to the peace and welfare of the colony, recommended
the council and assembly to employ their serious thoughts, that the most
effectual means to attain those desirable ends might be discovered, and to
point out other useful laws, and concludes with observing, that they would ever
find him ready to consent to all such things as should be for the good of the
whole.

In 1704, great inconveniences were found, by the same coin bearing different
values in the provinces on the continent; Coin.
to remedy this by one general medium, queen Anne published her proclamation
for ascertaining the value of foreign coin in America; which seems to claim a
place here,

By the QUEEN.
A proclamation for settling and ascertaining the current rates of foreign
coins in her majesty's colonies and plantations in America. Proclamation.

WE having had under our consideration the different rates at which the same
species of foreign coins do pass in our several colonies and plantations in
America, and the inconveniences thereof, by the indirect practice of drawing
the money from one plantation to another, to the great prejudice of the trade
of our subjects; and being sensible, that the same cannot be otherwise
remedied, than by reducing of all foreign coins to the same current rate within
all our dominions in America; and the principal officers of our mint having
laid before us a table of the value of the several foreign coins which usually
pass in payments in our said plantations, according to the weight and the
assays made of them in our mint, thereby showing the just proportion which each
coin ought to have to the other; which is as follows, viz. Sevill pieces of
eight, old plate, seventeen penny weight, twelve grains, four shillings and six
pence; Sevill pieces of eight, new plate, fourteen penny-weight, three
shillings and seven pence one farthing; Mexico pieces of eight, seventeen
penny-weight twelve grains, four shillings and six pence; pillar pieces of
eight, seventeen penny-weight twelve grains, four shillings and six pence three
farthings; Peru pieces of eight, old plate, seventeen penny-weight twelve
grains, four shillings and five pence or thereabouts; cross dollars, eighteen
penny-weight, four shillings and four pence three farthings; ducatoons of
Flanders, twenty penny-weight and twenty-one grains, five shillings and six
pence; eau's of France or silver Lewis, seventeen penny-weight twelve grains,
four shillings and six pence; crusadoes of Portugal, eleven penny-weight four
grains, two shillings and ten pence one farthing; the silver pieces of Holland,
twelve penny-weight and seven grains, five shillings and two pence one
farthing; old rix dollars of the empire, eighteen penny-weight and ten grains,
four shillings and six pence; the half, quarters and other parts in proportion
to their denominations; and light pieces in proportion to their weight: We have
therefore thought fit, for remedying the said inconveniences, by the advice of
our council, to publish and declare, that from and after the first day of
January next ensuing the date hereof, no Sevill, pillar, or Mexico pieces of
eight, though of the full weight of seventeen penny-weight and a half, shall be
accounted, received, taken or paid, within any of our said colonies or
plantations, as well those under proprietors and charters, as under our
immediate commission and government, at above the rate of six shillings per
piece, current money, for the discharge of any contracts or bargains to be made
after the said first day of January next; the halves, quarters, and other
lesser pieces of the same coins, to be accounted, received, taken, or paid in
the same proportion; and the currency of all pieces of eight of Peru, dollars
and other foreign species of silver coins, whether of the same or baser alloy,
shall after the said first day of January next, stand regulated, according to
their weight and fineness, according and in proportion to the rate before
limited and set for the pieces of Sevill, pillar and Mexico; so that no foreign
silver coin of any sort, be permitted to exceed the same proportion upon any
account whatsoever. And we do hereby require and command all our governors,
lieutenant governors, magistrates, officers, and all other our good subjects,
within our said colonies and plantations, to observe and obey our directions
herein, as they tender our displeasure: Given at our castle at Windsor, the
eighteenth day of June, 1704, in the third year of our reign.

Cornbury met the assembly at Burlington the 7th of September, Assembly meet.
and recommended the preparing a bill to ascertain the rights of the general
proprietors to the soil of the province, to settle a fund for support of
government; and a French privateer having committed depredations on the
settlers about Sandy Hook, he thence took occasion to press for a law to
establish a militia, and fix a watch house on the Navesink hills. The house
took the matters into consideration: It does not appear but they intended to
make such provision on those occasions, as suited the circumstances of the
province, yet their proceedings on the whole, were not to his mind; on the 28th
therefore, he abruptly sent for and dissolved them, and issued writs for a new
election, Dissolved.
to meet at Burlington the 13th of November following: This election was
industriously managed, and a majority of members procured to his mind; they met
at the time, and being divided in the choice of a speaker, Peter Fretwell and
John Bowne, candidates, and the votes equal, they called upon their clerk,
(William Anderson,) to give the casting vote, which he did for Fretwell, who
was accordingly placed in the chair; The members of this assembly were,

For the Eastern division.
John Bown, Richard Hartshorne, Richard Salter, Obadiah Bown, Anthony Woodward,
John Tunison, John Lawrence, Jasper Crane, Peter V^neste, Thomas Gordon, John
Barclay, John Royse.

For the Western division.
Restore Lippincott, John Hugg, John Kay, John Smith, William Hall, John Mason,
Thomas Bryan, Robert Wheeler, Peter Fretwell, Thomas Lambert, Thomas Gardener,
Joshua Wright.




then receiving the speech, they by an address complimented Cornbury, with
going through the affairs of government with great diligence and exquisite
management, to the admiration of his friends, and envy of his enemies; and
passed a bill to raise two thousand pounds The lieutenant governor Ingolds by
received l. 600 out of this sum.
per annum, by tax, for support of government, to continue two years.

Several other laws were passed this session, and amongst them one for
establishing a militia, by the unnecessary severity of which, those
conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms in many parts were great sufferers.

On the 12th of December, the governor adjourned them till next year, with more
encomiums on their conduct, than many of them got from their constituents on
their return home; during this whole session, they had tamely suffered the
arbitrary practices of Cornbury, to deprive them of three of their most
substantial members, Thomas Gardener, Thomas Lambert and Joshua Wright, under
pretense of their not owning land enough to qualify them to sit there, though
they were known to be men of sufficient estates; and the same assembly at their
next meeting at Amboy, in 1705, themselves declare, the members had heretofore
satisfied the house of their being duly qualified to sit in the same; and they
were then admitted, when the purposes of their exclusion were answered: This
sitting was in October and November, but produced nothing of much consequence;
the session which followed at the same place in October, 1706, likewise proved
unsuccessful; and now Cornbury again dissolved the assembly.

In the 11th month this year, the council of proprietors for the western
division, met according to their usual practice; Dissolved.
present, William Biddle, president, Samuel Jenings, George Deacon, John Wills,
William Hall, Christopher Wetherill and John Kay; to this council Cornbury sent
an order to resolve him in certain points proposed to them, which for some
reasons, were at present delayed; but in the spring next year, he sent for the
council of proprietors to attend him in council at Burlington, and there
proposed sundry questions on the same subject, demanding a categorical answer
to each; they soon resolved him by sending It was delivered to Cornbury in
council, the 30th, the proprietors then present, were, Samuel Jenings, William
Hall, Thomas Gardener, John Wills, John Kay, Christopher Wetherill and Lewis
Morris; with the answer they delivered to the governor and council, two papers
containing the names of several of the proprietors, declaring their approbation
of the council, and one Indian deed.
a summary of their constitution and establishment as follows;

The answer delivered to the governors three questions, delivered to him by the
council of proprietors.
WHEREAS our governor the lord Cornbury, was pleased at our attending on him in
council, Summary of WestJersey council of proprietors.
the thirteenth day of this instant May, to require answers to three questions,
viz. who was the council of proprietors the last year; and who are chosen for
this year 1707, and to have the names of them? the second is, what are the
powers the said council pretend to have? the third, by whom constituted?

And in obedience thereto, we being part of the trustees, or agents commonly
called the council of proprietors, are willing to give all the satisfaction we
are able, in humble answer to his lordships requirings, viz.

First, the persons chosen for the last year to serve the proprietors as agents
or trustees, were William Biddle, Samuel Jenings, George Deacon, John Wills,
and Christopher Wetherill, for the county of Burlington; and John Reading,
Francis Collings, John Kay and William Hall, of Salem, for the county of
Gloucester, and below; and for this present year 1707, William Biddle, Samuel
Jenings, Lewis Morris, George Deacon, John Wills, John Kay, John Reading,
Thomas Gardener and William Hall of Salem.

2. In the year 1677, the first ship that came here from England, which brought
the first inhabitants that came to settle in these remote parts, by virtue of
Byllinge's right, before she sailed the proprietors being met together at
London, thought it advisable to settle some certain method how the purchasers
of land from Byllinge, etc. should have their just rights laid forth to them,
concluded on a number of persons, viz. Joseph Helmsly, William Emly, John
Penford, Benjamin Scott, Daniel Wills, Thomas Olive and Robert Stacy, as should
be called commissioners, and they were first empowered to purchase what land
they could from the Indians, and then to inspect all rights, as any lands were
claimed, and when satisfied therein, to order the laying it out accordingly;
which commissioners when arrived here, did forthwith make several purchases of
land, and acted as aforesaid, (...) some time, till some of them being not
longer able to struggle with such hunger, and many other great hardships as
were then met withal, returned again for England; so for preventing confusion
among the people, the assembly took the trouble of it on them; this continued
in practice till about the year 1687; then the assembly having much other
business, and being not able to spend their time and money abroad, would not
longer be troubled with that business, as was wholly belonging to the
proprietors, and so threw it out of the house, and told the proprietors they
might choose a convenient number of persons of themselves, to transact their
own business: Accordingly the 14th day of February, the same year, the
proprietors met at Burlington, and then and there chose and elected eleven
persons of themselves, to act for the whole, for the next ensuing year; but
then finding that so many and at such distances being hard to be got together,
they next year chose but nine, and accordingly signed instruments for the
confirming that constitution, of which his lordship has a copy; and the same
methods have been every year since practiced to this present year 1707; and in
all this time no inconveniences has arisen from it, but on the contrary, much
ease and advantage to the proprietors; as by a further declaration of many
other of the proprietors under their hands, is ready to be proved.

Now as to the powers of those as are now and have all along been, they are the
same with the first that came over from England in the year 1677; that is to
say, to purchase land of the Indians, with the consent and advice of the said
proprietors as chose them, and to inspect the rights of every man as shall
claim any land, so that the same may be surveyed to him or them; and for the
more easy and speedy settling of the province, commissioners have been
appointed in each county, to inspect all rights as aforesaid; the said agents,
trustees or council, also to choose a recorder, a surveyor general and rangers
in each county, to range for the benefit of the said general proprietors, and
to appoint persons to prevent the wasting and destroying of the proprietors
timber, upon their unsurveyed lands, etc.

The proprietors residing in England, have had knowledge of a committee of the
agents or trustees of the proprietors here, who were to act and negotiate their
affairs by their agents, from time to time, acting in conjunction with them, as
Adlord Bound, John Tatham, agents to doctor Coxe; and when Jeremiah Bass was
agent, he acted with them also; after him, when our late governor Hamilton was
made agent, he acted as one of the said agents, trustees or council for several
years, and was president of the same; and now Lewis Morris, as agent to the
society, is one of the said trustees or council; and not only the agents of the
agents of the proprietors at home, but any proprietor now has, and have had
liberty, to come and meet with the said agents, trustees or council, when he or
they pleased.

Lastly, as to the constitution of the said agents, trustees or committee, and
by whom constituted; it is on certain days in the county of Burlington and
Gloucester, yearly and every year, they are chosen by the proprietors: The
above is as good an account as we that are present are able to give, in answer
to what was required of us by his lordship, and pray it may find acceptance as
such; but if any further thing may seem needful to be answered, we humbly pray
it may for this time be suspended, till the whole can be got together.

The writs for a new assembly were returnable to Burlington, the 5 th of April,
1707. In this Assembly it soon appeared, Cornbury had not the success in
elections as in the last choice; his conduct was arbitrary, and the people
dissatisfied; the assembly chose Samuel Jenings, speaker, The members now were,

For the Eastern division.
John Harrison, Lewis Morris, Elisha Parker, Thomas Farmer, Jasper Crane,
Daniel Price, John Bown, William Lawrence, William Morris, Enoch Mackelson,
John Royce, Thomas Gordon.

For the Western division.
Peter Canson, William Hall, Richard Johnson, John Thomson, Bartholomew Wyatt,
John Wills, Thomas Bryan, Samuel J^^ings, Thomas Gardener, John Kay, Philip
Rawle.




received the governor's speech, and soon after resolved into a committee of
the whole house to consider grievances; this committee continued sitting from
day to day, till at length they agreed upon fifteen resolves, and by petition
to the queen laid them before her, on the 8th of the month called May, they
also remonstrated their grievances to the governor, as follows:

May it please the governor,
WE, her majesty's loyal subjects, the representatives of the province of
New Jersey, are heartily sorry, that instead of raising such a revenue as is by
the governor (as we suppose by the queen's directions) required of us, we are
obliged to lay before him the unhappy circumstances of this province: it is a
task we undertake not of choice, but necessity, and have therefore reason to
hope, that what we say may meet with a more favorable reception.

We pray the governor to be assured, it is our misfortune extorts this
procedure from us, and that we should betray the trust reposed in us by our
country, did we not endeavor to obtain relief.

The governor encourages us to hope he will not be deaf to our entreaties, nor
by his denial render our attempts for the best ends fruitless.

We may not perchance rightly apprehend all the causes of our sufferings, but
have reason to think some of them are very much owing to the governor's long
absence from this province, which renders it very difficult to apply to him in
some cases which may need a present help.

It were to be wished the affairs of New York would admit the governor oftener
to attend those of New Jersey, he had not then been unacquainted with our
grievances; and we are inclined to believe they would nor have grown to so
great a number.

It is therefore, in the first place, humbly presented to the governor's
consideration, that some persons under sentence of death for murder, have not
only remained till this time unexecuted, (they being condemned not long after
lord Cornbury's accession to this government) but often have been suffered to
go at large; it is possible the governor has not been informed, that one of
those persons is a woman who murdered her own child; another of them a woman
who poisoned her husband: The keeping of them so long has been a very great
charge, and how far it is a reflection on the public administration, to suffer
such wretches to pass with impunity, we dare not say; but sure the blood of
those innocents cries aloud for vengeance, and just Heaven will not fail to
pour it down upon our already miserable country, if they are not made to suffer
according to their demerits.

Secondly, we think it a great hardship, that persons accused for any crime,
should be obliged to pay court fees, notwithstanding the jury have not found
the bill against them; they are men generally chose out of the neighborhood,
and should be the most substantial inhabitants, who cannot well be supposed to
be ignorant of the character of the person accused, nor want as good
information as may be had; when therefore they do not find the bill, it is very
reasonable to suppose the accused person innocent, and consequently no fees due
from him; we pray therefore, that the governor will give his assent to an act
of assembly to prevent the like for the future; otherwise no person can be safe
from the practices of designing men, or the wicked effects of a vindictive
temper.

Thirdly, the only office for probate of wills being in Burlington, it must be
very expensive and inconvenient for persons who live remote to attend it,
especially for the whole Eastern division; we therefore pray the governor will
assent to an act to settle such an office in each county, or at least in each
division of this province, and that the officers be men of good estates, and
known integrity in the said county or division.

Fourthly, that the secretary's office is not also kept at Amboy, but that all
the Eastern division are forced to come to Burlington, that have any business
at said office, is a grievance which we hope the governor will take care to
redress; it seeming inconsistent with the present constitution of government
established by the queen, which does not admit one of the divisions of this
province to enjoy more privileges than the other; we therefore entreat the
governor not to take it amiss, that we desire his assent to an act to be passed
to oblige the secretary to keep the office at both places.

Fifthly, the granting of patents to cart goods on the road from Burlington to
Amboy, for a certain number of years, and prohibiting others, we think to be a
grievance that is contrary to the statute 21 Jac. 1. c. 3. against monopolies;
and being so, we doubt not, will easily induce the governor to assent to an act
to prevent all such grants for the future; they being destructive to that
freedom which trade and commerce ought to have.

Sixthly, the establishing fees by any other power or authority than by the
governor, council and representatives met in general assembly, we take to be a
great grievance, directly repugnant to Magna Charta, and contrary to the
queen's express instructions in the governor's instructions, which says, You
are to take care, that no man's life, member, freehold or goods; be taken away
or harmed in our province, under your government, otherwise than by established
and known laws, not repugnant to, but as near as much as may be, agreeable to
the laws of England; we therefore pray, that the governor will assent to an act
to be passed to settle fees; without which we think no more can be legally
demanded, than the persons concerned by agreement oblige themselves to pay.

Seventhly, the governor putting the former public records of the Eastern
division of this province into the hands of Peter Sonmans, pretended agent to
the proprietors, one that does not reside in the province, nor has not given
security for the well and true keeping of them, as is by the queen directed,
and kept them so that her majesty's subjects cannot have recourse to them; and
their being carried out of the division, is a great and crying grievance: They
are the only evidences that one half of this province has to prove the titles
to their estates, and this house is humbly of opinion, they ought to be so
kept, that persons may have recourse to them; and in the hands of such of whose
fidelity there is no reason to doubt; this being a thing so reasonable,
encourages us to request the governor to assent to an act to be passed to put
them in proper hands for the future, that the country may not be under the same
disappointments they now are.

These, governor, are some of the grievances this province complains of, and
which their representatives desire may be redressed; but there are others of a
higher nature, and attended with worse consequences; they cannot be just to the
governor, themselves, or their country, should they conceal them: We did expect
when the government of the Jersies was surrendered, to feel the benign
influences of the queen's mild government, under her more immediate
administration, and to be protected in the full enjoyment of our liberties and
properties, the last of which we thought ourselves something more secure in
than some of the neighboring plantations; and had an entire dependence that
her majesty's royal bounty and goodness would never be wanting to make us easy
and happy, even beyond our wishes: It is our misfortune, that we must say, the
success has not answered the expectation, and the queen's subjects here have
felt the reverse of what they had most reason to hope; that greatest and best
of princes is, without all peradventure, ignorant of our pressures, or we had
long since had relief; she is too good to continue even the deserved sufferings
of the miserable, and has more of Heaven in her than to hear the cry of those
that groan under oppression, and the unkind effects of mistaken power, to whom
we owe our miseries; and what they are, the sequel shows.

In the first place, the governor has prohibited the proprietors agents,
commonly called the council of proprietors, from granting any warrants for
taking up of land in the Western division of this province: We cannot see by
what law or reason any man's property can be disposed of by the governor
without his consent: The proprietors when they surrendered their government,
did not part with their soil, and may manage it as they think fit, and are not
to take directions from any person whatsoever, how and when to do it; if any
persons concerned be grieved, the laws are open, by which disputes in property
are decided; and he doubtless will not be left remediless. We are very sorry
the governor gives us occasion to say, it is a great encroachment on the
proprietors liberties; but we are not surprised at it, when a greater
en^^oachment on our liberties lead the way to it, and that was the governor's
refusing to swear or attest three members of the last assembly upon the
groundless suggestions of Thomas Revel and Daniel Leeds, two members of the
queen's council, by which they were kept out of the assembly: We are too
sensibly touched with that procedure, not to know what must be the unavoidable
consequences of a governor's refusing to swear which of the members of an
assembly he thinks fit; but to take upon himself the power of judging of the
qualifications of assembly-men, and to keep them out of the house (as the
governor did the aforesaid three members nigh eleven months till he was
satisfied in that point) after the house had declared them qualified; is so
great a violation of the liberties of the people, so great a breach of the
privileges of the house of representatives, so much assuming to himself a
negative voice to the freeholders election of their representatives, that the
governor is entreated to pardon us, if this is a different treatment from what
we expected: It is not the effects of passionate heats, the transports of
vindictive tempers; but the serious resentments of a house of representatives,
for a notorious violation of the liberties of the people, to whom they could
not be just, nor answer the trust reposed in them, should they decline letting
the governor know they are extremely dissatisfied at so unkind a treatment,
especially when its causes and effects conspire to render it so disagreeable.

It is notoriously known, that many considerable sums of money have been raised
to procure the dissolution of the first assembly, to get clear of the
proprietors quit-rents, and to obtain such officers as the contributors should
approve of; this house has great reason to believe, the money so gathered was
gives to lord Cornbury, and did induce him to dissolve the then assembly, and
by his own authority keep three members out of the next assembly, and put so
many mean and mercenary men into office; by which corrupt practice, men of the
best estates are severely harrassed, her majesty's good subjects in this
province so impoverished, that they are not able to give that support to her
majesty's government as is desired, or as they would be otherwise inclined to
do; and we cannot but be very uneasy when we find by these new methods of
government, our liberties and properties so much shaken, that no man can say he
is master of either, but holds them as tenant by courtesy and at will, and may
be stripped of them at pleasure: Liberty is too valuable a thing to be easily
parted with, and when such mean inducements procure such violent endeavors to
tear it from us, we must take leave to say, they have neither heads, hearts,
nor souls, that are not moved with the miseries of their country, and are not
forward with their utmost power lawfully to redress them.

We conclude, by advising the governor to consider what it is that principally
engages the affections of a people, and he will find no other artifice needful
than to let them be unmolested in the enjoyment of what belongs to them of
right; and a wise man that despises not his own happiness, will earnestly
labor to regain their love.

By order of the house, Samuel Jenings, speaker.

By this remonstrance may be seen much of the history of the times, and that
though things were carried to arbitrary lengths, there were not wanting in the
province, men of discernment to see and lament the unhappy situation of their
country, and of spirit to oppose it is greatest enemies; several such were in
this assembly, the speaker in particular, Lewis Morris, also now distinguished
himself with great activity in behalf of privilege, and had a large share in
the whole conduct of this assembly; of him more hereafter.
had very early known New Jersey, had lived through many changes and commotions,
to see great alterations in it; much concerned in public transactions, he knew
what belonged to a public (...); he had governed the western part of the
Province for several years, with integrity and reputation; saw the advantages
of a just confidence, and that it could not be acquired another way; that
though the office was in itself respectable, it was the honest execution of it
according to it is dignity, that produced the intended service, and secured the
approbation of a kind but watchful mistress; for such queen Anne was accounted
to her governors. Jenings was also undaunted, and lord Cornbury on his part,
exacted the utmost decorum; while as speaker he was delivering the
remonstrance, the latter frequently interrupted him with a stop, what is that,
etc. at the same time putting on a countenance of authority and sternness, with
intention to confound him; with due submission, yet firmness, whenever
interrupted, he calmly desired leave to read the passages over again, and did
it with an additional emphasis upon those most complaining; so that on the
second reading they became more observable than before; After the house was
gone, Cornbury with some emotion, told those with him, that Jenings had
impudence enough to face the D -- l.
he at length got through; when the governor told the house, to attend him
again on saturday next, at 11 o'clock, to receive his answer; he did not get
ready till the twelfth, when sending for the house, he delivered his answer.

CHAP. XVI.
Lord Cornbury's answer to the assembly's remonstrance.
Gentlemen,
ON thursday last I received a paper from you, which you call a remonstrance; I
then told you, it was of an extraordinary nature, and contained many
particulars, which though they lay open enough to receive an immediate answer,
yet because I would not put it in your power to say I had given you a rash
inconsiderate answer, I would make no return to it till the saturday following,
at which time I sent you word by the secretary, that I should not expect your
attendance till this day. I shall not take notice of any thing in your
preamble, but the two last clauses of it; in the first of which you say, that
you have reason to think that some of your sufferings are owing to the
governor's long absence from this province, which renders it very difficult to
apply to him in some cases that may need a present help: This is so far from
being true, that besides my being twice in this province every year, and have
never staid less than a Month, some times six weeks, or more, the post goes
every week to New York, by which I may be easily informed of any emergency;
moreover the lieutenant governor, colonel Ingoldsby, resides constantly in this
province, and would certainly have done right to any persons that would have
complained to him; which makes this allegation very frivolous.

In the next clause you say, that it were to be wished that the affairs of
New York would admit the governor oftener to attend those of New Jersey. The
affairs of New York have never hindered the governor from attending those of
New Jersey, whenever it has been requisite; and I can safely say, I don't know
of any grievances this province labors under, except it be the having a
certain number of people in it, who will never be faithful to, nor live quietly
under any government, nor suffer their neighbors to enjoy any peace, quiet or
happiness, if they can help it.

I now begin with your articles.

Two women that have been condemned for murdering, have not been executed,
there having appeared most notorious malice and revenge in some people, who
were zealous in these prosecutions; the queen is the fountain of honor,
justice and mercy; and as she is so, she may when she pleases, exert her mercy,
either in reprieving or pardoning any criminal: That power of pardoning and
reprieving after condemnation, the subjects of this province, her majesty has
been pleased to entrust me with; and I am no ways accountable to any person or
number of persons whatsoever, for what I do in those matters, but to the
queen's majesty alone.

As for what you say, with relation to the apprehensions you have, that just
heaven will not foil to pour down vengeance upon your already miserable
country, if these criminals are not made to suffer according to their demerits:
I am of opinion, that nothing has hindered the vengeance of just heaven from
falling upon this province long ago, but the infinite mercy, goodness, long
suffering, and forbearance of almighty God, who has been abundantly provoked by
the repeated crying sins of a perverse generation among us, and more especially
by the dangerous and abominable doctrines and the wicked lives and practices of
a number of people; some of whom under the pretended name of christians, have
dared to deny the very essence and being of the savior of the world: It is a
strange thing, that such an assembly of men as the representatives of the
people of this province are or ought to be, should complain of any thing under
the name of hardship, before they had informed themselves whether the thing
they had a mind to complain of, were really a hardship or not: This plainly is
your case at this time; for if you had asked any man, that knows any thing of
the practice of the law in England, you would have found, that if any
proceedings had been carried on against any persons supposed to be guilty, they
have always paid the court fees, notwithstanding the grand jury have not found
the bill; and this is so known a practice, that it is not to be disputed; but
when men will intermoddle with, or pretend to things which they neither know
nor understand, they cannot fail of misguiding themselves, and misleading those
that have a mind to be guided by them.

Indeed, if juries in this country were as they ought to be, the supposition
might in some measure be allowed; but we find by woeful experience, that there
are many men who have been admitted to serve upon grand and petty juries, who
have convinced the world that they have no regard for the oaths they take,
especially among a sort of people, who under a pretense of conscience, refuse
to take an oath; and yet many of them under the cloak of a very solmn
affirmation, dare to commit the greatest enormities, especially if it be to
serve a friend, as they call him; and these are the designing men, and the
vindictive tempers, of which all the queen's good subjects ought to beware, and
be protected from; and these are the crying sins which will undoubtedly draw
down the vengeance of just heaven upon this province and people, if not timely
and seriously repented of.

If I could persuade myself to wonder at any of the enormities contained in
this remonstrance (and which I would do if it came from any other men) it
should be at this; because no reasonable man can persuade himself to believe,
that a number of men chosen by their country to represent them, would presume
to complain of a thing as a grievance, when the thing complained of is in fact
not true; for the office of probate of wills is wherever the governor is,
consequently not at Burlington only: Ever since the queen has done me the
honor to entrust me with the government of this province, I have never failed
of being in the province twice every year, once at Burlington, and once at
Amboy; except the last year, that I had the unspeakable misfortune of losing a
wife, whom I loved as my own soul, after a very long tedious sickness, during
which I am persuaded no reasonable man could expect I should leave her for any
time; and yet notwithstanding that, I was twice at Amboy last year, where any
body that had a will to prove, might have had it done if they had pleased;
besides my being twice every year in the province, considering the remoteness
of Cape-May county and the county of Salem, I did appoint a surrogate at
Burlington, before whom any of the inhabitants of either division might have
had their wills proved; I did not think it necessary to appoint one in the
Eastern division, because the inhabitants of that division who are most remote
from New York, are within a very easy day's journey of my surrogate at
Burlington, and much the major part of the people of that division, are within
a small day's journey of New York, where their private affairs daily calls many
of them, and where any of them may have their wills proved without any injury
to, or encroachments upon their properties, rights or privileges: This is so
certain a truth, that I am persuaded all judicious and impartial men will look
upon this complaint to be malicious, scandalous, and frivolous, contrived only
to amuse poor ignorant people with notions of grievances; when in truth there
is no manner of cause of complaint: Besides what you desire, is a direct
invasion of the queen's prerogative; for it belongs to her majesty alone to
appoint who shall take probate of wills, and grant letters of administration;
and that power the queen has been pleased to vest in the governor; and I am
sure I will never so far betray the trust her majesty has honored me with, as
to sacrifice her prerogative royal, to the humors of any person or persons
whatsoever: But of all the people in the world, the quakers ought to be the
last to complain of the hardships of traveling a few miles upon such an
occasion, who never repine at the trouble and charges of traveling several
hundred miles to a yearly meeting, where it is evidently known, that nothing
was ever done for the good of the country, but on the contrary continual
contrivances are carried on for the undermining of the government both in
church and state.

You have had as little regard to the truth of matter of fact in this
complaint, as in some of the rest; for it is certain, that the secretary's
office is kept at Amboy, as well as at Burlington, as far as the nature of the
thing requires, and it can admit of, for the records of the eastern division,
or at least so many of them as the agent for the proprietors of that division
could hitherto recover from one Thomas Gordon, into whose hands they were put
in the time of the proprietors government, and who has embezzled several of
them, for which he must be answerable: there is a supreme court held once every
year at Amboy, there is no more at Burlington; so that one division does not
enjoy more privileges and advantages than the other; and you have no more
reason to desire a secretary's office to be settled at Amboy, than the people
of the county of Cumberland would have to desire a secretary of state's office
to be settled in their county, because it is a great way for them to travel to
London when they have any business in the secretary's office; the thing is
inconsistent in itself, to have two secretaries offices in the same province,
and consequently unreasonable, and I am pretty well satisfied without
precedent; besides I don't know any body that can claim the right or power of
appointing a secretary in this province but the queen, and she has been pleased
to appoint one under the great seal of England, and her majesty is pleased to
think one sufficient; as undoubtedly it is; but if you had thought that another
had been necessary, it would have been much more modest to have acquainted me
with it, that I might have humbly represented it to her majesty, rather than to
have remonstrated that as a grievance, which is done in pursuance of the
queen's commands: But this is of the same nature with the rest of your
complaints, contrived on purpose to amuse the poor ignorant people with a
notion of grievances, when in truth there is not the least color or cause of
complaint. I could wish, since you had a mind to color this complaint with the
authority of an act of parliament of England, that you had advised with some
lawyer, to know whether this could be any ways brought under that statute, or
can by any construction in the world be called a monopoly; but where a man
engrosses a commodity into his own hands, and imposes what unreasonable price
he pleases upon that commodity, or where a man is suffered to enjoy any trade
or occupation exclusive of others, to the prejudice of the public, or
particularly the hindering or burthening of trade; the thing now complained of
is so far from being of that nature, that it is directly contrary; for by the
patent now complained of, the subjects of this province have the convenience of
sending such quantities of goods to and from Burlington and Amboy, as their
private occasions, or the nature of their trade requires, at reasonable and
certain rates, and at certain times, which they never could do before; for
before the settling of this wagon, if any persons had occasion to send any
goods to or from either of those places, they were forced to hire a wagon,
though perhaps they had not the tenth part of a load, and were forced to pay such
rates as the owners of the wagon thought fit to impose upon them; whereas at
present every body is sure once a fortnight to have an opportunity of sending
any quantity of goods, great or small, at reasonable rates, without being in
danger of being imposed upon at the will of the owner of the wagon; and the
settling of this wagon is so far from being a grievance or a monopoly, that by
this means and no other, a trade has been carried on between Philadelphia,
Burlington, Amboy and New York, which was never known before; and in all
probability would never have been, had it not been for this certain convenient
way of sending such quantity of goods as people pleased from place to place;
and in all the parts of Europe, the having public carriages for goods has
always been esteemed of absolute necessity, and the want of them has been
looked upon as a hardship: But it seems those things which in the wisest and
best governments in Europe, have not only been thought convenient but esteemed
of absolute necessity, are found out by some of our wiser people here, to be
grievances and monopolies: This being undoubtedly true, it is plain the patent
complained of cannot come within the stat. of the 21 Ja. 1. chap. 3. This I
believe will be sufficient to convince all reasonable men, how frivolous and
unreasonable this complaint is. I shall observe, that when I was first applied
to for a patent for the allowing this wagon, which was by one Dellaman, who in
colonel Hamilton's time was permitted to drive a wagon for carrying goods,
though under no regulation, either with respect to times of going, or prices for
carrying goods, and then was no monopoly; before I would grant it, I did
acquaint the council with it, and desired them to let me know, if they
apprehended any inconveniency in granting such a patent; those gentlemen were
all of opinion, there could be no inconveniency in it, but rather a great
convenience; and indeed experience has proved that opinion to be true; nay, mr.
Lewis Morris himself, the chief promoter of these unreasonable and frivolous
complaints at this time, who had the honor to be one of her majesty's council,
expressed himself very fully to that purpose: Indeed had that gentleman ever
been consistent with himself in any two actions of his life, I should wonder
how he could so soon alter his opinion in a case of that nature; but his
behavior at all times having fully convinced the world that he never was so,
makes me cease wondering: This clause of your remonstrance is indeed of a more
extravagant nature than the former, for you presume to call that a great
grievance, and affirm it to be directly contrary to magna charta, and contrary
to the queen's express directions in the governor's instructions; which is most
certainly exactly pursuant to, and in obedience of the express words contained
in the queen's instructions to the governor; so that you make the governor's
faithful obedience to the instructions the queen has honored him with, to be a
great grievance; which is no less than accusing her most sacred majesty, the
best of queens, of commanding her governor to do things which in themselves are
great grievances; how grateful a return this is to her majesty, for the
repeated favors she has been pleased to show to this province and people, let
the world judge!

That clause of my instructions which you recite in this article, has no manner
of relation to fees; indeed there is another clause in my instructions, which
directs how, and by whom, all fees shall be settled, and the queen's commands
have been observed; the words of the clause are those, And you are with the
advice and consent of our said council, to take especial care to regulate all
salaries and fees belonging to places, or paid upon emergencies, that they be
within the bounds of moderation, and that no exaction be made on any occasion
whatsoever; as also that tables of all fees be publicly hung up in all places
where such fees are to be paid, and you are to transmit copies of all such
tables of fees to us, and to our commissioners for trade and plantations as
aforesaid; and I challenge every one of you, and all mankind, to show, how,
when, and where, any man's life, member, freehold, or goods, have been taken
away, or harmed in this province, since it came under her majesty's government;
otherwise than by established and known laws, not repugnant to, but as much as
may be, agreeable to the laws of England: When I first read this clause, I
could not imagine what it was put in for, unless it were on purpose to arraign
the queen's express commands to me. First, Mr. Sonmans is not the pretended
agent, but the lawfully constituted agent for the proprietors of the eastern
division of this province, and has qualified himself according to the queen's
instructions to me, and he does reside the greatest part of his time in the
province; the records are not carried out of the Eastern division, unless it be
those which Thomas Gordon has imbezzled; but those that came to the hands of
Mr. Sonmans are kept at Amboy, where any body may have recourse to them that
will desire it, at any reasonable hour; and the country is not under any
disappointment upon that account; besides the records of the Eastern division
were put into the hands of the proprietors agent, by an order from England,
upon a complaint made in England, that the records were not in the hands of the
proprietors agents.

"These, governor, are some of the grievances."

This is certainly one of the boldest assertions that ever was made, especially
when there appears no manner of proof to make it out: When I read these two
clauses; for there are two before you come to enumerate these grievances of an
higher nature, and attended with worse consequences, I expected to have found
myself, or some other persons entrusted with me in the administration of the
government over her majesty's subjects in this province, not only accused, but
made plainly appear, by undeniable manifest proofs, beyond the possibility of a
contradiction, to be guilty or the most enormous crimes: Who can imagine when
such a body of men, as the representatives of a province, venture to say, that
they did expect when the government of the Jersies was surrendered, to feel the
influences of the queen's mild government under her more immediate
administration, and to be protected in the full enjoyment of their liberties
and properties; the last of which they thought themselves a little more secure
in, than some of the neighboring plantations, and had an entire dependence
that her majesty's royal bounty and goodness would never be wanting to make
them easy and happy, even beyond their wishes; it is their misfortune, that
they must say, the success has not answered the expectation; and the queen's
subjects here have felt the reverse of what they had most reason to hope that
the greatest and best of princes is without all peradventure ignorant of their
pressures, or they had long since had relief; she is too good to, continue even
the deserved sufferings of the miserable, and has more of heaven in her, than
not to hear the cries of those that groan under oppression and the unkind
effects of mistaken power, to whom they owe their misery; who would not, I say,
after such assertions, expect to see the governor proved guilty either of
treason, or betraying the trust reposed in him by the queen, by depriving the
subjects of their lives, their estates or properties, or at least denying them
justice, and perverting the laws, to the oppression, instead of administering
them for the protection and preservation of the people committed to his charge?
These or the like crimes manifestly proved, are the only things that can
justify men in the accusing a governor of corrupt practice, and of shaking the
liberties and properties of the people; but if none of these things can be
proved, but on the contrary, it does appear plainly, that no one act of
severity, much less of injustice or oppression, has been done since the
government of this province came under the queen, but that there has been an
impartial, just and equal administration of justice observed through out the
whole course of my government, and that many acts of mercy have been extended
to persons who deserved to be severely punished; then what sort of creatures
must these bold accusers appear to be, in the eyes of all impartial and
judicious men! That these are truths beyond all contradiction, and which all
the people of this province know, I do challenge you, and every one of you, to
prove the contrary: And though I know very well, that there are several unquiet
spirits in the province, who will never be content to live quiet under any
government but their own, and not long under that neither, as appears by their
methods of proceeding when the government was in the hands of the proprietors;
when many of these very men who are now the remonstrancers, were in authority,
and used the most arbitrary and illegal methods of proceeding over their fellow
subjects that were ever heard of; yet I am satisfied, there are very few men in
the province, except Samuel Jenings and Lewis Morris, men known neither to have
good principles, nor good morals, who have ventured to accuse a governor of
such crimes, without any proof to make out their accusation; but they are
capable of any thing but good.

But that the unreasonableness of these complaints may appear the plainer, let
us consider what these enormities of mine are, that have turned the benign
influences of the queen's mild government into oppression, and the unkind
effect of mistaken power: First, by the instructions her most sacred majesty
the queen has honored me with, I am to allow all such agents as the general
proprietors shall appoint, such agents qualifying themselves by taking such
oaths as the queen is pleased to direct, and no others; no persons under the
name of a council of proprietors have ever tendered themselves to take those
oaths, consequently they are not capable of acting as agents; Besides, I say,
those people who call themselves a council of proprietors, are a parcel of
people, pretending to act by a power derived from certain persons, who have no
power to grant; the governor has therefore done in this case nothing but his
duty, in hindering, as far as in him lay, that pretended council of proprietors
from acting illegally, which they have long done to the prejudice of her
majesty's subjects: This is a truth I cannot doubt of, because besides the
other reasons I have to satisfy me in that point, you have voted my putting the
records of the eastern division into the hands of Peter Sonmans, to be a
grievance; though Mr. Sonmans has qualified himself long ago; so that the council
of proprietors not having qualified themselves at all, is a much greater
grievance. By the queen's instructions to me, she is pleased to direct, that no
person shall be capable of being elected a representative by the freeholders of
either division, or afterward sitting in general assembly, who shall not have
one thousand acres of land, of an estate of freehold in his own right, within
the division for which he shall be chosen; two gentlemen of the council
informed me, that three persons, whose names they then mentioned, were not
qualified; upon which I refused to take their attestations (for they were all
Quakers) and in so doing, I did my duty: I recommended it to the assembly at
that time, to proceed in the first place, to enquire into that matter; but they
did not think fit to do it, till they had sat about three weeks, and then they
sent me a message, to desire those three members might be sworn, for they were
satisfied they were qualified: I sent them word, that if they would communicate
to me the proofs which had satisfied them, I should be ready to admit them; but
that they would not do: In some few days the assembly was adjourned to meet at
Burlington, where they met at the time appointed, and sent me the same message
as they had done before; I sent them the same answer; upon which they ordered
the three members to produce to me the proofs of their qualifications; which
having done, I admitted them immediately, which I could not do before, without
breaking the queen's instructions; so that it was entirely through their own
stubborness that they were not admitted sooner, and no intent or desire of mine
to keep them out: If I had had a mind to keep any members out of the house, I
could have made objections which they could never have answered; but such
practices are below me; and it is not true, that I have made any violation of
the liberties of the people, nor have assumed to myself a negative voice to the
freeholders election of representatives, as this house of representatives has
lately most notoriously done: But of that more anon.

Indeed the treatment I have met with from this house of representatives, is
far different from what I and all reasonable men expected from most of them,
thinking them endowed with reason and common justice to mankind; but it is not
different from what ^ expected from Samuel Jenings and Lewis Morris, two men
notoriously known always to have been disturbers of the quiet and peace of this
province, men always possessed with passionate heats, and the transports of
most vindictive tempers, but never capable of such serious resentments as would
become a house of representatives, if there were any occasion given them to
show any; how they have been able to prevail with the major part of the house
to join with them, in destroying as far as in them lay, the reputation of a
gentleman who has the honor to serve the queen as governor of this province,
and is so far from deserving such treatment from them, that he has always done
to the utmost of his power, for the good, welfare and prosperity of this
province and people, and would have done much more if the assembly would have
put it into his power, by preparing such bills as the governor at the beginning
of every sessions has recommended to them, and the condition of the country
required; but that they must answer for to God and their own consciences, and
perhaps one day to me.

Whether many considerable sums of money have been raised or not, I know not;
and if they were raised, for what intent and purpose they were raised I know
not; but this I know, that if any money was raised, it was not given to me, not
was ever any money offered to me to procure the dissolution of the first
assembly, or to get clear of the proprietors quit rents, or to obtain such
officers as the contributors should approve of, as is falsely alleged: The
reasons why I dissolved the first assembly were evident to all mankind; for it
was plain that house never intended to do any thing for the support of the
queen's government, nor for the good of the country; and indeed better could
not be expected from an assembly so corruptly chosen as that was; for some of
the now remonstrancers, and some other people, prevailed with Thomas Gordon,
then sheriff of the county of Middlesex, to refuse a poll when demanded; and
when the people, injured by that practice, complained to the house of
representatives, they had a day assigned them to be heard, but were limited to
bring but twenty witnesses; the people attended at the day appointed, with the
number of witnesses they were allowed to bring, but were then by the house
refused to be heard, not only by themselves but by their council, and their
witnesses refused to be examined; though at the same time they heard Thomas
Gordon, who was complained against, and did examine some witnesses on his
behalf; upon which the petition of the complainants was dismissed, thereby
supporting the illegal proceedings of the sheriff; this was a violalation of
the rights of the people with a vengance, and a sufficient reason, (if I had no
other) for the dissolving that assembly, that the people might once more have a
free choice of their representatives: As for getting clear of the proprietors
quit rents, it is such an absurdity to mention, that no body would be guilty of
it but Samuel Jenings and Lewis Morris; for it is evident, that at the
beginning or every sessions I have recommended it to the assembly, to prepare a
Bill or Bills, for settling the rights of the proprietors; which I suppose will
be a full answer to that part; and as I know of no such men as contributors, so
can I have no such application made to me: I have not knowingly put any mean or
mercenary men into office; indeed at my first coming into the government of
this province, I desired the gentlemen of the council, to recommend persons to
me fit to be put into offices, military and civil; several of them gave me
lists, and amongst the (...) mr. Lewis Morris gave me one, which I have still
by me, in which indeed, by experience, I find there are some mean, scandalous
men; but I cannot accuse any body else of doing the like. Thus much I thought
myself obliged to say, in answer to your remonstrance, to satisfy the world of
the falsehood of your (...) and the unreasonableness of your complains. I have
said the less in answer to the scandalous reflections you have cast upon me,
because I do not doubt, but upon my most humble application to her most sacred
majesty the queen, she will be graciously pleased to allow me to take such
measures as may be most proper to procure me ample satisfaction, for the great
and extravagant injuries you have done me: As for the advice you conclude with,
I shall only say, that I can never answer the taking advice from men who do not
know how to govern themselves, and who have always opposed the service of the
queen, and the interest and good of the country, which are inseparable.

Now, gentlemen, I shall take notice to you of some of your late unaccountable
proceedings in this assembly, which I cannot pass by without a breach of the
trust reposed in me by her majesty; and first, I shall observe, that at the
opening of the sessions, I recommended to you the settling a revenue, and the
preparing several bills which I thought might be useful for the country; and I
told you, that if you found any thing else necessary to be provided for by a
law, you should always find me ready to agree to any thing that might be
reasonable; but instead of proceeding upon those things so necessary, that they
ought to have employed your first thoughts, you have squandered away your time
in hawking after imaginary grievances, for the space of one whole month,
without making one step toward the service of the queen, or the country; you
have presumed to take the queen's subjects into the custody of the sergeant at
arms, who are not members of your house; which you cannot lawfully do; and is a
notorious violation of the liberties of the people; you have taken upon you, to
administer an oath to one of your members, and have expelled him the house for
refusing to take an oath, which you could not legally administer to him: This
is most certainly robbing that member of his property, and a most notorious
assuming to yourselves a negative voice to the freeholders election of their
representatives; for which there can be no precedent found: You have
arbitrarily taken upon you, to command the high sheriff of this county, to
discharge a prisoner who was in his custody, at the suit of one of the queen's
subjects; and he has been weak enough to do it, for which he lies liable to be
sued for an escape, whenever the gentleman thinks fit to do it; and from which
you cannot protect him: This is a notorious violation of the rights of the
subjects, and a manifest interruption of justice: You have taken upon you, to
appoint one of your members to act as clerk of the committee of the whole
house, which you have no power to do; and the party officiating is liable to be
prosecuted for acting without lawful authority, and without being qualified to
act. These, gentlemen, are some of the irregularities you have been guilty of
this sessions; some of them are encroachments upon the queen's prerogative, the
rest are all notorious infractions upon the liberties and properties of the
people.

I was going to conclude, with giving you some wholesome advice; but I consider
that will be but labor lost, and therefore shall reserve it for persons who I
hope will make a right use of it.

CHAP. XVII.
The assembly's reply to Lord Cornbury's answer to their remonstrance.
THE assembly did not immediately go upon the consideration of a reply,
Fauconier's accounts.
having before them the treasurer, Peter Fauconier's accounts, in which they
found many articles extraordinary in their nature, several of them being paid
by Cornbury's order barely, and the whole without vouchers; they sent for him;
he attending, refused to lay his vouchers before them without the governor's
commands; two members were sent to the governor, to desire him to order the
treasurer to lay the vouchers of his accounts, and the orders for the payment
of the sums therein mentioned before them; the governor said, he had already
ordered it, though it was what he could not legally do, because the lord high
treasurer had appointed an auditor general for the province, and he not being
in it, had deputed one to audit the accounts, and that the treasurer was
accountable only to the lord high treasurer; but if the house was dissatisfied
with any articles in the accounts, and thought proper to apply to him, he would
satisfy them: This was not done; and the accounts, extraordinary as they were,
remained unsettled till Hunter's administration several years after. Several
bills of consequence were now also under consideration; but Cornbury,
apprehensive, that if he suffered the sessions to continue much longer, it
would produce something not to his advantage, on the 16th adjourned the house
till the next September, to meet him at Amboy. In the October following they
met accordingly: The first thing now concluded on, was a reply to the foregoing
answer to their remonstrance; next place, they resolved N. C. D. that they
would raise no money till the governor consented to redress the grievances of
the country; which if he did, they would raise L. 1500, for support of
government for one year.

On the 28th, the house sent a committee to acquaint the governor, that having
seen his answer to their remonstrance in print, they thought fit to make a
reply to it, and desired to know when he would admit them to wait on him with
it; the governor said, he would return an answer in due time; they waited for
his message till next day, and then concluding he intended to elude giving them
opportunity of presenting it, sent a committee with it, but he would not
receive it; Their message to introduce it he received, and the next day laid it
before the council, as follows: The house of representatives having sent a
message to your excellency, to know when your excellency would be waited upon
with a reply this house has made to your excellency's answer to their
remonstrance; and your excellency having not, as is usual in such cases,
assigned them any time, they have appointed us to wait on your excellency with
the said reply, and to deliver it to you.
upon which they ordered it to be entered in their journal, as follows:

May it please your excellency,
WE, the representatives of this her majesty's province of New Jersey, finding
her majesty's subjects greatly, and as we are very well satisfied with good
reason, aggrieved; thought we could not answer the trust reposed in us by our
country, should we not endeavor to get those hardships removed under which
they labor.

It was needless to hunt after imaginary grievances, real ones in too great
numbers presenting themselves; and though from you we have missed of obtaining
that relief that the justice of our complaints entitled us to; yet we do not
despair of being heard by her sacred majesty, at whose royal feet we shall in
the humblest manner lay an account of our sufferings; and however contemptible
we are, or are endeavored to be made appear, we are persuaded her majesty will
consider us as the representatives of the province of New Jersey, who must
better know, what are the grievances of the country they represent, than a
governor can do, who regularly ought to receive informations of that kind from
them; and we do not doubt that glorious queen will make her subjects here as
easy and happy as she can.

When we told your excellency, we had reason to think some of our sufferings
were very much owing to your excellency's long absence from this province,
which rendered it very difficult to apply to your lordship in some cases that
might need a present help, we spoke truth; and notwithstanding all your
excellency has said of a months or twelve weeks in a year, and the weekly going
of a post; we cannot be persuaded to believe, that nine months and upwards in a
year, is not a long absence, especially when the seal of the province is
carried and kept out of the government all that time; and the honorable
colonel Ingoldsby, the lieutenant governor, so far from doing right, that he
declined doing any act of government at all; whether he governs himself by your
excellency's directions or not, we cannot tell; but sure we are, that this
province being as it were without government for above nine months in a year,
we must still think it a great grievance, and not made less so by carrying the
seal of the province to New York, and laying her majesty's subjects under a
necessity of applying from the remotest part of this province, for three parts
of the year and better, to your excellency at fort Ann, in New York, from which
place most of the commissions and patents granted during your excellency's
absence, are dated, (by what authority we shall not enquire) notwithstanding a
lieutenant governor resides in the province, and is by her majesty's commission
empowered to execute the queen's letters patents, and the powers therein
contained, during your excellency's absence from this province of New Jersey;
without which powers given and duly executed, a lieutenant governor is useless
and an unnecessary charge; and we cannot think, that her sacred majesty, who
honored that gentleman with so great a mark of her royal favor, as giving him
a commission for lieutenant governor of New Jersey, did at the same time
inhibit him from executing the powers therein expressed.

Things are sometimes best illustrated by their contraries; and perhaps the
most effectual way to convince the world, that this complaint is frivolous and
untrue, as by your excellency alleged, would be, for your excellency to bring
the seal of the province of New York to Burlington, keep it there, and do all
the acts of government relating to the province of New York, at Burlington, in
New Jersey, for above three fourths of a year, and let the lieutenant governor
reside at New York during that time, without doing any act of government,
adjourn their assemblies on the very day, or day before they are to meet, that
they may not lose the advantage of traveling to New York, from the remotest
part of that province, and at a time when it cannot be done without the utmost
prejudice to their affairs; it is hardly probable they would be pleased under
such an administration, notwithstanding the case of informing your excellency
every week by the post, of any emergency that might happen.

We are apt to believe, upon the credit of your excellency's assertion, that
there may be a number of people in this province who will never be faithful to,
or live quietly under any government, nor suffer their neighbors to enjoy any
peace, quiet nor happiness, if they can help it; such people are pests in all
governments, have ever been so in this, and we know of none who can lay a
fairer claim to these characters than many of your excellency's favorites.

What malice and revenge were in the prosecution of the condemned persons, we
don't know; we never heard of any till now, and hardly can be persuaded to
believe it is possible there should be in both the instances.

It is not impossible, there might be malice in the prosecution of the woman
who was condemned for poisoning her husband; there not being (as is said) plain
proof of the fact, but it was proved she had attempted it before more than
once; and there were so many other concurring circumstances as did induce the
jury, who were of the neighborhood (and well knew her character) to find her
guilty, and it is hardly probable their so doing was an act of malice.

The woman who murdered her own child, did it in such a manner, and so
publicly, that it is unreasonable to suppose there could be any malice in the
prosecution of her, and we cannot think (notwithstanding your excellency's
assertions) that you can or may believe there was. This woman was a prisoner in
the sheriff's custody for breach of the peace, and going about some of the
household affairs the sheriff employed her in, with a knife in her hand, her
child who was something froward, followed her crying; upon which the mother
turned back to it and cut it is throat; but not having cut it deep enough, the
child still followed her all bloody, and crying, O! mother you have hurt me;
the mother turned back a second time, and cut it effectually, and then took it
up and carried it to the sheriff or his wife, at whose feet she laid it: How
far such a wretch is entitled to the queen's favor, her majesty can best tell,
when she is made acquainted with the fact; but sure we are, she never gave your
excellency the power of pardoning wilful murder: Whether your excellency has or
has not reprieved them, you best know, and are only accountable to her majesty
for your procedures therein; though we have too much reason to believe, the
favorable opinion your excellency has so publicly expressed of her, has been
a great reason to induce her to make her escape, which she has done. -- We
thought it our duty, humbly to represent that matter to your excellency's
consideration, and had reason to be apprehensive of the judgments of almighty
God, whose infinite mercy has hitherto suspended the execution of his justice,
notwithstanding that great provocations have been given him, by impiety,
profaneness and debauchery, under the mask of a pretended zeal for his glory,
and love for his church: It is not our business to enter into religious
controversies; we leave them to divines, who ought best to understand things of
that nature, and who may perhaps inform us what is meant by denying the very
essence of the savior of the world.

We cannot yet be persuaded, that an innocent person should pay fees; what the
practice in England is, we did never enquire, but believe, that persons
acquitted by a grand jury, do not pay those extravagant fees they are made to
pay here; we did not govern ourselves by the practice there, but the
unreasonableness of the thing; and your excellency does grant, that what we say
is in some measure to be allowed, were the juries in this country such as they
ought to be; we hope they are, and our experience has not convinced us, that
persons who under pretense of conscience refuse an oath, have yet no regard for
the oaths they take, as your excellency says. The temptations to resentment
prove often too powerful, and irresistably engage us in unbecoming heats, and
when the characters of men are written with pens too deeply dipped in gall, it
only evinces a want of temper in the writer. Our juries here are not so learned
or rich as perhaps they are in England; but we doubt not full as honest. We
thought the only office for probate of wills was at Burlington; but your
excellency has convinced us, that it is wherever your excellency is, and
consequently may be at York, Albany, the east end of Long Island, or in
Connecticut, or New England, or any place more remote should your excellency's
business or inclination call you there; which is so far from making it less a
grievance, that it rather makes it more so; and notwithstanding those soft,
cool, and considerate terms of malicious, scandalous and frivolous, with which
your excellency vouchsafes to treat the assembly of this province; they are of
opinion, that no judicious or impartial men, will think it reasonable, that the
inhabitants of one province should go into another to have their wills proved,
and take letters of administration at Fort Ann, from the governor of New York,
for what should regularly be done by the governor of New Jersey in Jersey, to
which place all the acts of government relating to New Jersey, are limited by
the queen's letters patents under the great seal of England; and when your
excellency is absent from New Jersey, to be executed by the lieutenant
governor; and by the said letters patents not the least color of authority is
given to your excellency, to do any act of government relating to New Jersey,
any where but in Jersey; nor is there any instruction (that we know of)
contradicting the said letters patents any where upon record in this province,
to warrant your excellency's conduct in that affair: If this be not cause, and
just cause of complaint, we do not know what is; we are inclined to believe,
the province of New York would think it so, were they to come to Amboy or
Burlington, to prove wills, etc.

We do not think, that what we desire, is an invasion of the queen's right; but
what her majesty, without infringment of her prerogative royal, may assent to;
and their late majesty's of blessed memory, did, by their governor colonel
Fletcher, assent to an act made in New York, in the year 1692, entitled, An act
for the supervising intestates estates, and regulating the probate of wills,
and granting letters of administration;' by which the court of common pleas in
the remote counties of that province, were empowered to take the examination of
witnesses to any will within their respective counties, and certify the same to
the secretary's office; and the judges of the several courts in those remote
counties, empowered to grant probates of any will, or letters of
administration, to any person or person, where the estate did not exceed L. 50;
what has been done there may with as much reason be done here, without
sacrificing the queen's prerogative royal to the humors or caprices of any
person or persons whatsoever.

It is the general assembly of the province of New Jersey, that complains, and
not the quakers, with whose persons (considered as quakers) or meetings we have
nothing to do, nor are we concerned in what your excellency says against them;
they perhaps, will think themselves obliged to vindicate their meetings from
the aspersions which your excellency so liberally bestows upon them, and evince
to the world how void of rashness and inconsideration your excellency's
expressions are, and how becoming it is for the governor of a province to enter
the lists of controversy, with a people who thought themselves entitled to his
protection of them in the enjoyment of their religious liberties; those of them
who are members of this house, have begged leave in behalf of themselves and
their friends, to tell the governor, they must answer him in the words of
Nehemiah to Sanballat, contained in the 8th verse of the 6th chapter of
Nehemiah, viz. There is no such thing done as thou say, but thou seignest
them out of thine own heart.

We are so well assured the fact is true, that the secretary's office is kept
at Burlington only, that we still are of opinion it is a grievance, for the
reasons we have assigned; the proprietors records has not any thing to do with
the secretary's office, but is an office wholly belonging to the proprietors,
and altogether at their disposal; and is not a secretary's office kept at
Amboy, either as far as the nature of the thing requires or can admit of, or
any way at all.

And as the assemblies and courts sit alternately at Amboy and Burlington, so
it is highly reasonable the secretary's office should be kept alternately also
at both these places, or by deputy in one of them, and may be very well done
without making two secretaries.

Both this and the rest of our complaints, are not with design to amuse the
people, but are just and reasonable; and we believe, will by the people be
thought to be grievances till they are redressed; who can no more think it
reasonable, that all the inhabitants of the eastern division should come to the
office at Burlington, than that all of the western division should go to Amboy.

We are still of opinion, the grant we complain of is against the statute we
mentioned, because it is exclusive of others, and to the prejudice of the
public. It can never be thought reasonable to prohibit any body to cart their
own goods, or any body's else, as by virtue of that grant has been done; and
not only in the road from Amboy to Burlington, but in the road from Shrewsbury;
and a patent may as well be granted to keep horses to hire, by which a man may
be hindered to ride his own: It is destructive to the common rights of men, and
a great grievance, and we had reason to endeavor to get it redressed.

It Is true, a certain convenience for transportation of goods, is no doubt of
great use, and the profit that accr^es by such undertakings, is the motive that
induces any persons to be at the charge of them, and providing fit carriages
for that end, and of ascertaining the times and prices of carrying; and the
more providers of such carriages, the more certain and cheap the
transportation, and freest from imposition; and consequently the fewer
carriages, the less certain and dearer, and the persons under a necessity of
using them more subject to be imposed upon by the carrier; now whether granting
by which others are excluded, waving the unlawfulness of it, be a means to
increase the number of the undertakers in that kind, or to lessen them, and
confine those who have any occasion to transport goods, to give such price as
he that has the patent thinks fit to impose, we leave to all men of common
sense to judge; and if experience may be admitted to determine that matter, it
is plain that transportation of goods, both by land and water, is dearer than
it was before the granting of that patent: It Is true, the certainty was not so
great as now; for now we are certain that a man cannot with his own carts carry
his own goods, but that if he does they will be seized; and if that be one of
the conveniences which the wise people in Europe think of absolute necessity,
we shall think it no irony to be called wiser, in differing from them, and
calling them monopolies as they are, and prejudicial to trade, and especially
that between York and Amboy, Burlington and Philadelphia; which did not owe
it is beginning to your excellency's patent, but was begun long before your
excellency had any thing to do with New Jersey, and in all probability had much
more increased were it not for that patent; and we believe whenever the
gentlemen of the law will give your excellency their true opinion of it, you
will not be long in doubt whether it is a monopoly or not: We thought it a
monopoly, as we do still, and a grievance, as is also both that and other
grants made by your excellency at fort Ann in New York, for any thing in Jersey.

Your excellency has neither by birth nor acquisition, a right to the
sovereignty of New Jersey; nor have you any power of governing the queen's
subjects here, but what her majesty is pleased to grant you by her letters
patents, under the great of England; by which letters patents the powers
therein contained, are limited to that country, which was formerly granted by
king Charles the second, under the name of Nova Caesaria or New Jersey, and
which has since been subdivided by the proprietors, and called East New Jersey,
and West New Jersey, and which her majesty is pleased to reunite under one
entire government, viz. The divisions of East and West New Jersey, in America;
and in case of your excellency's death, or absence from that country, which was
subdivided by the proprietors, and called East New Jersey and West New Jersey,
the powers of government are lodged in other hands. Now either fort Ann and the
city of New York, is in that country granted by king Charles the second, and
sub-divided by the proprietors thereof, and called East New Jersey and West
New Jersey; or your excellency is absent from New Jersey, when you are at fort
Ann in New York; that fort Ann is in New Jersey, we believe, that even your
excellency will think impracticable to presuade us to do so much violence to
our reason as to believe; therefore your excellency when at fort Ann, or any
where in New York, is absent from New Jersey; and what the consequence is we
need not say, thinking the pretense of a power to do acts of government
relating to New Jersey, at fort Ann, in New York, to be so manifestly absurd,
as to need nothing further to be said against it.

There is nothing more common in the statutes than the establishing fees, and
we are of opinion that all fees have been established by act of parliament; and
indeed it seems to us unreasonable they should be established by any other
authority; for if a governor, either with or without his council, can appoint
what sums of money shall be paid for fees, he may make them large enough to
defray the charge of government, without the formality of an act of assembly,
to raise a revenue for the necessary support of the same; and if it does not
come up to the taxing of the queen's subjects, without their consents in
assembly, we are to seek what does.

We cannot think the clause of your excellency's instructions, which we have
recited, to be so foreign to the matter of fees, as your excellency says it is;
for the enforcing the payment of fees by any authority but that of the
assembly's, is taking away a man's goods otherwise than by established or known
laws, except the act of a governor and council be a law, which we think is not,
nor never intended by the queen it should; nor do we think, by the instructions
your excellency mentions, you are to establish fees; but only to regulate those
already appointed, and to take care that no exaction was used; but if it did,
your excellency has convinced the world, that you do not think yourself bound
by the queen's instructions, but where the law binds also.

As in the case of Ormston, where nothing could be more positive than her
majesty's directions; yet your excellency did not think yourself ministerial,
or by not complying with her majesty's orders, that you accused the best of
queens, with commanding her governor to do a thing which was not warranted by
law; nor never enquired, whether the refusing obedience to her commands, was a
fit return for the many favors she had bestowed upon you; but governed
yourself in that singular instance as near as you could by the law. The seventh
clause was not put in to arraign the queen's express commands to your
excellency; but to complain of the great hardships her majesty's subjects lay
under, by your excellency's putting the records there mentioned, into the hands
of Peter Sonmans, who is not the proprietor's recorder, nor had no express
command from the queen to put the books into his hands; and may in part answer
the challenge made by your excellency in the last part of the next foregoing
clause; for your excellency had commanded the said records to be put into the
hands of Mr. Bass, the queen's secretary; upon which, application was made to
her majesty, who was pleased to give an order in favor of the proprietors; and
without all peradventure, it was intended they should be in the hands of the
proprietor's recorder, which Mr. Thomas Gordon was at that time, and regularly
is still, being constituted by the majority of the proprietors in the eastern
division, and by your excellency sworn; mr. John Barclay was also by your
excellency sworn, and a proclamation issued in his favor; since which Mr.
Peter Sonmans arrived from England, and upon application to your excellency,
was by your excellency, admitted receiver general of the quit rents, and the
proprietors records by your excellency put into his hands; which, with
submission, we think could not be done regularly by your excellency: For in the
first place, they were constituted by the majority of the proprietors, whose
servants they were, and to whom they were accountable, and to none else.

2. These places were the properties of Mr. Thomas Gordon and Mr. John Barclay
(...) to deprive them of them, without due course of law, is what your
excellency has no authority to do, nor can have.

3. Whether they were made by the greater or lesser part of the proprietors,
your excellency was no ways concerned, nor had any right of determining in the
favor of either one or other, the law being open to any who thought themselves
aggrieved.

4. Those books and records were the properties of the general proprietors; and
if your excellency can dispossess any proprietor of them (for Thomas Gordon was
a proprietor) and put them into the hands of another, you may by the same rule
dispossess any one of their goods, and give them to who you think fit, and any
proprietor of their property, and give it to which of the proprietors you think
fit, as is actually done by your excellency in the case of Sonmans; and was
attempted with the same violence in favor of Mr. Bass: It will not be a
sufficient answer to this, to say, Sonmans was proprietor's agent; which
whether he was or was not, your excellency had no right to determine to any
other purpose but administering an oath to him, after which he was of course to
be allowed; and so ought as many agents as the proprietors made, who were not
accountable to your excellency for any procedures in the proprietors affairs,
that were not unlawful.

5. Sonmans neither had, nor pretended to have, at that time (whatever he has
done since) any right or color of right, to be the proprietors recorder, not
any mention being made of it in that very lame commission he had; and were he
to have the top of his pretenses, it would but to be deputy to a person in
England; and whether he has a right or not, is a great question, and regularly
only determinable at the common law; but your excellency's shorter method of
procedure saves disputes of that kind: If this be acting according to
established and known laws, not repugnant to, but as agreeable as may be, to
the laws of England; if this be administering those laws for the preservation
and protection of the people, we would be very gladly informed, what perverting
of them can be; as to the matter of fact, we aver it to be truth, that Mr.
Sonmans did not reside in the province, had not given security for the keeping
of those records, as by the queen is positively directed, they were carried out
of the Eastern division, and were produced at the supreme court at Burlington
at the time of our complaint.

Those things, and that gentleman's character, are so well known, that it is
needless to offer any thing else in justification of that reasonable request we
made, that they might be so kept as her majesty's subjects might have recourse
to them, and in the hands of such of whose fidelity there is no reason to doubt.

These, may it please your excellency, were the grievances we complained of;
and they were but a small number of many we could with equal justice
remonstrate; and which, notwithstanding those soft, cool, and considerate terms
of false, scandalous, and malicious, and other bitter invectives which your
excellency so often uses to the representative body of a country; we are still
of opinion, they are not imaginary, but real grievances, not false, but God
knows too true; and which it was our duty, in discharge of the trust reposed in
us, to get redressed.

Our said experience has convinced us, that our endeavors have not met with a
success answerable to what might reasonably be our expectations, and that
instead of redressing the grievances of the country, their number is increased:
Before we enumerated those grievances of an higher nature, and attended with
worse consequences, we first said, the treatment the people of New Jersey had
received, was very different from what they had reason to expect under the
government of a queen deservedly famous for her just, equal and mild
administration; that the hardships they endured, were not owing to her majesty,
who they were well assured, would by no means, make any of her subjects
miserable, nor continue their misfortunes were she acquainted with them, and in
her power to give them relief; but that the oppressions they groaned under,
were the unkind effects of mistaken power; and what these effects were, and who
the cause of them, we proceeded to show; and if the instances we there give, be
true, it will then appear to the world, that the expressions we have used, are
the softest could be chosen, and very far short of what the nature of the thing
could bear, and that these bold accusers are a sort of creatures called honest
men, just to the trust reposed in them by the country, who will not suffer
their liberties and properties to be torn from them by any man, how great
soever, if they can hinder it.

And that the reasonableness of our complaints may appear the plainer, we shall
consider what your excellency has said in answer, and leave it to our
superiors, and to all just and impartial men, whether we are not a people the
most abused of any of her majesty's subjects.

As to the first instance, your excellency does acknowledge the fact to be
true, and offers the following reasons to justify your conduct to the council
of proprietors: The first is, that by her majesty's directions you are to allow
of all such agents as the general proprietors shall appoint, such agents
qualifying themselves by taking such oaths as the queen is pleased to direct,
and no other; that no persons under the name of a council of proprietors, have
ever tendered themselves to take such oaths; consequently they are not capable
of acting as agents.

2. That the council of proprietors are a people pretending to act by a power
derived from certain persons who have no power to grant, and that this a truth,
viz. that they are a people pretending to act by a power derived from certain
persons, who had no power to grant, your excellency is satisfied; besides other
reasons, by this in particular, that the assembly have voted to put the records
into the hands of Peter Sonmans, to be a grievance; whereas their not
qualifying themselves is a greater grievance. To set this matter in a true
light, it will not be improper to produce the words of the instructions; which
are as follows: You are to permit the surveyors and other persons appointed by
the forementioned general proprietors of the soil of that province, for
surveying and recording the surveys of lands granted by and held of them, to
execute accordingly their respective trusts: And you are likewise to permit,
and if need be, to aid and assist such other agent or agents, as shall be
appointed by the said proprietors for that end, to collect and receive the quit
rents, which are or shall be due unto them, from the particular possessor of
any tracts or parcel of land from time to time; provided always, that such
surveyors, agents, or other officers appointed by the said general proprietors,
do not only take proper oaths for the due execution and performance of their
respective offices and employments, and give good and sufficient security for
their so doing; but that they likewise take the oaths appointed by act of
parliament to be taken instead of the oaths of allegiance and supremacy; as
also the test, and subscribe the 'forementioned association; all which you are
accordingly to require of them, and not otherwise to admit any person into any
such office or employment. After the proprietors had surrendered their power of
government, relating to their soil, they were under a necessity of employing
persons, to survey and record the surveys of lands granted by and held of them;
and in the Eastern division, several quit rents being due to them, there was a
necessity of having one or more agents to collect and receive those rents;
which persons (because the crown intended, that the proprietors by the
surrender of their government, should by no means be insecure in their
properties) your excellency was directed not only to permit such officers to be
and execute their respective trusts, but also to aid and assist them, if need
were; and because such offices were places of trust, both with respect to the
proprietors and the inhabitants, it was directed, that they should take proper
oaths, and give good and sufficient security; and that they who enjoyed those
places of trust, might be persons well affected to the present government,
there was especial care taken, to direct, that they should take the oaths
appointed by act of parliament to be taken, which your excellency was to
require of them, and not otherwise to admit them to execute those trusts: From
all which we observe, first, that no agents are concerned in that instruction,
but such as were to survey and record the surveys of lands, and collect the
quit-rents.

2. That the proprietors were not limited to employ a certain number of agents,
but might employ as many as they thought fit; all which your excellency was to
aid and assist if need were.

3. Your excellency was not to expect while they tendered themselves to take
the oaths appointed, but to require them to take them; and upon their refusal
not to admit them; for it was impossible they, or any else, should deem
themselves bound by the queen's instructions to certain performances, except
such instructions had been made public, and they made acquainted with it.

Now in the first place, your excellency never published any such instruction,
nor ever did require those agents called the council of proprietors to comply
with it by taking any oaths.

2. The council of proprietors are not such agents as the instructions mention.

3. Were that instruction binding, your excellency has by no means complied
with it; for the surveyor appointed by the proprietors of the western division,
has several times tendered himself to take and subscribe according to her
majesty's directions, and has been refused.

4. Mr. Sonmans, though a bankrupt, and his powers disputed, admitted to keep the
records of the eastern division, and that without any security; and persons who
were sworn to those places, and employed by proprietors, and a greater number,
not only not permitted to act, but deprived of their places (with which your
lordship had nothing to do) without a due course of law, forceably by your
lordship's directions.

Lastly, the council of proprietors are attorneys to private men, for the
taking care of their several properties, and are neither concerned in that
instruction, nor bound by it; if they were, we shall not dispute how far that
instruction may be a law to your lordship, but we are sure it is so to no body
else, but where the laws of the land bind without it; and if so, it is no
sufficient warrant to destroy any man's property, or deprive him of the use of
it, without the judgment of his peers; for your lordship cannot but know, if
you do not, the last clause of the petition of right will tell you, that the
queen's servants are to serve her according to law, and not otherwise; and
every gentleman of the law can inform your excellency, if he pleased, that the
queen's authority or warrant produced (if you had done any such thing) cannot
justify the commission of an unlawful act; which this certainly must be, except
the law provides that no man must make an attorney but with your lordship's
approbation: As to the second reason, to use your excellency's expressions, if
we could wonder at any thing your excellency has done, it would be at the
reason your excellency gives, as much as at the action; it being a plain
pretending to a right of judging solely who have a right to their estates, and
who not, and according to that judgment to permit them to retain or force them
to part with their possessions; for in the first place, that matter was never
brought before your lordship, and what information you had (if you had any) was
private; and we are told no freeman can be dispossessed of his freehold but by
judgment of his peers, or the law of the land; but here is at once a
determination, that a number of proprietors, nigh or above nine tenths of the
whole, have no right to grant, and accordingly they are prohibited taking up or
disposing of their lands; for the council of proprietors, are all proprietors
themselves, except mr. Morris, their president; and we cannot see, but any
freeman, or number of freemen in the province, may be dispossessed by the same
measures; for it is but your lordship's saying, the persons they had their lands
from, had no right to grant, and then order the possessors to make no further
improvements, nor to dispose of any of their lands; and thus conclude them
without the tedious formality of the old magna charta way; and who is hardy
enough to dispute with a man that commands two provinces?

2. What your excellency asserts, with relation to the council of proprietors,
viz. that they were persons deriving a power from those who had no right to
grant, is what your excellency neither did, nor could know; that you did not
know it, nothing is more plain; because your excellency some days after your
lordship's answer to our remonstrance, summoned some of the council of
proprietors before yourself in council, and there asked them the following
questions, viz. First, who the late council of proprietors were? Secondly, who
were the present council of proprietors? Thirdly, who they derived their powers
from? Fourthly, what their powers were? By which it appears, your excellency
neither knew who the council of proprietors were, what their powers were nor
who they derived them from; which is very far from knowing whether the persons
who gave them those powers, had power to grant or not; and that your excellency
could not know, is as plain; because the deeds of what proprietors are in this
country, you never did see; and those that are in England, you could not see.

How your excellency is, from our voting the putting the records into mr.
Sonmans hands to be a grievance, satisfied that the persons from whom the
council of proprietors derive their power, have no power to grant; is very much
beyond our poor capcities to understand, and may perhaps be of the number of
those unanswerable objections your lordship tells us of in your answer. To the
next clause your lordship justifies your proceedings with the assemblymen, as
being your duty; and that what you did, was by virtue of the queen's
instructions; how far they will justify your excellency's conduct is our next
business to speak to; but in the first place we are obliged to your excellency,
for acknowledging the matter of fact; which though notoriously known, was omitted
to be entered in the journals of this house, by your excellency's faithful
servant, mr. William Anderson, late clerk of this house.

By the queen's instructions, not the least color of authority is given to
your excellency, to be a judge of the qualifications of assemblymen, so as to
admit or reject them; which is not only a direct contradiction to the very
nature and being of assemblies, but must render the liberties, lives and
properties of the people entirely at your excellency's disposal; which as her
majesty never intended, so without doubt she never did intend by any
instruction to make so precarious; and how well she will be pleased at wresting
her instructions to authorize what we are well satisfied she will be very far
from countenancing, time may inform us: This house could not be so much wanting
to themselves, and the province they represent, as to omit taking notice of a
procedure, which tends to destroy the very being of assemblies, by rendering
them the tools of a governor's arbitrary pleasure, and the enemies instead of
the preservers of the liberties of their country; and we are well assured, that
nothing your excellency has said, will persuade the world to believe, that your
excellency or any other governor, has that power you pretend to, or that it can
be consistent with the liberties of a free people.

That there were considerable sums of money raised; that most of them were
raised with intent and purpose to give to your lordship, to procure the
dissolution of the last assembly, and procure such officers as the contributors
should approve of; that in all probability the money so raised, was given to
your lordship; that the assembly was dissolved; that the contributors were
complied with as far as could be; that you did receive from doctor John
Johnston, two hundred pounds, upon the score or the proprietors of the eastern
division of New Jersey; are such notorious tuths, that it is a vanity to deny
them; and will be believed, notwithstanding all the force of evasive arts to
persuade to the contrary: And since we have mentioned doctor Johnston, it is not
amiss to enquire, whether the services you were to do the proprietors were such
as your lordship ought, or ought not to have done; if they were such as you
ought to have done, you ought not to have taken money for the doing of them; if
they were such as you ought not to have done, much less ought your lordship to
have taken money; and had you not been more than ordinarily concerned in those
private contributions, without all peradventure would have used all possible
endeavors to have detected the thing, and not given those public marks of
your favor to the persons most concerned in the persuading and procuring of
them.

As to what relates to the assembly, as your lordship is not accountable to
this house for what reasons you dissolved them, neither is this house to your
lordship for their proceedings; they acted as became a house of representatives
in the affair of Mr. Gordon, and what they did, was not without your lordship's
approbation; if that could add any thing to the power they had: As to your
excellency's reflections on private men, it is below the representative body of
a province to take any further notice of them, than to do that justice to the
two worthy members of this house, as to say, they both have, and deserve better
characters than your excellency gives them; and that the humblest application
you can make to her majesty will never induce her to grant you a power to use
any means to procure a satisfaction but what the laws allow of, without such
application: We concluded, by acquainting your excellency, that the way to
engage the affections of a people, was to let them be unmolested in the quiet
enjoyment of those things which belong to them of right, and should have dated
our happiness from your excellency's complying with so reasonable and just a
desire; to which your excellency replied, that you could never answer taking
advice from men, who did not know how to govern themselves, and who have always
opposed the service of the queen, and interest and good of their country: We
shall wave the admirable coolness of temper, and considerateness of the
reflection; and say, your excellency could hardly have used plainer terms, to
tell us, you will not let us be quiet in the enjoyment of what belongs to us of
right; and your excellency's proceedings since that, has effectually convinced
the world, that we have not put a wrong construction on your excellency's
expressions.

Are not her majesty's loyal subjects haul'd to goals, and there lie without
being admitted to bail? and those that are the conditions of their
recognizances are, that if your excellency approves not of their being bailed,
they shall return to their prisons; several of her majesty's good subjects
forced to abscond, and leave their habitations, being threatened with
imprisonment, and no hopes of receiving the benefit of the law; when your
excellency's absolute will is the sole measure of it: One minister of the
church of England, dragged by a sheriff from Burlington to Amboy, and there
kept in custody, without assigning any reason for it, and at last haul'd by
force into a boat by your excellency, and transported like a malefactor, into
another government, and there kept in a garrison a prisoner; and no reason
assigned for these violent procedures, but your excellency's pleasure: Another
mininister of the church of England, laid under a necessity of leaving the
province, from the reasonable apprehensions of meeting with the same treatment;
no orders of men either sacred or civil, secure in their lives, their liberties
or estates; and where these procedures will end, God only knows.

If these, and what we have named before, be acts of mercy, gentleness and
goodnature; if this be doing for the good, welfare and prosperity of the
people of this province; if this be the administering laws for the protect on
and preservation of her majesty's subjects; then have we been the most mistaken
men in the world, and have had the falsest notion of things; calling that
cruelty, oppression and injustice, which are their direct opposites, and those
things slavery, imprisonment and hardships, which are freedom, liberty and
ease; and must henceforth take France, Denmark, the Muscovian, Ottoman and
Eastern empires, to be the best models of a gentle and happy government.

Your excellency at last endeavors to persuade the country, that the assembly,
instead of protecting are invading the liberties of the people; and if we might
have the liberty of using some of your excellency's cool and considerate terms,
perhaps the following instances might justify those expressions; but we leave
that to just and impartial men, who no doubt will apply them where they are
most due.

Your excellency asserts in the first place, You have presumed to take the
queen's subjects into the custody of the sergeant at arms, who are not members
of your house; which you cannot lawfully do, and is a notorious violation of the
liberties of the people. Answer: There is nothing more known, than that ^^e
contrary to what your excellency says is true, and hardly a session of
parliament but affords multitudes of instances, nay several instances can be
produced during the time of your excellency's being in the house of commons;
and what your excellency means by asserting a thing, which every body that
knows any thing, knows is not so, we cannot tell.

Secondly, You have taken upon you to administer an oath to one of your
members, and have expelled him from the house for refusing to take an oath
which you could not legally administer to him; this is most certainly robbing
that member of his property, and a most notorious assuming to your selves a
negative voice to the freeholders election of their representatives, for which
there can be no precedent found. Answer: We never did administer an oath, (though
we think we have power so to do) what oaths were administered were administered
by justices of the peace before us: We expelled that member for several
contempts; for which we are not accountable to your excellency, nor no body
else in this province: We might lawfully expel him; and if we had so thought
fit, might have rendered him incapable of ever sitting in this house; and of
this many precedents may be produced. We are the freeholders representatives;
and how it is possible we should assume a negative voice at the election of
ourselves, is what wants a little explanation to make it intelligible.

Thirdly, You have arbitrarily taken upon you to command the high sheriff of
this county, to discharge a prisoner who was in his custody at the suit of one
of the queen's subjects; and he has been weak enough to do it, for which he
lies liable to be sued for an escape, whenever the gentleman thinks fit to do
it, and from which you cannot protect him; this is a notorious violation of the
right of the subject, and a manifest interruption of justice. Answer: The
person we ordered to be discharged, was an evidence attending by order of the
house, and under the protection of this house; who were only wanting to
themselves, in not sending the high sheriff and lawyers to the same place, for
daring to offer so public an affront to the representative body of a country.

Fourthly, You have taken upon you to appoint one of your members to act as
clerk of the committee of the whole house, which you have no power to do, etc.
Answer: Your excellency has been so very much mistaken in all the foregoing
clauses, that we have great reason to believe you are so in this: This house
has always, till of late, made their own clerks, and your excellency cannot
show us any law why we may not do it still, should we think fit to insist on
it: We have made no encroachments on her majesty's prerogative royal, nor never
intended to do it, but shall to our utmost, study to preserve it, and
honorably support her government over us, and hope your excellency will think
it for the service of the queen to comply with our reasonable desires; which
will very much encourage us so to do.

Diverse of the members of this assembly being of the people called Quakers, do
assent to the matter and substance, but make some exception to the style.

By order of the house, Sam. Jenings, speaker.
P.M. Die Veneris. 24 Octobris, 1707.
CHAP. XVIII.
Memorial of the West-Jersey proprietors residing in England, to the lords
commissioners for trade and plantations: The lieutenant governor, with some of
the council, address the queen: The last meeting of assembly, under Cornbury's
administration: They continue their complaints: Samuel Jenings's death and
character.
THE foregoing proceedings being by connection necessary together, has delayed
the following memorial a little out of course as to strict order of time: The
western proprietors residing in England, had much resented Cornbury's treatment
of the inhabitants, especially in relation to the three members being kept out
of the assembly, by which he gained a majority devoted to his measures; and
thus they complain.

To the right honorable the lords commissioners for trade and plantations.
The humble memorial of the proprietors of the Western division of the province
of New Jersey, in America.
WE humbly acknowledge your lordships great justice, in making the terms of our
surrender of government, part of the lord Cornbury's instructions ^^lating to
the said province: and heartily wish his excellency had given us occasion of
acknowledging his due observation of the instruction, instead of troubling your
lordships with a complaint of his breach of them, which we are fully assured
from undoubted testimonies his excellency has made in the following instances;
and though he endeavors to palliate his proceedings there, by frequently and
publicly asserting, that your lordships consented to no terms upon our
surrender; yet were that as great a truth as it is a mistake, and those
instructions had been only of grace and favor, we conceive him to be obliged,
and ourselves entitled to his punctual observation of them.

It is one of the terms consented to by your lordships, and one of his
excellency's instructions from your lordships; that the general assembly shall
consist of four and twenty representatives; two to be chosen by the
inhabitants, householders of the city or town of Perth-Amboy; two by the
inhabitants, householders of the city or town of Burlington; (...) to be chosen
by the freeholders of the eastern, and ten by the freeholders of the western
division; in which election, every elector is to have one hundred acres of
freehold land in his own right, within the division for which he shall choose;
and every person elected is to have one thousand acres of freehold land in his
own right, within the division for which he shall be chosen.

This instruction, which we relied on as the chief security of our estates in
that province, his excellency has not only violated, but has totally destroyed
that part of our constitution; and in such a manner as will render all
assemblies a mere piece of formality, and only the tools of a governor's
arbitrary pleasure.

For setting which proceeding in a due light, we must crave leave to lay before
your lordships the account we have received of it from our agent, and other
reputable persons of that province.

An assembly having been called and chosen, in the year 1703, pursuant to your
lordships instructions, prepared bills for settling the rights of the
proprietors and planters, and for raising a revenue of thirteen hundred pounds
per annum, for three years, (which they knew was the utmost the country could
bear) for the support of the government; but his excellency requiring a greater
sum, several persons, our constant enemies and invaders of our properties, and
who therefore opposed the bill for settling our rights, undertook to procure an
assembly more obedient to his excellency's demands; and by that and other
arguments, which out of regard to his honor, we choose to wave the mention of,
prevailed upon him to dissolve that assembly, and to call another to sit in
November last; the writs were issued, and the election directed to be made, in
such haste, that in one of the writs the qualifications of the persons to be
elected was omitted, and the sheriff of one county not sworn till three days
before the election, and many of the towns had not any (much less due) notice
of the day of election; but passing by these, and many other illegal artifices
used by those undertakers, to obtain an assembly to their own humor; we shall
insist only upon one grand instance, which is not to be parrallel'd in any of
her majesty's plantations, and could not have been attempted without his
excellency's encouragement, nor put in practice without his concurrence.

When this assembly was met, and attended his excellency in council, in order
to be sworn, mr. Revell and mr. Leeds, (two of the governor's council, and of
the undertakers to procure such an assembly as they had promised) suspecting
the strength of their party, objected against three of the members returned, as
persons not having each, one thousand acres of land, and therefore unqualified
to serve in the assembly; though these persons had such estates in land, and
were generally known to have so, and at the time of their election had
convinced Revell and Leeds, who opposed them under that pretense, of the truth
of it; and this objection was not examinable or determinable by his excellency
or his council, or otherwise than in the house of representatives, who are the
only proper judges of their own members; yet his excellency, upon this bare
suggestion of Revell and Leeds, refused to swear these members, and excluded
them from sitting to serve their country; this attempt was seconded by another
trick of Revell and Leeds, who immediately sent the following note to the house
of representatives.

To the honorable the house of representatives.
Gentlemen,
WE underwritten, supposing we had good reason to charge three of the persons
returned to serve as representatives in this general assembly; but upon due
consideration find it difficult to come to a true determination thereof, until
we can by further enquiry find the truth of what we have been informed of; we
therefore humbly desire fourteen days time further, that we may be able more
fully to inform this house therein, which we humbly suppose at present cannot
reasonably be expected from us; we subscribe ourselves your humble supplicants,

THOMAS REVELL. DANIEL LEEDS.

Nov. 15, 1704.

The counties for which they were chosen to serve, expressed a great
dissatisfaction at the exclusion of their members; and these and several other
representatives delivered an address to his excellency, for having them
admitted to their right; which met with no other reception, than being called a
piece of insolence and ill manners.

By this exclusion of three members, and the contempt of the address for their
admission, the undertakers gained a majority by one in the house of
representatives, who adjourned the hearing of this case, until they had reaped
the fruits of their iniquity, and accomplished the ends for which it was
contrived; for whilst this case was depending, a bill for taking away the
qualifications of electors and the elected, and placing the right of choosing
and being chosen in the freeholders generally, without any express value of
their estates, was prepared and passed, wherein there is this remarkable and
self-condemning declaration of his excellency's proceedings, viz. that
representatives met in general assembly are and shall be the judges of the
qualifications of their own members.

After this and one other act, which we shall hereafter take notice of in it is
proper place, were passed, a day of hearing was allowed to the three excluded
members, and notice of it given to Revell and Leeds, who would not vouchsafe to
appear, but having already obtained their ends, graciously signified by a
message, their mistake in their objection to those members.

The house proceeded in the inquiry, and by deeds and other authentic proofs,
was so fully satisfied of the estates of the excluded members, and that Revell
and Leeds had been convinced thereof, at the time of their elections, that the
house unanimously declared them duly qualified, and sent two of their body to
acquaint his excellency of it, and to pray they might be sworn; but his
excellency, whether out of a desire of assuming the glory of his arbitrary
proceeding wholly to himself, or of making the country sensible that
notwithstanding the act so lately passed, declaring the house judges of their
own members; he was resolved to exercise that power for the future; or for what
other reason we know not, told those messengers he must be satisfied of their
qualifications, as well as the house; and still keeps them out of the assembly.

This we conceive to be the assuming a negative voice to the freeholders
election of their representatives; and such an invasion of the rights of the
assembly, as will, if tolerated or connived at, place the whole legislature in
the governor; for if he can, at his pleasure, reject three representatives, he
may reject all, and make what laws he thinks fit without the formality of an
assembly; but if this notorious violation of our constitution had not been made
by him, and the assembly had consisted of it is full proportion of duly elected
members; we conceive, and are advised, that his excellency had no authority,
nor any probable color from his instructions for passing this act; for though
the instruction relating to the election of general assembles, allows an
alteration by act of assembly, of the number of the representatives, and the
manner of their being elected; it leaves no power to the general assembly to
alter the qualifications of the electors or elected; which was intended to be a
standing and unalterable part of the constitution, as most agreeable to the
constitution of England, where the electors of knights of the counties must
have a certain fixed freehold; and the elected are generally the principal
landed men of their respective counties; but the alteration now made, was
intended to put the election of representatives into the meanest of the people,
who being impatient of any superiors, will never fail to choose such from
amongst themselves, as may oppress us, and destroy our rights.

It is another term of our surrender, and an instruction to his excellency,
that no act should be made to lay a tax upon unprofitable lands; but his
excellency has encouraged and assented to a bill in this last assembly, for
taxing (without distinction) all lands belonging to the inhabitants there, and
to all others not inhabiting there who have settled any plantations, either by
tenants, servants or negroes; it is objection enough to this act, that there is
no other colony in America wherein uncultivated lands are taxed; and as this act
was intended, so none more effectual could have been contrived, to prejudice
the country in general, or the proprietors in particular; for if any man who
has a thousand or more acres of land, which he can neither manure nor sell (as
most of the first planters have) he must pay a tax for this land, which may eat
up the greatest part of the profit of what he can and does cultivate; or he
must desert the whole; and if we, who have great tracts of land of many
thousand acres to sell, let or settle but a few acres to maintain our agents
or servants, we must pay a tax for all the residue which yields us nothing: In
consequence of this act several persons who had agreed with our agent for
lands, have renounced their bargains, and removed into other countries, where
they can purchase great tracts of land, preserve them for their posterity to
settle on; and we, unless relieved from this oppression, must deliver up our
lands or our purses: This tax is imposed by the act passed in the assembly for
raising a revenue of two thousand pounds per annum, for two years, for the
support of her majesty's government within that province; and we have great
reason to believe it to be part of the return promised by the undertakers to
his excellency, for his dissolving the former assembly, and curtailing the last
of three members.

It is another term of our surrender, and an instruction to his excellency,
that the surveyors and other persons appointed by us, for surveying and
recording the surveys of land granted and sold by us, shall be permitted to
execute their trusts; but his excellency has taken upon him, even contrary to
the advice of his council, to appoint fees for patenting lands; which has
created an opinion in the people, that the power of granting lands is in him,
has lessened the credit of our title to lands, and encouraged the planters to
dispute our right.

His excellency has ordered all public books, records and papers, to be
delivered by our late secretary to mr. Bass, our great debtor, and therefore
our avowed enemy, and has carried our records of deeds and conveyances out of
the province; by this method the proprietors of both the divisions are deprived
of all means to justify their past administration of the evidences of their
grants of lands to the purchasers under them, (all the surveys and patents
being recorded in those books) and will destroy the office of our register, or
at least will disable him to perform his duty in some cases; which by acts of
general assembly he is obliged to do.

It is a further term of our surrender, and instructions to his excellency,
that all officers be appointed by advice of the council; but his excellency has
constituted several officers without such advice, and particularly a sheriff of
Burlington, who was therefore suspended by order of council, and yet continued
to act under his lordship's appointment.

We are further informed, that his excellency has put several mean and
contemptible persons into the commission of the peace, particularly one ******
whom he knew to be under prosecution for felony; and has given commissions in
the militia to others, who have no estate in the province, and therefore are
not like to be zealous in the defense of it.

It is matter of some wonder to us, that after so many acts of despotic power,
his excellency did not assume to himself, or obtain from the last assembly, an
authority of licencing any persons to purchase lands from the Indians; but
condescends to apply to your lordships, for an alteration of his instructions
in that particular; there wants only the breach of this instruction to complete
the ruin of our interests in New Jersey, and we humbly hope your lordships will
not enable him to give that finishing stroke; This instruction, founded upon
the right which the crown of England claims by the law of nations, to all
countries discovered by English subjects, was intended to assert that right
against the pretenses of many planters, who set up the Indians title in
competition with it; and if that right be taken from the grantees of the crown,
all patents and grants of the whole main land of North America, have been only
royal frauds, under the sanction of the great seal of England, and no man will
ever after purchase lands under that title.

His excellency was lately so fully satisfied of the policy and reasonableness
of asserting this right to the crown and its grantees, that in the year 1703,
he recommended, and assented to an act of assembly, for restraining all persons
besides the proprietors, from purchasing lands from the Indians, under great
penalties; and for vacating all such purchases formerly made, unless the
purchasers took a fresh grant from the proprietors; of which act we humbly pray
your lordships perusal.

We are purchasers for ready money, under a grant from king Charles the second,
and are willing to sell our lands and the Indians title to it, at reasonable
rates; according to the goodness of the soil and situation, and ought not to be
compelled to accept a quit-rent (much less a quit-rent to be let by other
persons than ourselves as his excellency proposes) instead of selling for ready
money; nor ought our properties to be at the disposal of a governor: It Is not
the want of a power in the planters to purchase lands from the Indians, but the
taxing of uncultivated lands, and overturning the constitution for
assembly-men; that has occasioned those persons mentioned by his excellency, to
remove to Pennsylvania and other colonies.

May it please your lordships,
The usage we have received from his excellency, is so contrary to the terms of
our surrender of government, to the assurances we had from your lordships, of
the due observance of them, and to the plain instructions given by your
lordships to his excellency; that we humbly hope, it will not be thought any
immodesty or want of duty in us, to protest, as we do protest against all the
proceedings of the last assembly, wherein by the arbitrary exclusion of three
members without any just exception, the country was not duly represented, and
to beg your lordships intercession with her majesty, that the acts passed in
that assembly may not be confirmed by her royal assent.

We further pray, that colonel Lewis Morris, who has been a second time
suspended from his place in council, by his excellency, only for using the
freedom which every member of the council is entitled to, and ought to
exercise, of opposing any bill brought before them, if he conceives it
prejudicial to the interest either of the country in general, or of any
particular persons, may be restored; and that your lordships will please to
place in the room of such as are dead, some of the persons following, viz. Mr.
Miles Foster, mr. Richard Townley, mr. Hugh Huddy, mr. William Hall and mr.
John Harrison, who are men of known integrity and estates; and as a further
security of our estates there, and that no persons may at any time be admitted
of the governors council, or to be in the commission of the peace, or of the
militia, but such who have real estates in the province suitable to their
stations, and who reside there.

Signed by Thomas Lane, Paul Dominique, John Bridges, Rob. Mitchel, Tho.
Burrow, Fra. Mitchel, Eben. Jones, Jos. Broosbank, John Norton, Jo. Bennet, E.
Richier, Tho. Skinner, Rich. Greenaway, Jos. Collins, Cha. Mitchel, Jos.
Micklethwait, Tho. Jews, Wm. Snelling.


Two days after Cornbury had refused to receive the assembly's reply, he sent
for them, and though several important bills were unfinished, adjourned the
house to the spring next year: Not receiving the reply in form, he escaped the
necessity of attempting to clear up what he could not do with justice or
equity: Some of the glaring facts still confirmed the truth of the charges
against him, he thought he had a more effectual way of dealing; that was, to
lodge a complaint with the queen; accordingly by an underhand artifice, his
trusty friend the lieut. governor Ingoldsby, with some of the council, signed
and privately transmitted an address, as follows.

To the Queen's most excellent majesty. Address to the queen.

The humble address of the lieutenant governor and council of Nova-Caesaria or
New Jersey, in America.
May it please your majesty;
We the lieutenant governor and council of your majesty's province of
Nova-Caesaria or New Jersey, having seriously and deliberately taken into
consideration the proceedings of the present assembly or representative body of
this province, thought our selves bound, both in duty and conscience, to
testify to your majesty, our dislike and abhorrence of the same; being very
sensible, that the unaccountable humors and pernicious designs of some
particular men, have put them upon so many irregularities, with intention only
to occasion divisions and distractions, to the disturbance of the great and
weighty affairs which both your majesty's honor and dignity as well as the
peace and welfare of the country required; their high encroachments upon your
majesty's prerogative royal; notorious violations of the rights and liberties
of the subjects; manifest interruptions of justice, and most unmannerly
treatment of his excellency the lord Cornbury, would have induced us sooner to
have discharged our duty to your majesty, in giving a full representation of
the unhappy circumstances of this your majesty's province and government; had
we not been in hopes that his excellency the lord Cornbury's full and ample
answer to a most scandalous libel, called the remonstrance of the assembly of
Nova Caesaria or New Jersey, which was delivered to the governor by the
assembly at Burlington in May last, would have opened the eyes of the assembly,
and brought them back to their reason and duty; but finding that those few
turbulent and uneasy spirits in the assembly, have still been able to influence
and amuse the judgments of many well-meaning men in that body; as appears by
another late scandalous and infamous libel, called, The reply of the house of
representatives of the province of New Jersey, to an answer made by his
excellency Edward viscount Cornbury, governor of the said province, to the
humble remonstrance of the aforesaid house: We are now obliged humbly to
represent to your majesty, the true cause, which we conceive may lead to the
remedy of these confusions.

The first is owing to the turbulent, factious, uneasy, and disloyal principles
of two men in that assembly, mr. Lewis Morris, and Samuel Jenings, a quaker;
men notoriously known to be uneasy under all government; men never known to be
consistent with themselves; men to whom all the factions and confusions in the
government of New Jersey and Pennsylvania for many years are wholly owing; men
that have had the confidence to declare in open council, that your majesty's
instructions to (...) governors in these provinces, shall not oblige or bind
them, nor will they be concluded by them, further than they are warranted by
the law, of which also they will be the judges; and this is done by them, (as
we have all the reason in the world to believe) to encourage not only this
government, but also the rest of your governments in America, to throw off your
majesty's royal prerogative, and consequently to involve all your dominions in
this part of the world, and tho honest, good and well-meaning people in them,
in confusion, hoping thereby to obtain their wicked purposes.

The remedy for all these evils, we most humbly propose, is, that your majesty
will most graciously please to discountenance those wicked designing men, and
show some dislike to this assembly's proceedings, who are resolved neither to
support this your majesty's government by a revenue, nor take care to defend it
by settling a militia: The last libel, called "the reply, etc." came our so
suddenly, that as yet we have not had time to answer it in all its particulars;
but do assure your majesty it is for the most part false in fact, and that part
of it which carries any face of truth, they have been malicious and unjust in
not mentioning the whole truth; which would have fully justified my lord
Cornbury's just conduct.

Thus, having discharged this part of our duty, which we thought at present
incumbent upon us, we beg leave to assure your majesty, that whenever we shall
see the people of this province labor under any thing like a grievance; we
shall, according to our duty, immediately apply to the governor, with our best
advice for the redress of it; and we have no reason yet to doubt of a ready
compliance in him; we shall not be particular, but crave leave to refer to his
excellency's representation of them to the right honorable the lords
commissioners for trade and plantations.

The strenous asserting of your majesty's prerogative (...), and vindicating
the honor of your governor the lord Cornbury, will in our humble opinion, be
so absolutely necessary at this juncture, that without your so doing, your
majesty will find yourself deceived either in expectation of a revenue for
support of the government, or militia for its defense.

In hopes your majesty will take these important things into your
consideration, and his excellency the lord Cornbury, with all the members of
your majesty's council, into your royal favor and protection; we shall
conclude with our most fervent prayers to the most high, to lengthen your days,
and increase your glories; and that ourselves in particular, and all others in
general, who reap the benefit of your majesty's most gentle and happy
government, may be, and ever continue the most loyal and dutiful of subjects to
the most glorious and best of queens.

Rich. Ingoldshy, William Pinhorne, R. Mompeson, Thomas Revell, Daniel Leeds,
Daniel Coxe, Richard Townley, Rob. Quarry, William Sandford.

On the 5th of the month called May, this year, the assembly met at Burlington:
Jenings their speaker being indisposed, T. Gordon, speaker.
Thomas Gordon was chose to succeed him: They received the speech; and
delivered their address the 12th; which containing the old story of grievances,
so displeased the governor, that he immediately adjourned them to the September
following, to meet at Amboy, but in the interval dissolved them; and being
himself soon after superseded, Assembly dissolved.
he met them no more; the business of the last session began by his telling
them in his speech.

It was the great desire he had to see the service of the queen, Speech.
and good of the province carried on, supported and provided for, that induced
him to call them together; to prepare and pass such laws as were proper; and
that he might not be wanting in his duty, he should point out what he thought
requred their immediate notice; the first was a bill for support of government;
that the revenue the queen expected was L. 1500, per annum, to continue 21
years; next the reviving or re-enacting the militia bill, which was likely soon
to expire; that he had every session since he had been governor, recommended
the passing a bill or bills for confirming the right and property of the soil
of the province to the general proprietors, according to their respective
rights and titles; as also to settle and confirm the particular titles and
estates of all the inhabitants of the province, and others, claiming under the
proprietors; that he was still of opinion, such a bill would best conduce to
the improvement, as well as peace and quiet of the province; that he had last
year recommended the passing of bills for erecting and repairing prisons and
court houses in the different counties, the building of bridges in places where
they were wanting, by general tax; and as late experience had taught the
necessity of settling the qualifications of jurymen, he desired they would
prepare bills for these purposes; and revive such of the acts of assembly
passed in the time of the proprietary government as would be of use, that they
might be presented for the queen's approbation.

The assembly in their address on this occasion, declare, Assemblys address.
they then were, and always had been ready and desirous to support the
government to the utmost of their poor abilities; that they were heartily sorry
for the misunderstanding between the governor and them; that about twelve
months ago they had humbly represented to him, some of the many grievances
their country labored under; most of which they were sorry to say, yet
remained, and daily increased; that they found the queen's good subjects of the
province were continually prosecuted by informations, upon frivolous pretenses,
which rendered that excellent constitution of grand juries useless; and if
continued, would put it in the power of an attorney general, to raise his
fortune upon the ruin of his country.

That they found it a great charge to the country, that juries and evidences
were brought from remote parts of the province, to the supreme courts at
Burlington and Amboy; that it was a great grievance that the practice of the
law was so precarious, that innocent persons were prosecuted upon informations,
and actions brought against several of the queen's subjects, in which the
gentlemen licenced to practice the law, were afraid to appear for them; or if
they appeared, did not discharge their duty to their clients, for fear of being
suspended, without being convict of any crime deserving it, or reason assigned;
as was done at Burlington, in May last, to the damage of many of the queen's
good subjects.

That they found the representatives of this her majesty's province so
slighted, and their commands so little regarded, that the clerk of the crown
had refused to issue a writ for the electing a member wanting in their house;
they hoped he would consider, and remove these and many other inconveniences
and grievances that the province labored under; which would enable them to
exert the utmost of their abilities, in supporting her majesty's government,
and would make them happy under the mild and meek administration of a great and
glorious queen; that they doubted not, were her majesty rightly informed of the
poverty and circumstances of their country, and that their livelyhoods depended
upon the seasons of the year; their most gracious sovereign would pity their
condition, and never expect the settlement of any support of government,
further than from one year to another.

That they found the present militia bill so great a grievance to their
country, they could never think of reviving or re-enacting it, as it now was;
though they were heartily willingly to provide for the defense of their
country, which they hoped might be done with greater ease to the people; that
they had been, and still were endeavoring to answer her majesty's commands, in
confirming the right and property of the soil of the province to the general
proprietors, according to their respective rights and titles; and likewise to
confirm and settle the particular titles and estates of all the inhabitants,
and other purchasers, claiming under the proprietors; but though they had several
times met in general assembly, they had not opportunity to perfect it; they
acknowledge the favor of being put in mind of providing prisons, court-houses,
and bridges, where such were wanting, which they should take into consideration,

That they had a bill for settling the qualifications of juries, prepared last
sitting at Amboy, and should now present it; and thanking him for reminding
them of reviving their former laws; say, they had before appointed a committee
for that end; but were impeded by Bass, the secretary, positively refusing to
let them have the perusal of them; and that as they had always used their
utmost endeavor in the faithful service of the queen, and for the benefit of
the country; so they should still continue to do it with all the dispatch they
were capable of.

Here we part with lord Cornbury's administration. Lord Cornbury.
At a council held at Amboy, 28th of March, 1708. The petition of Edward
viscount Cornbury, late governor of this province; setting forth, that he had
due to him, sundry sums of money, for which he desired warrants, to enable him,
if the revenue of this province was not able to pay the same, he might demand
the same of her majesty, was read, and dismissed.

Lord Cornbury, (says a writer, well informed in his character) was no less
obnoxious to the people of New Jersey, than to those of New York: The assembly
of that province, impatient of his tyranny, drew up a complaint against him,
which they sent home to the queen.

Her majesty graciously listened to the cries of her injured subjects, divested
him of his power, and appointed lord Lovelace in his stead; declaring, that she
would not countenance her nearest relations in oppressing her people.

As soon as my lord was superceded, his creditors threw him into the custody of
the sheriff of New York; and he remained there till the death of his father.
when succeeding to the earldom of Clarendon, he returned to England.

We never had a governor so universally detested, nor any who so richly
deserved the public abhorrence; in spite of his noble descent, his behavior
was trifling, mean and extravagant.

It was not uncommon for him to dress himself in a woman's habit, and then to
patrole the fort in which he resided; such freaks of low humor exposed him to
the universal contempt of the people; but their indignation was kindled by his
despotick rule, savage bigotry, insatiable avarice and injustice, not only to
the public, but even his private creditors; for he left some of the lowest
tradesmen in his employment unsatisfied in their just demands. Hist. of
New York, p. 116.

He died in 1723. See notes in the Art. Law. Hyde, E. of Rechester, Biogr. Brit.




Here also we part with his opponent S. Jenings; his indisposition continued
about twelve months, and then finished his life: S. Jenings's death and
character.
His many services have occasioned him to be often mentioned: His profession of
religion was that of the people called quakers; he was early ^n approved
minister among them, and so continued to his death; common opinion, apt to
limit this sphere of action, will however allow general rules to have their
exceptions, as instances now and then, though perhaps but rarely, occur, where
variety of talents have united in the same individual, and yet not interfered;
such, the accounts of those times (stripped of the local uncertainties of
faction and party) tell us, was the circumstance with regard to Jenings; that
his authority, founded on experienced candor, probity, and abilities, enlarged
opportunities, rendered him not in one capacity or to one society only, but
generally useful: It is mentioned, that he was of an obliging, affectionate
disposition, yet of a hasty warm temper; that he notwithstanding managed it
with circumspection and prudence, so that few occasions escaped to the
disadvantage of his character, or of any cause he engaged in; that he saw the
danger to which his natural impetuosity exposed him; knew his preservation lay
in a close attention to his cooler prospects, and diligently guarding in that
spot, experienced the benefit in many trying events; that his integrity and
fortitude in all stations, were acknowledged; that his judgment was the rule of
his conduct, and by what can now be gathered, this seems to have been but
seldom injudiciously founded; that alive to the more generous emotions of a
mind formed to benevolence and acts of humanity, he was a friend to the widow,
the fatherless and the unhappy; tender, compassionate, disinterested, and with
great opportunities left but a small estate; that abhorring oppression in every
shape, his whole conduct discovered a will to relieve and befriend mankind, far
above the littleness of party or sinister views; that his sentiments of right
and liberty, were formed on the revolution establishment, a plan successfully
adapted to the improvement of a new country, or any country; that he was
notwithstanding all this sometimes thought stiff and impracticable, but chiefly
on account of his political attachments; yet that there were instances, where
better knowledge of his principles, and the sincerity with which he acted,
totally effaced those impressions, and left him friends where none were
expected: Much of his time, we have seen, was long devoted to the public, with
a will to be useful, occasions were not wanting; West-Jersey and Pennsylvania,
He lived some years, and bore several important offices in Pennsylvania.
and New Jersey after the surrender, for near twenty eight years successively,
were repeated witnesses of his conduct in various capacities; he studied peace,
and the welfare of mankind; but in some instances met with ungrateful returns;
and though his endeavors did not altogether succeed to his mind, he survived
personal accusation, in a great measure, with respect to himself; and as to the
public, just lived long enough to see it emerging from an unpromising state of
litigation and controversy, to more quiet than had been known for many years:
His three daughters, (who were all the children he left) intermarried with
three brothers, of the name of Stephenson, whose posterity now reside in
New Jersey and Pennsylvania. See p. 124, 295.


In the latter end of this year was a new return of members of assembly; their
names were, For the Eastern division: Thomas Gordon, speaker; Thomas Farmer,
Elisha Parker, John Royse, John Harrison, Benjamin Lion, Gershom Mott, Elisha
Lawrence, John Trent, William Morris, Enoch Machelsen, -- Eldridge. For the
Western division, Thomas Gardener, Thomas Raper, Hugh Sharp, Nathaniel Cripps,
John Kay, John Kaighn, Richard Johnson, Nathaniel Breading, Hugh Middleton,
John Lewis: This assembly met, but upon the new governor's arrival, was
dissolved.

CHAP. XIX.
Lord Lovelace arrives governor: Convenes a new assembly; they apply to him for
a hearing on the subject of the lieutenant governor and council's application
to the queen: His death; is succeeded by the lieutenant governor Ingoldshy: The
first paper currency: Arrival of governor Hunter: A short account of the first
expedition to Canada: A new assembly chosen; their first session in Hunter's
time.
JOHN Lord Lovelace, baron of Hurley, being appointed to succeed lord Cornbury;
he summoned the council to meet him at Bergen, December 20, 1708, published his
commission, and met a new assembly For the Eastern division: Elisha Lawrence,
Capt. Price, G. Most, -- Shepard, J. Johnston, T. Gordon, J. Harrison, Tho.
Pitzrandolph, Geo. Duncan, John Trent, Law. Vanbuskirk.

Western division: John Kay, speaker, P. Fretwell, J. Kaighn, H. Sharp, T.
Lambert, John Lewis, Samuel Smith, -- Dennis; Jacob Spicer, Robert Wheeler,
William Bustill.


. in the spring, at Perth-Amboy, and informed them by speech:

That he was very sensible of great difficulties attending the honorable
employment in which her majesty had placed him, Speech.
and he hoped they would never fail to assist him to serve the queen and her
people; that her majesty had shown, in the whole course of her reign (a reign
glorious beyond example) how much she aimed at the good and prosperity of her
people; having with indefatigable pains united her two kingdoms of England and
Scotland, and continued the same application to unite the minds of all her
subjects; that this was her great care, and ought to be the care of those whom
she deputed to govern the distant provinces, not happy enough by situation to
be under her more immediate government; that as he could not set before him a
better pattern, he should endeavor to recommend himself to them, by following
as far as he was able, her example; that he should not give them any just cause
of uneasiness, under his administration, and hoped they would bear with one
another; that past differences and animosities ought to be buried in oblivion,
and the peace and welfare of the country only, pursued by each individual;
that her majesty would not be burdensome to her people; but there being an
absolute necessity that the government be supported, he was directed to
recommend that matter to their consideration; that they knew best what the
province could conveniently raise for it is support, and the easiest methods of
raising it; that the making a law for putting the militia on a better footing
than it at present stood, with as much ease to the people as possible, required
their consideration; that he should always be ready to give his assent to
whatever laws they found necessary, for promoting religion and virtue; for the
encouragement of trade and industry, and discouragement of vice and
profaneness, and for any other matter or thing relating to the good of the
province.

The assembly, in their turn, told the governor by address; Assemblys address.
that they esteemed it their great happiness, that her majesty had placed a
person of so much temper and moderation over them, and made no question he
would surmount every difficulty with honor and safety.

That her-majesty's reign would make a bright leaf in history; that it was the
advantage of the present, and would be the admiration of future ages, not more
for her success abroad, than prudence at home; that though their distance had and
might sometimes be disadvantageous to them, yet they experienced the effect of
her princely care, in putting an end to the worst administration New Jersey
ever knew, by sending him, whose government would always be easy to her
majesty's subjects here, and satisfactory to himself, whilst he followed so
great and good an example.

That they had no animosities with one another, but firmly agreed to do
themselves and their country justice; that they were persuaded none that
deserved public censure, would have a share in his esteem; and doubted not of
meeting with his hearty concurrence in every measure, that conduced to peace
and good order.

That they should support the government to the utmost of their abilities, and
most willingly so at a time when they were freed from bondage and arbitrary
encroachments, and were convinced that vice and immorality would no more
receive the public countenance and approbation.

They assured him, all his reasonable desires would be commands to them; and
promised it should be their study to make his administration as easy and happy
as they could.

The session lasted a month, in which business went on with unusual smoothness;
the assembly obtained from the governor, a copy of the address (before
inserted) from the lieutenant governor and council, to the queen, in 1707; they
thanked him for the favor, and requested he would desire the lieutenant
governor, and all that signed the address, to attend him at such time as he
thought fit to appoint, to prove their allegations; and that the house might
have leave to be present, and have opportunity of making their defense, in
order to clear themselves from such imputations.

The governor showed a ready inclination to grant this request, and appointed a
day for a hearing; but by the artifices of those concerned, it was evaded from
time to time: Whether they at last gained their point, does not appear.

Most of the inhabitants of New Jersey, now pleased themselves with the
prospect of happy times: With a change of governors followed a change of
measures and favorites; impartiality and candor succeeded trick and design;
the tools of the former administration having nothing but the protection of
that to support them, sunk into neglect.

It was Cornbury's weakness to encourage men that would flatter his vanity, and
trim to his humors and measures; these were sure of his favors; but the case
was otherwise now: Such of the former favorites as yet continued in the
council, were not without their share of disesteem; even the confidence which
had been usually put in that board, on passing the support bill, was
discontinued: The assembly declaring to Lovelace, that though they had an entire
confidence in his justice and prudence, respecting the disposition of the money
for support of government, they had not that confidence in the gentlemen that
were now of her majesty's council; and that this was the reason they had
altered the former method; and therefore requested he would favorably
represent it to the queen in their behalf. The law regulating the qualification
of representatives to serve in general assembly, now passed, is yet in force;
the substance of this and the additional one passed, at a different session,
but in the same year, is, that every voter shall have 100 acres of land in his
own right, or be worth L. 50 current money; that the persons elected, shall
have 1000 acres in his own right, or be worth L. 500 current money, in personal
estate; that the representatives and electors shall be freeholders, and have
estates sufficient to qualify him or them in the division where electing or
chosen; that the house of representatives shall be judges of the qualification
of their members; that the same forfeitures shall attend undue returns as in
England; and that no person shall be chosen a representative, who with his
family, does not reside in the province. See also the laws of 1725 and 1730.
Vol. 1, p. 142, 195.


The difference of these administrations will appear on a short comparison.

The first on the subject of a support, makes use of the following expressions:
That I may not be wanting in my duty in the station the queen has been pleased
to honor me with; I shall put you in mind of those things, which I think ought
to be immediately provided for; the first of which is providing a revenue for
the support of government; the revenue which the queen expects is fifteen
hundred pounds a year, for one and twenty years.

Lord Lovelace, ten months afterward, upon the same occasion, speaks as
follows: Her majesty would not be burdensome to her people, but there being an
absolute necessity that the government be supported; I am desired to recommend
that matter to your consideration; you know best what the province can
conveniently raise for its support, and the easiest method of raising it.

Hence may be seen, that the inhabitants had some reason to promise themselves
more happy times than heretofore; but to their great disappointment, lord
Lovelace died within a few days afterward, and the administration devolved on
the lieutenant governor Ingoldsby, Lord Lovelace dies.
who laid before the assembly the design of the crown, respecting an expedition
against Canada, under the colonels Nicholson and Vetch; they immediately voted
L. 3000, for the service, by an emission of paper bills of credit, but did not
now pass the bill.

The lieutenant governor adjourned them for a few weeks, and then told them, he
had given them another opportunity of doing their duty to her majesty,
Lieutenant governor's speech.
and what their country required at their hands.

That he found in their votes at last sitting, a resolve for raising L. 3,000,
for her majesty's service; that this was now become a debt, and they had only
to consider of ways and means of raising it; and that a proper application was
made for the paying of their quota of men appointed for reducing Canada.

The assembly prepared three bills, one for raising L. 3,000, First paper money.
Here began the paper currency in New Jersey: The care of the legislature
respecting it, in this and all the succeeding emissions being to render the
funds for sinking, according to the acts that created it, secure, and to
prevent the currency failing in value; by changing the bills as they became
ragged and torn, and allowing no re-emissions on any other account whatsoever;
it has thence from the beginning, preserved its credit, and proved of great
service to the proprietors, in the sale of their lands, and to the settlers, in
enabling them to purchase and contract, and pay English debts, and go on with
their improvements; the securities when issued on loan, were double the value
in lands, or treble in houses, and five percent. interest; but now (1765) there
is none current on this footing; The funds for sinking by tax the money created
for the expedition and other purposes, are mortgages (secured in the acts that
make the respective emissions) on the estates real and personal, in the
province; hence they are secured as firmly as the province itself; they are a
legal tender to all the inhabitants in the province, and elsewhere, but not to
others, except while in the province: The remittances of this province to
England, being chiefly from New Jersey and Philadelphia, and the bills no legal
tender there, they can never operate to the prejudice of English debts; let
exchange be as it may, because none there are obliged to take them; this is a
particularity only belonging to the state of trade, of New Jersey, and renders
a paper currency there, free from the objections usually made against it in
England.
another for enforcing its currency, and a third for the encouragement of
volunteers, going on the Canada expedition; these bills having received the
governor's assent, the house was adjourned to the first of November, to meet at
Burlington; in November they met accordingly, but deferred business till
December, when they sat ten weeks, passed 18 bills, were then adjourned, and
afterward prorogued from time to time, till dissolved by governor Hunter, in
1710. For a few months before governor Hunter's arrival, William Pinhorne, as
president of the council, exercised the office of commander in chief.


It was in the latter end of the year 1708, that col. Vetch first applied to
the court of Great Britain, for sea and land forces, Colonels Vetch and
Nicholson
to reduce Canada; he, with col. Nicholson, obtained a small force from
England, and instructions to the several governors on the continent to give
them what assistance they could: The instructions to the governor of New York
and New Jersey, were as follows:

ANNE R.

Right trusty and well beloved, we greet you well: Whereas we are fitting out
an expedition with great expense, for the security of our subjects in your
government, from the neighborhood of the French at Canada, which has been very
troublesome to them of late years: According to certain proposals laid before
us by our trusty and well beloved colonel Vetch, and pursuant to the many
applications that have been made to us by our subjects, who have suffered very
much from the French in that neighborhood; we do hereby strictly require and
command you, to be assisting to this expedition, after the manner that the said
colonel Vetch shall in our name propose to you, and that you look upon those
parts of his instructions which relate to you, and our governments under your
care, and which we have ordered him to communicate to you, in the same manner
as if they were our positive commands directed to yourself, and that you pay
the same obedience to them: And whereas there may be some particulars in our
above mentioned instructions, as that which concerns the place of rendezvous,
in which you who live in the country, may be the most proper judge; we do
therefore leave this and the other the like circumstances, to be altered at
discretion; provided, that colonel Vetch and colonel Nicholson, do agree with
you in any such alteration; and provided you do punctually observe the number
of men which you are to furnish, and the time when they are to appear and be on
a readiness to enter upon their expedition: And so we bid you farewell.

Given at our court at St. James's, the 28th of February, and in the seventh
year of our reign. By her majesty's command, SUNDERLAND.

To our trusty and well beloved John Lord Lovelace, our captain general and
governor in chief of our province of New York and New Jersey, in America, or in
his absence to the commander in chief of the said provinces for the time being.


They had a promise of a fleet of ships of war to follow them in due time; they
came over in the beginning of summer 1709, The colonels Nicholson and Vetch
both appearing at a council held at Amboy, the 30 th May, 1709, it was
concluded, that George Riscarricks should be forthwith sent to Weequehala, the
Indian sachem, to acquaint him, that the lieut. governor Ingoldsby expected his
attendance on that board forthwith; and that captain Aarent Schuyler should
forthwith send for Mahcotuinst, Cohcowickick, Ohtossolonoppe, Meskakow and
Teetee, sachems of the Minisinks and Shawhona Indians; who appearing soon
afterward, joined in the undertaking; and Ingoldsby, governor of New Jersey,
G. Saltonstall, governor of Connecticut, and C. Gookin, governor of
Pennsylvania, jointly commissionated colonel Peter Schuyler, the 23 d of May,
1709, to be over these and the other Indians on this expedition; and soon
afterward the said three governors joined in a petition to Nicholson, that he
would take upon him the chief command of the expedition; after which he bore
the name of general Nicholson.
and brought with them the following instructions, directed to col. Vetch.

ANNE R.

Instructions for our trusty and well-beloved Col. Vetch, to be observed in his
negotiations with the governors of several of our colonies in America: Given at
our court at St. James's, the 28th day of February, 1708-9, and in the seventh
year of our reign.

Whereas you have laid before us the proposal of an enterprise on Canada and
Newfoundland, which may turn very much to the security and advantage of our
subjects in those parts of America, as well as to the prosperity of our
kingdoms in general; we having taken the same into consideration, do entirely
approve of the said proposal; and in order to execute it effectually, have
thought fit to give you these our following instructions.

You shall immediately repair on board the ship appointed by our high admiral
for the transporting of you, with officers as shall be sent under your command,
to several of our colonies in North America; upon your arrival at New York, you
are to deliver to our governor of that place a letter from us, and communicate
to him these our instructions, acquainting him, that we shall expect from him a
punctual and ready compliance in all such as relate to him; you shall represent
to him, that out of a great desire to answer the frequent applications which
have been made to us, by our good subjects the inhabitants of those parts, to
deliver them from the neighborhood of the French of Canada, which of late
years has been so troublesome to them; we have fitted out an expedition, the
particulars of which you shall lay before him, and withal let him know, that we
strictly require and enjoin him, to give such an assistance to the said
expedition, as is hereafter specified.

You shall signify to him our pleasure, that the governor of New York do
furnish a quota of eight hundred men, including the four standing companies;
and that the city regiments of York and Albany do duty in the forts, during the
absence of the said standing companies. You shall at the same time acquaint
him, that New Jersey is to furnish two hundred men; Connecticut three hundred
and fifty, and Pennsylvania one hundred and fifty; so that the whole force will
consist of fifteen hundred effectives; which are to be disposed into four
battalions; each battalion to have one of the four regular companies mixed and
incorporated in it, and to be commanded by the captains as colonel whose
company is so incorporated in it, and under him by the respective officers of
the country troops; the officers that go with you, and are designed for
New York, to be distributed among the companies, as the governor in concert
with the commander in chief, shall think best for the service.

You shall likewise acquaint our aforesaid governor, in our name, that we do
command and expect from him, that the quotas of his government, be ready at
Albany, with all things necessary for the expedition, by the middle of May next
ensuing, at the furthest; and that he furnish all the troops with what arms and
ammunition they want, out of the magazine at New York; and that he do forthwith
get together and keep in readiness, three months provision for his quota of
those, to be transported and lodged in some convenient place at the wood creek,
or elsewhere; for the security of which, he shall, in conjunction with the
governments of Connecticut and Pennsylvania, cause to be built a large wooden
store house; as also six or more large boats, that will carry sixty men each,
for the transportation of their heavier stores by water; and also contract with
the five nations, to make with all speed, as many canoes as will be wanted for
the said expedition.

You shall moreover enjoin the aforesaid governors in our name, to command and
engage the aforesaid five nations, as also the river Indians, to join with all
their fighting men in the said expedition, and promise them a good present if
they do; you shall likewise acquaint them, that it is our pleasure that he give
all fitting encouragement to any gentlemen, or others, that shall offer
themselves to go as volunteers in this our service.

You shall deliver a letter from us to the governor of Connecticut, and another
to the governor of Pennsylvania, for the time being, and signify to them our
royal will and pleasure, that they have their quotas of men and provisions
ready by the middle of May at furthest; acquainting them withal, that the
governor of New York is ordered to assist them with what arms and ammunition
they shall want.

After having finished your negotiations for the foregoing expedition, with all
possible secrecy and dispatch, you shall deliver a letter from us to our
governor of New England, and another to the governor of Rhode Island, for the
time being, strictly enjoining and commanding them in our name, to raise at
least twelve hundred of their best men, according to their usual proportions;
and to give all fitting encouragement to any such as shall offer themselves to
go volunteers in the expedition, whether gentlemen or others; as also to have
in readiness a sufficient number of transports, with three months provisions,
and able pilots, whereof capt. Southwech He was master of the province galley,
belonging to the Massachusetts government.
is to be one, and to go in his own galley; and that all may be ready to embark
by the middle of May, upon the arrival of the fleet from England; and for their
greater encouragement, you shall acquaint them, that we have ordered arms and
ammunition to be sent with you, for the number of troops they are to furnish;
which arms and ammunition you shall accordingly deliver to the several
companies, in presence of the governor or commissary of the country, taking a
receipt for the same, which you shall transmit to our board of ordnance in this
kingdom.

You shall with the concurrence and advice of our governor of New England,
contract with ship-carpenters; for the building of ten or more large flat
bottomed boats, that will carry sixty men each, for the landing of troops; and
also contract with proper persons for the furnishing of eight months provision
to the troops that shall be left at Quebec or Montreal, if it shall please God
to make our forces masters of those places, and to give us the success that we
hope for from this our expedition.

And to the end, that nothing may be wanting on our parts, toward engaging the
several governments to act with the utmost spirit and vigor in this
expedition, you shall assure them in our name, that such of the governments as
contribute toward the reduction of Canada, shall have a preference both with
regard to the soil and trade of the country, when reduced, to any other of our
subjects; and when they shall have concerted among themselves any reasonable
proposals, for securing to their respective colonies the benefit of the said
soil and trade, we shall not be wanting to give our royal sanction to the same.

You shall communicate these our instructions to colonel Francis Nicholson, who
has offered himself to go as a voluntier in this expedition; and further, out
of regard to his known abilities and zeal for our service, we do require, that
you should admit him into your private consultations with our several
governors, on the methods for putting this your proposal into execution; and if
by reason of the distance of time and place, any other preparations may be
necessary for the carrying on this expedition, which we could not here foresee,
and which is not contained in these your instructions, you shall, with the
concurrence of the governor, who is to assist in any such service, and of
colonel Nicholson, make any such preparations, though it is not in your
instructions; provided, that it appear to you absolutely necessary for the
carrying on of the expedition aforesaid, and that the governor and colonel
Nicholson do entirely concur in judging it to be so.

A. R. SUNDERLAND.


Being arrived, they did their best at raising forces on the continent; but a
difference arising among the ministry at home, the ships of war expected from
thence, came not: They waited without doing any thing till the winter, and then
Nicholson went back to England, to solicit further assistance, and forward
what had been proposed; to do this with more probability of success, four
Indian sachems of the Five now Six Nations, were prevailed upon to take a
voyage to England, to assist what they could in persuading this Expedition:
Indians in England were then a strange fight; these sachems were also
considered in proportion to the faithfulness and importance of the nations they
belonged to, and accordingly much taken notice of: The court was in mourning
for the death of George prince of Denmark, the sachems at the queen's expense
had under-cloaths of black, covered with a scarlet mantle, edged with gold;
they were carried to court in coaches, and introduced in form to the queen; one
of them made a speech, setting forth, that they doubted not the queen was
acquainted with their long and tedious war against the French, in conjunction
with her children, (subjects) that they had been a strong wall for the security
of these, even to the loss of their best men, as Quider and Anadagarjaux
(Schuyler and Nicholson) could testify; that they were glad an Expedition to
Canada had been undertaken, and had assisted in the preparations on the lake,
whilst Anidiasia (Vetch) at the same time was raising an army at Boston; that
as some important affair had prevented the expected fleet, and rendered the
design for that season abortive; they were left much exposed; and if the Queen
was not still mindful of them, they with their families must forsake the
country, and seek other habitations, or stand neuter; either of which would be
must against their inclinations; they concluded with presenting some belts of
wampum.

After this they were magnificently entertained by several of the nobility, and
were once present at the review of the guards in Hyde-Park, with the duke of
Ormond at their head; to him they made a speech, and presented him with three
skins, to enforce a request, that he would forward their business with the
queen. On their return, at Southampton, Admiral Aylmer, who commanded a fleet
there, sent his yatch to bring them on board; they dined with him, and then
sailed for America.


With these went over col. Schuyler. They sailed early in the year; had several
conferences with the lords of trade; and with Nicholson and the forces he
brought, returned in the summer, and arrived at Boston.

According to the instructions to the governments on the continent, for getting
their assistance in readiness, a considerable armament was raised, and set out
from Boston September 18. The fleet consisted of the Dragon, Falmouth,
Leostaff, Feversham, men of war, the Star bomb, and the Massachusetts province
galley, with transports, in all thirty-six sail; the forces on board were, one
regiment of marines from England, two regiments of Massachusetts Bay, one
regiment of Connecticut, and one of New Hampshire and Rhode Island,
commissioned by the queen, armed and victualed in part by her gift, and part by
the several colonies, toward which New Jersey was L. 3,000; they arrived at
Port Royal, now called Annapolis-Royal, in six days sail from Boston; after
some small canonading and bombarding, the French governor Subercasse,
capitulated; October 5, the fort was given up, and col. Vetch, according to the
instructions for that purpose, became governor; the terms of the capitulation
were, that all the French, being four hundred and eighty one persons, within
three miles of the fort, should be under the protection of Great Britain, upon
taking the oaths of allegiance; the other French settlers were left at
discretion; that in case the French made incursions upon the frontiers of
New England, the British should make reprisals upon the French in Nova Scotia,
by making some of the chief of their inhabitants slaves to their Indians;
notwithstanding this, the French of L' Accadia, soon after committed
hostilities; though the Port Royal and Cape-Sable Indians desired terms of amity
and alliance might be settled with them; which was accordingly done. The men of
war and transports sailed again for Boston, October the 14th, leaving a
garrison in Port Royal of two hundred marines and two hundred and fifty of the
new raised volunteers from the continent; which were the next year relieved by
four hundred of the troops destined for Canada.

Nova Scotia had continued with the French from the year 1662 (except the
momentary reduction and possession of it by sir William Phips, in 1690. Vid.
lieut. governor Hutchinson's his^ of the Massachusetts. Bay, p. 397, etc.
) until now; this acquisition afterward confirmed to Great Britain by the
treaty of Utretcht, has so remained ever since.

The design respecting Canada, was for this year laid aside; the earl of
Dartmouth, secretary of state, wrote to governor Hunter upon the subject, and
to encourage an attempt upon Port Royal; as follows:

Sir, Whitehall, August 1710.
The queen commands me to acquaint you, Earl of Dartmouth's letter.
that as she has formerly taken into consideration the sending over into
New England, such a number of land forces, that joined with those under your
command, and such as the neighboring colonies could have furnished, might have
been of strength sufficient to beat the French out of Canada and North America;
so her majesty had caused this year all necessary preparations to be made, for
this expedition; which her majesty has been forced to lay aside for the
present, by reason of the contrary winds which happened, when the season was
proper for the fleet to sail, and in regard of other important services which
intervened; the queen commands me to add, that she hopes to receive a good
account of the expedition against Port Royal; having sent away last spring Col.
Francis Nicholson, with such commissions, instructions and dispatches, as were
necessary for that purpose; and that she is very well pleased with the accounts
she has received of the zeal with which her subjects under your government
embraced this undertaking, and the forwardness they expressed to promote it;
her majesty therefore for this season, out of her tender care for their good
and prosperity, intends to pursue this design as soon as the state of her
affairs will permit it, being very sensible of the great advantages which may
be thence expected. And as her majesty will not be wanting of her endeavors to
promote whatever may conduce to the welfare and security of the colony under
your government; so her majesty doubts not, but that proper measures will be
effectually taken there for the common safety and interest, which her majesty
earnestly recommends to your care.

This is what I have in command from the queen, who would have you to
communicate this letter in the usual manner, to her loving subjects.

I am, sir, your most humble servant, DARTMOUTH.

Brigadier Hunter arrived governor in the summer this year, The members of
council in his instructions were, Lewis Morris, William Pinhorne, George
Deacon, Richard Townley, Daniel Coxe, Roger Mompesson, Peter Sonmans, Hugh
Huddy, William Hall, Thomas Gordon, Thomas Gardener, Col. Robert Quarry.
called a new assembly The Members were,

For the town of Burlington, Isaac Decow, Robert Wheeler. The county of
Burlington, Thomas Lambert, Joshua Humphreys. Gloucester, John Kay, John
Kaighn. The town of Salem, Hugh Middleton, John Mason. The county of Salem,
Bartholomew Wyat, Isaac Sharp. Cape May, Peter Fretwell, Jacob Spicer. The town
of Perth-Amboy, John Johnston, John Reid. The county of Middlesex, Thomas
Farmer, Adam Hude. Essex, Joseph Marsh, John Trent. Bergen, Andreas Vanbuskirk,
William Sandford. Monmouth, Gershom Mott, William Lawrence. Somerset, Cornelius
Longfield, John Tunison.


to meet the 6th of December; they chose John Kay, of Gloucester, speaker,
Governor Hunter arrives.
received the governor's speech; we give it in is own words.

Gentlemen,
I am little used to make speeches, so you shall not be troubled with a long
one; if honesty is the best policy, Speech.
plainness must be the best oratory; so to deal plainly with you, so long as
these unchristian divisions which her majesty has thought to deserve her
repeated notice, reign amongst you, I shall have small hopes of a happy issue
to our meeting.

This is an evil which every body complains of, but few take the right method
to remedy it; let every man begin at home, and weed the rancour out of his own
mind, and the work is done at once.

Leave disputes of property to the laws, and injuries to the avenger of them;
and like good subjects, and good christians, join hearts and hands for the
common good.

I hope you all agree in the necessity of supporting the government, and will
not differ about the means; that it may the better deserve your support, I
shall endeavor to square it by the best rule that I know, that is the power
from whence it is derived; which all the world must own to be justice and
goodness itself.

There are several matters recommended to you by her majesty, to be passed into
laws, which I shall lay before you at proper seasons; and shall heartily concur
with you in enacting whatsoever may be requisite for the public peace and
welfare, the curbing of vice, and encouraging of virtue.

If what I have said, or what I can do, may have the blessed effect I wish for,
I shall bless the hour that brought me hither; if I am disappointed, I shall
pray for that which is to call be back, for all power except that of doing good
is but a burden.

The assembly's address.

May it please your excellency,
We sincerely congratulate your accession to the government of this province,
Address*
and hope the long wished for time is come, in which the unchristian causes of
our divisions will be taken away, which we presuade ourselves you will be as
willing, as we conceive you are able to do, by divesting a few designing men of
that authority, which they use to the worst purposes.

We have experienced repeated instances of her majesty's care over us; among
which one was, the sending the good lord Lovelace, who put an end to an
administration the then assembly of this province, with great justice, style
the worst New Jersey had ever known; that good man lived long enough to know
how much the province had been oppressed, though not to remove the causes:
Another instance of her majesty's royal favor, we esteem, is the sending your
excellency to govern us, and we persuade ourselves your conduct will evince it
so to be.

We hope great things from you, and none but what are just; let not ill men be
put or continued in power to oppress; let her majesty's subjects enjoy their
liberties and properties, according to the laws, and let not those laws be
warpt to gratify the avarice or resentment of any, and then we may safely leave
disputes of property to them; this we are humbly of opinion, is the greatest
honesty, and we make no question you esteem it to be the best policy.

We always thought it equally reasonable to support a government, and to deny
that support to tyranny and oppression; we should be glad our abilities would
come up to what we esteem your merits; what we are able to do, shall be
sincerely done, and in as agreeable a manner as we are capable; all your
desires, which we doubt not will be reasonable, shall be commands to us, who
will be always ready to join in any thing that may conduce to the public
benefit, and your own; and hope you may never want will and power to punish
wickedness and vice, and encourage true religion and virtue; which if you do,
we shall esteem you our deliverer, and posterity shall mention your name with
honor,

Diverse members of this assembly, being of the people called quakers, concur to
the substance of this address, with their usual exception to the style. This
session continued better than two months; the governor and assembly agreed
cordially, but a majority of the council differed from both, notwithstanding an
accession of diverse new members.

Ever since the surrender, the province had been involved in great confusion,
on account of the people called quakers being denied to serve on juries,
Confusion in exacting the oath.
under pretense that an oath was absolutely necessary; the inhabitants in many
parts, were chiefly such, and juries could not be got without them; the
assembly seeing the confusion that had and would unavoidably follow such
refusal, passed a bill for ascertaining the qualification of jurors, and
enabling the people called quakers to serve on them, etc. and another
respecting the affirmation: The reports of the committee, will, among other
things, show the conduct of the council on this occasion.

The house, according to order, resolved itself into a committee of the whole
house, to consider farther of the papers laid before this house by his
excellency; Committees report
and after some time spent therein, mr. speaker resumed the chair, and doctor
Johnston reported from the said committee, that the 43d article of her
majesty's instructions being read, requiring an act to be passed, for settling
the properties and possessions of all persons concerned in this province; they
do think it to be a matter of the greatest concern, for the quieting the minds
of the people and making the province happy, and do think it will be to no
purpose at present to spend time about such a bill, seeing the council has put
them out of all hopes of having any such act to pass.

Doctor Johnson also reported from the said committee, that the 60th article of
her majesty's instructions being read, requiring an act to be passed, for those
people that make a religious scruple of swearing, to the like effect of that
passed in the 7th and 8th of king William the third in England, so far as may
be consistent with good order and government; that the house have already seat
up such an act to the council for their concurrence, as near to the like effect
as the circumstance of this colony will admit; which the council rejected
without committing the same.

And further, that the 94th article of her majesty's instructions being read,
requiring an act to be passed ascertaining qualifications of jurors; that the
same was included in the bill, entitled, An act for ascertaining the
qualifications of jurors, and enabling the people called quakers to serve on
them, etc. which the council rejected without committing the same, as is
reported before to the 60th article.

And that he was desired to move, that they might have leave to sit again.

By this report, it seems the assembly had no expectation of obtaining these
matters this session; they took into consideration the militia act, passed in
Cornbury's time, by which the quakers in many parts of the province had been
greatly oppressed; they appointed doctor Johnston, Isaac Sharp, Jacob Spicet,
William Sandford, John Reid, and Robert Wheeler, The two last had left the
quakers, with G. Keith, and Sandford (...) distinguished himself against them.
a committee, to prepare and bring in a bill, for explaining an act of this
province, past in the third year of her majesty queen Anne, entitled, an act
for settling the militia of this province, and for relieving persons aggrieved
thereby.

A Bill was brought in, and diverse officers who had been more rigorous in
distressing, than the law warranted, were sent for, to answer for their conduct
at the bar of the house, and ordered to render account of the goods distrained;
this gone through, the bill passed, in which provision was made for the relief
of the sufferers; but the council rejected it, as they had done the other bills.

Next came on the consideration of the charges made against a former assembly,
to the queen, whose vindication they undertook.

A copy of a paper entitled, The humble address of the lieutenant governor and
council of Nova-Caesaria or New Jersey, Vindication of a former asembly.
in America, to the Queen's most excellent majesty; See p. 345, etc.
signed by Richard Ingoldsby, William Pinhorne, Roger Mompesson, Thomas Revell,
Daniel Leeds, Daniel Coxe, Richard Townley, William Sandford, and Robert
Quarry, in the year 1707; was read in the house; and being taken into
consideration, the question was put, whether the said humble address (as it is
called) of the lieutenant governor and council to the queen's most excellent
majesty, be a false and scandalous representation of the representative body of
this province, or not? it was carried in the affirmative. A motion being made,
and the question being put, whether this house do address her majesty for the
justification of the proceedings of the representative body of this province,
in the present and former assemblies, or not? it was carried in the affirmative.

A motion being made, and the question being put, whether any person that has
signed the above mentioned false and scandalous representation of the
representative body of this province, be a fit member to sit in this house,
unless he acknowledge his fault to this house, or not? it was carried in the
negative.

Major Sandford, one of the members of this house, having acknowledged that he
signed the above mentioned address to her majesty, was asked if he would
acknowledge his fault to this house for the same? his answer was, he signed it
as he was one of her majesty's council, and was only accountable to her majesty
for the same; wherefore the question was put, whether major Sandford be
expelled this house for the same; or not? it was carried in the affirmative.

Ordered, that major Sandford be expelled this house, for signing a false and
scandalous paper, called the humble address of the lieutenant governor and
council, to her majesty, in the year 1707; and he is expelled this house
accordingly.

CHAP. XX.
Representation of the Assembly to governor Hunter; and his answer.
PURSUANT to the resolutions of the house, an address was prepared, and sent to
the queen, and a representation to governor Hunter: This last is a particular
answer to the charges, and was as follows:

The humble representation of the general assembly of her majesty's province of
New Jersey.
To his excellency Robert Hunter, Esquire captain general and governor in chief of
the provinces of New Jersey and New York in America, and vice admiral of the
same, etc.
May it please your excellency;
When the lord Lovelace was pleased to let the representave body of this
province know, Representation to governor Hunter.
that her majesty desired to be informed of the causes of the differences
between the gentlemen of the council and them; nothing could be more
satisfactory; because they entirely depended, that a person of so much justice
and veracity, would put things in their true light; and had he lived long
enough to have complied with her majesty's commands, we had not now been under
the necessity of laying the following representation before your excellency.

We are very sorry we have so much reason to say, it was lately our misfortune
to be governed by the lord Cornbury, who treated her majesty's subjects here
not as freemen who were to be governed by laws, but as slaves, of whose persons
and estates he had the sole power of disposing. Oppression and injustice
reigned every where in this poor, and then miserable colony; and it was
criminal to complain or seem any way sensible of these hardships we then
suffered; and whatever attempts were made for our relief, not only proved
ineffectual, but was termed insolence, and flying in the face of authority: The
most violent and imprudent stretches of arbitrary power, were stamped with the
great name of the queen's prerogative royal; and the instruments and strenous
assertors of that tyranny, were the only persons, who in his esteem and their
own, were for supporting her majesty's government: Bribery, extortion and a
contempt of laws, both human and divine, were the fashionable vices of that
time; encouraged by his countenance, but more by his example; and those who
could most daringly and with most dexterity trample upon our liberties, had the
greatest share both in the government of this province and his favor: This
usage we bore with patience a great while, believing, that the measures he took
proceeded rather from want of information or an erroneous judgment, than the
depravity of his nature; but repeated instances soon convinced us of our
mistaken notions; and that he was capable of the meanest things, and had
sacrificed his own reputation, the laws, and our liberties, to his avarice: No
means were left unessayed, that gave hopes of gratifying that fordid passion:
The country was filled with prosecutions by informations of the attorney
general, contrary to law: Those of her majesty's subjects who are called
Quakers, were severely harrassed, under pretense of refusing obedience to an
act of assembly for sett^^ng the militia of this province, when neither the
letter nor meaning of that act justified the severities used on that account;
the measures that were then taken, being chiefly such as the implacable malice
of their adversaries suggested: The rights of the general proprietors, which
upon the surrender of the government, were promised to be preserved inviolable
to them, and which her majesty, by her instructions, had taken all possible
care to do, were by him invaded in a very high degree; their papers and
registers, being the evidences they had to prove their titles to their lands
and rents, violently and arbitrarily forced from them, and they inhibited from
selling or disposing of those lands; by which means their titles were made
precarious, the value of lands through the whole province fell very much, and a
great stop was put to the settlement and improvement of it: To be short, all
ranks and conditions of men grossly abused, and no corner of the country
without complaints of the hardships they suffered from the exercise of a
despotick and mistaken power: An administration so corrupt, so full of tyranny
and oppression in all its parts, induced the assembly to have a regard to the
cries of that unhappy country they represented, and to endeavor (if possible)
some redress, and accordingly, in a most humble manner, remonstrated to his
lordship their grievances; who was of opinion, their remonstrance lay open to a
very ready answer; but that he might give them no occasion to say he had done
it with heat and passion, he took some few days to do it; but with what
coolness and temper it was done, those who have seen it can judge; they both
lie before your excellency (No. 1 and 2.) Sometime after the assembly were
adjourned; and when we met again, made a reply to that answer; which reply (No.
3.) lies before your excellency; but neither the one nor the other procured the
desired effects; on the contrary, the number of our grievances were increased,
some of the most considerable of our inhabitants deserted the province, and
many of those that remained thought themselves unsafe in it; the only hopes
they had, was the arrival of the lord Lovelace, which supported their sinking
spirits, and gave them an expectation of better days.

Upon the first sitting of the assembly, after his arrival, he communicated to
them a paper, called, The address of the lieutenant governor and council of
New Jersey. It was no surprise to us, to find any thing indecent or virulent
proceeding from such men; but it was with some concern, we beheld what
endeavors they had used, to render her most gracious majesty disaffected with
her honest and loyal subjects here, by accusations which were not only false,
but what they knew to be so, at the time of their writing of them, and which we
had made appear to be so, had they not used evasions and shifts to avoid coming
to the test, in the time of lord Lovelace, and while the assembly was sitting;
then they seemed to be for reconciling matters, and burying every thing in
oblivion, in hopes their own deeds of darkness might partake of the same
covering; and hoped the sweetness of that noble lord's temper, and inclinations
to peace, might secure them from that examine which was necessary to expose
them in their true colors; and how much on that occasion they fawned and
flattered, appears by an address of theirs to him, which for the peculiarity of
the language (and we might say the unintelligibleness of the terms) ought never
to be forgotten: It begins thus, Your lordship has not one virtue or more, but
a complete accomplishment of all perfections, etc. and at the same time they
were deifying him (if such an address could do it) they were caballing and
articling against him, triumphed in his death, and have barbarously treated his
memory; and notwithstanding the laws of heaven and nature, (as they are pleased
to express themselves) and all the fine things they say of you, added to the
justness of your administration, they will give you the same treatment when they
can; the knowledge we have of their practices, has made us trespass a little
longer on your excellency's patience than we at first designed: But to return
to the address; we believe the gentlemen of the council have transmitted
something to one of her majesty's secretaries of state, which they called
proofs, and with all the secrecy they could, hoping it may obtain at that
distance, especially when backed by some whose interest it is, that all they
have said be credited: To prevent the ill consequences that may attend the
belief of what they have said, or indeed can say, we shall endeavor to prove
every article of the said address false; and that the subscribers knew several
of them to be so at the time of their signing; what we say is public, not
carried on in darkness, to prevent that reply, which the gentlemen concerned to
justify themselves, and upon the spot, may make if they can.

We begin with the title of the address; which is, The humble address of the
lieutenant governor and council of Nova-Caesaria or New Jersey in America.

This carries a falsehood in the very front of it; for it was no act of council;
but signed by some in the western, and by others in the eastern division of
New Jersey, by one or two in New York, at different times, being privately
carried about by a messenger of my lord Cornbury's; and some were raised out of
their beds to sign it; it never passed the council; was never minuted in the
council books, and the lieutenant governor has several times protested he
signed it without ever reading it: The gentlemen of the council cannot deny the
truth of this; if they do, we can prove it; but to justify themselves they say,
it was signed by the lieutenant governor and the gentlemen of the council,
though not in council: So that it is plain, they designed to abuse the queen, by
giving it the style of an act of council, which her majesty and every body that
reads it would take to be so, when they knew in their consciences it was not
so; but that their malice or servile fears induced them to sign it, and may not
improperly be called, forging an act of council; it is apparent that Roger
Mompesson, esquire signed it by himself; that it was brought to him as an act of
council, and that as such he thought himself obliged to sign it, as by his
reasons for signing it appears; which reasons could have had no weight, had he
not understood it to be so; for he owns he never examined into the particulars
of it.

The first article is, We the lieutenant governor and council of her majesty's
province of Nova-Caesaria or New Jersey, having seriously and deliberately
taken into consideration the proceedings of the present assembly or
representative body of this province, thought our selves bound, both in duty
and conscience, to testify to your majesty our dislike and abhorrence of the
same. This is true, if signing any thing without reading or examining into the
particulars of it, and by some between sleeping and waking, be arguments of
seriousness and deliberation, otherwise not; except by the words seriously and
deliberately, be meant, their resolutions on all occasions to do what the lord
Cornbury commanded them; as indeed their signing this address, and their
conduct in every other thing, did but too plainly evince, to be the only
seriousness and deliberation they were capable of: When col. Quarry signed that
address, we believe he was misled, and depended too much on the credit of
others; we must do him the justice to own, that he has of late declined joining
with them in many of their hot and rash methods, and behaves himself at present
like a man of temper, who intends the service of the queen and good of the
country. These addressors tell her majesty, that they were in duly and
conscience bound to testify their dislike and abhorrence of the same to her:
Had they abhorred falsehood, and discharged their duty as in conscience they
were bound to do, in refusing to join with the lord Cornbury, in all his
arbitrary and unjust measures, and particularly in that scandalous address,
(pardon the expressions) the country would not have had that just cause to
complain, as now they have, and in probability always will, while they continue
in their present stations: There were no proceedings in that assembly that any
honest man had reason to dislike; and their endeavors for the good of the
country, deserve the highest praise, and ought never to be forgotten by
New Jersey.

The second article is, That the unaccountable humors and pernicious designs
of some particular men, have put them upon so many irregularities, with
intention only to occasion divisions and distractions, to the disturbance of
the great and weighty affairs which her majesty's honor and dignity, and the
peace and welfare of the country required: The so many irregularities are, we
suppose, what the lord Cornbury mentioned in his answer to their remonstrance;
which that house replied to; as may be seen in their reply (No. 3.) and whether
they were irregularities or no, the world can judge; but be they what they
will, the addressors are never able to prove, that the unaccountable humors of
some particular men put them upon them; they may indeed boldly say they did,
and if that will do, they may say again, that it was with intention to occasion
divisions, etc. but that neither proves, that any particular men influenced
that assembly, nor that the intentions of doing so, were as they say; that
being impossible for them to know; and if we may be allowed to know the
intentions of that assembly, they were far otherwise than what the addressors
represent them to have been.

The 3d article was, That we had highly incroached upon her majesty's
prerogative royal.

The 4th, That we had notoriously violated the rights and liberties of the
subject.

The 5th, That we had manifestly interrupted justice.

These three articles are what the lord Cornbury, in his answer to the
remonstrance, charges that assembly with, which are fully answered in the
aforesaid reply, and proved to be false charges; and this the addressors knew
when they signed the address, if ever they read the reply or address (which is
very much to be questioned) and we believe, if the truth were known,
notwithstanding their pretensions to seriousness and deliberation, they had
little more hand in it than setting their hands to it, as we shall endeavor to
evince: It is undeniably true, that it was signed at different times, and in
different places; it then must be true, that it was brought ready drawn to the
signers, and its very probable that they did not read it, certainly not with
any consideration: The lieutenant governor, as we observed before, has owned he
did not, and the late chief justice, Roger Mompesson, Esquire a man as likely to
read and consider as any of them, owns under his hand, he never did examine the
particulars of it; which is, in other words, owning he did not read it; and its
not very likely the rest should: These three articles are the very words used
by the lord Cornbury in his answer: the whole address seems to be an abridgment
of that answer, several sentences the same, the style the same, and the same
vein of intemperance and ill nature through them both; and in all likelihood
done by his lordship, who made the addressors father whatever his lordship was
ashamed to own.

The 6th article is, That the remonstrance was a most scandalous libel.

The 7th, That the lord Cornbury made a full and ample answer to it.

The 8th, That the reply of the house of representatives of the province of
New Jersey, was a scandalous and infamous libel; and they add on that head,
this last libel came out so suddenly, that they had not time, as yet, to answer
it in all its particulars.

Certainly it is impossible, that ever men in their right wits, after reading
such an address, should sign it! Was it ever known, that any book or paper
wrote by a house of commons, was called a libel, and a most scandalous and
infamous libel? If the gentlemen had intended to show their talents of railing
and abusive language; they could hardly have taken a more effectual way, than
by that address, which if it prove nothing else, proves them to be very much
masters of those qualifications; but we cannot be of opinion, that their
calling the remonstrance or reply a libel, proves them to be so; nor had they
any reason to expect it would be taken by her majesty, for any thing more than
a demonstration of their want of temper; for if those two papers were libels,
then the house of representatives might have been punished for them, or at
least prosecuted; and if so, any vote, resolve, address or remonstrance that
they made, or any other house of representatives could make, would subject the
said house of representatives (the authors of them) to the same inconveniency,
whenever the gentlemen of the council were pleased to call them so: This is so
contrary to the known practice of England, to the laws, to the rights and
privileges of the house, that it is a needless labor to prove, either that the
gentlemen never read what they signed, or knew what they signed to be false at
the time of their signing of it: But to say a little more, the remonstrance and
reply are so far from being false, that they are most true: Several of the
facts are owned by the lord Cornbury, and where he either evades or denies
them, they are made out in the reply: His bribery was proved by a cloud of
evidences in the house; and whatever else is charged upon him, he knew to be
true; and it is neither in the power of his full and ample answer, nor even of
the address itself, to persuade the contrary: The assembly say indeed in their
remonstance, Had the affairs of New York admitted his lordship oftener to
attend those of New Jersey, he had not then been unacquainted with their
grievances; and that they were inclined to believe they would not have grown to
so great a number. This, perhaps, may be one of the falsehoods the addressors
mean; and truly it ought to be acknowledged, that the then assembly had no
reason to believe his lordship's presence in this province would have any other
effect, than the increasing, instead of diminishing their grievances; but when
the addressors say, that the reply came so suddenly out, that as yet, they had
not time to answer it in all its particulars: They seem to imply, that they had
answered it in some of them; which has not been done, no, not as yet, though it
has been out above three years: And, its coming out so suddenly, etc. is a
great mistake, to say no worse of it; for it had been out above six months
before their address was signed: This is another proof that they never read the
address before they signed it; or if they did, that they knew what they signed
to was false, at the time of their signing.

The 9th article is, That these disturbances are owing wholly to mr. Lewis
Morris and Samuel Jenings, men of turbulent, factious, uneasy and disloyal
principles; men notoriously known to be uneasy under all government, and men
never known to be consistent with themselves.

The 10th article is, That to these men are awing all the factions and
confusions in the governments of New Jersey and Pennsylvania.

These articles are not only the style of the lord Cornbury's answer to the
remonstrance; but for the most part the very words. If mr. Morris, and mr.
Jenings, were such men as the addressors say they are, viz. turbulent and
factious, uneasy under all governments, and the causers of the factions and
confusions of New Jersey and Pennsylvania; then certainly to continue thus
turbulent, etc. evinced they were not inconsistent with themselves, but
constantly pursued the same measures: This was an expression the lord Cornbury
was very fond of, and very much used, and the addressors here have been but the
parrots of his thoughts; and all they have said of these gentlemen (one of whom
is in his grave, viz. Mr. Jenings) is a notorious abuse; for whatever was done
by the assembly (if it is their proceedures they call disturbances) was not done
either by the influence of Mr. Morris or Mr. Jenings, but from a just sense of
their duty, in discharge of the trust reposed in them by the country, and to
prevent the ill effects of an arbitary and unjust use of power, by the lord
Cornbury, so much encouraged by the slavish compliances of the addressors, men
never known to be inconsistent with themselves, nor we fear never will.

We should not trouble your excellency longer on this head, did we not know
this is an article which the addressors think they can justify, and which they
suppose will prove a sufficient defense for all they have said; therefore, to
put this matter in some measure out of dispute, we say, in the first place,
that should they be able to prove what they say in that article, yet it would
not justify their other accusations, nor the severe reflections they have
unjustly made on the representative body of this province: 2dly, It plainly
appears by the journals of the house, that the assembly insisted on the same
things, when neither Mr. Morris nor Mr. Jenings were among them; and now
endeavors to evince to your excellency, that their proceedings were
reasonable. 3dly, The disturbances in Jersey or Pennsylvania, ascribed to Mr.
Morris or Mr. Jennings, were no other than the opposition of an unlawful and
unjust authority, and that during the proprietors government, before it was
surrendered to the queen; so not a sit matter to have been at that time
seriously and deliberately meddled with by the addressors, and could be done
with no other intent but to mislead the queen, into a belief that Pennsylvania
and New Jersey, were then disturbed by these gentlemen: 4thly, We do not find,
that ever Mr. Morris was concerned at all, even during that time, in the
western division of New Jersey or Pennsylvania.

The 11th article is, That this is done with design to throw off the queen's
prerogative royal, and consequently to involve all her majesty's dominions, in
this part of the world, and the honest and good well meaning men in them, in
confusion, hoping thereby to obtain their wicked purposes.

It is evident from this article, that the accusations of Mr. Morris and Mr.
Jenings, were to mislead the queen into such a belief as we have instanced;
1st, from their using the terms (is done) being in the present tense: 2dly,
they assign the reason why it is done, viz. not only to encourage this
government, but all the governments in America, to throw off her majesty's
prerogative royal, and as a consequence of that, to involve all her dominions
in this part of the world, etc. in confusion; which is in plain English,
throwing off our allegiance, and revolting from the crown of England; the
addressors in the first place, suppose all the plantations on the continent of
America inclinable to a revolt, whenever they have an opportunity; or at least
if they don't believe it themselves, would have the queen believe so, and be
apprehensive of some danger from it; which if she had, it is natural enough to
suppose such severe methods would have been taken, as would prevent any such
thing; so that what the addressors have said, is not only an accusation of all
the plantations in America, of want of loyalty and affection to her majesty;
but an endeavor to alienate her affections from them: We thank God it has not
had the ill effects they intended, and hope no representation founded on the
malice of any men, ever will; but that the authors of them may always meet with
as little credit as they deserve: Can it be thought, or could the addressors
themselves ever seriously and deliberately think, that the province of
New Jersey, (one of the most inconsiderable of all her majesty's colonies, and
the most incapable of making any defense, having no fortification that exceeds
a stone house, and of them but very few; a great part of whose people are
quakers, who by their principles are against fighting) would be so
unaccountably mad, as to throw off their allegiance (especially to be the first
in doing it) and expose themselves to unavoidable ruin and destruction? Whoever
can seriously think this, and with deliberation assert it, ought very
seriously, and without much deliberation, be confined to the society of
madmen, as persons that can seriously and deliberately believe and say any
thing; which is all we shall say to this ridiculous, as well as malicious
charge, and pass to the 12th article; than which nothing more untrue, and
knowingly so, could be asserted, as we shall by what follows, make out; the
article runs thus: That the assembly are resolved neither to support the
queen's government with a revenue, nor defend it by settling a militia.

Now it is plain, that this house never did deny to raise a sufficient support
for the government, and took proper care concerning the militia, as by the
several acts for those ends does more largely appear; nay, when the expedition
against Canada, was on foot, we gave three thousand pounds for that end, over
and above the support of government; and the casting vote for the raising that
money, and the settling the militia now, was given by Mr. Hugh Middleton, one
reputed a quaker; so that it will very easily appear, that accusation of the
addressors, was not only very untrue, but that they knew it to be so at the
time of their signing of it; nay more, we shall make it appear, that the
gentlemen of the council have used their utmost endeavors to defeat the
government of a necessary support, and to frustrate, as much as in them lay,
the expedition against Canada; so that the accusation lies most justly against
them, and not against us; for the acts for the support of the government, and
settling the militia, made in the time of the good lord Lovelace, was passed by
them with the greatest difficulty; and the act for raising three thousand
pounds, toward carrying on the expedition against Canada, was at their
direction, by Elisha Lawrence and Gershom Mott, two of their tools, who were
members of this house, (and were not quakers) voted out, and who on the first
and second reading, voted for it, concealing their design of voting against it,
till the time of their voting; and not being quakers, were not suspected of
voting against it, otherways care had been taken to put it out of their power;
and to make it appear, that it was done with design, by direction of the
lieutenant governor and council, to cast a reflection on the house, and to
justify their allegations in their address, even at the expense of defeating
the expedition; the lieutenant governor colonel Ingolds by, though assured by the
speaker, and other members of the house, that if the house was prorogued but
for twenty four hours, care should be taken the bill should pass; who presently
after did, notwithstanding, adjourn the house, from the thirteenth of June to
the twenty eighth of July following; a time so long, that if the house and
council had been never so willing, the season would by that time have been so
far advanced, that it had been of no use then to have raised either men or
money toward that expedition; as the lieutenant governor and council very well
knew; and had not the honorable colonel Nicholson, and col. Vetch, in an
extraordinary manner, pressed the calling the house sooner than the time
appointed, viz. on the twenty third day of June, neither money nor men had been
raised on that account: This we think comes up to a demonstration, that these
gentlemen, rather than not gratify their resentments, and give some color of
justifying what they had said, chose to sacrifice the service of the queen, and
the common good, on so extraordinary an occasion, to their private piques; and
indeed their proceedures ever since, have confirmed the country in that
opinion, and exposed their conduct to a just censure, and showed that they have
been so far from endeavoring (as they say, in the last article) by application
to the governor, to remove the grievances, if any were; that if their best
advice was at any time offered, it was rather how to continue and render them
more intolerable: We are sorry we have so much reason to say this as we have;
but a long and uninterrupted series of despotick and arbitrary government
exacts it from us; and which we are sure they will, to their power, continue as
long as to the great misfortune of this colony, they remain in any places of
public trust.

To enter into a detail of their several male-admistrations, 'twould take up
more time than we can at present spare, and stretch the bounds of this
representation to too great a length: We have already laid before your
excellency some proofs against mr. Hall, one of the council, of his extortion,
and imprisoning and selling the queen's subjects; who, if they had been guilty
of the crimes alleged against them, ought to have been prosecuted accordingly,
and not discharged on any hopes of private gain; and if not guilty, ought not
to have been laid in prison and in irons, and by those hardships forced to
become his servants, rather than endure them: But a man that could, after
taking up adrift several cask of flour, deny them to the owner, and sell 'em,
is capable of any thing that is ill; and how fit for so honorable a post as
one of her majesty's council, or indeed any other place of trust in this
government, is most humbly submitted to your excellency's consideration.

Were there nothing against Mr. Peter Sonmans, but his being indicted for
perjury; from which by a packed jury he was cleared, as appears by the memorial
(No. 4.) there being but too much reason to believe he was justly accused; it
would be no mean reason to lay him aside from her majesty's council; it being
some sort of reflection to continue a person even supposed guilty of so heinous
a crime, in so high a post, which her majesty in a particular manner has
endeavored to secure the honor of, by directing in her instructions, that no
person necessitous or much in debt shall be of it; much less a person known to
be a bankrupt, as Sonmans is, and who at this time, and for some years past,
has lived in open and avowed aduldery, in contempt of the laws, which his being
in power not only protects him from being punished, but enables him to carry on
his wicked designs, by imposing on the honest and simple people, who (...) no
trick from a person of his rank; as appears by the depositions (No. 5.)
relating to the (...) petition against dr. Johnston and mr. Reid; and (...) and
warp the laws, to the manifest prejudice, (...) and undoing of many of her
majesty's subjects, whose complaints from the several parts of the province, so
unfortunate as to be under his direction,) we make no doubt has long ever this
reached your excellency's ears; and which, we persuade ourselves, will, when
your excellency is satisfied with the truth of them, have their proper effects.

The courts of law in which the gentlemen of the council were judges, instead
of being a protection and security to her majesty's subjects, of their
liberties and properties, in disputes that came before them, became the chief
invaders and destroyers of them both; and what should have been the greatest
benefit, proved the greatest grievance; as we we shall instance in a few of the
many things we could: And first, notwithstanding her majesty, for the ease of
her subjects here, has been pleased to appoint the supreme court of this
province to be held alternatively at Amboy in the eastern, and Burlington in
the western division of this province; yet the causes of one division are tried
in the other, and juries and evidences carried for that end, at the great and
needless charge of those concerned, as well as great expense and loss of time
to the people in general; who can receive no benefit by the courts being held
alternatively, if the ends for which they are so held, be not answered, and
causes tried in the same division to which they do belong; besides it is a
practice of very mischevious consequence, making the people entirely depend on
and be subject to the judges of the said court, who can by that method, lay any
persons they do not like, under the necessity of being at the beforementioned
charge, and make them that way sensible of their resentments; which, as we have
instanced, they have been too ready and willing on all occasions to do:
Secondly, the writ of habeas corpus, the undoubted right, as well as great
privilege of the subject, was by William Pinhorne, Esquire second judge of the
supreme court, denied to Thomas Gordon, Esquire then speaker of the assembly; and,
notwithstanding the station he was in, was kept fifteen hours a prisoner, until
he applied by the said Pinhorne's son, an attorney at law, and then, and not
before, he was admitted to bail; which fact, as well as other things, may
appear by the said Gordon's case (No. 6) now laid before your excellency. The
proceedings against a person in that station, and at that time, made it but too
evidently appear, that the said Pinhorne would not stick to join with the lord
Cornbury in the most daring and violent measures, to subvert the liberties of
this country; and cannot be looked on by this house, or any succeeding
assembly, duly considering the procedure and the address abovementioned,
afterward signed by him, but as a person ready and willing on any occasion, to
attempt upon their liberties, and overthrow them if he can; and how safe we can
think ourselves while he continues in power to hurt, is most humbly submitted.

Many persons prosecuted upon informations, have been, at their excessive
charge, forced to attend court after court, and not brought to trial, when
there was no evidence to ground such informations on; but they kept prisoners
in hopes that some might be in time procured; and two of them, to wit, David
Johnston and his wife, after some weeks imprisonment, not admitted to bail till
they entered into a recognizance, the condition of which was, That if the lord
Cornbury was dissatisfied with admitting them to bail, upon notice thereof
signified to them, they should return to their imprisonment: His lordship was
dissatisfied, and Leeds and Revell, who took the recognizance, sent their
orders to them to return according to the condition of it.

Actions have been suffered to continue, after the persons in whose names they
were brought, have in open court disavowed them, declaring they had never given
orders for any such actions to be brought.

Actions upon frivolous pretenses have been postpon'd, and the trials delayed
to serve particular persons, when the juries and evidences were all ready, and
attending on the trials.

Though it be the right of the subject, by proper writs, to remove actions from
any inferior to a superior court; yet at the court of sessions held at
Burlington, in December 1709, colonel Daniel Coxe, colonel Hugh Huddy, colonel
Thomas Revell and Daniel Leeds, esquires, justices of the said county, did
reject a writ of certiorari, obtained by mr. George Willocks, and allowed by
Roger Mompesson, chief justice, and committed said Willocks till he entered
into recognizance, to appear at the next court of oyer and terminer.

The case of Peter Blacksfield, who by a mistake or design, was divested of his
estate, and ruined; is so well known to your excellency, that we need say
nothing more about it.

The people called quakers, who are by her majesty admitted to places of the
most considerable trust within this province, are sometimes admitted to be
evidences; as one Mr. Beaks, a quaker, was in a capital case against one Thomas
Bates, at a court of oyer and terminer, held by justice Mompesson, col. Coxe,
col. Huddy, and others; on which evidence, he was condemned to be executed; and
sometimes they have been refused to be jurors or evidences, either in civil or
criminal cases; so that their safety, or receiving the benefit of her majesty's
favor, seems not to depend on the laws, or her directions, but the humors and
capricios of the gentlemen who were judges of the courts: We, with all
humanity, take leave to inform your excellency, that the western division was
settled by those people, who combated with all the inconveniences attending a
new settlement; and with great difficulty and charge, have from a wilderness
improved it to be what you now see it is; there are great numbers of them in
it, and should they not be admitted as evidences or jurors, they would be very
unsafe; for it is in the power of ill men, to come into their religious
assemblies, and murder as many as they please, and with impunity, though looked
on by hundreds of quakers; or break open their houses and rob with safety; and
the encouragement the gentlemen of the council have given to the meanest of the
people, to abuse them, confirms us in the opinion, that there wants not those
who have will enough to perpetrate the greatest mischiefs on that people, when
they can escape the punishment due to their crimes.

The procedure of the whole body of the council, in relation to Mr. Barclay, is
a demonstration of their arbitrariness and partiality, as by his case, (No. 7.)
now laid before your excellency, will more fully appear: When he produced a
commission before them, from the proprietors in England, which superceded that
lame one given to Mr. Sonmans; they (as appears by an order of council) took
the said commission from him; than which nothing could be more arbitrary and
unjust; for that commission was the property of Mr. Barclay, and he had the
right of executing the powers of it; and if any persons was aggrieved, or the
commission not good, the law was open to dispute it; and a copy of it sent to
the queen would have answered all the just ends that sending the original could
do: It was indeed a short way of determining in favor of Peter Sonmans, and
putting it out of the power of Mr. Barclay, to right himself, during that
administration: The gentlemen may call this a strenuous asserting of the
queen's prerogative royal; but we can call it by no other name than an open
robbery, committed in their judicial capacity, under a pretense of authority;
than which nothing could be worse, or of more pernicious consequence.

To conclude, all persons not friends to the gentlemen of the council, or some
of them, were sure in any trial at law to suffer; every thing was done in
favor of these that were: Justice was banished, and trick and partiality
substituted in its place: No man was secure in his liberty or estate; but both
subjected to the caprices of an inconsiderate party of men in power, who seemed
to study nothing more than to make them as precarious as possible. Your
excellency's coming, has put a check to that violent torrent of injustice and
oppression, that bore down every thing before it; and we hope, that during your
administration, ill men will not have authority to hurt, nor their
representations gain any credit with a person so able to discern the motives of
them; which are no other, than the gratification of their own resentments, even
at the price of the public safety, as we have in great measure already proved;
and their proceedings now does plainly confirm what we have offered; for what
can be the intent of rejecting our bills without committing of them, but to
irritate us to that degree, that nothing might be done, either toward the
support of the government, or the settling of a militia, that they might have
where withal to justify themselves in what they have said of us? What was the
cause of their rejecting the bill for preventing of corruption in courts of
justice, but the consciousness of their own crimes, and the fears they had of
that examine, which must necessarily have exposed their conduct to a due
censure? What was it that made them throw out the bill against bankrupts
(though made by her majesty's express direction) and profess themselves against
any bill whatsoever on that head, but the dread they had of feeling the just
consequences of it themselves? Nay, one of them, William Pinhorne, esquire by name,
was pleased to say, it was with horror and amazement he beheld a bill with that
title; we are not so fond of the bill as it was drawn, but that we would have
readily joined with the council in any reasonable amendments, had they offered
them; but we think no honest man could be against a bill that makes the estates
of persons becoming bankrupts, liable to pay their just debts; and we hope
New Jersey will not long be a sanctuary for such. The bill, entitled, An act for
enabling persons aggrieved by an act for settling the militia of this province,
was, to make the distresses unreasonably and illegally made on pretense of the
militia act, returnable to the owners, and to punish the persons that did it;
but this they will not pass, knowing that so just an act would be attended with
consequences they can by no means bear; the instruments of that oppression
being to be protected by them at any rate, and nothing to be heard against
them, because they were officers of the government, though their practices were
never so unreasonable or unjust, and her majesty's subjects left remediless,
and must patiently sit down, after having their houses and plantations
plundered, and their persons abused by a crew of needy and mercenary men, under
pretense of law; but it was such persons that were useful to them, and such
they must, for their own safety, protect: It Is for this reason they combine
together, to secure, as far as they are able, Jeremiah Bass, their clerk, the
secretary of this province, and prothonotary of the supreme court; in all these
offices his pen is to be directed by them; they dread an honest man in these
offices: How he has behaved himself, is in some measure known to your
excellency, especially in the case of Dennis Linch, the Maidenhead people, and
Peter Blacksfield; the two last are notorious malversations in his office, and
appear under his hand, and by the minute books of the supreme court; and it is
no excuse in him, when men are turned out of their estates and ruined, to say,
it was a mistake; if such an excuse would do, it is very easily made on any
occasion; and in this province, can be safe, when such a person continues in
offices of so great trust. All the original copies of the laws passed in the
time of the just lord Lovelace, are somehow or other made away with; Bass
offers to purge himself by his oath, that he has them not, nor knows any thing
of them; and it may be so for aught we know; but in this province where he is
known, it is also known, that few men ever believed his common conversation,
and several juries have refused to credit his oaths; he corroborates what he
says with the evidence of Peter Sonmans, one of the council, a person once
indicted for perjury; and how he was cleared, the aforesaid memorial makes out;
so that we do not think him a person of sufficient credit to determine that
point. It is certain, that the secretary's office is the place those laws ought
to be in, and he ought not on any pretense to have parted with them out of the
province: It is certain, the lieutenant governor ought, within three months
after the passing of them, to have sent copies of them to the lords
commissioners for trade and plantations, and duplicates of them by the next
conveyance after; and this under pain of her majesty's highest displeasure, and
the forseiture of that year's salary, on which he should on any pretense
whatsoever omit the doing of it; how comes it then about, that neither the
secretary Bass, nor mr. Cockrill, private secretary to the lord Lovelace, and
who lived six months after his master's death, was never examined about them?
Mr. Cockrill could have cleared up that matter while alive, if the lieutenant
governor could be thought so grossly to neglect what he knew to be his duty; why
did not mr. Bass apply to him in all that time for those laws? If he had parted
with them, as he pretends, so much against his will, it was very natural to
suppose he would have used the utmost application to get them again; yet no one
enquiry is said to be made after them, either by Bass or the lieutenant
governor, of the lady Lovelace, who staid in New York long after the death of
her lord, or of his secretary; nor no noise at all made about them till this
time, so long after the arrival of your excellency; can any body think it was
the interest of either the lord or lady Lovelace, or his secretary, or any of
his lordship's friends, to destroy a law which gave the lord Lovelace eight
hundred pounds, and without which he could not have it? but it does appear to
be the interest of the lieutenant governor and his friends to destroy it; for
they had got an act passed, which took from the lord Lovelace three hundred and
thirty pounds of that money, and gave it to the lieutenant governor; and two
hundred and seventy pounds more of it was given to him for the support of the
government. Had he sent the act made in favor of the lord Lovelace, to the
queen, for her approbation or disallowance, and her majesty had approved of it,
as in all probability she would have done, then the act made in colonel
Ingoldsby's favor had been void; but had the other gone home first, there was
an expectation it might pass, the queen knowing no more about the first act,
than that a vote had passed in favor of the lord Lovelace.

And to make it plainly appear, that colonel Ingoldsby, and the gentlemen of
the council, were apprehensive of the danger of sending those acts to England;
to the act we have no past, for making the printed copies as effectual as if
the originals were in the secretary office, that your excellency may be enabled
to transmit them to her majesty; they have added a providing clause, that the
act made in col. Ingoldsby's time, (which takes that money from the lord
Lovelace) shall not by this act we have past, be made void in the whole or any
part thereof; but continue in full force and virtue, as if this act had never
been made: This amendment they insist on, though they knew, and do know, we will
never agree to a clause so foreign to the title and intent of the bill; but
this is done by them, with design that the bill shall not pass; by which means
her majesty will be without authentic copies of the acts, during that good
lord's administration; and they hope will confirm the acts past in colonel
Ingoldsby's time: What we have said on this head, shows very plainly who are
the persons that ought, with most reason to be charged, with the making away
those original laws.

We are concerned, we have so much reason to expose a number of persons,
combined to do New Jersey all the hurt that lies in their power: Her majesty
has been graciously pleased to remove colonel Richard Ingoldsby from being
lieutenant governor, and we cannot sufficiently express our gratitude for so
singular a favor; and especially for appointing your excellency to be our
governor: We have all the reason in the world to be well assured, you will not
forget that you are her subject; but will take care that justice be duly
administered to the rest of her subjects here; which can never be done while
William Pinhorne, Roger Mompesson, Daniel Coxe, Richard Townley, Peter Sonmans,
Hugh Huddy, and William Hall, or Jeremiah Bass, Esqrs, continue in places of
trust, within this province; nor can we think our liberties or properties safe
while they do; but if they are continued, must with our families desert the
province, and seek some safer place of abode: We shall wait till your
excellency can transmit accounts of the state of this colony, to her majesty;
and assure you, that we will on all occasions very readily, to our power,
comply with her majesty's directions, and be wanting in nothing that may
conduce to make your administration happy, both to yourself and us.

Signed by order of the house of representatives. WILL. BRADFORD, Clk.
Die Veneris, A.M. 9 Feb. -- 1710.
This representation was received kindly by the governor; he answered, that her
majesty had given him directions to endeavor to reconcile the differences,
that were in this province; but if he could not, that he should make a just
representation to her; and that he did not doubt, but that upon the
representation he should make, her majesty would take such measures, as should
give a general satisfaction.

The governor accordingly backing the remonstrance to the queen, got all the
counselors removed, that were pointed out by the assembly, as the cause of
their grievances, and their places supplied by others: The business of this
session being finished, the governor prorogued the house.

CHAP XXI.
A session of general assembly: A second expedition to Canada: Meeting of a new
assembly: They quarrel: Some members designedly absent themselves: Expelled the
house: Several of them again returned, and refused seats: A fruitful session at
Crosswicks: Last session in Hunter's time: An act passed for running the
division line between East and West-Jersey: William Burnet arrives governor: An
uncommon wet harvest: Governor Burnet meets a new assembly.
GOVERNOR Hunter, convened the assembly in the summer, 1711, and opened
business, with telling them, That her majesty's instructions which he was
commanded to communicate, Governor's speech.
would discover the reason of his calling them together, at this time; and that
he doubted not the matters therein contained, would be agreeable to them, and
the success profitable.

That the fleet and forces destined for the reduction of Canada, were arrived
in good health and condition, and would proceed in a little time; that what was
required on their parts, was the levying in each division 180 effective private
men, besides officers, and to provide for their encouragement, pay, and
provisions, as well as transportation over the lakes, and other incidental
charges attending the service.

The assembly resolved to encourage this expedition, by raising to the value of
12500 ounces of plate, Second paper bills of credit.
in bills of credit, Equal to L. 5000 currency, at that time.
to be sunk, together with the former L. 3000, by a subsequent tax; and
provided bills for raising volunteers to go on the expedition, and for emitting
the money.

The governor passed the bills, and dismissed them with thanks, for the
cheerful dispatch they had given.

This was a second expedition against Canada, and made a formidable appearance:
Second expedition to Canada.
Nicholson's designs having hitherto, by various disappointments, sailed; he
how, under the scheme of reducing all Canada, and thereby engrossing the cod
fishery, so prevailed on the new ministry, that the regiments of Kirk, Hill,
Windress, Clayton, and Kaine, from Flanders; Seymour's, Disney's, and a
battalion of marines from England, under the command of brigadier Hill, were
sent to him, on this occasion; they came in 40 transports, under convoy of 12
ships of the line of battle, commanded by admiral Walker; Fleet arrives.
several frigates, two bomb vessels; and brought a large train of artillery,
under col. King, with 40 horses, and six store ships; they arrived at Boston
early in the summer.

By orders from home, a congress was held at NewLondon, of all the plantation
governors, north of Pennsylvania, Congress.
with Nicholson, to adjust the measures to be fallen upon: Two regiments from
the Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire, joined the British forces;
while the militia from Connecticut, NewYork, and New Jersey, with the Indians
of the five nations, under Nicholson, marched by land from Albany, to attack
Montreal: The fleet being retarded at Boston for want of provisions, occasioned
admiral Walker, in a letter to governor Dudley of Boston, to write, I concur
with the opinion of all the sea and land officers here, that the government of
this colony have prejudiced the present expedition; instead of assisting it.
The fleet consisting of 68 vessels, and 6463 troops; anchored in the bay of
Gaspee, on the south side of the entrance of the river St. Lawrence, to take in
wood and water, on the 18th of the month called August, and the 23d in the
night, contrary to the advice of the pilots, weighed anchor in a fog, Several
transports lost.
fell in with the north shore, and lost 8 transports and 884 men upon the
island of Eggs; A council of war was called, who resolved, that by reason of
the ignorance of the pilots, it was impracticable to proceed, and that advice
should be sent to recall general Nicholson from proceeding to Montreal; which
done, Fleet returns.
and the fleet returning, anchored in Spanish River, off Cape Breton, September
4; and there, in a council of war it was resolved, not to attempt any thing
against Placentia, but to return to Great Britain: They sailed for England
September 16, and arrived at St. Helens the 16th of October: The Edgar, Edgar
blown up.
with the admiral's papers, was blown up: This prevented other particulars of
the expedition transpiring; thus concluded, at a great expense of men and
treasure, an affair above three years in agitation.

In 1712 died Thomas Gardener, of Burlington, several times mentioned before;
Death of the second T. Gardener.
he was well acquainted with public business, a good surveyor, and useful
member of society; several years one of the council, treasurer of the western
division, and the first speaker of assembly after the union of the governments,
East and West Jersey.

The 7th of December, 1713, the governor called the assembly, Assembly meets.
and next day informed them, that he was glad to see them after so long
absence, and believed they were not sorry to meet him in so good company;
Meaning the change of counselors, William Pinhorne, Daniel Coxe, Pteter
Sonmans and William Hall, had been suspended, and a mandamus since arrived,
appointing John Anderson, Elisha Parker, Thomas Byerly, John Hamilton and John
Reading.
that the tender regard her majesty had to their quiet, in particular at a time
when she had blessed the world with a general peace, called for their pious
endeavors and could not fail of meeting the returns due from the most grateful
people, to the best and most indulgent princes; that he was persuaded the
efforts of such as had been removed from places of trust by the queen, at their
request, would be too impotent to destroy the peace, by breaking that mutual
confidence, or disturbing that harmony, that then subsisted between the several
branches of the legislature; that full of this confidence, he recommended to
their immediate care, the providing for past arrears, and future support of her
majesty's government, the discountenancing vice and immorality, the improvement
of trade and encouragement for planting and peopling the province; that this
could not be better effected than by a law to affirm and ascertain the
respective properties of the proprietors and people, if they thought it
practicable.

That the gentlemen of the present council, having no views or interests
differing from theirs, if they would agree to frequent and amicable conferences
with them, or a number of them, upon all matters under deliberation, it would
save much time and effectually disappoint all contrivances of their enemies;
who in return for their being at present no counselors, had ridiculously
endeavored to persuade some that they were no assembly.

The assembly replied, Assemblys address.
That they were indeed glad to meet him in such good company, and as the
persons who had hitherto obstructed the welfare of their country, were removed,
they presumed on the favor oftener than heretofore; they acknowledged
themselves under the greatest obligations to the best of queens, and hoped
their actions would demonstrate they were not ungrateful.

Among other bills passed this session, was that entitled, An act that the
solemn affirmation and declaration of the people called quakers, shall be
accepted instead of an oath in the usual form, and for qualifying and enabling
the said people to serve as jurors, and to execute any office or place of trust
or profit within this province.

This bill was introduced by the governor's communicating to the house the
queen's instruction on that head, after it was fully adjusted by the council
and assembly; the second enacting clause was thought to be designedly left out
by the secretary, who had it to engross, it so passed the council without being
perceived; but on reading it again in the assembly it was discovered, and the
secretary making his acknowledgement at the bar of the house, it passed over:
This act continued till the year 1732, and then was supplied by that now in
force.

Other laws also passed; this session concluded to mutual satisfaction.

'I thank you,' says the governor in his concluding speech to the house, for
what has been done this sessions for the support of this her majesty's
government, and do not doubt, but that you will receive ample thanks from those
who sent you, for the many good laws that have been passed; some things that in
their nature were acts of favor, I have agreed that they should be made acts
of assembly, that your share may be greater in the grateful acknowledgment of
your country.

I hope my conduct has convinced the world, (I cannot suppose you want any
further conviction) that I have no other view than the peace and prosperity of
this province; if such a few as are enemies to both, are not to be reduced by
reason, I shall take the next best and most effectual measure to do it.

No historical occurrences intervening, we pass on to the year 1716.

Governor Hunter met a new assembly at Perth-Amboy, in the spring, who chose
col. Daniel Coxe, speaker; The members, Town of Burlington, Daniel Smith,
Samuel Smith. County of Burlington, Jacob Doughty, Jacob Hewlings, Gloucester,
Colonel Daniel Coxe, Richard Bull. Town of Salem, William Hall, Henry Joyce.
County of Salem, William Clews, Dickinson Shephard. Cape May, Jacob Spicer,
Jeremiah Bass. Perth-Amboy, William Eirs, John Harrison. Middlesex, John
Kinsey, Charles Morgan. Essex, Josiah Ogden, Joseph Bonnell. Bergen, David
Akerman, Henry Brockholst. Monmouth, Elisha Lawrence, William Lawrence,
Somerset, Benjamin Clark, Thomas Hall.
being presented and accepted, the governor by speech informed them.

That the dissolution of one assembly by the demise of the late queen, of
another by the arrival of a new patent from the present king, constituting him
governor of the province, and of a third by reason of a circumstance well
known, together with the long sessions at York, and his necessary attendance on
the service of the frontiers, had been the occasion of putting off their
meeting till now; that on his part he brought with him a firm purpose for the
advantage of the subject and service of the crown; which, (says he) I have ever
pursued, and now bid a fair defiance to the most malicious to assign one single
instance in which I have acted counter to what I now profess, notwithstanding
the false and groundless accusations and insinuations to the contrary, from two
persons on the other side, who pretended to have been instructed from this;
which though they met with that contempt at home they deserved, I could not
without injustice to myself let pass unmentioned here.

The assembly being now convened at Amboy, when it ought in turn to have been
at Burlington, were determined to remonstrate against the infringement of the
usual custom of alternately meeting at each of those places, and accordingly
represented to the governor, that in the year 1709, an act was passed,
entitled, An act for ascertaining the place of the sitting of the
representatives, to meet in general assembly; that in March, 1710, the
aforesaid act was confirmed, finally enacted and ratified by her late majesty,
with the advice of her privy council, and transmitted to him (the governor) by
the lords commissioners for trade and plantations, the 16th of said month.

That as they found themselves entirely inclinable to pay all due regard and
obedience to his majesty's and the governor's commands, so they could not but
think it their duty to maintain the known established laws of the province.

And as that law had the royal sanction, and had gone through all the usual
forms both here and in Great Britain, necessary to the confirming and
perpetuating of it, they were of opinion it was still in force.

The governor replied, That his majesty's instructions, which were laws to him,
having restored that affair to the just and equal footing upon which it was put
by, and at the time of the surrender of the government by the proprietors, he
could not give his consent to any alteration, or give way to any thing that
might elude the intent and purpose of that instruction without giving juster
grounds of complaint against him, than he had hitherto given; and that he had
reasons of great weight, made it impracticable for him to hold either council
or assembly at Burlington, at this time.

The dispute being principally founded on the new commission to the governor,
upon the accession of K. George the first to the throne; the assembly thought
proper to let it drop, and pursue what was before them at the place where they
were then convened; matters however went heavily on; the speaker disliked the
governor, and influenced many of the members: The governor saw there was no
prospect of their answering the design of their meeting at that time, so
prorogued them.

He summoned them to meet again at Amboy on the 14 th of May, Members refuse
attending.
when only nine members appearing they waited five days, and then presented an
address, requesting the governor would take such methods as he should see meet,
to cause the absent members to attend the service; he sent warrants to several
of them, commanding their attendance, as they would answer the contrary at
their peril; four presently appeared, and there being now thirteen met, the
governor sent for them, and recommended their meeting at the house and choosing
a speaker, (for their speaker was absent among the rest) in order to enable
themselves to send their sergeant at arms for those that were still absent.

The thirteen met the 21st, but the speaker still absent; they proceeded to a
new choice, and placed John Kinsey in the chair.

This done, and the new speaker presented, the governor delivered his speech:

Gentlemen,
The last time you were here upon the like occasion, I told you, that I thought
fit to approve of whatever choice you thought fit to make of a speaker: I now
tell you that I heartily approve of the worthy choice you have made.

As the conduct of that gentleman who last filled the chair, sufficiently
convinced you of a combination between him and his associates, to defeat all
the purposes of your present meeting: I hope, and cannot doubt but it will open
the eyes of all such as by his and their evil acts, and sinistrous practices,
have been misled and imposed upon; so that for the future, here they will not
find it so easy a matter to disturb the peace of the country.

I must refer you to what I said at the opening of the assembly; but harvest
drawing near, I am afraid you will hardly have time for more business than what
is absolutely and immediately requisite; that is the support of the government,
and the public credit, you know that the date of the currency of your bills of
credit is near expiring, so there will be wanting a new law to remedy the evil
that must attend the leaving the country without a currency for ordinary uses,
as well as trade.

ROBERT HUNTER.

The house then examined into the conduct of their late speaker, and the absent
members, who on the question, were all at different times severally expelled,
for contempt of authority and neglect of the service of their country, and
writs issued for new elections.

The 8th of next month soon after the speaker's exclusion, but before the other
members were expelled, the assembly presented their address as follows:

May it please your excellency,
Your administration has been a continued series of justice and moderation, and
from your past conduct we dare assure ourselves of a continuation of it, and we
will not be wanting in our endeavors to make suitable returns, both in
providing a handsome support of the government, and of such a continuance as
may demonstrate to you and the world, the sense we have of our duty and your
worth.

The gentleman, our late speaker, has added this one instance of folly to his
past demeanor, to convince us and the world, that in all stations, whether of
a counselor, a private man, or a representative, his study has been to disturb
the quiet and tranquillity of this province, and act in contempt of laws and
government; we are sensible of the effects it has had, and may have on the
public peace; and our expulsion of him, we hope evinces that we are not the
partisans of his heat and disaffection to the present government; we are very
sorry he has been capable to influence so many into a combination with him, to
make effectual his ill purposes; but we hope it is rather the effect of
weakness than malice, and that their eyes are now so much opened that they will
return to their duty, and join with us in providing for the public credit, and
what ever else may make this province happy, and your excellency easy.

Next the assembly resolved, That the late members whom they had expelled,
should not sit as members of the house if they should be returned on a new
election, during this sessions of assembly.

Notwithstanding this resolve, several of the same members were returned; but
refused seats in the house, and the electors obliged to choose over again.

The governor then prorogued them to the 3d of October. In November the same
house met at Croswicks, The true Indian name of this place is supposed to be
Clossweeksung, a separation.
the smallpox being at Burlington; the governor opened the business of this
session by telling them, That supporting government and public credit,
required their immediate deliberation; that they knew the funds for the first
had expired fifteen months ago, and that the other had suffered much by the
obstinacy of some in refusing the payment of taxes, or remisness in others in
collecting or putting the laws in execution, sufficient (if duly executed) to
have answered the end, and in a great measure prevented or remedied that evil;
that he doubted not they were now met with a good disposition, as well as in
full freedom, all clogs and bars being removed, to pursue to effect the good
ends of their meeting, and to make good their engagements and promises in
several addresses; that the true interest of the people and government were the
same; to wit, a government of laws, that no other deserved the name; that this
was never separated or separable but in imagination by men of craft, such as
were either abettors of lawless power on the one hand, or confusion and anarchy
on the other; that the first was not the case of this province, and we had well
grounded hopes, that all endeavors toward the latter were ceased.

This session proved long and fruitful: It held above two months; sixteen
public and private bills received the governors assent.

In 1718 died Samuel Smith, one of the members of assembly for Burlington; he
had sought happiness in the quiets of obscurity, but being against his
inclination called to this and other public stations, he passed through them
with a clear reputation: In private life he was inoffensive, benevolent, steady
and respected. He with five of his brothers, John, Daniel, Joseph, Emanuel and
Richard, and one sister, removed from near Bramham, in Yorkshire, at different
times; but mostly in and about the year 1691. Daniel served the public several
years faithfully in assembly, and died in 1742. Richard was 12 years one of the
council, and died the latter end of 1750.


This year was remarkable for an uncommon storm of hail: It fell larger than
had been remembered before in the provinces, it killed many wild pigeons, and
other birds, and did considerable damage.

In the beginning of summer 1742, another happened with a strong gust of wind,
accompanied with some rain and hail of very uncommon bigness; in one house it
was said to have struck 28 holes through the roof; the damage to the grain in
some places was so great, that the farmers began to forbear selling their last
year's stock, least they should want bread; at Amwell, a boy was said to be
killed, and others very much hurt.

Such another happened in the spring 1758: It came from the north, the hail in
large stones continued for 8 or 10 minutes, and abated gradually; it drifted in
some places 6 inches thick, it went in a vein (as it commonly does) about a
mile and a half broad: The destruction of green corn and gardens were great,
and the trees had their young leaves shattered to pieces.

In the spring governor Hunter again met the assembly at Perth-Amboy; but at
the desire of the members, their private affairs interfering, they were
adjourned to the winter, when meeting he made a speech, setting forth:

That the revenue was sometime since, expired; that when this came under
consideration, he desired an augmentation of the officers salaries; that in
former acts they were so scanty and so retrenched from what they had been, that
the officers were not enabled to perform their respective duties.

That the assembly of New York, had passed an act for running the division
line, betwixt this province; and that upon supposition, that another for the
same purpose would be passed here; that the justice due to the proprietors and
the disturbances among the people, made such a law immediately necessary; that
he had formerly recommended their providing for an agent at the court of Great
Britain, and now repeated it; that the lords commissioners for trade, had in
several of their letters complained of the want of one; that this was the only
province in his majesty's dominions, that had none; that by means of this
omission their business in England stood still; that what could not be delayed
without danger or loss to the public, since his administration had been
negociated by persons employed by him, at his own very great expense, which he
hoped they would consider; that as to projects of trade, he had no reason to
change his opinion since they last met; that to this subject he referred them
on what he then spoke The paragraph was as follows:

As for the measures of advancing or rather for giving a being to trade amongst
you, the generality of you has shown such aversion to solid ones; and others
such a fondness for imaginary or ruinous ones, that without a virtue and
resolution of serving those you represent against their inclination, your
endeavors will be to little purpose; but if any thing of that nature fall
under deliberation, I cannot think of a better guide, than a just inspection
into the trade in other provinces, where it is in a good and flourishing
condition, the means by which it became so, can be no mystery; where it is
otherwise, or has decayed, you will find the true cause of such decay
conspicuous: And it is but a rational conclusion, that what has formed trade or
that on which it depends, credit in one place cannot but be the most proper
means either to begin it or preserve it in another.




The assembly said in their address, That they were not insensible the present
circumstances of the government as well as of the country, Address.
made their meeting necessary, notwithstanding the rigor of the season; that
they were not unmindful that the revenue was expi^ed, nor of their duty in a
reasonable support; that they were willing to pass an act for running the
division line betwixt this province and New York; but conceived the expense of
that affair belonged to the proprietors of the contested lands; that they were
very sensible an agent for the province at the court of Great Britain, was very
necessary, but were sorry the circumstances of the province, were such, that
they could not make a suitable provision for so useful an officer; and that
they would readily come into any measures that might be effectual to promote
the trade and prosperity of the province.

This session produced eleven public and private bills, among them was one for
running and ascertaining the division line betwixt New Jersey and New York; but
this act was never put in execution further than fixing the north partition
point; this was done by indenture made the 25 th of July, 1719, between R.
Walter, Isaac Hicks and Allane Jarrat, surveyor general, on the part of
New York; John Johnston and George Willocks, on behalf of East-Jersey; Joseph
Kirkbride and John Reading, on behalf of West-Jersey, and James Alexander,
surveyor general, on behalf of both East and West-Jersey; these commissioners
and surveyors duly authorized, met at the place, and after many observations of
the latitude, unanimously by the deed aforesaid, fixed the north partition
point on the northermost branch of Delaware; which they found to be that branch
called the Fish-Kill: This done, the commissioners for West-Jersey thought they
were not further concerned; the others, though both greatly interested in
having it settled, left it an uncertainty till 1764, when by acts of assembly
of both colonies, it was referred to be finally settled and determined by
commissioners to be appointed by the crown.

Another act passed now, was that for running and ascertaining the line of
division between East and West Jersey, Vid. Laws of the province, vol. 1. p.
63, etc.
the conditions here not hitherto complied with, this line remains in the same
uncertainty the act left it; still a subject of inconvenience and anxiety to
many, and seems to call for exertion in those with whom the powers to settle
it, are properly lodged.

The beginning of the summer this year afforded a fair prospect of a plentiful
harvest, much was expected from a great crop in the ground; West harvest.
a day or two in the beginning proved good weather, but before the grain was
secured, showers of rain and a few hours sunshine constantly succeeded each
other; clouds at first small in appearance, spread widely and filled the
furrows: the intervals of sunshine encouraged opening the shocks, but were not
long enough to dry them; after several weeks came two days and an half fair
weather; what could be dried and saved was now done, the rain then began again,
and continued day after day as before, alternate rain and sunshine for near
three weeks, so that single ears of corn standing, grew; thus it continued till
the grain was generally reaped, several lost their corn entirely, others saved
but little; this was what is called the wet harvest.

We are now come to the end of governor Hunter's administration, he resigned in
favor of William Burnet (son of the celebrated bishop) and returned to
England; Governor Hunter resigns.
he had a ready art at procuring money, few loved it more; this foible it is
said drew him into schemes, gaming, and considerable losses; though not in all
respects accomplished: His address here was engaging and successful, he
assented to most of the laws the people wanted, and filled the offices with men
of character. He had before, so early as the year 1705, been appointed
lieutenant governor of Virginia, under George earl of Orkney, and was on his
voyage thither taken prisoner to France.

The assembly at the sessions last mentioned, fixed for salary and incidental
charges 600 l. per annum, Salary.
for two years this had been the accustomed support, since the surrender,
except once in lord Cornbury's time, 500 l. was provided in the succeeding
administrations, till Lewis Morris, came governor of New Jersey, separate of
New York; when it was augmented to 1000 l. per annum, and 60 l. house rent,
with 500 l. addition the first year, for expenses attending his voyage, etc.

Governor Burnet The members of council in his instructions were, Lewis Morris,
Thomas Gordon, John Anderson, John Hamilton, Thomas Byerly, David Lyell, John
Parker, John Wills, John Hugg, John Johnston, jun. John Reading, Peter Bard.
met the assembly soon after his arrival, Governor Burnet.
but little business was then thought necessary, nor did they very well agree;
that house had been continued a long time, and were now dissolved, and writs
issued for a new election.

The members returned, were convened early in the spring 1721; they chose dr.
John Johnston, speaker The members of this house were: Town of Perth-Amboy,
John Johnston, Andrew Redford. County of Middlesex, John Kinsey, Moses Rolph.
Somerset, Robert Lettis Hooper, Thoams Leonard, Essex, Josiah Ogden, Joseph
Bonnel. Bergon, William Provost, Isaac Vangezon. Monmouth, William Lawrence,
Garrat Schank. Town of Burlington, John Allen, Jonathan Wright. County of
Burlington, William Trent. Thomas Lambert. Gloucester, Samuel Cole, John
Mickell. Town of Salem, John Mason, Thomas Mason. County of Salem, Isaac Sharp,
Bartholomew Wyatt. Cape May, Humphrey Hughes, Nathaniel Jenkins.


The governor's speech.

Gentlemen,
The choice which the country has made of you to represent them, Speech.
gives me a happy opportunity of knowing their sentiments; now when they have
been fully informed of mine in the most public manner, I have no reason to
doubt, that after so much time given them to weigh and consider every
particular, you bring along with you their hearty resolutions to support his
majesty's government, in such an ample and honorable manner as will become you
to offer, and me to accept; and in doing this, I must recommend to you, not to
think of me, Whether an alteration in sentiment, or instructions, or both was
the cause, must be left to conjecture; but while governor of the Masachusetts
Bay, his conduct was different; there he insisted for several years with the
greatest firmness on an indefinite support, and pursued it through the
plantation board, privy council, and to the parliament, where his death
prevented its coming to a conclusion.
so much as of the inferior officers of this government, who want your care
more, and whose salary have hitherto amounted to a very small share of the
public expense. I cannot neglect this occasion of congratulating you upon the
treasures lately discovered in the bowels of the earth, which cannot fail of
circulating for the general good, the increase of trade, and the raising the
value of estates; and now you are just beginning to taste of new blessings, I
cannot but remind you of those which you have so long enjoyed, and without
which all other advantages would but have increased your sufferings, under a
Popish king, and a French government.

You can ascribe your deliverance from these, to nothing but the glorious
revolution, begun by king William the third, of immortal memory, and completed
by the happy accession of his present majesty king George, to the throne of
Great Britain, and his entire success against his rebellious subjects at home,
and all his enemies abroad.

To this remarkable deliverance, by an overruling hand of providence, you owe
the preservation of your laws and liberties, the secure enjoyment of your
property, and a free exercise of religion, according to the dictates of your
conscience: These invaluable blessings are so visible among us, and the misery
of countries where tyranny and persecution prevail, so well known, that I need
not mention them, to raise in your minds the highest sense of your obligations
to serve God, to honor the king, and love your country.

W. BURNET.

The assembly's address.

May it please your excellency:
We gladly embrace this opportunity, to assure your excellency, that our
sentiments and those we represent, are one and the same, cheerfully to
demonstrate our loyalty to our sovereign king George, and submission to his
substitute, and readiness to support his government over us in all its
branches, in the most honorable manner the circumstances of this province will
allow; which we hope your excellency will accept of, though it fall short of what
the dignity of his majesty's governor and the inferior officers of the
government might expect, were the province in a more flourishing condition.

We thankfully acknowledge your excellency's congratulation, and doubt not when
the imaginary treasures (except mr. Schuyler's) becomes real, the country will
not be wanting in their duty to his majesty in making your excellency, and the
officers of the government partakers of the advantage.

We doubt not but your excellency will extend your goodness to countenance any
proposal that may tend to the public utility.

We hope your excellency will excuse us in falling short of words, to express
our thankful acknowledgements to God Almighty and those under him, who have
been instruments in working deliverance to that glorious nation to which we
belong, from popery, tyranny and arbitrary power, wishing it may always be
supplied with great and good men, that will endeavor their utmost to maintain
his majesty's royal authority, and assert and defend the laws, liberties and
properties of the people, against all foreign and domestic invaders.

We beg your excellency to believe the sincerity of our thoughts, that there
are none of his majesty's subjects that entertains hearts more loyal and
affectionate, and desire more to testify their duty, gratitude and obedience to
their sovereign king George, his issue, and magistrates in their respective
degrees, than does the representatives of his majesty's province of New Jersey.

JOHN JOHNSTON, speaker.

Sundry bills were prepared this sessions, among these, one had a title too
singular to be omitted, An act against denying the divinity of our savior
Jesus Christ, A remarkable bill.
the doctrine of the blessed trinity, the truth of the holy scriptures, and
spreading atheistical books: Assemblies in the colonies have rarely troubled
themselves with these subjects, perhaps never before or since; it probably
arose from the governor's motion, who had a turn that way, and had himself
wrote a book to unfold some part of the apocalipse; the bill was however
rejected on the second reading in the assembly: The sessions continued near two
months, the support was settled 500 l. a year, for five years; the governor
after passing that, and several other bills, dismissed the house with the
following speech.

Gentlemen,
I have so many reasons to thank you for your proceedings in this affair,
Speech at dismissing the assembly.
that should I mention them all, time would not suffice me; two I cannot but
acknowledge in a most particular manner; the acts for the cheerful and
honorable support, and for the security of his majesty's government in this
province.

I cannot but say, that I look upon the latter as the noblest present of the
two; as I think honor always more than riches: The world will now see the true
cause of our misunderstandings in the last assembly, and that we met in the
innocence and simplicity of our hearts; that the enemy had sown such seeds of
dissension among us, that defeated all our good purposes, and made us part with
a wrong notion of one another.

It has pleased God now to discover the truth, and no man in his sober senses
can doubt that the hand of Joab was then busy, as it is now certain that it has
at this time.

It is a peculiar honor to me to be thus justified in all my conduct by the
public act of the whole legislature; and God knows my heart, that I am not
fond of power, that I abhor all thoughts of revenge, and that I study to keep a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward man.

After the publication of the acts, I desire you to return to your house, and
after having entered this speech in your minutes, to adjourn yourselves to the
first day of October next; that though it is not probable we should meet so soon,
it may not be out of our power if occasion should be.

W. BURNET.
May 5, 1722.
Governor Burnet, after this, continued to preside over New York and
New Jersey, till 1727; when he was removed to Boston, and succeeded by John
Montgomerie, Esquire he continued till his death, which happened in the summer
173^: To him succeeded William Cosby, Esquire he continued till his death in 1736:
The government here then devolved on the president of the council, John
Anderson, Esquire he died about two weeks afterward, and was succeeded by John
Hamilton, Esquire (son of Andrew Hamilton, governor in the proprietors time) he
governed near two years. In the summer, 1738, a commission arrived to Lewis
Morris, Esquire as governor of New Jersey, separate from New York; he continued
till his death in the spring 1746; he was succeeded by president Hamilton; he
dying, it devolved upon John Reading, Esquire as the next eldest councellor; he
exercised the office till the summer 1747, when Jonathan Belcher, Esquire arrived;
he died in the summer 1757, and was succeeded by John Reading, Esquire president.
Francis Bernard, Esquire arrived governor 1758; was removed to Boston, and
succeeded here by Thomas Boon, Esquire in 1760; he was removed to SouthCarolina,
and succeeded here by Josiah Hardy, Esquire in 1761; he was removed, and afterward
appointed consul at Cadiz, etc. and succeeded here in the spring 1763, by the
present governor, William Franklin, Esquire

CHAP. XXII.
Occurrences since the year 1721.
HAVING now gone through the accounts proposed to the limited period; what
follows are partly matters incidental; the rest though not a regular course of
events, nor perhaps more important than others omitted, may nevertheless assist
in a future Volume, and in the mean time possibly be of some historical service
here.

December 29, this year, died William Trent, Esquire chief justice of New Jersey:
He was several years member, and part of the time speaker of the assembly; and
being a large trader at Trenton, when that place was laid out for a town, it
from him took its name, being before significantly called Little-Worth: He had
been also speaker of the assembly of Pennsylvania; he bore the character of a
gentleman.

In November a small earthquake was felt, it began between the hours of ten and
eleven at night.

In this year the following act was passed, which though but short, will probably
hereafter be found of great importance.

An act for the limitation of actions, and for avoiding suits in law.
For quieting men's estates and avoiding of suits. Be it enacted by the
governor, council, and general assembly of this province, and it is hereby
enacted by the authority of the same, That all the statures now in force, in
that part of Great Britain, called England, concerning the limitation of
actions, real and personal, shall, and are hereby declared to be in force in
this province from the publication hereof, as fully and effectually, as if
every of them were herein at length repeated and enacted; any law, usage or
custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Extracts from the proceedings of the house of assembly of the colony of
New Jersey, John Montgomerie, Esquire governor.

Die Jovis, 9th of January, 1728. A motion being made, whether the having a
distinct governor for New Jersey, be in the opinion of the house for the
advantage of the province, or not? Extracts from the assembly's minutes on the
subject of a separate government.
A debate arising thereon, and the question being put, the previous vote was
demanded, whether that question be now put or not? it was carried in the
affirmative; and then the question was put, whether the having a distinct
governor for New Jersey, be in the opinion of the house, for the advantage of
the province, or not? it was carried in the affirmative: Then the house
adjourned till three, o'clock, P. M.

Three o'clock, P. M. the house met according to adjournment. Resolved nemine
contradicente, that the house will enter into consideration, what may be the
most effectual method for obtaining a distinct governor for this province
hereafter; and it is ordered, that mr. Kinsey, mr. Stacy, mr. Lambert, mr.
Eaton, mr. Sonmans and mr. Bonnell, wait on his excellency and council, with
this and the last resolve, and desire their concurrence therein, and a
conferrence touching the manner most likely to effect it; and withal, to
signify to the governor and that board, that it is in no wise the intention of
this house, to give him the least uneasiness (were it in their power) during
the time he may continue in commission; but only to take such measures as may
best conduce to the end aforesaid, when his commission may determine by the
king's pleasure or otherwise; and this they conceive a duty incumbent upon
them: Then the house adjourned till tomorrow, nine o'clock, A. M.

To the king's most excellent majesty.
The humble petition of the representatives of the province of New Jersey, in
America, in general assembly convened.
Most gracious sovereign,
WE, your majesty's most loyal and dutiful subjects, the representatives of
your province of New Jersey, Their petition to the king.
in general assembly convened, by the early care your majesty has been pleased
to show for the general benefit of all your people, are animated to believe,
that nothing which may contribute to the advantage and prosperity of this,
(though small and distant) part of your dominions, will be denied us; we
therefore beg leave thus to approach your royal presence, in discharge of that
duty we owe to your majesty and to our country, in the most humble manner here
to represent:

That the inhabitants of this colony, (formerly a proprietary government) since
the surrender thereof to the crown, have always been under the same governor
with your majesty's province of New York; that we humbly apprehend it would
much more conduce to the benefit of this province, and no prejudice to that of
New York, were their governors, as are the governments, distinct.

It is a peculiar happiness many of our fellow subjects enjoy, to be near your
royal person, and to partake of the immediate influence of so good a
government; but since our distance deprives us of that great benefit, it might,
(we humbly conceive) in some degree be recompensed, by having a person clothed
with your majesty's authority constantly residing amongst us: This we cannot
expect while under the same governor with New York; that government necessarily
taking up so much of our governor's time, that but a small part of it can fall
to our share; and his residence being chiefly there, renders applications to
him from hence, on ordinary occasions, difficult, and in extraordinary cases
(however willing) he may be unable to relieve until the affairs of that
province will permit his coming into New Jersey.

Under the like difficulties, (and for the like reason) we have labored in
respect to our principal officers, who have formerly been inhabitants of that
colony; which not only renders them less useful in their several stations, but
by spending their salaries there, drained us of money, which would otherwise
have circulated amongst us.

Our having the same governor with the colony of New York at first, was (as we
humbly conceive) because this province was then in its infancy, the inhabitants
few, and it might justly have been thought too heavy a burden to maintain a
governor of our own; but since we are now much more numerous, and are as able
and willing to support one, as diverse of our neighboring colonies, who enjoy
that benefit; we are humbly of opinion, the granting this colony such a
governor, might tend to increase our wealth, and put us in a condition to
emulate our neighbors in trade and navigation.

We entreat your majesty to believe, that nothing we here say, proceeds from
any dissatisfaction to our present governor; on the contrary, we are well
pleased with his government, and desire it may continue during your royal
pleasure; but all we humbly ask, is, that when your majesty shall think fit to
put a period to his government, you will then graciously condescend to bestow a
distinct governor on this your colony of New Jersey.

That your majesty may long live to enjoy the crown you wear, with case and
delight, exceeding in honor your illustrious ancestors; that when you part
with an earthly diadem, it may be to receive a crown more permanent and
glorious, and that Great Britain and these your dominions, may be always happy
in a sovereign, whose virtues are so conspicuous (as in duty we are bound)
shall be the prayers of, may it please your majesty,

Your majesty's most dutiful and most loyal subjects.

By order of the house, JOHN KINSEY, jun. speaker.

Diverse of the members of this assembly being of the people called quaker,
concur to the matter and substance of this address, but make some exception to
the style.

Report of the lords of trade, Report of of the Lords of Trade.
relating to the separating the government of the province of New Jersey, from
New York.

To the right honorable the lords of the committee of his majesty's most
honorable privy council.
My Lords,
We have considered the humble petitions of the president and council, the
speaker, and several members of the assembly, of his majesty's province of
New Jersey; of the grand jury of the said province, and mr. Richard Partridge,
agent for New Jersey; together with two other papers annexed to the last
mentioned petition; all of them referred to us by your lordships on the 24th
day of May last; humbly praying, for the reasons contained, that when his
majesty shall nominate a governor for the province of New York, the province of
New Jersey may not be included in his commission, but that his majesty would be
graciously pleased to appoint a separate governor for the said province of
New Jersey.

We have considered the reasons given by the petitioners for this separation,
and upon the best information we have been able to procure, we take leave to
acquaint your lordships, that the allegations of the several petitions appear
to be of great consequence; and we cannot doubt but that a separate governor,
whom the province is willing to support, would be a means to give a quicker
dispatch to their public affairs, to increase their trade and number of
people, and very much advance the interest of the province.

Wherefore we are humbly of opinion, that his majesty may be graciously pleased
to comply with the prayer of these petitions.

We are, my lords, your lordships most obedient and most humble servants.

T. PELHAM. ORL. BRIDGMAN. JA. BRUDENELL.

Whitehall, Aug. 5, 1736.
In this year died John Hugg, Esquire of Gloucester County: He was about ten years
one of the council: Riding from home in the morning, he was supposed to be
taken ill about a mile from his house; when getting off his horse, he spread
his cloak on the ground to lie down on; and having put his gloves under the
saddle girth, and hung his whip through one of the rings, he turned the horse
loose, which going home, put the people upon searching, who found him in this
circumstance speechless; they carried him to his house, and he died that
evening.

In the spring this year, died in an advanced age, John Barclay, brother of
Robert Barclay the apologist: He bore the character of a good neighbor, and
was serviceable to the public in several capacities; but more particularly in
Amboy, where he lived and died: He came over early among the Scotch settlers to
East-Jersey.

On the 5th of September, about noon, a small shock of an earthquake was felt.

On the 6th of September, died in the seventy-first year of his age, dr. John
Johnston, of Amboy: He was an early settler in East-Jersey; 13 years member of
assembly, and ten of the time speaker; he went through several other important
offices with reputation. In his practice as a physician, he was knowing and
useful, and did many charitable acts; for the poor were generally the objects
of his particular care.

In the spring this year, died Peter Sonmans: He was sometime one of the
council for New Jersey, appointed by queen Anne; but being suspended, he was
afterward twice chosen in the assembly for Bergen; he was agent to some of the
proprietors of East-Jersey, surveyor general there, receiver of the quit rents,
and ranger of the forests, as well as sea coasts, etc. He was son to Aarent
Sonmans, one of the states of Holland; who having purchased a considerable
share of propriety in East-Jersey, had intended to have come over; and
embarking for that purpose, arrived in England; and riding in company with
Robert Barclay for London, was shot by a highway-man, supposed to be an effect
of the party confusion in Holland, relating to De Wit: His estate falling to
Peter, he became a great proprietor: He had before finished his studies at
Leyden, and had borne considerable offices in England, under king William:
About 1705 he came over hither to settle, it being his second voyage: He
continued much engaged in the business of his offices; but being no oeconomist,
he was greatly embarrassed in his private affairs: We have before seen by the
public charges, other imputations he lay under. He published a long
vindication of his character; but with what success, is a question not now
easily resolved.

In November this year, came to these provinces, by land from Boston, (where he
had arrived from London) Sheck Scidit, a native of Berytus, in Syria, (about 60
miles north of Jerusalem.) He was said to be prince of Syria; but the
credentials he produced under the sign manual and privy signet, called him Unus
ex nobilibus civitatis Berytus; having letters of safe passport, and
recommendation to the charity of those where he past.

He was reported to have suffered much for his religion in his own country,
being by profession a member of the eastern church, though situate under the
Mohammedan or Turkish government, and a tributary prince of that empire: His
pretense was,

That a greater quota of soldiers was exacted from him than he was able to
furnish, having other tribute to pay, and his country, by several years
distress from locusts, and blasts of other kind, so impovershed, that both
quota and tribute could not be collected; That the grand segnior taking umbrage
at this, sent for his head; of which he, by means of the Czarian ambassador,
having received private intelligence, fled to the Czarina's court; That in the
mean time his country was seized, and his wife and children kept prisoners:
while there, the Czarina gave him expectations, that in her treaty with the
Turks, she would take care and provide for him when peace was made; That after
some stay at the Russian court, he obtained letters recommendatory to their
ambassador at London; and being by his means, taken notice of, he obtained the
credentials aforesaid, with which he traveled through most of the corporations
in England, where it was thought he collected two thirds or three fourths of
what was due from him to the grand segnior; but was nevertheless encouraged to
come to America, where he also received considerable.

Contributions were made for him in New York and New Jersey; he was every where
received with distinguished respect; it was said, he received from the
different congregations in and about Philadelphia, two hundred and fifty pounds.

He was a well proportioned lusty man, with a grave aspect, and clothed after
the eastern manner, with a turbant on his head, and wore whiskers, spoke and
wrote the arabic language; his conversation and deportment was graceful and
easy, and seemed to be-speak him of a noble education.

At Philadelphia he met with a handsome entertainment, his expenses were borne
while he stayed, and provision was made for him in the vessel he went.

The 7th of December, this year, at night, was a large shock of an earthquake,
accompanied with a remarkable rumbling noise; people waked in their (...), the
doors flew open, bricks fell from the chimnies; the consternation was serious,
but happily no great damage ensued.

In this year died Robert Lettice Hooper, Esquire chief justice of New Jersey; in
which post he had continued many years with a good character.

In the spring this year, died at Trenton, Daniel Coxe, Esquire one of the justices
of the supreme court: He was son of the great proprietor and governor dr. Coxe,
of London: He had gone through several other public offices in New Jersey, to
which, from his father's character and influence, he came with great
advantages: His differences with governor Hunter, and the assembly, and the
share he had in the public transactions, being all occasionally related
before, renders further addition here unnecessary.

About the 22d of the month called February, appeared to these provinces, in
the east, and continued upwards of six weeks, a comet or blazing star, with a
long bright tail; it was supposed to be near the equinoctial at its first
appearance, but moved five degrees near north, in twenty-four hours, and
continued moving till it disappeared; toward the last it was very much
increased in length of tail and bigness.

In the spring this year, died Lewis Morris, Esquire governor of New Jersey: To our
relief, we find his character in great part already drawn, by an able hand,
History of New York, p. 125, 126.
to whom we have before been obliged: He was a man of letters, and though a
little whimsical in his temper, was grave in his manners, and of penetrating
parts; being excessively fond of the society of men of sense and reading: He
was never wearied at a sitting, till the spirits of the whole company were
dissipated. From his infancy he had lived in a man^^^ best adapted to teach him
the nature of man, and to fortify his mind for the vicissitudes of life: He
very early lost both his father and mother, and fell under the patronage of his
uncle: Being a boy of strong passions, he gave frequent offense to his uncle,
and on one of these occasions, through fear of his resentment, strolled away
into Virginia, and thence to Jamaica, in the West Indies; where to support
himself, he set up for a scrivener: After several years spent in this vagabond
life, he returned again to his uncle, who received the young prodigal with joy.
In New Jersey, he signalized himself in the service both of the proprietors and
the assembly; the latter employed him to draw up their complaint against my
lord Cornbury, and he was made the bearer of it to the queen: Though he was
indolent in the management of his private affairs, yet through the love of
power, he was always busy in matters of a political nature; and no man in the
colony equalled him in the knowledge of the law, and the arts of intrigue. He
was one of the council of New Jersey, and a judge of the supreme court in 1692.
Upon the surrender of the government to queen Anne, in 1702, he was named to be
governor of that colony, but the appointment was changed in favor of lord
Cornbury, the queen's cousin.

He was several years chief justice of New York, and a member of assembly
there; in whatever post he is named, activity must be supposed; for he was
among the foremost on all occasions; he was the second councellor for
New Jersey, named in lord Cornbury's instructions; suspended by him in 1704;
restored by the queen, and suspended a second time in the same year; was chosen
in the assembly here in 1707, re-appointed of the Council in 1708; suspended by
the lieutenant governor Ingoldsby in 1709; appointed again in 1710, and so
continued till 1738, when he succeeded Cosby as governor of New Jersey,
separate from New York: The proceedings during his administration in this
capacity, will be found the labor of many pages; but too voluminous to have
justice done them in an abridgement here; his favorite monopoly of doubts and
disputation, however amusing in mechanical and metaphysical subtilties, but
illy agreed with the dispatch and management necessary in a public station;
accordingly the whole transactions of that period are chequered with great
variety of debates, some of them curious; qualified to hold up a side from long
experience, no argument he thought proper to espouse, was to be yielded, unless
mathematically wrong; in this but few apparent convictions attended, either for
want of candor in acknowledging, or antagonists sufficiently skilled in the
science: Had those who managed the controversy against him, found patience
enough to have let his own arguments gone to their proper lengths, they had
probably sometimes gained their points, and saved themselves great fatigue in
attendance, and the expense it often occasioned; but having a trust, they
opposed, refused, and disputed his measures; he replied, rejoined, and
demurred, and kept them in unmanly suspense and attendancies for months
together, with scarce a prospect or means of accommodation; and yet nothing but
that to do; frequent formal angry dissolutions ensued, in which nothing was
gained but increasing sirmness in the points contested, and a popular turn
against the government. In this uncertainty things were left at his death, and
restored to their original footing in the next administration: But whatever
were his faults, it must be remembered, that the province owed much to his
early patriotism and abilities; scarce an instance of inordinate love of money
is to be found in his private conduct; he inherited a large estate from his
uncle, and appeared moderate in adding to it: He was besides in his way, a kind
husband, and indeed had uncommon cause to be so; an affectionate parent; had
the satisfaction of a promising offspring, and lived to see most of them
married: The following are extracts from the singular preamble of his will:

IN THE NAME OF GOD AMEN: God's will be done; but what I will or desire should
be done after my decease, and how I would have what estate God has been pleased
to bless me with, disposed of, is contained in what follows: But before I give
any directions concerning the disposition of my body or estate, I think it my
duty to leave the following testimonial of my sense of the goodness of God to
me, in protecting and wonderfully preserving of me, from my infancy to this
present time, now in an advanced age. My mother died when I was about six
months old, and my father not long after, in New York, where I was left an
orphan, entirely in the hands of strangers, who were appointed by the
government to take care of me. Sometime after that, the Dutch took the place,
and I was put by their magistrates into the hands of trustees, by them
appointed to take care of me, and of what effects their soldiers had left
unplundered; and after the surrender of New York to the English, my uncle came
into these parts of America, and kindly took care of me until I came to man's
estate; and he then dying, what he had fell into my hands, being his sole and
only heir. He had made a will, in which were found several material
interlinations and erasures; which will, when exhibited before the governor and
council of New York to be proved, of six subscribing witnesses to the said
will, only two of them could make oath in due form of law; and they knew
nothing of those erasures and interlinations; and one William Bickley, a
quaker, who wrote the will, said, that he wrote the will, and made them; but
knew not why they were made. My uncle by that will having bequeathed his
plantation overagainst the town of Haerlem, to his wife; but for what estate,
did not appear; the words being scratched or erased out so as not to be read,
and instead of what was so erased, there was after the words, Mary Morris,
(which was the name of his widow) these words, viz. ( her heirs and assigns
forever, the lands thereof) interlined. The widow died about a week after her
husband, (the will having been in her and Bickley's keeping all that time) and
after, or about the time of her death, I was told of this erasure by Miles
Forster, one of the executors in the will named. This will was dated the 12th
of February, 1690, but a little before my uncle's death, and exhibited for
proof the 15th of May following, at which time the erasure, and reason for
making of it, must have been fresh in the memory of the writer, who declared he
knew of it; and must have been fresh in the memory of the witnesses, had any
such thing been shown unto them. That Bickley should know of, and make this
erasure and interlination, and not know or remember the reason of making it in
so short a time after it was done, appeared strange to all present; and most
were of opinion, that the words erased out, were of different import from those
interlined, or there had been no necessity for making the erasure and
interlination; but as the writer of the will, either could not, or would not
tell for what end they were made, though it appeared to be done with intent to
vest an estate in fee simple in the widow, which it is probable the words
erased did not do; and only two witnesses being able to make oath in due form,
and these not knowing any thing concerning it; administration was committed to
me, with the testament annexed; and I have since purchased releases from the
heirs and legatees of the widow, and have been in quiet possession above fifty
three years. Thus, by the sole goodness of almighty God, my benign creator, the
designs against me were rendered ineffectual, without any contrivance or act of
my own. Whether my uncle was persuaded, or really intended to give that estate
to his wife and her heirs; or whether he had given it to her for life, and so
intended, and the words interlined were done after his death; or if he did
intend to give it her in fee, and the writer had not made use of proper words
for that purpose (though he had done it in every other case where an estate was
given to me in fee) and discovered it to my uncle, and made the alteration
during his life, and by his consent; or discovered them after his death, and
then made the erasure and interlination; is what I know nothing of, and what
the writer of the will either could not or would not say any thing about; but
it is evident on the face of the will, that every bequest to me, either of
lands or chattels, even of my mother's jewels, and what in the will was
mentioned to belong to her, and did only belong to me, was given (as the writer
of the will called it) with restriction and limitation (meaning as I suppose
with this condition) that I should submit myself wholly and absolutely to every
thing contained in that will; and it was therein determined, that if I, or any
body claiming under me, should under pretense of right from my father, whether
by partnership with my uncle or otherwise, make any claim or demand of the
estate left by my uncle, or any part of it; that in such case the bequests to
me were to be void. The drawer of that will had purchased and read (with all
the judgment he had) a book, entitled Orphan's Legacy, in order to qualify him
for that performance; and so apprehensive was the contriver or contrivers of
that will of my making such claim, and that the law might determine in my
favor; that by a clause in that will it was directed, that if any doubt or
controversy should arise, by reason of imperfection, defect, or any other cause
whatsoever, of, or in any words, clauses and sentences in his last will and
testament, or about the true intent and meaning thereof; that in such case, his
executors, or any three of them, should expound, explain, interpret, and
finally decide the same, according to their wisdoms and discretions. There had
been articles of agreement and partnership entered into between my uncle and my
father, and executed by both the parties; in which amongst other things, it was
covenanted and agreed between them, that if either of them died without issue,
the survivor, or issue of the survivor (if any) should take the estate. Upon
the death of my father, that part of the agreement executed by my uncle, with
other my father's papers, came into the hands of my uncle, and upon his death
into Bickley's (as I suppose) who kept the keys of his scruitore: That part of
the agreement executed by my father, I had seen often, and it came into my
hands; but that part executed by my uncle, was made away with; who destroyed
it, I cannot say; but believe my uncle was too just a man to do any thing of
that nature. It appears from all this, that there was a design formed to
deprive me of the greatest part of the estate my uncle died possessed of, and
that this design was defeated. That this might be accounted for from natural
and obvious causes, such as the erasure of the will and the like, may be; but
what confounded the understanding of the writer so as to make the erasure in
that particular place, and in the manner he did, and to pretend not to be able
in so short a time after it was done, to give any account why it was done, I
attribute only to the overruling providence of the Almighty, who has
wonderfully protected and preserved me hitherto; and I doubt not will continue
his goodness to me till he thinks fit to call me hence, though I am unworthy of
the least of his favors. I now proceed to directions concerning the disposal
of my body and estate; and first, I will, that my body shall be buried by the
bodies of my uncle and my children that lie at Morrisania, if it can be
conveniently done. I would be buried in a plain coffin of black walnut, cedar,
or mahogany, without covering or lining with cloth, or any other material of
linen, woollen, or silk; my age and the time of my death may be put upon it in
such manner as my executors shall think fit: I forbid any rings or scarfs to be
given at my funeral, or any man to be paid for preaching a funeral sermon over
me: Those who survive me, will commend or blame my conduct in life as they
think fit, and I am not for paying of any man for doing of either; but if any
man, whether churchman or dissenter, in or not in priest's orders, is inclined
to say any thing on that occasion, he may, if my executors think fit to admit
him to do it. I would not have any mourning worn for me by any of my
descendants; for I shall die in a good old age; and when the divine providence
calls me hence, I die when I should die, and no relation of mine ought to mourn
because I do so; but may perhaps mourn to pay the shop keeper for his goods,
should they comply with (what I think) the common folly of such an expense. I
will, (if it be not done before my death) that a vault of stone be built at or
nigh the place at Morrisania, where my good uncle lies buried; and that the
remains of my relations lying there, be collected and put into coffins in it;
and my executors may get a tomb stone for me if they think fit. -- What the
state of the dead is, I know not; but believe it to be such as is most suitable
for them, and that their condition and state of existence after death, will be
such as will fully show the wisdom, justice, and goodness of their great
creator to them. As to what estate it has pleased God to entrust and bless me
with, I will and dispose of it as follows: First, I will as the law wills, that
all my debts and funeral charges be justly paid and discharged, etc.

In this year died Joseph Cooper: He was at eight successive elections chosen
to represent Gloucester county in assembly, and continued in that station 19
years; he had steady principles, and a nobility of disposition and fortitude,
superior to many: At one of the tedious sessions, in Col. Morris's time, when
contrariety of sentiments had long impeded business, that governor casually
meeting him in the street, said, Cooper, I wish you would go home, and send
your wife. I will, says he, if the governor will do the same by his: An
anecdote deservedly expressive as to those good women.

In the summer this year, three natives of Greenland, passed through the
province, dressed in seal-skins, with the hair on after the manner of their own
country; they were two young men and a young woman, converted to the christian
religion by the moravian missionaries: They had left Greenland about two years
before, in a Moravian ship (which had carried a house ready framed, for
worship, to be erected there, that country affording no wood for building) and
had since visited the brethren in several parts of Europe; as England, Holland,
and Germany: Their eyes and hair were black, like the Indians here; but their
complexion somewhat lighter: Two Indian converts from the moravian mission, at
Barbice, near Surrinam, were also with them: They together went to the Moravian
settlement at Bethlehem, in Pennsylvania; there they met with some Delaware and
Mohickon Indians; converts also of the Moravians; and though their native lands
are so vastly remote as the latitude of 5, 41, and 65 north; yet what they
observed of each other's hair, eyes, and complexion, convinced them that they
were all of the same race; they could find however, no similitude in their
several languages.

The 9th of November died, in the 53d year of his age, Richard Smith: He
represented Burlington in assembly near twenty years, through a great variety
of difficult business: He maintained a fair reputation, was instrumental in
procuring considerable provincial benefits; and hence acquired the love of
many, who had no opportunities of knowing him, but in a public character. He
was cool and even in his temper, impartial and conscientious in the discharge
of his duty, kind and careful in every paternal relation, and generous in both
sentiment and conduct.

The 18th of November, at four o'clock in the morning, was a considerable shock
of an earthquake, which lasted about two minutes; the weather for seven days
successively before, had been remarkably clear and still, and all that night
was so, with a clear full moonshine; the two days following, continued also
very still and clear, not a cloud to be seen, till toward evening of the
second day after it happened: It did not begin with so much of a rumbling noise
as that in 1737, but was thought not to fall short in the concussion.

Early in this year died at New York, James Alexander, Esquire where he had long
borne the office of provincial secretary, and afterward many years one of the
council He was also long surveyor general of both East and West-Jersey, and
several years of the council in New Jersey. He was bred to the law, and though no
speaker, at the head of his profession for sagacity and penetration; and in
application to business, no man could surpass him: With his knowledge he was
ready and communicative; and having by candid practice, and ingenuous industry
and diligence, acquired a great estate in his latter years, remained a generous
source of instruction for the advantage of younger practitioners, and many
others.

In this year died, in the seventy-sixth year of his age, Jonathan Belcher, Esquire
governor of New Jersey: In this station he arrived in 1747. He was a native of
New England, and in his youth falling heir to great acquisitions, got early
upon the wing, in the gay world; a handsome exterior, a fondness for it, and
for dress, equipage, and popular eclat, insensibly betrayed him into a scence
of show and expense, which at length proved inconvenient to his patrimony; with
this turn he traveled, kept the first rate entertainments and company, and
received marks of distinguished notice and respect in the electorate of Haover.
Prince, in the dedication to him, of his chronology, speaks of this in the
following strain:

Upon this occasion his excellency will forgive me, if for the honor of his
country, as well as for his own; we boast of one among us, who inspired with
zeal for the succession of that illustrious house, even in the joys of youth,
twice brake away, viz. in 1704 and 1708, and passed a double ocean; that he
might with rapture see, and in his country's name, express the ardour of their
vows to that most important family; in which under Heaven, all the welfare of
three mighty nations, and even of all the protestant states and kingdoms in the
world, as well as the liberty, religion and felicity of these colonies and
provinces were involved. A celebrated instance peculiar to himself alone, that
I presume no other American can pretend to; and for the fatigue and pains, I
suppose no other subject of the whole British empire; which redounds to the
glory of the land that bred him, that parted with him, and received him with
applause; and the happy consequence whereof, at the head of his country, he now
enjoys.


He went over agent for the Massachusetts Bay, on the long contest with
governor Burnet, on the subject of an indefinite support; on his death came
over governor of that colony, and long insisted on the same demands his
predecessor had done, and with the same success: He continued governor there
for a considerable time, and had great opportunities of indulging his favorite
taste; but carrying a high hand in the administration, disgusted men of
influence; and at one time putting a negative on several counselors,
occasioned so many voices to unite in their applications against him, that he
was removed from his government. Here he witnessed a reverse of fortune, being
obliged to wait at a great expense several years before an opportunity
presented of getting again into office; at length the government of New Jersey
falling vacant, early notice, properly used, procured him that: He was now
advanced in age, yet lively, diligent in his station, and circumspect in his
conduct, religious, generous and affable: He affected splendor, at least equal
to his rank and fortune; but was a man of worth and honor; and though in his
last years, under great debility of body from a stroke of the palsy, he bore up
with firmness and resignation, and went through the business of the government
in the most difficult part of the late war, with unremitting zeal in the duties
of his office.

In this year died Andrew Johnston, esquire aged 67: He succeeded his father in
representing Amboy in assembly, and was speaker several years; long one of the
treasurers: The last 15 years of his life he was in the council, and a diligent
attender on the business there; he had great equality of temper, circumspection
of conduct, an open, yet grave engaging mein, much goodness of heart, and many
virtues both public and private.

The 30th of October, between four and five in the afternoon, was a very
considerable shock of an earthquake; which directed its course to the eastward.

In the beginning of this year died Robert Hunter Morris, Esquire He was near
twenty-six years one of the council, and chief justice of New Jersey, and some
time lieutenant governor of Pennsylvania: He had strong natural powers, an
elevated quickness of apprehension, a memory tenacious, read much, and was
uncommonly furnished in conversation on most subjects; he gloried in the
rational privilege of free disquisition; in his motives to action, disdained
to resemble the floating log He was apt to apply this expression in contrast to
a sentimental choice.
that went with the tide; yet the other extreme had a snare of too delicate
concealment to be always avoided: He came young into the office of chief
justice, stuck to punctuality in the forms of the courts, reduced the pleadings
to precision and method, and possessed the great qualities of his office,
knowledge and integrity, in more perfection than had often been known in the
colonies: Had no other stations engrossed his attention, his character had
remained without dispute, more light than shade; inheriting from his father,
See page 427, etc.
or imbibing a turn at starting more difficulties, than himself or others could
easily solve, introduced debate, in which often appeared a seemingly
constitutional delight; but being brought up under the tuition of an excellent
mother, the bias here was qualified in part, with the advantages of this, the
father's experience, and much of his own, in variety of situations: He had a
liberal education, a comely respectable person, easy address, smooth flow of
words, a commanding influence in his manner, and was a warm friend, but
formidable enemy, not partial or oppressive as a judge, in several private
relations generous and manly, in none avaritious, in some inconsiderate, in
many his own original or his father's copy, often singular, sometimes
whimsical, always opinionated, and mostly inflexible.

The 20th of the month called July, at about 40 miniutes past seven in the
evening, an uncommon ball of fire was seen in the north-east, about fifty
degrees above the horizon; it took its course near north-west; its diameter
seemed as large or larger than the sun, especially at one time, when it opened
so as to seemingly separate: It appeared like sheets of fire inclining
together; its found as it went in some places, was said to resemble that of a
great fire urged by a strong wind; it kept near one height all the way, till it
had crossed the meridian to the north about twenty degrees; there a small cloud
seemed to attract it; mounting higher, just as it approached the outward edge
of the cloud, it appeared to shatter into innumerable pieces.

CHAP. XXIII.
The present state of Indian affairs in New Jersey.
TO the accounts before given respecting the Indians, we now add other
particulars, as far as New Jersey has been concerned.

For nigh a century, such of them as were natives of that province, had all
along maintained an intercourse of great cordiality and friendship with the
inhabitants, being interspersed among them, and frequently receiving meat at
their houses, and other marks of good will and esteem: When the troubles broke
out among the back Indians, it was observed, that some who had usually resided
there, were missing, and supposed to have retired among them.

In the year 1758, for a considerable time after the first hostilities had
commenced in Pennsylvania, the family of Nicholas Cole, in Walpack, nigh the
frontier of New Jersey, were at two in the afternoon unexpectedly attacked, and
most of them murdered and carried off; this, and a few other murders alarmed
the province, as it was not known or supposed they had any complaint against
it. They had, to one of the messengers sent from Pennsylvania, complained of
the death of the sachem Weequehelah; but this was looked upon as mere pretense
to color their attempts with the appearance of justice; as that Indian was
known to have been executed for actual murder, and to have had a legal trial:
The fact was, he was an Indian of great note and account both among Christians
and Indians, of the tribe that resided about South-river, where he lived with a
taste much above the common rank of Indians, having an extensive farm, cattle,
horses and negroes, and raised large crops of wheat, and was so far English in
his furniture as to have a house well provided with feather beds, calico
curtains, etc. He frequently dined with governors and great men, and behaved
well; but his neighbor, captain John Leonard, having purchased a cedar swamp
of other Indians, to which he laid claim, and leonard refusing to take it on
his right, he resented it highly, and threatened that he would shoot him; which
he accordingly took an opportunity of doing in the spring 1728, while Leonard
was in the day time walking in his garden or near his own house, at South-river
aforesaid.


The legislature appointed commissioners to examine into the treatment the
Indians had received; they first met them at Crosswicks, in the winter 1756,
and heard what they had then to allege as grievances, and promised to lay them
before the legislature; which they did at a session in 1757; when an act passed
to remedy them, by laying a penalty upon persons selling strong drink, so as to
intoxicate them, and declaring all Indian sales or pawns for drink, void; that
the person of no Indian should be imprisoned for debt, and that no traps larger
than to weigh three pounds and a half should be set, etc. and making all sales
of lands or leases void, not obtained according to the direction of the act.
Vide vol. 2 of laws, pa. 127.


They afterward, by another act, gave the commissioners power to appropriate
sixteen hundred pounds, in purchasing a general release of Indian claims to
New Jersey; one half to be laid out in a settlement for the Indians residing in
the province to the south of Rariton river, whereon they might reside, raise
the necessary subsistence, and have always in view the consideration they had
received for the remainder of their lands; the other half was to be applied to
purchase any latent claims among the back Indians not resident in the province.

The commissioners accordingly procured a second conference The commissioners
were, Andrew Johnston and Richard Salter, esquires, of the council, and Charles
Read, John Stevens, William Foster and Jacob Spicer, esquires. The Indians
were, Teedyescunk, king of the Delawares. George Hopayock, from the
Susquehanah. Crosswick Indians, Andrew Wooley, George Wheelwright, Peepy,
Joseph Cuish, William Loulax, Gabriel Mitop, Zeb. Conchee, Bill News, John
Pembolus. Mountain Indians, Moses Totamy, Philip. Rariton Indian, Tom Evans.
Ancocus Indians, Robert Kekott, Jacob Mullis, Samuel Gosling. Indians from
Cranbury, Thomas Store, Stephen Calvin, John Pompshire, Benjamin Claus, Joseph
Wooley, Josiah Store, Isaac Still, James Calvin, Peter Calvin, Dirick Quaquay,
Ebenezar Wooley, Sarah Stores widow of Quaquahela. Southern Indians, Abraham
Loques, Isaac Swanelae. John Pompshire, interpreter.
with the first mentioned; which was held at Crosswicks in the second month
(February) 1758.

They first reminded them, that they had above a year since informed them, that
the disorders committed in the back parts of Pennsylvania and this colony, had
not lessened the regard they entertained for their friends the Indians, who in
this time of trial lived peaceably and quietly among the inhabitants, and
assured them of the governor's protection; that they had then desired they
would make known any burden that lay upon their minds; that the Indians then
signifying some abuses they were subject to by private sales made by some of
their own people, and the inconveniences they had suffered from setting iron
traps for deer, being cheated of their goods when in drink, and that they
thought they had still a right to some pieces of land, which they had not sold;
that in consequence of these demands, they, the commissioners, had faithfully
reported to the legislature, who had passed a law to prevent all future abuses
of that kind; and that they were now empowered fully to hear the particulars of
any claims they had to lands in the colony, which was determined to do them
strict justice: The Indians informed the commissioners, that the lands they
claimed, could not be by them described by lines, very intelligible to persons
not on the spot, as they went to hollows, and small brooks, which had no
certain names; but that they had described them as well as they could: And then
they delivered lists of the tracts they esteemed unpurchased, as follows: No.
1, A power of attorney from Capoose and Telaman, to Moses Totamy, dated the
30th of January, 1743-4, for lands on the south and southwest side of the south
branch of Rariton, joining thereto; as explained by the said power. No. 2. A
paper declaring the lands from the half way from the mouth of Metetcunk, to
Tom's river, from the sea to the heads of the rivers, belong to capt. John,
Totamy Willockwis; and from John Eastel's to Hockanetcunk, on Crosswicks; then
on a strait course to Mount-Holly, and so up Ranchocas creek, to the head; and
from thence to the heads of Wisteconk creek, and along the said creek to Jarvis
Farrow's Mill, and so to the sea. Pompshire, and Stephen Calvin, say, they are
concerned in the tract, No. 3. A power of attorney to Totamy, and capt. John,
dated the 21st of February, 1742, from Tawleynemun, Tohokenum, Gooteleck, to
sell lands on Egg-Harbour, between Mount-Holly and Crosswicks.

They have a tract of land beginning at the Old-Ford, by John Fowler's; then on
a line to Doctor's creek above, but in sight of Allen-Town; then up the creek
to the lower end of Imlay's town; then on a line to Crosswicks creek, by Duke
Horseman's; then along the said Creek to the place of beginning. Teedyescunk
and Totamy are concerned in the above lands; then they said, that from the
Mouth of Squan, to No. 2. belongs to Sarah Store, to whom it was given by her
husband, to the heads of the branches, and so across from one branch to the
other.

Tom Store and Andrew Wooley, claim a tract between Cranbury and Devil's Brook,
possessed by Josiah Davison's sons, that has two new houses built thereon, in
which is included the whole tract of the late president Hamilton, and also Mr.
Alexander's surveys, where Thomas Sowden lives; he has sold part of this tract
to Hollinshead, where M'Gee lives; also has sold some to Josiah Davison, to
Door Marlet, John Wetherill, and James Wilson: He claims lands from Cranbury
brook, to the cross roads, lying on the right hand of the road, and is claimed
by William Pidgeon; James Wall and John Story lives upon one corner of it; also
a piece upon Pompton river, the livers upon it he knows not; it lies in one
piece, and is the same that Mr. Woodruff and company, were about purchasing of
him.

They also claim from the mouth of Squan, to the mouth of Shrewsbury river, by
the streams of each, to their heads, and across from one head to the other.

Also Vanot's place, on the west side of Squan river. Also a piece at Topanemus
bridge: In this piece Ben Claus is concerned.

Tom Store and Andrew Wooley, also claim a piece on the north side of South
River. Polly Ritchies place.

Also a piece between Allen-Town and Millstone brook, where Hockan Gapee used
to live, joining on the east side of the post road to Amboy; part of Dunstar's
tract.

Also, Vanse's place, joining to Millstone brook, on Amboy road; part of
Fullerton's tract.

Also a swamp near Gawen Watson's place, belonging to the Johnston's family,
and the Furmans.

Isaac Still claims from the mouth of Great EggHarbour river, to the head
branches thereof, on the east side; so to the road that leads to Great
Egg-Harbour; so along the road to the sea side, except Tuckahoe, and the
Summer's Steelman, and Skull's places.

Robert Kecott, claims in Piles grove, the places whereon John Mayhue's sons
live.

Also the township of Deerfield, in the county of Cumberland, where the
presbyterian meeting house stands.

Also the tracts of James Wasse, Joseph Peck, and Stephen Chesup.

Jacob Mullis claims the pine lands, on Edge Pillock Branch, and Goshen Neck
Branch, where Benjamin Springer and George Marpole's mills stands; and all the
land between the head branches of those creeks to where the waters join or meet.

Abraham Loques claims the Cedar-Swamp, on the east side, Tuckahoe Branch,
which John Campion and Peter Campbell have, or had in possession.

Also Stuypson's island, near Delaware river. Tom Store claims 30 acres
adjoining Richard Parks, wheelwright in Middlesex county.

Teedyescunk claims a tract in Hunterdon, called Neshannock, beginning at
Philip Ringoe's house, which stands near a corner of it; and so along the road
that leads from thence to Brunswick, as far as Neshannock creek; thence up the
same to George Hatten's; thence on a strait course to Petit's place, and so on
to a hill called Paatquacktung; thence in a strait line to the place of
beginning; which tract was reserved at the sale, and marked out by Wauhaway,
who is alive.

The Indians in general, claim their settlements near Cranbury, on Menolapan
river, in Falkner's tract, whereon many of the Indians now live.

And also a few acres below the plantation of Robert Pearsons, on the north
side of Crosswicks creek.

Having delivered these claims to the commissioners the Indians present
executed a power of attorney, appointing Tom Store, Moses Totami, Stephen
Calvin; Isaac Still, and John Pompshire, or the major part of them, to transact
all future business with the government, respecting lands; and then they
released all claims for themselves, and their heirs, to the proprietors of the
respective divisions, and the purchasers under them, to all the lands in
New Jersey, not included in the above list; and to such of these likewise, as
could be proved to be conveyed by deed from the Indian inhabitants, except the
claims of the Minisink and Pompton Indians, on the northern parts; which power
was acknowledged by all the parties, before John Imlay, Esquire one of the judges
of Burlington county, in order to be first recorded, and then delivered to the
Indian attorneys.

Teedyescunk, the next day told the commissioners that he was very well pleased
with what was done, and esteemed the methods concluded on to be just and
equitable; and to this all the Indians gave their assent.

Thus things rested, till the latter part of the summer; when governor Bernard
procured a treaty with several of the back Indians, by means of the following
message:

To Teedyescung, king of the Delaware Indians; by Moses Tetamy and Isaac
Stille, messengers deputed by me: Greeting.
I was surprised, on my arrival here with his majesty's royal commission as
governor of this his province, to find that invasions have been lately made on
the inhabitants of this colony, and much blood shed by Indians, supposed to be
those of Minisink or Pompton, who have resided within this colony, and have
sometime since withdrawn themselves; and as I have no knowledge of any reason
they, or any of them, have, for being discontented, or offering violence to the
Inhabitants of his majesty's colony under my government; and no public
complaints have been made by the Indians of Minisink or Pompton, formerly
inhabitants of this colony, at any of the conferences held between the
commissioners of NewJersey, and the Indian inhabitants of the same; to prevent
any further hostilities, I hereby send you this power, to go to the Indians of
Minisink and Pompton, formerly inhabitants of this colony; and in my name, to
desire them to desist from hostilities, and kindly to invite them to a
conference with this colony; and to assure them they shall be received in the
most friendly manner, and every endeavor shall be used to establish and
confirm a friendship between the subjects of our great king George, our common
father, and them, as a thing of the greatest use. You are to enforce the
natural affection between us and them, and how much it is for their interest to
be at peace with a people, who have the means of making them happy and easy,
and have, by the blessing of providence, provisions, and every necessary of
life in plenty, sufficient to supply their friends in distress.

As I have named a time, most convenient for them to be down here, it would
give me pleasure to see them then: But if unavoidable accidents should put it
out of their power to attend at that time; I have left the time and place to
themselves, so that it be in my government; and that they come by Fort Allen,
and enter New Jersey, below the falls at Trenton, and send an account of their
arrival, that I may appoint persons to receive and conduct them to me. I
prescribe this path, because the people above, who have lost their friends and
relations, are so inflamed, as to render it unsafe for them to enter this
colony above Trenton.

If you cannot go to the places of residence of the Minisink and Pompton
Indians, you are (or in case of your death or absence, that Moses Tetamy and
Isaac Still are) empowered to employ two good and faithful messengers, to find
out the chief place of the residence of these Indians, and to deliver to them
the message from me, with the belt and four strings of wampum, and the safe
conduct and flag given you herewith; and you are desired to report to me your
proceedings herein, with all convenient speed.

Given under my hand and seal at a^ms, the 25th day of June, in the
thiry-second year of his majesty's reign.
(L. S.) By his excellency Francis Bernard, Esquire captain general governor and
commander in chief of the colony of NewJersey, etc. Brethren, the Minisink, or
Munsy Indians, and those of Pompton:
It is with great pain I am to tell you, that some Indians have invaded our
province on the upper parts of the Delaware, and shed much blood, and that you
are suspected to be concerned in it.

A string. Brethren,

A string. Brethren,

A string. Brethren, out of your hearts the seeds of enmity, before they take
too deep a root. And I will kindle a council fire, and bury all the blood, that
has stained our ground, deep in the earth, and make a new chain of peace, that
may bind us and our children, and you and your children, in everlasting bonds
of love, that we may live together as brethren, under the protection of the
great king, our common father.

A belt. Brethren,

A string. At a conference held at Burlington, on monday, August 7, 1758.
PRESENT, Esquire governor.

The honorable James Hude, Andrew Johnston, Peter Kemble, Richard Saltar,
Lewis M. Ashfield, Samuel Woodruff, esquires, of his majesty's council.

Charles Read, John Stevens, William Foster, Esqrs, commissioners for Indian
affairs.

Indians. Otawopass, or Benjamin, Coallins, or Goatshank, messengers from the
Minisink or Munsey Indians. Apewyet, or John Hudson, a Cayugan, Samuel, a
Delaware Indian, messengers from the Mingoians. Taudakass, a Delaware Indian,
who came with the Munsey Indians.

John Pumpshire, interpreter. Moses Totamy, Stephen Calvin, assistants.

His excellency sat, holding four strings of wampum in his hand, and spoke to
them as follows:

Brethren,
As you are come from a long journey, through a wood full of briars: with this
string I anoint your feet, and take away their soreness: With this string I
wipe the sweat from your bodies: With this string I cleanse your eyes, ears and
mouth, that you may see, hear and speak, clearly; and I particularly anoint
your throat, that every word you say may have a free passage from your heart:
And with this string I bid you heartily welcome.

Then delivered all the four strings. His excellency then informed them, that
he should be ready to hear what they had to say, in answer to the message he
had sent to their chiefs, as soon as would be convenient to them; when they
informed him, they would be ready in the afternoon: And thanked his excellency,
for using the customs of their fathers, in bidding them welcome.

Monday afternoon.

PRESENT, As in the morning.

The Indians being informed, that the governor was ready to hear them,
Benjamin, on behalf of the Munsey Indians, holding a belt in his hand, spoke
sitting, not being allowed to stand till the Mingoian had spoke.

Brother,
As first when your messengers came to us at Assinske, twenty seven days since,
our ancient people were glad to hear them, and our young men, women and
children, rejoiced at the tidings. We know you are great and strong, and we
took it kindly. All our friends and relations were in sorrow, and pitied the
condition of the women and of the children, who are growing up. The kind words
of our brethren the English, we sent to our uncles the Mingoians; and one of
them is come down here to the place of our meeting, to be a witness of what
passes between us.

Then John Hudson, the Cayugan, abovementioned, stood up, and spoke as follows:

Brother,
In confirmation of what has been said to you, I, who am the Mingoian, am, by
this belt, to inform you, that the Munseys are women, and cannot hold treaties
for themselves; therefore I am sent to inform you, that the invitation you gave
the Munseys, is agreeable to us; and we have taken hold of your belt; and I
desire you may write down my attending here; though while I am here, I left my
family in danger of being cut off by our enemies the French.

Further, brother,

Brother,

Brother, the chain of friendship more clear than it has heretofore been.

This belt confirms what I have said. He then delivered the governor a belt, on
one side of which are three figures of men in black wampum, representing the
Shawanese, Delawares, and Mingoians, living on the Ohio; on the other side,
four figures representing the united councils of the six nations, in their own
country: By their being now joined in this belt, he declared it expressed their
union. That the western Indians having consulted their uncles, now joined in
sending it, in pursuance of a belt of invitation sent them above a year since,
by George Croghan, on behalf of the English.

Then Benjamin, on behalf of the Munsies, stood up, and said

Brother,
Our ancient people, and chief men, are glad to hear of the kind disposition of
the English. We believe you are wise and strong; and for the good of our wives
and children, for whose protection we are concerned, that they may have some
good and lasting settlement made for them to the latest posterity, in order to
obtain it, we should be glad of the opportunity, to see all our brethren the
English together. Our chief men, and old counselors, are making ready to come
to the council-fire, in order to settle all matters which have been the cause
of uneasiness between us. We believe your professions are sincere, and that you
will agree upon what is most for the good of both you and us; and we shall be
ready to be advised by you, as we think you are wise. We are glad to have an
opportunity of conversing with you, without interruption, though the sun is low:
But we hope our and your ancient and wise men, will have the happiness of
consulting freely together, for the good of one another, before it be dark; and
that we shall meet one another with sincerity and truth, as we expect the
blessing from above to attend us therein.

And I am directed to inform you, that the Indian nations will be next full
moon after this, at the forks of Delaware, and will send the governor word
before hand, of the particular day they will be there, and of their nations and
numbers: And so you may make it known to whom you think proper, that they may
be present at our meeting.

There are two nations besides the Munseys, parties to this message.

The Senecas, whose chief man is Tageeskata, and lives at Mahahensink.

The Cayugas, whose chief man is Eshakanata.

The chief man of the Munseys, is Egohohoun.

Tuesday, August 8, 1758.
PRESENT.

His excellency delivered the following answer to what the Indians said
yesterday:

Brethren,
I am glad to hear, that our offers of peace and amity have been well received
by your people, and that they are disposed to brighten the chain that
heretofore had held us together, and to restore that brotherhood that had for
many years subsisted between us. Of late a great darkness has overshadowed the
land, but we hope, that the sun is up that will disperse the clouds that have
hindered us from seeing one another, and make all our future days bright and
pleasant.

We agree with you, that it would be best for us all to meet at the
great-council-fire that is ^indled on the forks of Delaware: It is on many
accounts proper; and the particular circumstances of this province, make it
most agreeable to us. We differ from the neighboring provinces in many things:
We have bounds set to our people, beyond which they neither can, nor desire to
pass; they are content with the cultivation of their lands, and seek not for
extraordinary gains, by following trade out of their own country. As we have
had little intercourse with your people, we can have little cause of contention
with them: The encroachments of unbounded settlers, and the tricks of unfair
traders, cannot be charged on us. All we have to do, is to offer your people
our friendship; which, if you will sincerely and heartily accept of it, shall
endure to you and your children, as long as the sun shall shine, or the river
on whose banks we meet shall flow.

Brethren,

Brethren,

Brethren,

His excellency then delivered one belt to John Hudson, the Cayugan, and one to
Benjamin, the Munsey.

The two foregoing treaties, opened the way for another to be held the October
following, at Easton, in Pennsylvania; so much of this as concerns the purchase
of the Indian claims to the province of New Jersey, were as follow:

At a conference held at the town of Easton, on the eighth day of October, 1758.
PRESENT. Esquire lieut. governor.

Lawrence Growdon, William Logan, Richard Peter's, Lynford Lardner, Benjamin
Chew, John Mifflin, esquires, members of the governor's council.

Isaac Norris, Joseph Fox, Joseph Galloway, John Hughes, Daniel Roberdeau, Amos
Strickland, esqrs. committee of the house of representatives.

Charles Read, Jacob Spicer, esquires, commissioners for Indian affairs, in the
province of New Jersey.

A number of magistrates and freeholders of this and the neighboring province,
and of the citizens of the city of Philadelphia, chiefly of the people called
Quakers.

George Croghan, esquire, deputy agent for Indian affairs under Sir William
Johnson.

Indians of several nations, viz. Mohawks: Nichas, or Karaghtadie, with one
woman and two boys. In all 4 Senecas: Tagashata, alias Takeaghsado, alias
Sigachsadon, chief man, with 7 other chiefs, 37 other men, 28 women and
children. In all 83 Onondagas: Affaradonguas, with 9 men, 9 women and children.
In all 19 Oneidos: Segughsonyout, alias Thomas King, Anagaraghiry, Affany quou,
with 3 warrior captains, 6 warriors, and 33 women and children. 45 Cayugas:
Tokaaio, with 8 men, 11 women and children. 20 Tuscaroras: Nichaquantaquoah,
alias Jonathan with 5 men, 12 women, and 2 children. 20 Nanticokes: Robert
White, alias Wolahocumy, Pashdomokas, alias Charles, with 16 men, 20 women, and
18 children. 56 Conoys: Kanakt, alias Last Night, with 9 men, 10 women, and 1
child. 21 Tutelos: Cakanonekoanos, alias Big Arm, Asswagarat, with 6 men, and 3
women. 11 Chogknots: Ten men, 20 women and children. 30 Chihohockies: alias
Delawares, and Unamies: Teedyuscung, with diverse men, women and children. 60
Munsies or Minisinks: Egotchoweh, with sundry men, women and children. 35
Mawhickons: Abraham, or Mammatuckan, with several men, women, and children. 56
Wawpings or Pomptons: Nimham, Aquaywochtu, with sundry men, women, and
children. 47 In all 507


Conard Weifer, Esquire provincial Interpreter.

Captain Henry Montour, interpreter in Six Nation and Delaware languages.

Stephen Calvin, Issac Stille, Moses Tetamy, Delaware Indians, interpreters in
the Delaware language.

At a conference held at Easton with the Indians, on the 11th of October, 1758.
P. M.
PRESENT.

The Indians, etc. as before.

His excellency Francis Bernard, Esquire captain general and governor in chief of
his majesty's province of New Jersey.

The honorable Andrew Johnston, Charles Read, John Stevens, Jacob Spicer,
William Foster, Esqrs, commissioners of New Jersey, for Indian affairs.

Tagashata, the Seneca chief, intending to speak first, on behalf of the
Indians, had laid some belts and strings in order on the table.

As soon as the company sat down, Teedyuscung holding out a string, said he had
something to deliver, and desired he might be heard first of all. Mr. Croghan
requested to know, if what he was going to say was the result of the Delaware
council, and if it was their desire it should be spoke first; but no answer was
given him as to this.

Governor Bernard signifying his desire to bid the Indians welcome, and just
mention to them the business he came upon, it was agreed he should speak first;
which he did as follows.

Brethren,
I AM glad to see so many of you met together, to cultivate peace with your
brethren and old friends the English. I heartily bid you welcome, and wish that
the good work for which you are now assembled, may prosper in your hands, and
have that success, which your wise men, and all that wish you well, must desire
as a thing much to your advantage.

The situation of the province over which I preside, and the disposition of its
people, have hitherto afforded very little occasion for treaties with the
neighboring Indians; but having some months ago sent a message to the
Minisinks, I received a message from our brethern the Senecas and Cayugas,
wherein they take upon them to answer my message to the Minisinks, and desire
that I would meet them at the council fire burning at this place.

It is not usual for the king's governors to go out of their provinces to
attend treaties; but I am glad to have an opportunity of showing my good
disposition to establish peace and friendship with my neighbors, and therefore
I have waved all form, and am come here according to the invitation I received
at Burlington.

To you, therefore, our brethren the Senecas and Cayugas, and your nephews the
Minisinks, I now speak, and desire that you would take into your most serious
consideration, my message to the Minisinks, your message to me, and my answer
thereto, and let me know what we are to expect from you.

What is past we are willing to forget; but I must remind you, that if you are
disposed to be our friends for the future, you should give us that proof of
your sincerity, which I have desired in my answer to your message, and return
us the captives that have been taken out of our province, and are now within
your power: This should be one of the first steps, and will be the best that
can be taken toward restoring and confirming that brotherly love and
friendship between us; which, I am convinced, will be for the mutual benefit of
all parties.

This was interpreted in the six nations language, by mr. Weiser, and in the
Delaware, by mr. Stephen Calvin, the Indian schoolmaster in West-Jersey.

Then Teedyuscung spoke,

Brethren,
I desire all of you who are present will give ear to me. As you, my brethren,
desired me to call all the nations who live back; I have done so. Now if you
have any thing to say to them, or they to you, you must sit and talk together.

Brethren,

A String. The above speech was interpreted in the six nation language.

Tagashata then rose up, and spoke,

Brethren, the governors, and your councils,
It has pleased the most high, that we meet together here with cheerful
countenances, and a good deal of satisfaction: And as public business requires
great consideration, and the day is almost spent, I choose to speak early to
morrow morning.

The governors answered, that they should be glad to give all the dispatch
possible to this good work they were engaged in, and desired the chiefs would
fix the time of meeting; but they declined it, saying, 'They were unacquainted
with hours, but would give notice when they were ready.'

At a conference held at Easton, on the 12th of October, 1758.
PRESENT.
The governors; the gentlemen of their councils, and others, as before.

Tagashata, the Seneca chief, taking the strings and belt of wampum, which
governor Bernard gave yesterday, repeated according to the Indian custom, the
particulars of his speech, and then added,

Brethren,
We approve of every article mentioned to us yesterday, by the governor of
Jersey; all that he said is very good: We look upon his message to us, as a
commission and request from him, that we should bring matters to a good
conclusion with our cousins the Minisinks. They themselves sent for us to do
the same thing, on their behalf; and at their request we came here, have taken
it in hand, and will use our utmost endeavors to bring about the good work
which governor Bernard desires, and do not doubt but it will be done to his
entire satisfaction.

Brethren,

Brethren,

The Delawares desired us to say this for them by this belt.

A belt. Brethren,

They assured us, they would never use it any more against you, but would
follow our advice; and entreated us to use our utmost endeavors to reconcile
them to you their brethren, declaring they were very sorry for what they had
done, and desired it might be forgotten, and they would forever cultivate a
good friendship with you. These declarations were made by the principal
warriors of four tribes of the Minisink Indians, at giving us this belt.

A belt. Then taking eight strings of black wampum, he proceeded;

Brethren,
We let you know, that we have not only brought about this union with our
nephews on the waters of the river Susquehannah, but we also have sent messages
to our nephews the Delawares and Minisinks, and to those likewise of our own
nations who are on the Ohio, under the influence of the French. We have told
all those, that they must lay down the French hatchet, and be reconciled to
their brethren the English, and never more employ it against them. And we hope
they will take our advice. We the Mohawks, Senecas, and Onondagas, deliver this
string of wampum, to remove the hatchet out of your heads, that has been struck
into them by the Ohio Indians; in order to lay a foundation for peace.

Eight strings of black wampum. Tagashata sat down, and then the Cayuga chief,
Toka aio, arose, and said,

Brethren,
I speak in behalf of the younger nations, part of, and confederated with the
Six Nations, viz. the Cayugas, Oneidas, Tuscaroras, Tutaloes, Nanticokes, and
Conoys.

A road has been made from our country to this council fire, that we might
treat about friendship; and as we came down the road, we saw, that by some
misfortune or other, blood has lately been spilt on it. By these strings we
make the road wider and clearer; we take the blood away out of it, and likewise
out of the council chamber, which may have been stained, we wash it all away,
and desire it may not be seen any more; and we take the hatchet out of your
heads.

Gave three strings. Brethren, the governors, and all the English,

I will hide nothing from you, because we have promised to speak to each other
from the bottom of our hearts.

The French, like a thief in the night, have stolen away some of our young men,
and misted them; and they have been concerned in doing mischief against our
brethren the English.

We did not know it when it happened, but we discovered it since. The chiefs of
our nation held their young men fast, and would not suffer them to go out of
their sight; but the French came and stole them away from us, and corrupted
them to do mischief: We are sorry for it; we ask pardon for them, and hope you
will forgive them: We promise they shall do so no more: And now, by this belt,
we take out of your heads the hatchet with which they struck you.

A belt of ten rows. He added, he had found out, That some of their young men
had been concerned in striking the English four times.

At a conference with the Indians, on the 16th of October, 1758.
PRESENT.
The governors and gentlemen of their council, etc. Governor Bernard spoke,

Brethren of all the confederated nations,
As you proposed your questions concerning Teedyuscung separately, I think
proper to give you a separate answer thereto

I know not who made Teedyuscung so great a man; nor do I know that he is any
greater than a chief of the Delaware Indians settled at Wyomink. The title of
king could not be given him by an English governor; for we know very well, that
there is no such person among the Indians, as what we call a king, And if we
call him so, we mean no more than a sachem, or chief. I observe in his treaties
which he has held with the governor of Pennsylvania, [which I have perused
since our last meeting] that he says he was a woman, till you made him a man,
by putting a tomhawk into his hand; and through all of those treaties,
especially in the last, held at this town, he calls you his uncles, and
professes that he is dependent on you; and I know not that any thing has since
happened to alter his relation to you. I therefore consider him still to be
your nephew.

Brethren,

A belt. After the governor had done speaking, and their answers were
interpreted in the united nations and Delaware languages, the Indian chiefs
were asked, if they had any thing more to say. On which Tagashata arose, and
made a speech to his cousins the Delaware and Minisink Indians, directing his
discourse to Teedyuscung.

Nephews,
You may remember all that passed at this councilfire. The governors who sit
there have put you in mind of what was agreed upon last year: They both put you
in mind of this promise, and desire you will perform it: You have promised it,
and must perform it. We your uncles promised to return the prisoners. We your
uncles, have promised to return all the English prisoners among us, and
therefore we expect that you our cousins and nephews will do the same. As soon
as you come home, we desire that you will search carefully in your towns for
all the prisoners among you that have been taken out of every province, and
cause them to be delivered up to your brethren. You know that the is an article
of this peace that was made between you and your brethren: In confirmation of
which you received a large peace belt; of which belt we desire you will give an
account, and let us know what is become of it, and how far you have proceeded
in it.

A bell. After this was interpreted in the Delaware language, it was observed,
that there were no Minisink Indians present; the governors therefore desired,
that mr. Peter's and mr. Read would procure a meeting of the chiefs of the
united nations, Delawares and Minisinks, and cause the speech of Tagashata to
be interpreted to the Minisinks in presence of their uncles.

Robert White, the Nanticoke chief, arose and said, he was going to speak in
behalf of seven nations, and directing his discourse to the governors, he
delivered himself in the English language as follows,

Brethren,
It is now more than two years since we heard of our cousins the Delawares
taking up the hatchet against the English. At the first, Sir William Johnson
sent a message to the head nations, and when they received it, they sent to us
at Otsaningo; telling us, that as we lived close by our cousins, they desired
we would invite them to meet at our town, and accordingly we invited them, and
they came to a great meeting at our town of Otsaningo. We then gave our cousins
a belt of a fathom long, and twenty five rows in breadth, and desired them to
lay down the hatchet that they had taken up against the English, and to be easy
with them: And if they would follow this advice, we told them, that they would
live in peace, until their heads were white with age; otherwise, it might not
be so with them.

Not hearing from our cousins for some time what they did in consequence of
this belt, we sent to them two other belts, one of sixteen and the other of
twelve rows, desiring them once more to be easy with their brethren the
English, and not to strike them any more: But still we heard nothing from them;
indeed sometime afterward we understood the Delawares should say, that the
Indians at Otsaningo, had gray eyes, and were like the English, and should be
served as Englishmen; and we thought we should have had the hatchet struck into
our heads. We now want to know what is become of these belts; may be they may
be under ground, or they may have swallowed them down their throats.

Brethren,

A string. 17th October, 1758.
The Indians were in council all day; and acquainted the governors, that they
could not be ready to meet before morning.

At a conference held at Easton the 18th October, 1758.
PRESENT.
The governors, council, gentlemen and Indians, with the interpreters: As
aforesaid.

Mr. Peter's and mr. Read acquainted the governors, That at a meeting of the
chiefs of the older and younger nations, with the several tribes of the
Delaware and Minisink Indians, on Monday night, the speech of Tagashata,
delivered that morning in the public conference, respecting the giving up the
prisoners, was interpreted in the Delaware language by Stephen Calvin; and
another belt, on the part of the governors, being joined to Tagashata's belt,
they were both delivered to the Delaware and Minisink chiefs, to enforce the
subject matter. When this was done, Tagashata spoke to the Minisink chief
Egotchowen, saying, we were told by you, that you had delivered up the English
prisoners, and we believed you; but our brethren have told us, that they were
not delivered up, and therefore we earnestly desire that they may be made easy
on this article. You know, cousins, that their hearts will always be in grief,
till they see again their flesh and blood: It is natural that they should be
so: It would be so with us, if it was our case. We desire you will be extremely
careful to perform this matter fully and soon. let there be perfect peace over
all the English country. And let it now be published, that we may all live in
peace, and with satisfaction, now and for ever. I told you, Egotchowen, when
you was in my town, to bring with you the English prisoners, and that our
brethren would expect it. I wish you had done it. But however, do it now with
all speed, and it will be well.

That Egotchowen answered, It is true, 'I was at my uncles fire, and I believe
he desired me to bring the prisoners down; but I suppose it was not interpreted
to me; for I did not understand it clearly; but I now understand it.

That the Minisink and Delaware Indians were desired to collect all their
warriors together, and give them their belts, and receive from them their
answer, it being necessary they should concur heartily in whatever should be
concluded.

Then Nichas, the Mohawk chief acquainted the governors, 'That, as counselors,
they had finished, having nothing to propose at this present meeting. The
warriors were to speak now, and Thomas King was appointed to deliver their
words; who thereupon arose, and began, "with an exhortation as well to all
concerned in public affairs, governors and their councils, and Indian chiefs
and their councils, as to the warriors of all nations, white people and
Indians, desiring all present to attend carefully to what was going to be
related, as matters of great consequence, which would serve to regulate the
conduct of the English and Indians to each other. He added, that the relation
going to be made had taken a great deal of trouble to put it into order, and it
was made on information given by the several nations now present, who were
acquainted with the facts.

Brethren,

This was interpreted in the Delaware language; and Thomas King then proceeded,
directing his speech to the governors, and all the English upon the continent.

Brethren, against the English, and gave them the hatchet. Being resolved on
revenge, they accepted it, and likewise spoke to their grandfathers the
Delawares, saying, grandfathers, are not your hearts sore at our being used so
ill, and at the loss of one of our chiefs? Will you not join us in revenging
his death? So by degrees our young men were brought over to act against you. On
searching matters to the bottom, you will find, that you in this manner, gave
the first offense. This we thought proper to let you know: It may be of service
for the future. You may be induced by this, to take better care in conducting
your council-business, so as to guard against these breaches of friendship; or
as soon as they happen, in corresponding immediately with one another, and with
the Indian nations, who are in any wise concerned on such occasion.

Eight strings of black wampum. Brethren,

About three years ago, eight Seneca warriors were returning from war through
Virginia, having seven prisoners and scalps with them. At a place called Green
Briar, they met with a party of Soldiers, not less than one hundred and fifty,
who kindly invited them to come to a certain store, and said they would supply
them with provisions: And accordingly they traveled two days with them, in a
friendly manner; and when they came to the house, they took their arms from the
Senecas: The head man cried out, 'Here is death, defend yourselves as well as
you can;' which they did, and two of them were killed on the spot; and one, a
young boy, was taken prisoner. This gave great offense, and the more so, as it
was upon their warriors road, and we were in perfect peace with our brethren.
It provoked us to such a degree, that we could not get over it.

Brethren,

Six strings of white wampum. Brethren,

Brethren,

A belt. Brethren,

Two strings of black and white wampum. Then directing his discourse to the
governor of Jersey, he proceeded,

Brother, the governor of Jersey.

Two strings of white wampum. On the 19th October, 1758.
At a private conference with the Indians, held at Easton.
PRESENT.
His excellency governor Bernard.

The commissioners of New Jersey.

The chiefs of the United Nations, and of the Minisinks and Wapings.

George Croghan, Esquire captain Henry Mountour and Stephen Calvin.

His excellency reciting the request of the United Nations to him, to do
justice to their nephews the Minisinks, concerning their claim to lands in
New Jersey, said, he would make diligent enquiry, what lands were remaining
unsold by them: But as that would be a work of time and expense, he wished that
some means could be found to give them satisfaction at this meeting. The people
of New Jersey said, they had bought all, or the greatest part of the Minisink
lands; and the Minisinks said they had a great deal of land unsold. He could
not tell who was in the right; but would suppose there were some lands unsold:
And upon that supposition would give them some money by way of consideration
for them, if they would propose a reasonable sum; and desired they would advise
about it, and give an answer.

The united nations said, it was a very kind proposal, and recommended it to
the consideration of the Minisinks.

At a private conference with the Indians, held at Easton, the 21st of October,
1758.
PRESENT.
His excellency governor Bernard, and the Jersey commissioners.

Thomas King, chief of the Oneidas. Tagashata, chief of the Senecas. Taka, aio,
chief of the Cayugas. Egohohowen, chief of the Minisinks. Aquaywochtu, chief of
the Wapings. With other Indians of the several nations.

George Crochan, esquire deputy to sir William Johnson; captain Henry Montour, his
majesty's interpreter to the United Nations; mr. Stephen Calvin, interpreter of
the Delaware and Minisink languages.

His excellency informed them, that he met them to agree about a consideration
for the uncertain claims of the Minisinks, Wapings and other Indians, claimants
of land in the northern parts of the province of New Jersey, and desired that
it might be considered, that they knew not what they sold, and he knew not what
he bought; therefore the price ought not to be large.

That they might propose a sum to him, or he would make an offer to them; or it
should be left to their uncles to consider of a price, as would please them
best.

The united nations, by Thomas King, said, that they had no claim to the lands
of the Minisinks, or others their nephews, on the east side of Delaware, and
should therefore leave the fixing a price to them.

Then the Minisinks and Wapings withdrew to consult about it; and being
returned, Egohohowen, the Minisink chief, said, that they would choose the
governor should make an offer, as they might perhaps demand too much.

His excellency having consulted the commissioners, offered them eight hundred
Spanish dollars for their claim in New Jersey, as an extraordinary price.

The Minisinks said, they should be glad of the opinion of their uncles in the
matter.

The United Nations, by Thomas King, said, it was a fair and honorable offer,
and that, if it was their own case, they would cheerfully accept of it: But as
there were a great many persons to share in the purchase money, they
recommended it to his excellency, to add two hundred dollars more; and, if that
was complied with, the report of it would be carried to all the nations, and
would be a great proof of the affection and generosity of their brethren the
English, on this occasion, and would be very agreeable to them.

His excellency desired to know of the Minisinks, and other claimants, if they
approved of the proposal of their uncles; and they informed him, that they did.

The governor after consulting the commissioners, said, it was more than he had
intended to give; but as the United Nations had given themselves the trouble of
being mediators between them, he could not refuse their recommendations, and
was glad of the opportunity he had of showing his regard to the United Nations,
and his benevolence to the Minisink and other Indians, who had resided in the
province where he presided; and therefore complied with their request.

His excellency then desired them to remember, that this consideration money,
was to be in full for the claims of all the Minisink and Waping Indians, and
all others who claim any lands, in a map, which was laid before them at the
same time, which included all the lands from the line between the provinces of
New York and New Jersey, and down Hudson's river, to the mouth of Rariton up
the same to Alametung Falls, on the north branch of Rariton river, thence on a
straight line to Paoqualin Mountain, where it joins on Delaware river, and
thence up the Delaware to Cushytunk; and recommended it to them to have respect
to this in the division of the consideration money.

Then Tagashata, the Seneca chief, arose, and addressing himself to the
Minisinks and other Indian claimants, spoke as follows.

My nephews,

Now you must remember the friendship between you and your brother, and
transmit to your children, and make them acquainted with the transactions of
this day. I recommend this to you, not from my lips only, but from the bottom
of my heart: I hope it will also make a deep impression in your hearts.

It seems, as if your grandfathers had not told you of the treaties they used
to have with their brethren, but carried them with them to the grave. But we
hope you will not do so, but carefully inform your children of your agreements.
We have given you this advice, and hope you will follow it. We also expect you
will take care of your young men, that they do no more mischief to their
brethren the English.

Egohohowen, then addressed himself to the governor, and desired to be heard.

Brother,

We are now thoroughly satisfied; and we still retain a friendship for our
brethren the English, and we desire, that if we should come into your province,
to see our old friends, and should have occasion for the bark of a tree to
cover a cabin, or a little refreshment, that we should not be denied, but be
treated as brethren: And that your people may not look on the wild beasts of
the forest, or fish of the waters, as their sole property; but that we may be
admitted to an equal use of them.

The governor answered, that, as soon as he got home, he should issue a
proclamation, to notify to the people of his province, that he had made a peace
with them, and to order, that, for the future, they should be treated as
brethren, which he hoped would be done: But desired they would not go into
those parts, where they had lately committed hostilities, till the people's
passions were cooled; for he could not be answerable for his people's
behavior, whilst their losses were fresh upon their minds.

The 21st of October.
PRESENT.
All the confederate Chiefs.

Teedyuscung, Nowalkeeka, alias Four steps, Awehela, alias James Davis,
Egohohowen, Munsey chief, Tapiscawen, alias Samuel Davis, Philip Compass,
Lappink, Moses Tetamy.

Conrad Weiser, Henry Montour, Isaac Stille, interpreters.

Governor Bernard, requesting the attention of the Indians, addressed them as
follows,

Brethren of the united nations,

By this string, you spoke on behalf of our brethren the Minisinks, and said,
That they were wronged in their lands; that the English settled so fast, they
were continually pushing them back; and when they asked for their lands, they
were told that they had sold their land, and had got drunk and forgot it. If
they had swallowed their lands, they must be content; but they did not believe
that they had swallowed all, but that some was left. They desired, that I would
enquire after their lands that were left, and do them justice.

Brethren,

I have therefore had a conference with the Minisinks, in the presence of some
of their uncles; and have come to a full agreement with them, the proceedings
of which are now ready to be read to you.

Brethren, A belt.

Brother Teedyuscung,

Brother,

A string. Governor Denny, being obliged to return to Philadelphia, on urgent
business, took his leave of the Indians, saying.

Brethren,

I am sorry, I am now to inform you, that I am obliged to leave you, having
received last night an express from general Forbes, who is now near the Ohio.
My business calls me to town; I shall therefore leave mr. Logan and mr. Peter's
to transact the remainder of the business, and doubt not but they will act to
your satisfaction. I assure you of my affection for you, and wish you all
manner of happiness.

Teedyuscung arose, and desired to be heard on behalf of the Wapings, living
near AEsopus, and produced a short broad belt of white wampum, having in the
center, two hearts of a reddish color, and in figures 1745, wrote after the
following manner, 1745. The belt had a round circle pendant, representing the
sun: He then produced two certificates, one from governor Clinton, and the
other from governor Hardy, both which were much in favor of the Waping
Indians. He said the belt was given them by the government of New York, and
represented their union, which was to last as long as the sun should continue
in the firmament

Teedyuscung addressed governor Bernard, desiring by a string of Wampum, that
he would extend his protection to the Wapings; and as their chief was old and
infirm, he requested the favor of a horse to carry him home; which was readily
granted.

Tagashata made the same request to governor Denny, which was likewise granted.

The Six Nation chiefs consulted together, and in a little time, Nichas, in
their behalf, returned an answer to the speeches of the governors, laying the
belts and strings upon the table, in the order they were delivered, and
repeating distinctly what was said on each of them. At the end of every article
he returned thanks, and expressed the highest satisfaction, particularly on the
ratifying the peace, and the large belt given thereupon, which he said should
be sent to all the distant nations of Indians, to whom it would be very
agreeable; he likewise promised, that every thing transacted in these
conferences, which he again said had afforded them great pleasure, should be
laid before the great council at Onondaga, whose answers should be carefully
transmitted.

He thanked governor Bernard for making up all the differences between that
government and the Minisink Indians so much to their satisfaction.

He made an apology for the want of Wampum, and the exchange of other belts to
give in confirmation of their performance of the several things mentioned in
the governors speeches, agreeable to Indian customs. And then wished governor
Denny a good journey.

At a conference with the Indians, held at Easton, on the 26th of October, 1758.
PRESENT.
His excellency governor Bernard.

William Logan, Richard Peter's, Andrew Johnston, Charles Read, John Stevens,
George Croghan, Conrad Weiser, Charles Swain, esquires. Major Ordnt, the
sheriff of Northampton county, John Watson.

The chiefs of the United Nations, and of the other nations, and the
interpreters, as aforementioned.

Mr. Secretary Peter's having observed to the confederate chiefs, that the
governors were by Toka aio, charged with having omitted some things in their
answers, and desired to know what they were, Thomas King said, that in regard
to some things they had been since supplied, and recommended that some other
things should be more particularly taken notice of, than they had been.
Wherefore agreeable to his advice, the following speech was spoke by the
members of the Pennsylvania council, governor Bernard assenting thereto.

Brethren,

A string consisting of a thousand grains of Wampum. Brethren,

A string of a thousand grains of wampum. Brethren,

A string of a thousand grains of wampum. Then mr. Peter's and mr. Weiser
produced the confirmation deed, executed by the chiefs of the United Nations,
as before set forth, which the Indian chiefs acknowledged to have been their
voluntary act and dead, and that they clearly understood the contents thereof,
together with the limits described in the draught annexed to it; and the same
being handed from Indian to Indian, all round the house, it was delivered to
the proprietor's agents.

After which the Indian chiefs produced the prorietary deed of release,
executed by mr. Peter's and mr. Weiser, the proprietary's agents: who
acknowledged it to be their act and deed, in behalf of their constituents, as
well as their own, and re-delivered it to the Indians, together with the belt.

His excellency governor Bernard produced the following deeds, executed by five
Indian attorneys, appointed by a council of the Delaware nations, for all the
lands lying in New Jersey, south of a line from Paoqualin mountains at Delaware
river, to the falls of Alamatung, on the north branch of Rariton river, thence
down that river to Sandy-Hook; dated the 12th of September last, with
endorsements thereon, made by Teedyuscung, Unwallacon and Tepascawen,
signifying their agreement thereto, and acknowledgment of their having received
satisfaction thereon; witnessed by three chiefs of the Six Nations, who in
behalf of the Six Nations, approved the sale, and also by several English
witnesses. And another deed, dated the 23d October instant, at Easton; from the
chiefs of the Munsies, Wapings, Opings, or Pomptons, sixteen in number, and
including all the remaining lands in New Jersey, beginning at Cushytunk, and
down the division lines between New Jersey and New York, to the mouth of Tappan
creek at Hudson's river, and down the same to Sandy Hook, thence to the mouth
of Rariton, thence up that river to the falls of Alamatung, thence on a strait
line to Paoqualin mountains, where it joins on Delaware river, thence up the
river Delaware to Cushytunk; endorsed by Nimham, a chief of the Opings or
Pomptons, who was sick at the execution thereof, and approved by the Six
Nations; which was testified by three of their chiefs, signing as witnesses
thereto: And governor Bernard desired, that all present might take notice of
the same, and remember that the Indian titles to all the lands in New Jersey,
were conveyed by those two deeds.

Which being interpreted in the Mingo and Delaware languages; his excellency
addressed the Indians, as follows:

Brethren,

The circumstances of our province, have hitherto rendered us unable to give
you any great proofs of our regard for you. But I shall endeavor to persude my
people, to do you good service for the future, by opening a communication with
you; which if rightly managed, will be much to the advantage of both people.
And for my own part, I shall be always ready to do you justice; and desire that
whenever you have cause of complaint against my people, you will take care to
signify it to me.

A string. The Five Nation chiefs, laid all the belts and strings on the table,
that were delivered at this and the last conference. Toka aio, the Cayuga
chief, desired the governor and all present, would take notice of what Thomas
King was going to say, on behalf of the United Nations.

On which Thomas King arose, and taking up the first belt which was given by
Teedyuscung, when he requested a deed for the Wioming lands, he addressed the
Delawares, (Teedyuscung not being present) as follows:

Cousins,

Which being interpreted into Delaware, the string of wampum was given to Moses
Tetamy and James Davis, to be delivered to Teedyuscung, as he was not present.

Then taking up each belt and string in the order it was delivered in this, and
the last conference, he proceeded to repeat distinctly, what had been said
under each article, returning thanks for all those good speeches, which he
said, were extremely agreeable. He made particular mention of the large peace
belt, saying, "The nations are greatly pleased, that all the ancient treaties
made here, at Albany, and elsewhere, are renewed, as well as that the old
councilfire at Philadelphia, is kindled again, and a good road made to it, that
may be traveled without any danger: These in particular, as well as every
other matter transacted at these conferences, we will make known to our own
nations, and to every other in friendship and alliance with us, and we are sure
they will be very well received.

Then addressing governor Bernard, he thanked him for his farewell speech,
saying, "It was a very kind one, and that they were much pleased with his
having been present, and given his assistance at this treaty, which had given
them an opportunity of gaining an acquaintance with him, which they would ever
remember with pleasure. After a pause, he desired to be excused for mentioning
some things that had been omitted by the governors and their councils.

They have forgot to bring with them ammunition, of which we always used to
receive a sufficient quantity, not only to serve us in our journey, but to
support us in our hunting season, that we might be enabled to make provision
for our families. They have given us gunlocks without guns, which are of no
manner of use to us; and therefore this must have surely been forgot; as it is
impossible for Indians to subsist without guns, powder and lead, of which we
have received none.

As many of us are old and infirm, we desire our brethren, will be so good as
to furnish us with a number of wagons, to convey such of us, as are not able
to walk, and the goods you have been pleased to give us, as far as Wioming,
where we have left our canoes, and then we will discharge the wagons, and they
may come back again.

We further desire a supply of provisions may be put into the wagons, enough
to serve us till we get to our respective habitations.

He then took up the proprietary release, and returned thanks for it. He said,
"When the United Nations first made the request to sir William Johnson, to be
transmitted to Onas, they had no doubt but Onas would comply with it, having
always found him ready to grant all their requests. With him we have never had
any difference; he has always settled our affairs without giving us any
trouble, and to our satisfaction. We heartily thank Onas; this act confirms us
in the good opinion we always had of him.

Then addressing himself to the Delawares, with a string of wampum, he spoke as
follows:

This serves to put Teedyuscung in mind of his promises, to return the
prisoners: Remember, cousins, you have made this promise in our presence; you
did it indeed before, and you ought to have performed it: To tell lies, does
not become a great man: A great man always keeps his word, and performs his
promises. Cousins, You must not now fail to keep your word: We are all now one
people, and we must all be punctual in the performance of our engagements.

This was interpreted into the Delaware language, and the string was given to
Moses Tetamy, to be delivered to Teedyuscung.

Then he said, the United Nations had finished what they had to say.

Some wine and punch was called for, and mutual healths were drank, and the
conferences were concluded with great satisfaction.

In consequence of the expectations given the Indian inhabitants, the
commissioners, with the consent of the Indian attorneys, purchased a tract of
upwards of 3000 acres, called Brotherton, situate in Burlington county, in
which is a cedar swamp and saw-mill, adjoining to many thousand acres of poor
uninhabited land, suitable for hunting, and convenient also for fishing on the
seacoast; the deed was taken in the name of the governor and commissioners, and
their heirs, in trust for the use of the Indian natives who have or do reside
in this colony south of Rariton, and their successors for ever, with a clause,
providing that it shall not be in the power of the Indians, their successors,
or any of them, to lease or sell any part thereof; and any person (Indians
excepted) attempting to settle there, to be removed by warrant from a justice
of the peace; no timber to to be cut but by the Indians, under penalty of forty
shillings fine for every tree. The Indians soon after the purchase, removed to
the settlement, and there remain to their satisfaction, having their usual
means of living very convenient; they were assisted by the government, in their
removing and buildings: There are about sixty persons seated here, and twenty
at Weekpink, on a tract formerly secured by an English right, to the family of
king Charles, an Indian sachem.

Some time after the treaty at Easton, fresh hostilities being commenced by the
back Indians, and approaching very near the frontiers of Jersey, it was feared,
notwithstanding these agreements, they would prove perfidious; which occasioned
a guard to be placed there: Part of the address of the assembly to governor
Franklin, in the spring, 1764, sets this and the present state of Indian
affairs, in a true light; and with that we conclude the subject.

In the original settlement of this province, great circumspection and care was
used to gain and preserve the friendship of the Indian natives; their lands
were from time to time, fairly and openly purchased, to their general
satisfaction: This conciliated their affection; and for a long course of time,
they were eminently serviceable to the new settlers; and since the beginning of
their hostilities, lest some among them should think any part of our lands
remained unpurchased, care was taken at the treaty of Easton, 1758, to obtain
for a valuable consideration, a general release for all the lands in this
province, such parts only excepted, as were reserved for the use of those
Indians that inclined to live under the protection of this government; this was
done, and the money paid in open council, and their approbation universally
expressed: Such therefore being the circumstance of this province, with regard
to the Indians, it became a matter of astonishment to us, that any conduct of
theirs should give reason to fear their intentions respecting us; and whether
they had actually any design upon this province or not, their hostilities in
the neighborhood of our frontier, and in one doubtful instance, over the line,
were inducements to place a frontier guard of two hundred men for the winter
past.

CHAP. XXIV.
A short geographical description of the province, and additional view of its
present state.

TO be very particular on this head, comes not within our design; nor will it
perhaps be a matter of much expectation, as the present state of trade carried
on chiefly through the provinces New York and Pennsylvania, seems but little
calculated to draw attention from abroad; but the situation of the province, as
lying directly in the concourse between the places aforesaid, renders it almost
as well known to strangers resorting there.

New Jersey lying about 75 west longitude from London, is bounded on the west
and south-west by Delaware river and bay, on the south-east and east by the
atlantic ocean; the sound, which separates Staten Island Or if we include that
Island still on the atlantic; but New York has it in possession, though from
situation it seems apparently intended a part of New Jersey.
from the continent, and Hudson's river on the north, by a line as yet
unsettled, to be run from the river last mentioned, in the latitude of 40 to
the northerly branch of Delaware, in latitude of 41 40, which line is to be the
boundary with NewYork on that side. The greatest length of New Jersey from
north to south, that is from Cape-May, in the latitude of 39 to the north
Station Point, in the latitude 41 40 at 69 miles to a degree, (...) 184 miles.
Its greatest breadth is about 60 miles; but supposing it on an average 150 in
length and 50 broad, the whole province must then contain 4,800,000 acres; of
which at least one-fourth, (probably more) is poor barren land, in respect to
tillage; but in part abounding with pines Chiefly the pitch pine.
and cedars, and some few tracts of swamp, that will make meadow. It is
supposed, that West-Jersey contains the greatest quantity of acres, and in
return took the most barren land. East-Jersey, now 1765, is supposed to have
located nearly 468,000 acres good land, and 96,000 acres of pine land. Good
rights in East-Jersey, now 1765, sell at 20s. proc. per acre, Pine ditto, 10 s.
proc. per acre: Rights in West-Jersey, at the same time, sell from 10l. to 12l.
per hundred acres.
The proprietors of West-Jersey, soon after their arrival, divided among them,
500,000 acres, which they calthe first dividend; since which, at different
times, they have issued directions for each proprietor's taking his part of
four other dividends of the like quantity, amounting in the whole, with
allowance of five per cent. for roads, to 2,625,000 acres, conjectured by many
to be full as much land as the division contains; of this the far greater part
is already surveyed; what yet remains are chiefly the rights of minors and
people abroad.

Delaware river, from the head of Cushietunk, though not obstructed with falls,
has not been improved to any inland navigation, by reason of the thinness of
the settlements that way: From Cushietunk to Trenton falls, are fourteen
considerable rifts, yet all passable in the long flat boats These boats are
made like troughs, square above the heads and sterns, sloping a little fore and
aft, generally 40 or 50 feet long, 6 or 7 feet wide, and 2 feet 9 inches, or 3
feet deep, and draw 20 or 22 inches water when laden.
used in the navigation of these parts, some carrying 500 or 600 bushels of
wheat. The greatest number of the rifts are from Easton downward; and those
fourteen miles above Easton, another just below Wells's ferry, and that at
Trenton, are the worst. The boats seldom come down but with freshes, especially
from the Minisinks: The freight thence to Philadelphia, is eight pence a bushel
for wheat, and three shillings a barrel for slour: From the forks, and other
places below, twenty shillings a tun for pig iron, seven pence a bushel for
wheat, two shillings and six pence a barrel for flour. This river above
Trenton, has no branches worth mentioning, for convenience of navigation.
Analysis of the map of the middle colonies, by L. Evans.


Though the province boundary on the ocean, is extensive, the harbors for
large shipping are but few, and, except Sandy-Hook, mostly inconvenient,
occasioned by a great extent of salt meadows, swamps and marshes, and being
exposed to the N. E. winds; this disadvantage is however amply supplied by the
Delaware and Hudson's river.

Almost the whole extent of the province adjoining on the atlantic, is
barrens, or nearly approaching it; yet there are scattering settlements all
along the coast, the people subsisting in great part by raising cattle in the
bog undrained meadows and marshes, and selling them to graziers, and cutting
down the cedars; these were originally plenty of both the white and red sorts:
The towering retreat of the former have afforded many an asylum for David's men
of necessity: 1 Samuel xxii. 2.
They are now much worked out: Another means of subsistence along the coast, is
the plenty of fish and oysters, these are carried to New York and Philadelphia
markets. It is thought, no inconsiderable whale-fishery might be formed there;
on the banks the New England men frequently fish with success. The barrens or
poor land, generally continues from the sea up into the province, thirty miles
or more, and this nearly the whole extent from east to west; so that there are
many thousand acres, that will never serve much of the purposes of agriculture;
consequently when the pines and cedars are generally gone (they are so already
in many places) this will not be of much value. This excepted, and what of the
same sort may be here and there intermixed in many in other parts of the
province, the lands in general (perhaps something better than two thirds of the
whole) are good, and bear wheat, barley, or any thing else suitable to the
climate, to perfection. As the province has very little foreign trade on
bottoms of its own, the produce of all kinds for sale, goes chiefly to New York
and Philadelphia; much of it is there purchased for markets abroad; but some
consumed among themselves. The Inhabitants, as to dress and manners, form
themselves much after the neighboring provinces; the western, about as far as
the tide flows up Delaware, those of Pennsylvania; the remainder, those of
New York. The political state of the province may be described in a few words;
harmony reigns in a considerable degree, in all branches of the legislature;
the public business is consequently dispatched with ease, and at a small
expense. Thus much in the general: Next for the counties; of these there are
thirteen: Their respective wealth on a comparison with each other, may be
collected from the proportions fixed by act of Assembly, on a ^. 25,000 tax,
1764.

MIDDLESEX, L.2,265: 17: 09 MONMOUTH, 3,285: 16: 10 ESSEX, 1,946: 08: 04
SOMERSET, 2,791: 07: 01 BERGEN, 1,647: 09: 08 BURLINGTON, 3,125: 09: 05
GLOUCESTER, 1,954: 10: 02 SALEM, 1,746: 07: 03 CAPE-MAY, 417: 14: 08 HUNTERDON,
3,544: 07: 11 M^RRIS AND SUSSEX, Sussex being the frontier county, and but
lately settled, pays but a small proportion.
1,389: 01: 08 CUMBERLAND, 885: 09: 03


The number of inhabitants in 1738, were said to be 47,369 In 1745, 61,403 The
increase in seven years, 14,034


Supposing the increase to be nearly the same since, the number now, 1765, must
be about 100,000

The increase of some of the counties in West-Jersey, between 1699 and 1745,
was found to be more than six for one; the proportion of strangers arriving
since, is not the same; but the natural increase must be far greater.

The counties are several of them marked by productions, differing in some
respects from each other, and when distinguished, may perhaps bear the
following general description.

Eastern Division.
MIDDLESEX
First ascertained a county by act of general assembly, in the proprietor's
time 1682, had its boundaries particularly fixed by subsequent acts, in 1709
and 1713. See laws of the province, vol. 1. p. 13, 40, 41.

In this county lies the city of Perth-Amboy, on a point of land, which divides
the river Rariton, and Arthur Kull sound. It takes its name Perth from James
Drummond, one of the proprietors, and earl of Perth, and Amboy from Ambo, in
Indian a point. The situation for a sea trade, as lying open to Sandy-Hook,
This took its name from its shape; not far from the land at Middletown, it
winds like a hook, the shore and bottom sandy.
whence vessels may arrive almost any weather in one tide from the sea, and
find a safe commodious harbor, capacious enough to contain many large ships,
is allowed to be as good a port as most on the continent; yet by a fatality
attending almost every attempt for trade in the province, the endeavors at
this have been hitherto with no great success; though they have a sea trade, and
export to foreign markets, yet not as might be expected from the advantages of
situation: The land lies high and dry, in a good air: The Scots proprietors
were indefatigable to improve it; but found up-hill work; yet effected a
considerable settlement: The best part of the country round has water carriage
to New York. The legislature, by early stipulation of the proprietors and
inhabitants. meet here and at Burlington, alternately, to accommodate each
division, and those in each toward the extremities of this long-extended
province: In the same manner the supreme courts of judicature for the province
were fixed: Here the courts for the county of Middlesex are held; here also the
general proprietors for East-Jersey always meet, and have lately erected a
large and elegant house. [ See chap. ix.] In this county also up the Rariton,
lies the city of New-Brunswick, Here is a public library.
well built, but the situation low, though high ground adjoining; the county
besides contains several villiages, as Woodbridge, including Raway, Piscataway,
Cranbury and Princeton; in the last is situate the New Jersey college, a
handsome capacious building: For a view, see New American Mag. 1759, p. 104.
The college was first founded by charter from president Hamilton, and enlarged
by governor Belcher, in 1747; at his death he left it a considerable donation
of books. The land in this county is in part very rich, and affords beef,
sheep, some pork, most sorts of grain, and smaller articles; besides staves,
firewood, and other lumber, for exportation and New York market. A general idea
may be formed of the religion of the inhabitants by the houses for worship; of
these, the episcopalians in this county have five, presbyterians seven, quakers
four, baptists two, seventh-day baptists one, low Dutch calvinists one.

MONMOUTH,
Boundaries by act of assembly, passed in 1709, begins at the mouth of a creek
that parted lands originally belonging to Andrew Bowne and George Willocks;
thence following Middlesex, to the line dividing the eastern and western
division of the province; thence southerly along this line to the sea; thence
along the sea to the point of sandy-hook, and thence up the bay to the creek
aforesaid: It contains the villages of Shrewsbury, Middletown, Freehold, and
Allen-Town: The courts for the county business, are held at Freehold. The lands
in Shrewsbury, Middletown, and part of Freehold, are mostly remarkably good;
they raise grain, beef, sheep, butter, cheese, and other produce for New York
market: At the high lands of Navesink, the New York merchants have lately
erected a commodious light house, for the security of navigation. The houses
for worship in this county, are, presbyterians six, episcopalians four, quakers
three, baptists four.

ESSEX,
Had its boundaries fixed by act of assembly, in 1709, but altered in 1741.
Laws of the province, vol. 1. p. 12, 274. It contains the well-settled towns of
Elizabeth and Newark; At each of those towns is a public library.
in the latter the courts for the county are held; in the former those for the
ancient borough: This being an old settled county, and good land, is
consequently full of inhabitants: their plantations are too high in value, to
be generally large; their improvements greater than in many other parts; they
raise wheat, beef, sheep, and generally what is common from good land; part is
carried to New York market, and part exported in bottoms of their own: Of
places for worship, the presbyterians have seven, episcopalians three, baptists
one, Dutch calvinists two.

SOMERSET,
Was divided from Middlesex by a proprietary law, in 1688, and then named; 'its
boundaries were again limited in the act of 1709, but altered by other acts in
1713 and 1741. Vol. 1. of laws, p. 12, 40. 274. It adjoins to Middlesex, on the
north, the rest on Essex, Morris and Hunterdon: In it is the village of
Bound-Brook: The land is rich, and being early settled by the industrious low
Dutch, and a few others, much improved. Wheat is the staple of the county, of
which they raise large quantities; they send their flour down Rariton river, to
New York; and near Brunswick, running under the river Rariton, is a copper
mine, but not yet very profitable. In this county lies the Rocky-Hill mines:
Here also at Baskin-ridge, is the seat of William Alexander, earl of Stirling;
his improvements for taste and expense, promise more than any thing of the kind
hitherto effected in the province. Of houses for worship, the English
presbyterians have three, low Dutch reformed ditto, five, Dutch lutheran one,
baptists one.

The Dutch of the calvinistical plan of Holland, in the eastern parts of this
province, were very insignificant, and only supplied by their ministers from
NewYork and Long Island, twice or thrice a year, (except Hackinsack, who had
one Burtolf settled among them) until about the year 1719, when those of
Somerset, Middlesex, and part of Hunterdon, jointly applied to Holland for a
minister, from whence came Theodorus Jacobus Freelinghausen, who officiated
among them, and was the chief means of establishing several congregations in
those parts: Since which the number of their ministers is increased to fourteen
or fifteen in the eastern division; and each of them do for the most part
supply two or three different congregations.

BERGEN,
By the act of 1709, is bounded from Constable-Hook, along the bay and Hudson's
river, to the partition point between New Jersey and New York; thence along the
partition line between the said provinces, and the division line of East and
West-Jersey, to Pequaneck river; thence down that and Passaick river to the
sound; and thence to the place first named: Its situation of Hudson's river,
opposite and adjacent to New York, opens an advantageous intercourse with that
market; their lands are generally good for grass, wheat, or any other grain.
The Schuylers have here two large parks for deer. The inhabitants of the
county, being the descendants of the low Dutch or Hollanders, that originally
settled there See p. 61.
under the Dutch title, preserve the religion of their ancestors, and worship
after the manner of the reformed churches in the united provinces; in principle
presbyterians, yet in subordination to the classis of Amsterdam: Their language
in general, bears the Dutch accent; nor have they forgot the customs of
Holland: They have of houses for worship, Dutch calvinists seven, Dutch
lutherans two. In this county are the Schuylers mines. Sixteen miles above
Newark in Essex, on the opposite side of Second-River, in Bergen, is the
remarkable Passaick falls, the precipice from the highest part of the rock, is
supposed to be about seventy feet perpendicular. In this county was born the
late famous col. Peter Schuyler, who died in 1762, aged about fifty-two years:
He was a younger son of Aarent Schuyler, the discoverer and first owner of the
mines abovementioned. He had the command of the province troops, against the
French of Canada, in diverse campaigns, in the two last wars; and by the best
judges of military merit, was allowed to rank high in that character: He had
qualities besides, that greatly recommended him to his acquaintance, being of a
frank, open behavior, of an extensive generosity and humanity, and unwearied
in his endeavors to accomplish whatever appeared of service to his country: He
was taken at Oswego, when that post was given up to the French, and long
detained a prisoner in Canada; where having letters of credit, he kept open
house for the relief of his fellow sufferers, and advanced large sums to the
Indians, in the French interest, for the redemption of captives; many of whom
he afterward, at his own expense, maintained whilst there, and provided for
their return; trusting to their abilities and honor for repayment, and lost
considerable that way; but seemed to think it money well bestowed: As to person
he was of a tall hardy make, rather rough at a first view, yet a little
acquaintance discovered a bottom of sincerity, and that he was ready to every
kind office in his power: In conversation he was above artifice or the common
traffic of forms, yet seemed to enjoy friendship with its true relish; and in
all relations what he seemed to be, he was. Matthew. vii. 20.

Western Division.
BURLINGTON.
For the first boundaries and settlement of this county, see chap. vi. It was
limited by the act of 1709, and afterward curtailed by another act, Vol. i of
laws, p. 41.

The city of Burlington Four miles from hence, a rec^use person who came a
stranger has existed alone, near twelve years, in a thick wood; through all the
extremities of the seasons, under cover of a few leaves, supported by the side
of an old log, and put together in the form of a small oven, not high or long
enough to stand upright or lie extended; he talks Dutch, but unintelligibly,
either through design, or from defect in his intellects, it is hard to tell
which; whence he came or what he is, no body about (...) can find out; he has
no contrivance to keep fire, nor uses any; in very cold weather he lies naked,
stops the hole he creeps in and out at with leaves; he mostly keeps in his hut,
but sometimes walks before it, lies on the ground, and cannot be persuaded to
work much, nor obliged without violence to forsake this habit, which he appears
to delight in, and to enjoy full health; when the woods and orchards afford him
no nuts, apples, or other relief as to food, he applies now and then for bread
to the neighborhood, and with that is quite satisfied; he refuses money, but
has been frequently (...) by charity; he seems to be upwards of forty year of
age; as to person rather under the middle (...); calls himself Francis.
was laid out in 1677, and early incorporated; but the charter now in being,
was granted by governor Cosby: The Delaware before it about a mile ^road, forms
a convenient basin for shipping; its situation for trade is good; but eclipsed
by the growing advantages of its opulent neighbor, the city Philadelphia.
Seventeen miles distant by land, twenty by water.
The land and air is good: where the houses chiefly stand, is an island, with
two entrances on causeways, and a quantity of drained meadows adjoining; but
long experience has proved them not unhealthy: The courts for the county are
held here; the legislature of the province meet alternately at Amboy and here;
the supreme courts are held in the same manner: The council chosen by the
general proprietors of West-Jersey to transact their business, always meet
here. [ See chap. xi.] In this place is also a promising library, the
contributors are incorporated by charter: Besides the town aforesaid, there are
two others; ten mile further up Delaware, is Borden Town, founded by Joseph
Borden; on a branch of Northampton or Rankokas river, is Bridge Town, or Mount
Holly: Here is a public library.
In this county also are the villages of Kingsbury, Crosswicks, New-Hanover and
Chester, or Moore's-Town: The arable land is generally but indifferent; yet
interspersed with quantities of good meadow, renders them profitable: Pork is
the staple; of which a large quantity is raised for the West India market, and
has deservedly gained reputation through all the islands: Beef, mutton, cheese,
butter, etc. are carried to Philadelphia markets: Very little hemp or flax is
raised in this county, or indeed through the province, the inhabitants
contented with a little, (very little in some places) for their own use, have
generally reserved their gains on other productions, for purchasing their chief
supply of these and woollen articles of European manufacture; labor is thought
too high to increase it much, and the climate not so favorable as in some
other places. In this county are the Indian settlements of Brotherton and
Weekpink: ( See chap. xxiii.) Of places for worship, the people called quakers
have fifteen, episcopalians two, baptists one, presbyterians one. [ See a note
p. 69.]

GLOUCESTER,
First laid out in 1677, had its boundaries ascertained by the act of 1709,
beginning at the mouth of Pensawkin creek; thence up the same to the fork
thereof; thence along the line of Burlington county to the sea; thence along
the seacoast to great Egg-Harbour river; thence up that river to the fork;
thence up the southermost and greatest branch of the same to its head; thence
upon a direct line to the head of Oldman's creek; thence down the same to
Delaware river; thence up that river to the place of beginning. Its situation
opposite and contiguous to Philadelphia, gives great opportunities to make the
most of the productions of the county at that market; though their uplands as to
the general are poor, the meadows are good and improve fast: They raise beef,
pork, mutton, butter, cheese, etc. They have three villages, Gloucester,
Haddonfield Here is a public library.
and Woodbury; at the first the courts for the county are held. Of houses for
worship, the people called quakers have seven, the presbyterians five,
episcopalians one, Sweeds lutheran one, baptists one, moravians one.

SALEM,
Named by John Fenwick, and distinguished by his tenth, in 1675: The name and
jurisdiction settled by a proprietary law, 1694: The boundaries were fixed in
1709, but altered by act of assembly, in 1747^ Vol. 1 of laws, p. 14. 361.
Their lands and meadows are rich, and productions of any kind, natural to the
climate, plenty: The chief they raise are beef, sheep, pork, butter, cheese,
and grain, for exportation. It being an old settlement, the improvements are
considerable as to plantations: The county business is transacted at the town
of Salem, which formerly sent two members to the general assembly; but in 1727,
these were given to Hunterdon, and their right of choice suspended till two
additional members were added to the eastern division. Places for worship are,
quakers four, episcopalians two, Dutch lutheran one, presbyterians three,
baptists two.

CUMBERLAND,
So named by governor Belcher, in respect to the duke of Cumberland; it was
divided from Salem by act of assembly in 1747, and the boundaries fixed, ( see
vol. 1. of laws, p. 361.) the land is mostly poor; but they have good meadows
and marshes; being a new settled county, these are not yet greatly improved;
they raise cattle and sheep for graziers; the courts are held at Cohansick
creek This creek was called by John Fenwick, Caesarea river, part of the
province name, as being the most considerable creek that puts out of Delaware
into West-Jersey.
or Hopewell. In this county besides is the village of Greenwich: They join
with Salem in the choice of two representatives: Places for worship are,
episcopalians one, presbyterians four, baptists two, seventh day baptists one,
quakers one.

CAPE-MAY,
Was first made a county by a proprietary law in 1692; by another in 1694, had
its boundaries better ascertained; and by the act of 1709, they were fixed to
remain, beginning at the mouth of a small creek, on the west side of Stipson's
island, called Jecah's creek, up the said creek as high as the tide flows;
thence along the bounds of Salem, now Cumberland county, to the southermost
main branch, of great Egg-Harbour river; thence down the said river to the sea;
thence along the seacoast to Delaware bay; thence up the bay to the place of
beginning; the land is generally poor, but the adjoining salt marshes serve to
breed cattle and horses; these with the red cedar beaches, and fish and
oysters, with which the coast abounds, afford the inhabitants an easy
maintenance; the county is divided into three precincts; the presbyterians have
a place for worship in the first; the baptists in the second; the quakers in
the third, being that next to the sea.

HUNTERDON,
Was divided from Burlington by act of assembly, in 1713, and named by governor
Hunter; the boundaries were then fixed, but altered in 1738. ( See vol. 1 of
laws, p. 41, 250.) It is situate along the Delaware, above the tide, and though
one of the later settlements, is the most populous and opulent county in the
province. The land is generally good for tillage; wheat, the staple; their
flour is carried to New York and Philadelphia markets: The courtsare held at
Trenton, a place of concourse and lively trade: It stands at the head of the
tide, and in a high pleasant situation; the inhabitants have a public library.
In this county resides John Reading, Esquire late president of the council, and
twice commander in chief on the deaths of the governors Morris and Belcher: The
counties of Morris and Suffex join Hunterdon in the choice of two
representatives. Of places for worship, the presbyterians have nine, the low
Dutch ditto one, German ditto one, episcopalians three, quakers two, baptists
two.

MORRIS,
Was made a county in 1738; and the boundaries then established by law; but
altered by the separation of Suffex, in 1753. ( Laws, vol. 1, p. 253. Vol. 2.
p. 20.) It was named by governor Morris, after his family: This, for a late
settled county, is populous: The courts are held at Morris-Town: They raise
grain and cattle chiefly for New York market, and cut large quantities of
timber of various forts for exportation: In this county resides Peter Kemble,
Esquire president of the council. The places for worship in this county, are,
presbyterians nine, lutherans one, anabaptists one, quakers one, separatists
one, rogereens one.

SUSSEX,
Was named by governor Belcher, after the duke of New-Castle's seat in Suffex:
It was divided from Morris by act of assembly, in 1753, and bounded by the
mouth of Muskonetkong, where it empties itself into the Delaware, and running
up that river to the head of the great pond; thence north-east, to the line
that divides New York and New Jersey; thence along the said line to Delaware;
thence down the same to the place of beginning. It being the newest county, and
a frontier, Pennsylvania and New York, both meet against it; but have few
settlements.
is not much improved, and has but few inhabitants: It lies toward the head of
Delaware; about fifteen miles was exposed to the Indians in the late wars, and
fortified by a frontier guard, and several block-houses, at provincial expense.
The courts for the county are held at Hairlocker's plantation, where a new
courthouse is lately built: Near the river lies the noted Paoqualin hill,
being part of the continental chain or ridge, called the blue mountains,
supposed to contain valuable ore: Between that and the river, is low intervale
excellent land, containing a few plantations. This county raises some wheat,
pork and cattle, for New York and Philadelphia markets, and cuts lumber: It
contains of low Dutch presbyterian meeting houses five, baptists two, German
lutherans one, quakers one.

Of COURTS.
These are; First, chancery: Second, the governor and council: Third, the
prerogative court, relating to the probate of wills, and granting letters of
administration on intestates effects: Fourth, courts of vice admiralty: Fifth,
supreme courts held four times a year, alternately at Burlington and Amboy, and
circularly through the counties generally once a year, or oftener if occasion:
Sixth, the sessions, and court of common pleas, for business in the respective
counties: Seventh, the justices court, for trial of causes of six pounds and
under, in a summary way; these causes are not allowed to be legally decided by
a single justice at a tavern, the act expressly barring against it; for debts
above forty shillings, a jury of six is allowed, if desired. The governor is
chancellor. The present justices of the supreme court are, Frederick Smyth, Esquire
chief justice; salary one hundred and fifty pounds per annum. Charles Read, Esquire
second justice; salary fifty pounds per annum. John Berrien, Esquire third justice;
salary fifty pounds per annum. Ten pounds is allowed for each of the circuit
courts, to the judge holding the same. All the courts are established in virtue
of the royal commission; none (except the six pound court) by act of assembly:
The common law is in use as in England: The customs and rules of legislation,
and practices of the courts, are as near as may be, in the English model; the
latter is thought to be as much so, by good judges, as that of any other
colony: Appeals for sums above two hundred pounds sterling, lie home, after
having gone through the courts here. Vid. 86 th instrustion, p. 255.

Method of appealing from the plantations, to the king in council, by sir
Dudley Ryder, attorney general, afterward L. C. J. of England.

"You are to bring your cause to trial, in the chief court or jurisdiction for
trial thereof; and if judgment shall be there given against you, then by your
attorney, you are to appeal in open court, within fourteen days, to his majesty
in council from the said judgment; and you are to obtain an entry thereof in
the register of the court, at the same time offering security to prosecute such
your appeal before his majesty in council, within twelve months, and to abide
by his majesty's determination in council therein: You are also to obtain
authentic copies, under the public seal of the province, of all papers and
evidences produced in your trial, and of all entries, records thereupon; which
being done, you are within twelve months, to have the same transmitted here,
and to petition his majesty in council, setting forth the whole matter, and
pray to be heard thereupon: But in case you shall be refused in the province to
be admitted to appeal; you are then likewise to petition his majesty in
council, setting forth the whole matter, and to pray, that your appeal may be
admitted there; where, upon his majesty's admitting your appeal, you are to
give security as before, and order will be then given for admitting the said
appeal, and for the transmitting hither authentic copies of the papers and
records, under the public seal of the province, in order to the hearing all
parties thereupon.

OF BEASTS.
The wild beasts, birds and fish, are those common to the rest of the
continent; some of the colonies have much greater variety: Of the first, the
panther, deer, bear, woolf, wild-cat, fox red and gray, raccoon, otter and a
few beaver, are the chief: Old settled places have but few of those most
voracious; the small tribe of squirrels, rabbits, minks, ground-hogs, etc. are
numerous: The deer in every county are plentier than one would expect; they
breed but once a year, with two at a time; great numbers are destroyed by traps
The enormous iron traps used for deer, with their wide jaws of destruction, are
abhorrent to the common principles of humanity: There is no safety for man or
beast where they are; laws to appearance well calculated, seem hitherto
ineffectual in restraining them, though so extremely and commonly dangerous; till
active men in neighbourhoods, will unite to exert themselves, and make it a
common concern to discourage them, it is feared the danger will remain: Still
worse is the practice of setting sharp stakes and loaded guns; these are
scarcer, but ought to be justly detected, as below the rights of humanity, even
with respect to brutes, and as common nusances to mankind, where ever they are.
and hunting, and by panthers, wild-cats, and sometimes wolves: The way the two
first take to effect it, may be known by an instance near Crosswicks, 1748, An
Indian hunting, discovered a large buck feeding, creeping to shoot, he heard
something among the bushes, presently saw a panther with his eyes so intent on
the buck, that he did not perceive him: the Indian watching his motions,
observed, that while the buck had his head down to feed, the panther crept, but
when he held it up, lay snug; he at last got unperceived, within about twenty
feet, and then making a desperate leap, fixed his talons in the buck's neck;
after he had nearly killed him, he would cease for a minute, give a watchful
look round, and then fall to shaking again; having done his work, and about to
draw the carcass to a heap of leaves for future service, the Indian shot, and
got both: They sometimes take their prey by suddenly jumping out of trees; so
the wild-cats also commonly effect it; these fix on voung cattle so eagerly, as
to be sometimes brought home on their backs: Some instances of the wolves
killing deer, have been known; though but seldom, and chiefly by accident: The
bucks also kill one another in fighting, by entangling in the horns, and so die
and rot; they have been taken alive so fastened, and the horns of others found:
The deer are sometimes white, and sometimes spotted nearly like the common
color of fauns; but these are rare; brown is the usual color.

The rattle-snake, as the country settles thick, are but little known; many old
inhabitants have never seen them alive: The mischief they have yet done, is
inconsiderable, their power and opportunities considered: This is remarkable;
they have an astonishing charm A person having one taken alive, and brought in
a small basket covered, the man that brought it, sat with the basket between
his knees; he wantonly took off the cover; the snake caught his attention; he
was immediately surprisingly affected, and expressed afterward every thing
attractive, as to the penetrating force of the snake's eye, the snake all the
while kept rattling with fury; the man's own action was lost in amazement and
terror; and had not another present, put the cover on the basket, he had
probably been bit.
in their eyes; the venom of their bite is perhaps without comparison; yet
their power is happily circumscribed in a way the most effectual, that is, by
not having a will to mischief equal to the means, otherwise there would, in
some places, scarcely have been any living among them; at least before
antidotes were discovered by the Indians: Formerly they were thick and plenty
in particular places; and yet in the new settled parts, are common, especially
in the spring, when from their winter's retreat, they prepare for a summer's
separation: A surveyor, with his eye on a distant object unawares among a
parcel of these, one would think in a poor situation; yet an instance of this
but lately happened: He had taken a long view in the spring on the south of a
hill, and keeping his eye to the object, without attending so much to his feet,
was first alarmed with a smell rank and disagreeable, and then an unusual
noise, on which, looking about, he saw the leaves in motion, and woods alive
with rattle-snakes; Half a dozen or less, with their tails in motion, might
answer this purpose; but he was too much frighted to count; there might however
be many more, as there frequently are numbers together, when they first leave
their holes in the spring. One Robins, in Amwell, H^terdon county, at a spot on
his own plantation, had upwards of 90 killed in each of three springs
successively: The parties performing it, barked young chestnut trees of the size
of their own legs, and tied them on; thus accoutred, they effected their
business without much danger; but the snakes frequently bit the bark. Instances
need not be multiplied in a case well known; or others where the snakes were
much more numerous, might be given. At one of the quarries, where stone was got
for PrinceTown college, the workmen came to an aperture in the rock, about
eighteen inches wide, ten feet long, and six deep, in which they found near
twenty bushels of snakes bones; they were supposed to have got in through
winding crevices of the rock in the fall, and in their weak state in the
spring, not able to get out again.
he got off by care in his steps, without harm. They choose for winter, the
sunny side of hills, among rocks, where these can be had, or holes under trees,
and in springy warm places: There have been dug up in their torpid state,
different sorts of snakes interwoven among one another, in great regularity,
with their heads uniformly sticking out at the top: They obtain much of their
food by striking a terror with their rattle at first, and then catching the eye
of the frighted object. It is commonly said, that this (the rattle) is a kind
contrivance of divine providence, to give warning to passengers, by the noise
which this part makes, when the creature moves, to keep out of the way of its
mischief; now this is a mistake. It is beyond all dispute, that wisdom and
goodness shine forth in all the works of the creation; but the contrivance here
is of another kind than is imagined.

All the parts of animals are made either for the preservation of the
individual, or for the propagation of its species; this before us is for the
service of the individual: This snake lives chiefly upon squirrels It is
reported, (...) circumstances of great credibility, that the Indians here had a
method of taking these animals, by the mere charm of fixing their eyes, whence
they have by degrees leaped down into possession.
and birds, which a reptile can never catch without the advantage of some
management to bring them within its reach; the way is this; the snake creeps to
the foot of a tree, and by shaking his rattle, awakens the little creatures
which are lodged in it; they are so frighted at the sight of their enemy, who
fixes his lively piercing eyes upon one or other of them, that they have no
power to get away, but leap about from bough to bough, till they are quite
tired, and at last falling to the ground, they are snapped into his mouth. This
is by the people of the country called charming the squirrels and birds.

It must likewise be observed, that this snake does not make any noise with its
rattle, in the common motions of its body.

There is something like this in the lion's hunting for his food; the hungry
tyrant, by his terrible roaring in the woods, rouses the lesser beasts out of
their holes; they running about in fright and surprise, are easily seized, and
become a prey to his devouring jaws.

And I have myself seen, upon a hawks settling upon a tree in a garden, the
little birds all about it, so struck with fear, that though they could fly
backwards and forwards, for some little distance, yet they have not been able
to get away from the ravenous destroyer. Dr. Mead, vid. his medical works,
quarto, edit. 1762, p. 59, 60. here may be seen an accurate description of the
head and teeth. For an exact view and description of the snake, see Cateshy's
Not. Hist. and supplement to the Gent. Mag. for 1753.


Though the use of the rattle seems principally designed for procuring food, it
has certainly been the means of preservation in respect to mankind; as that
alarm is frequently known to warn the unsuspecting traveller of imminent
danger; that the fascinations of their eye is necessary to their existence,
seems beyond a doubt; inactive and sluggish by nature, they have but little
other probable means, and have been seen and killed in the act even with foxes
detained in this manner. A person of undoubted credit relates of his own
knowledge, two instances of this attended with such circumstances, as leaves
very little room for doubt. In the end of May, 1715, stopping at an orchard by
the road side to get some cherries, being three of us in company, we were
entertained with the whole process of a charm between a rattle-snake and a
hare, the hare being better than half grown. It happened thus; one of the
company in his search for the best cherries espied the hare sitting, and
although he went close by her she did not move, till he (not suspecting the
occasion of her gentleness) gave her a lash with his whip; this made her run
about ten foot, and there sit down again. The gentleman not finding the
cherries ripe, immediately returned the same way, and near the place where he
struck the hare, he spied a rattle snake; still not suspecting the charm, he
goes back about twenty yards to a hedge to get a stick to kill the snake, and
at his return found the snake removed, and coiled in the same place from whence
he had moved the hare. This put him into immediate thoughts of looking for the
hare again, and he soon spied her about ten foot off the snake, in the same
place to which she had started when he whipped her. She was now lying down, but
would sometimes raise herself on her fore-feet struggling as it were for life
or to get away, but could never raise her hinder parts from the ground, and
then would fall flat on her side again, panting vehemently. In this condition
the hare and snake were when he called me: and though we all three came up
within fifteen foot of the snake to have a full view of the whole, he took no
notice at all of us, nor so much as gave a glance toward us. There we stood at
least half an hour, the snake not altering a jot, but the hare often struggling
and falling on its side again, till at last the hare lay still as dead for some
time. Then the snake moved out of his coil, and slid gently and smoothly on
toward the hare, his colors at that instant being ten times more glorious and
shining than at other times. As the snake moved along, the hare happened to
fetch another struggle, upon which the snake made a stop lving at his length,
till the hare had lain quiet again for a short space; and then he advanced
again till he came up to the hinder parts of the hare, which in all this
operation had been toward the snake; there he made a survey all over the hare,
raising part of his body above it, then turned off and went to the head and
nose of the hare, after that to the ears, took the ears in his mouth one after
the other, working each apart in his mouth as a man does a wafer to moisten it,
then returned to the nose again, and took the face into his mouth, straining
and gathering his lips sometimes by one side of his mouth, sometimes by the
other; at the shoulders he was a long time puzzled, often haling and stretching
the hare out at length, and straining forward first one side of his mouth then
the other, till got at last he the whole body into his throat. Then we went to
him, and taking the twist band off from my hat, I made a noose and put it about
his neck: This made him at length very furious, but we having secured him, put
him into one end of a wallet, and carried him on horseback five miles to mr. J.
B's house where we lodged that night, with a design to have sent him to dr. C.
at Williamsburg; but mr. B. was so careful of his slaves, that he would not let
him be put into his boat for fear he should get loose and mischief them;
therefore the next morning we killed him, and took the hare out of his belly,
the head of the hare began to be digested, and the hair falling off, having
lain about eighteen hours in the snake's belly.

In my youth I was a bear hunting in the woods above the inhabitan^, and having
straggled from my companions, I was entertained at my return, with the relation
of a pleasant rencounter, between a dog and a rattle-snake, about a squirrel.
The snake had got the head and shoulders of the squirrel into his mouth, which
being something too large for his throat, it took him up some time to moisten
the fur of the squirrel with his spawn, to make it slip down. The dog took this
advantage, seized the hinder parts of the squirrel, and tug'd with all his
might. The snake on the other side would not let go his hold for a long time,
till at last, fearing he might be bruised by the dog's running away with him,
he gave up his prey to the dog; the dog eat the squirrel, and felt no harm.

Another curiosity concerning this viper, which I never met with in print, I
will also relate from my own observation.

Some time after my observation of the charm, my waiting boy being sent abroad
on an errand, also took upon himself to bring home a rattle snake in a noose. I
cut off the head of this snake, leaving about an inch of the neck with it; this
I laid upon the head of a tobacco hogshead, one S. L. a carpenter, now alive,
being with me. Now you must note, that those snakes have but two teeth, by
which they convey their poison, and they are placed in the upper jaw, pretty
forward in the mouth, one on each side; these teeth are holow and crooked like
a cock's spur; they are also loose or springing in the mouth, and not fastened
in the jawbone as all the other teeth are; the hollow has a vent also through
by a small hole a little below the point of the tooth; these two teeth are kept
lying down along the jaw, or shut like a spring like a spring-knife, and don't
shrink up as the talons of a cat or panther; they have also over them a loose
thin film or skin of a flesh color, which rises over them when they are
raised, which I take to be only at the will of the snake to do injury; this
skin does not break by the rising of the tooth only, but keeps whole till the
bite is given, and then is pierced by the tooth, by which the poison is let
out. The head being laid upon the hogshead. I took two little twigs or
splinters of sticks, and having turned the head upon its crown, opened the
mouth, and lifted up the fang or springing tooth on one side several times, in
doing of which I at last broke the skin; the head gave a sudden champ with its
mouth, breaking from my sticks, in which I observed that the poison ran down in
a lump like oil, round the root of the tooth. Then I turned the other side of
the head, and resolved to be more careful to keep the mouth open on the like
occasion, and observe more narrowly the consequence; for it is observed, that
though the heads of snakes, terrapins and such like vermin, be cut off, yet the
body will not die in a long time after; the general saying is till the sun
sets. After opening the mouth on the other side, and lifting up that fang also
several times, he endeavored to give another bite or champ; but I kept his
mouth open, and the tooth pierced the film and emitted a stream like one full
of blood in blood-letting, and cast some drops upon the sleeve of the
carpenter's shirt, who had no waistcoat on. I advised him to pull off his
shirt, but he would not, and received no harm; and though nothing could then be
seen of it upon the shirt, yet in washing there appeared five green specks,
which every washing appeared plainer and plainer, and lasted so long as the
shirt did, which the carpenter told me was about three years after. The head we
threw afterward down upon the ground, and a sow came and eat it before our
faces; and received no harm. Now I believe, had this poison lighted upon any
place of the carpenter's skin, that was scratched or hurt, it might have
poisoned him. I take the poison to rest in a small bag or receptacle in the
hollow at the root of these teeth; but I never had the opportunity afterward
to make a farther discovery of that. Beverly's Hist. of Virg. p. 262, to 266.


No instance occurs of their hurting men, unless first disturbed; then indeed
they seldom fail. Very lately near Burlington, a mower without stockings,
drawing a soot, so as to touch one, as he lay coiled among the grass, he bit
him behind the ancle; the first notice the man had, was feeling something prick
in that spot; on which turning his head, he saw the snake; another in company
immediately killed him, and fetching salt, that applied, prevented the venom
spreading much higher than the knee; he afterward used sweet oil, and the
seneca rattle snake root; the last he thought the most effectual: He got well
in a few days; a small scar remained.

Thomas Budd, a proprietor and settler in West-Jersey, in a pamphlet, published
about 1686, says, The rattle snakes are easily discovered; they commonly lie in
the paths, for benefit of the sun; if any person draws nigh them, they shake
their tail, on which the rattles grow; this makes a noise like a child's
rattle: I never heard of but one person bitten in Pennsylvania or New Jersey;
he was helped by live chickens slit asunder and applied to the place, which
drew out the poison: As to other snakes, the most plentiful are the black
snake; its bite it is said, does no more harm than the prick of a pin.

The wampum snake is very large, of a black and white color; but harmless. The
horn or horned snake is scarce, and but few have seen them, whence many,
especially abroad, have doubted there being any such: A person of credit in
Gloucester county, being in the woods not long since, and approaching a place
where his dog was uncommonly barking, discovered a very large snake, and trying
to kill it, an intolerable stench prevented his getting near enough; at length
he threw a club at a venture, and going next day to see the effect, found the
snake killed: It was uncommonly long and thick, and had a horn at the end of
his tail, resembling a cock's spur. It is said they strike this horn even into
trees, and kill them. A person of credit now living in Burlington county, also
relates, that he has seen four, killed three of these snakes, His son killed
one this present summer 1765.
one of them were six or seven feet long: As to color, they are chequered with
a yellowish brown and white, and when disturbed, hiss like a goose. These
particular instances were here preferred to a more general account, as more
likely to contribute toward putting their existence out of dispute. The viper
and many other snakes abound also; but none remarkable enough to require a
particular description here.

Of FISH.
These in great variety, are plenty along the coast, in the Delaware and the
north river; the most noted are, sturgeon, rock, cod, sheep's-head,
horse-mackrel, black-fish, sea-bass, flounders, shad, herrings, munches, trout,
pike, perch, red perch, sun-fish, many inferior sorts; besides, oysters, clams,
and other shell fish: Most of these supply in great part the New York and
Philadelphia markets: The sturgeon are plenty up the rivers, and when more
generally manufactured, will probably answer well in remittances. It is said
they will grow fat in ponds, and live through the winter.

BIRDS.
Of these there are great plenty; as the wild turkey, wild geese, wild ducks of
many kinds, wild pigeons, brant, pheasants, heath-hen, partridges, larks,
woodcocks, plovers, snipes, kildees, and great variety of other small birds, a
few storks and cranes, many herons, hawks, turkey-buzzards, crows, and all
other birds of prey common to the continent: The wild geese, in autumn, flock
to the marshes on the sea shore, and are often killed by gunners; in the spring
they return to breed at the northern lakes. The wild pigeons, at three or four
seasons in the year, commonly pay a visit (except in seed time) generally
acceptable: They have not been observed of late years so plenty as formerly;
they then, sometimes, to avoid the north-east storms, slew night and day, and
thick enough to darken the air, and break trees where they settled, and were
more tame and more wanted; all which made them an article of consequence to the
early inhabitants: The Indians, before the European settlements, used every
year regularly to burn the woods, the better to kill deer; the manner was to
surround a swamp or cripple with fire, then drive the deer out, who not daring
over the bounds, were easily killed with bows and arrows; this practice kept
the woods clean, so that the pigeons readily got acorns, which then not being
devoured by hogs, were plenty almost every where, and induced a return more
frequently than now: They breed chiefly to the northward.

APPENDIX.
NUMBER I.
The concessions and agreement of the lords proprietors of the province of
New-Caesarea, or New Jersey, to and with all and every of the adventurers, and
all such as shall settle or plant there.
IMPRIMUS, We do consent and agree, that the governor of the said province has
power, by the advice of his council, to depute one in his place and authority,
in case of death or removal, to continue until our further order, unless we
have commissioned one before.

2. Item. That he has likewise power to make choice of, and take to him six
counselors at least, or twelve at most, or any even number betwixt six and
twelve, with whose consent and advice, or with at least three of the six, or
four of a greater number (all being summoned) he is to govern according to the
limitations and instructions following, during our pleasure.

3. Item. That the chief secretary or register which we have chosen, or shall
choose, (we failing) that he shall choose, shall keep exact entries in fair
books, of all public affairs: And to avoid deceits and lawsuits, shall record
and enter all grants of land from the lords to the planters; and conveyances of
land, house or houses, from man to man, as also all leases for land, house or
houses, made or to be made by the landlord to any tenant, for more than one
year; which conveyance or lease shall be first acknowledged by the grantor or
lessor, or proved by the oath of two witnesses to the lease or conveyance,
before the governor, or some chief judge of a court, for the time being, who
shall under his hand, on the backside of the said deed or lease, attest the
acknowledgement or proof as aforesaid; which shall be a warrant for the
register to record the same: Which conveyance so recorded shall be good and
effectual in law, notwithstanding any other conveyance, deed or lease for the
said land, house or houses, or for any part thereof, although dated before the
conveyance, deed or lease, recorded as aforesaid: And the said register shall
do all other thing or things that we by our instructions shall direct, and the
governor, council and general assembly shall ordain, for the good and welfare
of the said province.

4. Item. That the surveyor general that we have chosen or shall choose, (we
failing that the governor shall choose) shall have power by himself or deputy,
to survey, lay out and bound all such lands as shall be granted from the lords
to the planters; and all other lands within the said province, which may
concern particular men, as he shall be desired to do, and a particular account
thereof certify to the register, to be recorded as aforesaid. Provided, that if
the said register and surveyor, or either of them, shall misbehave themselves,
as that the governor and council, or deputy governor and council, or the major
part of them, shall find it reasonable to suspend their actings in their
respective employments, it shall be lawful for them so to do, until further
orders from us.

5. Item. That the governor, councillors, assembly men, secretary, surveyor,
and all other officers of trust, shall swear or subscribe (in a book to be
provided for that purpose) that they will bea^ true allegiance to the king of
England, his heirs and successors; and that they will be faithful to the
interests of the lords proprietors of of the said province, and their heirs,
executors and (...); and endeavor the peace and welfare of the said province;
and that they will truly and faithfully discharge their respective trust, in
their respective offices, and do equal justice to all men, according to the^^
best skill and judgment, without corruption, favor (...) and the names of all
that have sworn or subscribed, to be (...) in a book: And whosoever shall
subscribe and not s^ear, and (...) violate his promise in that subscription,
shall be liable to the same punishment that the persons are or may be, that
have (...) broken their oaths.

6. Item. That all persons that are or shall become subjects of the king of
England, and swear or subscribe allegiance to the king, and faithfulness to the
lords, shall be admitted to plant, and become freemen of the said province, and
enjoy the freedoms and immunities hereafter expressed, until some stop or
contradiction be made by us the lords, or else the governor, council and
assembly; which shall be in force until the lords see cause to the contrary:
Provided, that such stop shall not any ways prejudice the right or continuance
of any person that have been received before such stop or orders come from the
general assembly.

7. Item. That no person qualified as aforesaid, within the said province, at
any time shall be any ways molested, punished, disquieted or called in
question, for any difference in opinion or practice in matters of religious
concernments, who do not actually disturb the civil peace of the said province;
but that all and every such person and persons, may, from time to time, and at
all times, freely and fully have and enjoy his and their judgments and
consciences, in matters of religion, throughout the said province, they
behaving themselves peaceably and quietly, and not using this liberty to
licentiousness, nor to the civil injury or outward disturbance of others; any
law, statute or clause contained, or to be contained, usage or custom of this
realm of England, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

8. Item. That no pretense may be taken by our heirs or assigns, for or by
reason of our right of patronage and power of advenson granted by his majesty's
letters patents, unto his royal highness James duke of York, and by his said
royal highness unto us, thereby to insringe the general cause of liberty of
conscience aforementioned: We do hereby grant unto the general assembly of the
said province, power by act, to constitute and appoint, such and so many
ministers or preachers as they shall think fit, and to establish their
maintenance; giving liberty beside to any person or persons to keep and
maintain what preachers or ministers they please.

9. Item. That the inhabitants being freemen, or chief agents to others of the
province aforesaid; do, as soon as this our commission shall arrive, by virtue
of a writ, in our names, by the governor, to be for the present (until our seal
comes) sealed and signed, make choice of twelve deputies or representatives,
from amongst themselves; who being chosen, are to join with the said governor
and council, for the making of such laws, ordinances and constitutions as shall
be necessary for the present good and welfare of the said province: But so soon
as parishes, divisions, tribes, and other distinctions are made, that then the
inhabitants or freeholders of the several respective parishes, tribes,
divisions and districtions aforesaid, do by our writs, under our seals, (which
we engage shall be in due time issued) annually meet on the first day of
January, and choose freeholders for each respective division, tribe or parish,
to be the deputies or representatives of the same: Which body of
representatives, or the major part of them; shall, with the governor and
council aforesaid, be the general assembly of the said province; the governor
or his deputy being present, unless they shall wilfully refuse; in which case
they may appoint themselves a president during the absence of the governor, or
the deputy governor.

Which assemblies are to have power,

First. To appoint their own time of meeting, and to adjourn their sessions
from time to time, to such times and places as they shall think convenient; as
also to ascertain the number of their quorum; provided, the said number be not
less than the third part of the whole, in whom (or more) shall be the full
power of the general assembly.

Secondly. To enact and make all such laws, acts and constitutions as shall be
necessary for the well government of the said province, and them to repeal:
Provided, that the same be consonant to reason, and as near as may be,
conveniently agreeable to the laws and customs of his majesty's kingdom of
England: Provided also, that they be not against the interest of us the lords
proprietors, our heirs or assigns, nor any of those our concessions, especially
that they be not repugnant to the article for liberty of conscience
abovementioned; which laws, etc. so made, shall receive publication from the
governor and council, (but as the laws of us and our general assembly) and be
in force for the space of one year, and no more; unless contradicted by the
lords proprietors; within which time, they shall be presented to us, our heirs,
etc. for our ratification; and being confirmed by us, they shall be in
continual force, till expired by their own limitation, or by act of repeal, in
like manner to be passed as aforesaid, and confirmed.

Thirdly. By act as aforesaid, to constitute all courts, together with the
limits, powers and jurisdictions of the same, as also the several offices, and
number of the officers belonging to each court, with their respective salaries,
fees, and perquisites, their appellations and dignities, with the penalties
that shall be due to them, for the breach of their several and respective
duties and trusts.

Fourthly. By act as aforesaid, to lay equal taxes and assessments equally to
raise moneys or goods upon all lands (except such as belong to us the lord
proprietors before settling) or persons within the several precincts, hundreds,
parishes, manors, or whatsoever other divisions shall hereafter be made, and
established in the said province, as often as necessity shall require, and in
such manner as to them shall seem most equal and easy for the said inhabitants,
in order to the better supporting of the public charge of the said government,
and for the mutual safety, defense, and security of the said province.

Fifthly. By act as aforesaid, to erect within the said province, such and so
many manors, with their necessary courts, jurisdictions, freedoms and
privileges, as to them shall seem meet and convenient; as also to divide the
said province into hundreds, parishes, tribes, or such other divisions and
districtions as they shall think fit, and the said divisions, to distinguish by
what names we shall order or direct, and in default thereof, by such names as
they please; as also in the said province to create and appoint such and so
many ports, harbors, creeks and other places, for the convenient loading and
unloading of goods and merchandise, out of ships, boats, and other vessels, as
shall be expedient with such jurisdictions, privileges and franchises, to such
ports etc. belonging, as they shall judge most conducing to the general good of
the said plantation or province.

Sixthly. By their enacting, to be confirmed as aforesaid, to erect, raise and
build within the said province, or any part thereof, such and so many forts,
fortresses, castles, cities, corporations, boroughs, towns, villages, and other
places of strength and defense; and them, or any of them, to incorporate with
such charters and privileges, as to them shall seem good, and the grant made
unto us, will permit; and the same, or any of them, to fortify and furnish with
such provisions and proportions of ordnance, powder, shot, armor, and all
other weapons, ammunition and habiliments of war, both offensive and defensive;
as shall be thought necessary and convenient for the safety and welfare of the
said province; but they may not at any time demolish, dismantle, or disfurnish
the same, without the consent of the governor and the major part of the council
of the said province.

Seventhly. By act as aforesaid, to constitute trained bands and companies,
with the number of soldiers, for the safety, strength, and defense of the said
province, and of the forts, castles, cities; etc. to suppress all mutinies and
rebellions, to make war offensive and defensive, with all Indians, strangers
and foreigners, as they shall see cause; and to pursue an enemy as well by sea
as by land (if need be) out of the limits and jurisdictions of the said
province, with the particular consent of the governor, and under his conduct,
or of our commander in chief, or whom he shall appoint.

Eighthly. By act aforesaid, to give to all strangers, as to them shall seem
meet, a naturalization, and all such freedoms and privileges within the said
province, as to his majesty's subjects do of right belong, they swearing or
subscribing as aforesaid; which said strangers, so naturalized and privileged,
shall be in all respects accounted in the said province as the king's natural
subjects.

Ninthly. By act as aforesaid, to prescribe the quantities of land which shall
be from time to time allotted to every head, free or servant, male or female,
and to make or ordain rules for the calling of lots for land, and the laying
out of the same: Provided, that they do not in their prescriptions, exceed the
several proportions which are hereby granted by us, to all persons arriving in
the said province, or adventuring thither.

Tenthly. The general assembly, by act as aforesaid, shall make provision for
the maintenance and support of the governor, and for the defraying of all
necessary charges of the government; as also the constables of the said
province, shall collect the lords rent, and shall pay the same to the receiver
that the lords shall appoint to receive the same; unless the said general
assembly shall prescribe some other way whereby the lords may have their rents
duly collected, without charge or trouble to them.

Eleventhly, and lastly. To enact, constitute and ordain, all such other laws,
acts and constitutions, as shall or may be necessary for the good prosperity
and settlement of the said province (excepting what by these presents is
excepted) and conforming to the limitations herein expressed.

The governor is with his council before expressed,

First. To see that all courts established by the laws of the general assembly,
and all ministers and officers, civil and military, do and execute their
several duties and offices respectively, according to the laws in force, and to
punish them for swerving from the laws, or acting contrary to their trust, as
the nature of their offenses shall require.

Secondly, According to the constitution of the general assembly, to nominate
and commissionate the several judges, members and officers of courts, whether
magistratical or ministerial, and all other civil officers, coroners, etc. and
their commissions, powers and authority, to revoke at pleasure. Provided, that
they appoint none but such as are freeholders in the province aforesaid, unless
the general assembly consent.

Thirdly, According to the constitution of the general assembly, to appoint
courts and officers, in cases criminal, and to empower them to inflict
penalties upon offenders, against any of the laws in force in the said
province, as the said laws shall ordain; whether by fine, imprisonment,
banishment, corporal punishment, or to the taking away of member or life
itself, if there be cause for it.

Fourthly. To place officers and soldiers for the safety, strength and defense
of the forts, castles, cities, etc. according to the number appointed by the
general assembly, to nominate, place and commissionate all military officers
under the dignity of the said governor, who is commissionated by us, over the
several trained bands and companies, constituted by the general assembly, as
colonels, captains, etc. and their commissions to revoke at pleasure: The
governor, with the advice of his council, unless some present danger will not
permit him, to advise to muster and train all forces within the said province,
to prosecute war, pursue an enemy, suppress all rebellions and mutinies, as
well by sea as land; and to exercise the whole militia, as fully as we by the
grant from his royal highness can empower them to do: Provided, that they
appoint no military forces but what are freeholders in the said province,
unless the general assembly shall consent.

Fifthly, Where they see cause, after condemnation, to reprieve, until the case
be presented, with a copy of the whole trial, proceedings and proofs, to the
lords, who will accordingly either pardon or command execution of the sentence
on the offender; who is in mean time to be kept in safe custody, till the
pleasure of the lords be known.

Sixthly, In case of death or other removal of any of the representatives
within the year, to issue summons, by writ, to the respective division or
divisions for which he or they were chosen, commanding the freeholders of the
same to choose others in their stead.

Seventhly, To make warrants and seal grants of lands, according to those our
concessions and the prescriptions by the advice of the general assembly, in
such form as shall be at large set down in our instructions to the governor, in
his commission, and which are hereafter expressed.

Eighthly, To act and do all other things that may conduce to the safety, peace
and well government of the said province, as they shall see fit; so as they be
not contrary to the laws of the said province.

And for the better security of all the inhabitants in the said province.

First. They are not to impose, nor suffer to be imposed, any tax, custom,
subsidy, tallage, assessment, or any other duty whatsoever, upon any color or
pretense, upon the said province and inhabitants thereof, other than what shall
be imposed by the authority and consent of the general assembly, and them only
in manner as aforesaid.

Secondly. They are to take care, that lands quietly held, planted and
possessed seven years after its being duly surveyed by the surveyor general, or
his order, shall not be subject to any review, re-ssurvey or alteration of
bounds, on what pretense soever, by any of us, or any officer or minister under
us.

Thirdly. They are to take care, that no man, if his cattle stray or range, or
graze, on any ground within the said province, not actually appropriated or set
out to particular persons, shall be liable to pay any trespass for the same, to
us, our heirs, or executors. Provided, that custom of commons be not thereby
pretended to, nor any person hindered from taking up and appropriating any
lands so grazed upon, and that no person do purposely suffer his cattle to
graze on such lands.

And that the planting of the said province may be the more speedily promoted.

First. We do hereby grant unto all persons who have already adventured into
the said province of New-Caesaria, or New Jersey, or shall transport themselves
or servants before the first of day January, which shall be in the year of our
lord, 1665, these following proportions, viz. To every freeman that shall go
with the first governor from the port where he embarks (or shall meet him at
the rendezvous he appoints for the settlement of a plantation, there armed with
a good musket. bore twelve bullets to the pound, with ten pounds of powder and
twenty pounds of bullets, with bandaliers and matches convenient, and with six
months provision; for his own person arriving there, one hundred and fifty
acres of land, English measure; and for every able man servant, that he shall
carry with him, armed and provided as aforesaid, and arriving there, the like
quantity of one hundred and fifty acres of land, English measure; and whosoever
shall send servants at that time, shall have, for every able man servant he or
she shall send armed and provided as aforesaid, and arriving there, the like
quantity of one hundred and fifty acres; and for every weaker servant or slave,
male or female, exceeding the age of fourteen years, which any one shall send
or carry, arriving there, seventy five acres of land; and to every christian
servant, exceeding the age aforesaid, after the expiration of their time of
service, seventy five acres of land for their own user.

Secondly. Item, To every master or mistress, that shall go before the first
day of January, which shall be in the year of our lord 1665, one hundred and
twenty acres of land; and for every able man servant, that he or she shall
carry or send armed and provided as aforesaid, and arriving within the time
aforesaid, the like quantity of one hundred and twenty acres of land; and for
every weaker servant or slave, male or female, exceeding the age of fourteen
years, arriving there, sixty acres of land; and to every christian servant, to
their own use and behoof, sixty acres of land.

Thirdly. Item, To every free man or free woman, that shall arrive in the said
province, armed and provided as aforesaid, within the second year, from the
first day of January 1665, to the first day of January 1666, with an intention
to plant, 90 acres of land, English measure; and for every able man servant,
that he or she shall carry or send armed and provided as aforesaid, ninety
acres of land like measure.

Fourthly. Item. For every weaker servant or slave, aged as aforesaid, that
shall be so carried or sent thither within the second year, as aforesaid,
forty-five acres of land of like measure; and to every christian servant that
shall arrive the second year, forty-five acres of land of like measure, after
the expiration of his or their time of service, for their own use and behoof.

Fifthly, Item. To every free man and free woman, armed and provided as
aforesaid, that shall go and arrive with an intention to plant, within the
third year, from January 1666, to January 1667, armed and provided as
aforesaid, three score acres of land of like measure; and for every able man
servant, that he or they shall carry or send within the said time, armed and
provided as aforesaid, the like quantity of three score acres of land; and for
every weaker servant or slave, aged as aforesaid, that he or they shall carry
or send within the third year, thirty acres of land; and to every christian
servant so carried or sent in the third year, thirty acres of land of like
measure, after the expiration of their time of service. All which land, and all
other that shall be possessed in the said province, are to be held on the same
terms and conditions as is before mentioned, and as hereafter in the following
paragraph is more at large expressed. Provided always, that the before
mentioned land, and all other whatsoever, that shall be taken up and so settled
in the said province, shall afterward from time to time for the space of
thirteen years, from the date hereof, be held upon the conditions aforesaid,
continuing one able man servant or two such weaker servants as aforesaid, on
every hundred acres a master or mistress shall possess, besides what was
granted for his or her own person; in failure of which, upon other disposure to
the present occupant, or his assigns, there shall be three years given to such
for their completing the said number of persons, or for their sale or
dispositions of such part of their lands, as are not so peopled within such
time of three years: If any such person holding any land, shall fail, by
himself his agents, executors or assigns, or some other way to provide such
number of persons, unless the general assembly shall without respect to
poverty, judge it was impossible for the party so failing, to keep or procure
his or her number of servants to be provided for as aforesaid; in such case, we
the lords to have power of disposing of so much of such land as shall not be
planted with its due number of persons as aforesaid, to some others that will
plant the same. Provided always, that no person arriving in the said province,
with purpose to settle (they being subjects or naturalized as aforesaid) be
denied a grant of such proportions of land, as at the time of their arrival
there are due to themselves or servants, by concession from us as aforesaid;
but have full license to take up and settle the same, in such order and manner
as is granted or prescribed. All lands (notwithstanding the powers in the
assembly aforesaid) shall be taken up by warrant from the governor, and
confirmed by the governor and council, under a seal to be provided for that
purpose, in such order and method, as shall be set down in this declaration,
and more at large in the instruction to the governors and council.

And that the lands may be the more regularly laid out, and all persons the
better ascertained of their titles and possession.

First. The governor and council and general assembly, (if any be) are to take
care, and direct that all lands be divided by general lots, none less than two
thousand one hundred acres, nor more than twenty-one thousand acres in each
lot, excepting cities, towns, etc. and the near lots of townships; and that the
same be divided into seven parts; one seventh part to us, our heirs and
assigns; the remainder to persons as they come to plant the same, in such
proportions as is allowed.

Secondly, Item. That the governor, or whom he shall depute, in case of death
or absence, if some be not before commissionated by us as aforesaid, to give to
every person to whom land is due, a warrant, signed and sealed by himself, and
the major part of his council, and directed to the surveyor general, or his
deputy, commanding him to lay out, limit and bound (...) acres of land, (as his
due proportion) is for such a person, in such allotment, according to the
warrant; the register having first recorded the same, and attested the record
upon the warrant: The surveyor general, or his deputy, shall proceed and
certify to the chief secretary or register, the name of the person for whom he
has laid out land, by virtue of what authority, the date of the authority or
warrant, the number of acres, the bounds, and on what point of compas^ the
several limits thereof lie; which certificate the register is likewise to enter
in a book to be prepared for that purpose, with an alphabetical table,
referring to the book, that so the certificate may be the easier found; and
then to file the certificates, and the same to keep safely: The certificate
being entered, a warrant comprehending all the particulars of land mentioned in
the certificate aforesaid, is to be signed and sealed by him and his council,
or the major part of them as aforesaid, they having seen the entry, and
directed to the register or chief secretary, for his preparing a grant of the
land to the party for whom it is laid out; which grant shall be in the form
following, viz.

The lords proprietors of the province of New-Caesaria, or New Jersey, do
hereby grant unto A. B. of the (...) in the province aforesaid, a plantation,
containing (...) acres, English measure; bounding as in the certificate, to
hold to him or her, his or her heirs and assigns for ever, yielding and paying
yearly unto the said lords proprietors, their heirs or assigns, every twenty
fifty day of March, according to the English account, one half penny of lawful
money of England, for every of the said acres, to be holden as of the manor of
East Greenwich, in free and common socage, the first payment of which rents to
begin the 25th day of March, which shall be in the year of our lord 1670,
according to the English account. Given under the seal of the said province,
the (...) day (...) in the year of our lord 166^.

To which instrument the governor or his dep^ty, has hereby full power to put
the seal of the said province, and to subscribe his name; as also the council,
or major part of them, are to subscribe their names, and then the instrument or
grant is to be by the register recorded in the book of records for that
purpose; all which being done according to these instructions, we hereby
declare, that the same shall be effectual in law, for the enjoyment of the said
plantation, and all the benefits and profits of and in the same, (except the
half part of mines of gold and silver,) paying the rent as aforesaid: Provided
that if any plantation so granted, shall by the space of three years, be
neglected to be planted with a sufficient number of servants as is before
mentioned, that then it shall and may be lawful for us otherways to dispose
thereof, in whole or in part, this grant notwithstanding.

Thirdly. Item, We do also grant convenient proportions of land for high ways
and streets, not exceeding one hundred feet in breadth in cities, towns and
villages, etc. and for churches, forts, whar^^s, keys, harbors, and for
public houses, and to each parish for the use of their ministers, two hundred
acres, in such places as the general assembly shall appoint.

Fourthly. Item, The governor is to take notice, that all such lands laid out
for the uses and purposes aforesaid, in the next preceding article, shall be
free and exempt from all rents, taxes and other charges and duties whatsoever,
payable to us, our heirs or assigns.

Fifthly. Item, That in laying out lands for cities, towns, villages, boroughs,
or other hamlets, the said lands be divided into seven parts, one seventh part
whereof to be by lot laid out for us, and the rest to be divided to such as
shall be willing to build thereon, they paying after the rate of one penny or
half penny per acre, (according to the value of the land) yearly to us, as for
their other lands as aforesaid; which said lands in the cities and towns, etc.
is to be assured to each possessor by the same way and instrument, as is before
mentioned.

Sixthly. Item. That all rules relating to the building of each street, or
quantity of ground to be allotted to each house within the said respective
cities, boroughs and towns, be wholly left, by act as aforesaid, to the wisdom
and discretion of the general assembly.

Seventhly. Item. That the inhabitants of the said province, have free passage
through or by any seas, bounds, creeks, rivers, or rivulets etc, in the said
province, through or by which they must necessarily pass to come from the main
oc^an to any part of the province aforesaid.

Eighthly and lastly. It shall be lawful for the representatives of the
freeholders, to make any address to the lords, touching the governor or
council, or any of them, or concerning any grievance whatsoever, or for any
other thing they shall desire, without the consent of the governor and council,
or any of them. Given under our seal of our said province, the 10th day of
February, in the year of our lord 1664.

BERKELEY, G. CARTERET.

NUMBER II.
The concessions and agreements of the proprietors, freeholders and inhabitants
of the province of West New Jersey, in America.
CHAP. I.
WE do consent and agree as the best present expedient, that such persons as
shall be from time to time deputed, nominated and appointed commissioners by
the present proprietors, or the major part of them, by writing under their
hands and seals, shall be commissioners for the time being, and have power to
order and manage the estate and affairs of the said province of West NewJersey,
according to these our concessions hereafter following, and to depute others in
their place and authority in case of death or removal, and to continue until
some other persons be deputed, nominated and appointed by the said proprietors
or the major part of them, to succeed them in that office and service. And the
commissioners for the time being, are to take care, for setting forth and
dividing all the lands of the said province as be already taken up, or by
themselves shall be taken up and contracted for with the natives; and the said
lands so taken up and contracted for, to divide into one hundred parts, as
occasion shall require; that is to say, for every quantity of land that they
shall from time to time lay out to be planted and settled upon, they shall
first, for expedition, divide the same into ten equal parts or shares, and for
distinction sake, to mark in the register, and upon some of the trees belonging
to every tenth part, with the letters A. B. and so end at the letter K. And
after the same is so divided and marked, the said commissioners are to grant
unto Thomas Hutchinson, of Beverly, Thomas Pearson, of Bonwicke, Joseph
Helmsly, of Great Kelke, George Hutchinson, of Sheffield, and Mahlon Stacy, of
Hansworth, all of the county of York, or their lawful deputies, or particular
commissioners, for themselves and their friends, who are a considerable number
of people, and may speedily promote the planting of the said province. That
they may have free liberty to make choice of any one of the said tenth parts or
shares, which shall be first divided and set out, being also done with their
consent, that they may plant upon the same as they see meet; and afterward any
other person or persons who shall go over to inhabit, and have purchased to the
number of ten proprieties, they shall and may have liberty to make choice of
any of the remaining parts or shares to settle in: And all other proprietors
who shall go over to settle as aforesaid, and cannot make up amongst them the
number of ten proprietors; yet nevertheless, they shall and may have liberty to
make choice of settling in any of the said tenth shares, that shall not be
taken up before: And the commissioners have hereby power to see the said one
tenth part, that they shall so make choice of, laid out and divided into ten
proprieties, and to allot them so many proprieties out of the same as they have
order for; and the said commissioners are to follow these rules, until they
receive contrary order from the major part of the proprietors, under their
hands and seals.

The said commissioners for the time being, have hereby power for appointing
and setting out fit places for towns, and to limit the boundaries thereof; and
to take care they be as regular built as the present occasion, time, and
convenience of the places will admit of. And that all towns to be erected and
built, shall be with the consent of the commissioners for the time being, or
the major part of them. And further, the said commissioners are to order the
affairs of the said province, according to these concessions, and any other
instructions that shall be given them by the major part of the proprietors,
until such time as more or other commissioners shall be chosen by the
inhabitants of West-Jersey, as here in these concessions is mentioned and
appointed.

And it is further expressly provided and agreed to, that whereas there is a
contract or agreement granted by William Penn, Gawen Lawrie and Nicholas Lucas,
unto Thomas Hutchinson, Thomas Pearson, Joseph Helmsly, George Hutchinson and
Mahlon Stacy, dated the second day of the month called March, 1676, instant,
wherein they grant unto the said persons, certain privileges for a town to be
built, whereby they have liberty to choose their own magistrates and officers
for executing the laws according to the concessions within the said town; which
said contract or agreement is to be held firm and good to all intents and
purposes, and we do by these our concessions confirm the same.

CHAP. II.
AND that all and every person and persons, may enjoy his and their just and
equal propriety and purchase of lands, in the said province; it is hereby
agreed, concluded and ordained, that the surveyor or surveyors, that the said
proprietors have deputed and appointed, or shall depute and appoint; they
failing, that the commissioners shall depute and appoint, or that the general
free assembly hereafter shall depute and appoint, shall have power by him or
themselves, or his or their lawful deputy or deputies, to survey, lay out or
bound, all the proprietors lands, and all such lands as shall be granted from
any of the proprietors to the freeholders, planters, or inhabitants, and a
particular or terrior thereof, to certify to the register, to be recorded.

CHAP. III.
THAT hereafter upon further settlement of the said province, the proprietors,
freeholders, and inhabitants, resident upon the said province, shall and may,
at or upon the five and twentieth day of the month called March, which shall be
in the year according to the English account, one thousand six hundred and
eighty; and so thence forward, upon the five and twentieth day of March yearly,
by the ninth hour in the morning of the said day, assemble themselves together,
in some public place to be ordered and appointed by the commissioners for the
time being; and upon default of such appointment, in such place as they shall
see meet, and then and there elect of and amongst themselves, ten honest and
able men. fit for government, to officiate and execute the place of
commissioners for the year ensuing, and until such time as ten more for the
year then next following, shall be elected and appointed: Which said elections
shall be as follows, that is to say, the inhabitants each ten of the one
hundred proprietors, shall elect and choose one, and the one hundred
proprietors shall be divided into ten divisions or tribes of men.

And the said elections shall be made and distinguished by balloting trunks, to
avoid noise and confusion, and not by voices, holding up of the hands, or
otherwise howsoever: Which said commissioners so yearly to be elected, shall
likewise govern and order the affairs of the said province, (pro tempore) for
the good and welfare of the said people, and according to these our
concessions, until such time as the general free assembly shall be elected and
deputed in such manner and wise as is hereafter expressed and contained.

CHAP. IV.
And that the planting of the said province be the more speedily promoted, it
is consented, granted, concluded, agreed and declared.

THAT the proprietors of the said province, First.
have and do hereby grant unto all persons, who by and with the consent of one
or more of any of the proprietors of the said province, at tested by the
certificate, under his or their hands and seals, adventure to the said province
of west New Jersey, and shall transport themselves or servants, before the
first day of the month commonly called April, which shall be in the year of our
lord one thousand six hundred seventy and seven, these following proportions,
viz. For his own person arriving, seventy acres of land, English measure; and
for every able man servant that he shall carry with him, and arriving there,
the like quantity of seventy acres of land, English measure: And whosoever
shall send servants before that time, shall have for every able man servant, he
or they so send as aforesaid, and arriving there, the like quantity of seventy
acres; and for every weaker servant, male or female, exceeding the age of
fourteen years, which any one shall send or carry, arriving there, fifty acres
of land; and after the expiration of their time of service, fifty acres of land
for their own use and behoof, to hold to them and their heirs forever. All such
person and persons, freemen or servants, and their respective heirs and
assigns, afterward paying yearly to the proprietor, his heirs and assigns, to
whom the said lands belong, one penny an acre, for what shall be laid out in
towns, and one half penny an acre, for what shall be laid out elsewhere: The
first yearly payment to begin within two years after the lands are laid out.

Secondly, To every master or mistress, that by and with such consent
aforesaid, shall go hence the second year, before the first day of the month
called April, which shall be in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and
eight, fifty acres of land; and for every able man servant, that he or she
shall carry or send, and arriving there, the like quantity of fifty acres of
land; and for every weaker servant, male or female, exceeding the age of
fourteen years, arriving there, thirty acres of land; and after the expiration
of their service, thirty acres of land, for their own use and behoof; to hold
to them and their heirs forever: All the said person, and their respective
heirs and assigns yearly paying as aforesaid, to the proprietor, his heirs and
assigns, to whom the land belongs, one penny farthing the acre, for all such
lands as shall be laid out in towns, and three farthings the acre, for all that
shall be laid out elsewhere.

Thirdly, To every freeman that shall arrive in the said province, within the
third year, from the first day of the month commonly called April, in the year
one thousand six hundred seventy and eight, to the first of the said month
called April, one thousand six hundred seventy and nine, (with an intention to
plant) forty acres of land, English measure; and for every able man servant,
that he or she shall carry or send as aforesaid, forty acres of land, of like
measure; and for every weaker servant, aged as aforesaid, that shall be so
carried or sent thither, within the third year as aforesaid, twenty acres of
land, of like measure; and after the expiration of his or their time of
service, twenty acres of land for their own use and behoof; to hold to them and
to their heirs forever: All the said persons and their heirs and assigns,
paying yearly as aforesaid, to the proprietor, his heirs and assigns, with whom
they contract for the same, one penny half penny the acre, for what shall be
laid out in towns, and one penny the acre for what shall be laid out elsewhere.
All which lands that shall be possessed in the said province, are to be held
under, and according to the concessions and conditions as is before mentioned,
and as hereafter in the following paragraph, is more at large expressed.
Provided always, that the before mentioned land that shall be taken up and so
settled in the province as aforesaid, shall from the date hereof, be held upon
the conditions aforesaid, containing at least, two able men servants, or three
such weaker servants as aforesaid, for every hundred acres; and so
proportionably for a lesser or greater quantity as one hundred acres, besides
what a master or mistress shall possess, which was granted for his or her own
person; in failure of which, upon notation to the present occupant or his
assigns, there shall be three years given to such, for the completing the said
number of servants, and for their sale or other disposure of such part of their
lands as are not so peopled: Within which time of three years, if any persons
holding any land, shall fail by himself, his agents, executors or assigns, or
some other way, to provide such number of persons, (unless the general assembly
shall without respect to poverty, judge it was impossible for the party so
failing to keep his or her number of servants to be provided as aforesaid) in
such case the commissioners are to summon together twelve men of the
neighborhood, upon such inquest, verdict and judgment past of such default;
they are and have power of disposing of so much of such land, for any term of
years, not exceeding 20 years, as shall not be planted with its due number of
persons as aforesaid, to some other that will plant the same; reserving and
preserving to the proprietor, or his lawful assigns, the rents to become due
and owing, for or in respect of the same, according to the tenor and effect of
these concessions. And further, that every proprietor that goes over in
person, and inhabit in the said province, shall keep and maintain upon every
lot of land that they shall take up, one person at least; and if the lot shall
exceed 200 acres, he shall keep and maintain for every 200 acres, the like
quantity of one person at the least.

And for all other proprietors that does but go over in person, and inhabit in
the said province, shall keep and maintain upon every lot of land that shall
fall to them, one person at the least; and if the said lot exceed one hundred
acres, then upon every hundred acres that fall to them as aforesaid, they shall
keep and maintain one person at the least: And if any neglect or deficiency
shall be found in any of the proprietors, of their keeping and maintaining the
number of persons before mentioned; that then and in that case, the
commissioners are to dispose upon the said lands for any term of years not
exceeding twenty, to any person or persons that will keep and maintain upon the
said lands the number of persons as before is mentioned; reserving always unto
the said proprietors, the rents that shall fall due for the same, as before is
reserved and appointed to be so. Always provided, that the keeping and
maintaining of the said number of persons upon the several lots and number of
acres before mentioned, is to continue for ten years from the date of the
concessions, and no longer; except where there have been any deficiency, so as
the commissioners have let the lands for a longer time, to any person or
persons, they are to enjoy the same during the term granted them by the
commissioners; any thing in this last proviso, to the contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. V.
And for the regular laying out of all lands whatsoever in the said province,
this method is to be followed by the register and surveyor.

THAT the register to be appointed as aforesaid, having recorded any grant from
any of the proprietors, to any person, for any quantity or quantities of acres,
shall make out a certificate to the surveyor or his deputy, enjoining him to
lay out, limit and bound (...) acres of land, for A. B. out of the several lots
of C. D. one of the proprietors, in the proportions following; that is to say,
(...) part thereof in the lot of the said C. D. in (...) which the surveyor or
his deputy, shall lay out, limit and bound accordingly, and shall certify back
to the register on what point of the compass the several limits thereof lie,
and on whose lands the several parcels butt and bound; which last certificate
shall be entered by the said register or his deputy, in a book for that
purpose, with an alphabetical table of the proprietors names, and the name of
the planter or purchaser referring to the said certificate, shall by the said
register be endorsed in the back of the grant, with the folio of the book in
which it is entered, and his name subscribed to the said endorsement.

And that the commissioners for the time being, are hereby empowered to
ascertain the rates and fees of the public register, surveyor and other
officers, as they shall see meet and reasonable, how much or what every one
shall pay for registering any conveyance, deed, lease, speciality, certificate,
or other writing; as also what shall be paid by every proprietor for surveying,
dividing, and laying out of any lands in the said province; which said
register, surveyor, or other officer, is not to exact or demand any more or
greater rates as shall be established as aforesaid.

CHAP. VI.
WE do also grant convenient portions of land for highways, and for streets,
not under one hundred feet in breadth, in cities, towns and villages; and for
wharffs, keys, harbors, and for public houses, in such place as the
commissioners for the time being (until there be a general assembly) shall
appoint; and that all such lands laid out for the said uses and purposes, shall
be free and exempt from all rents, taxes, and other charges and duties
whatsoever; as also, that the inhabitants of the said province have free
passage through or by any seas, bounds, creeks, rivers, rivulets, in the said
province, through or by which they must necessarily pass to come from the main
ocean to any part of the province aforesaid; as also by land in ways laid out
or through any lands not planted or enclosed.

That all the inhabitants within the said province of West-Jersey, have the
liberty of fishing in Delaware river, or on the sea coast; and the liberty of
hunting and killing any deer or other wild beasts, the liberty to shoot or take
any wild fowls within the said province. Provided always, that they do not
hunt, kill, shoot, or take any such deer, wild beasts, or fowls, upon the lands
that is or shall be surveyed, taken up, enclosed, sown and planted, except the
owners of the said lands or their assigns.

CHAP. VII.
THE commissioners are to take care, that lands quietly held, planted and
possessed seven years after its being first duly surveyed by the surveyor or
surveyors, his or their lawful deputies, which shall be appointed by the said
proprietors, and registered in manner as aforesaid, shall not be subject to any
review, resurvey or alteration of bounds, upon any pretense, or by any
pretense, or by any person or persons whatsoever.

CHAP. VIII.
THE commissioners are to take care, that no man, if his cattle stray, range,
or graze on any ground within the said province, not actually appropriated or
set out to particular persons, shall be liable to pay any trespass for the
same: Provided, that custom of commons be not thereby pretended to, nor any
person hindered from legally taking up and appropriating any land so grazed
upon.

CHAP. IX.
THE commissioners are to see, that all courts established by the laws and
constitutions of the general assembly, and pursuant unto those concessions, do
execute their several duties and offices respectively, according to the laws in
force; and to displace or punish them for violating the said laws, or acting
contrary to their duty and trusts, as the nature of their offenses shall
require; and where they see cause of condemnation or sentence passed upon any
person or persons, by any judge, justice, or court whatsoever, the said
commissioners have power to reprieve and suspend the execution of the sentence,
until the cause be presented, with a copy of the whole trial, proceeding and
proofs, to the next general assembly; who may accordingly either pardon or
command execution of the sentence on the offender or offenders, (who are to be
kept in the mean time in safe custody until the sense of the general assembly
be known therein.)

CHAP. X.
TO act and do all other thing or things that may conduce to the safety, peace
and well-government of the said province, and these present concessions, and
that all inferior officers be accountable to the commissioners, and they to be
accountable to the general assembly. The commissioners are to take care, that
the constables of the said province, shall collect such of the proprietors
rents, who dwell not in the said province, but in England, Ireland, or
Scotland; and shall pay it to the receiver that they shall appoint to receive
the same; unless the general assembly shall prescribe some other way whereby
they may have their rents duly collected, without charge and trouble to the
said proprietors.

CHAP. XI.
THEY are not to impose or suffer to be imposed, any tax, (...) or subsidy,
tollage, assessment, or any other duty whatsoever, upon any color or pretense
how specious soever, upon the said province and inhabitants thereof, without
their own consent first had, or other than what shall be imposed by the
authority and consent of the general assembly, and that only in manner and for
the good ends and uses as aforesaid.

CHAP. XII.
THAT that the said commissioners, registers, surveyors, and all and every
other public officers of trust whatsoever, already deputed and chosen, or
hereafter from time to time to be deputed and chosen, shall subscribe (in a
book or books to be provided for that purpose) that they will truly and
faithfully discharge their respective trusts according to the law of the said
province, and (...) of these concessions, in their respective offices and
duties; and do equal justice and right to all men, according to their best
skill and judgment, without corruption, favor, or affection; and the names of
all that shall subscribe, to be entered in the said book; and whosoever shall
subscribe, and shall violate, break or any wise falsify his promise after such
subscription, shall be liable to be punished or fined, and also be made
incapable of any public office within the said province.

The Charter of fundamental laws of West New Jersey, agreed upon.

CHAP. XIII.
That these following concessions are the common law or fundamental rights of
the province of West New Jersey.

THAT the common law or fundamental rights and privileges of West New Jersey,
are individually agreed upon by the proprietors and freeholders thereof to be
the foundation of the government; which is not to be altered by the legislative
authority, or free assembly hereafter mentioned and constituted; but that the
said legislative authority is constituted according to these fundamentals, to
make such laws as agree with and maintain the said fundamentals, and to make no
laws that in the least contradict, differ, or vary from the said fundamentals,
under what pretense or allegation soever.

CHAP. XIV.
BUT if it so happen, that any person or persons of the said free, assembly,
shall therein designedly, wilfully and maliciously move, or excite any to move,
any matter or thing whatsoever, that contradicts or any ways subverts any
fundamental of the said laws in the constitution of the government of this
province, it being proved by seven honest and reputable persons; he or they
shall be proceeded against as ^raitors to the said government.

CHAP. XV.
THAT these concessions, law or great charter of fundamentals, be recorded in a
fair table, in the assembly house; and that they be read at the beginning and
dissolving of every general free assembly: And it is further agreed and
ordained, that the said concessions, common law, or great charter of
fundamentals, be writ in fair tables, in every common hall of justice within
this province; and that they be read in solemn manner four times every year, in
the presence of the people, by the chief magistrates of those places.

CHAP. XVI.
THAT no men, nor number of men upon earth, has power or authority to rule
over men's consciences in religious matters; therefore it is consented, agreed
and ordained, that no person or persons whatsoever, within the said province,
at any time or times hereafter shall be any ways, upon any pretense whatsoever,
called in question, or in the least punished or hurt, either in person, estate
or privilege, for the sake of his opinion, judgment, faith or worship toward
God, in matters of religion; but that all and every such person and persons,
may from time to time, and at all times, freely and fully have and enjoy his
and their judgments, and the exercise of their consciences, in matters of
religious worship throughout all the said province.

CHAP. XVII.
THAT no proprietor, freeholder or inhabitant of the said province of West
New Jersey, shall be deprived or condemned of life, limb, liberty, estate,
property, or any ways hurt in his or their privileges, freedoms or franchises,
upon any account whatsoever, without a due trial, and judgment passed by twelve
good and lawful men of his neighborhood first had; and that in all causes to
be tried, and in all trials, the person or persons arraigned, may except
against any of the said neighborhood, without any reason rendered, (not
exceeding thirty-five) and in case of any valid reason alleged, against every
person nominated for that service.

CHAP. XVIII.
AND that no proprietor, freeholder, free denison or inhabitant in the said
province, shall be attached, arrested, or imprisoned, for or by reason of any
debt, duty, or other thing whatsoever, (cases felonious, criminal and
treasonable, excepted) before he or she have personal summon or summons, left
at his or her last dwelling place, if in the said province, by some legal
authorized officer, constituted and appointed for that purpose, to appear in
some court of judicature for the said province, with a full and plain account
of the cause or thing in demand; as also the name or names of the person or
persons at whose suit, and the court where he is to appear; and that he has at
least fourteen days time to appear and answer the said suit, if he or she live
or inhabit within forty miles, English, of the said court; and if at further
distance, to have for every twenty miles two days time more, for his and their
appearance, and so proportionably for a larger distance of place.

That upon the recording of the summons, and nonappearance of such person and
persons, a writ or attachment shall or may be issued out to arrest or attach
the person or persons of such defaulters, to cause his or their appearance in
such court, returnable at a day certain, to answer the penalty or penalties in
such suit or suits; and if he or they shall be condemned by legal trial and
judgment, the penalty or penalties shall be paid and satisfied out of his or
their real or personal estate so condemned, or cause the person or persons so
condemned to lie in execution till satisfaction of the debt and damages be
made. Provided always, if such person or persons so condemned, shall pay and
deliver such estate, goods and chattels, which he or any other person has for
his or their use, and shall solemnly declare and aver, that he or they have not
any further estate, goods or chattels wheresoever, to satisfy the person or
persons (at whose suit he or they are condemned) their respective judgments,
and shall also bring and produce three other persons as compurgators, who are
well known and of honest reputation, and approved of by the commissioners of
that division where they dwell or inhabit, which shall in such open court
likewise solemnly declare and aver, that they believe in their consciences,
such person and persons so condemned, have not wherewith further to pay the
said condemnation or condemnations; he or they shall be thence forthwith
discharged from their said imprisonment; any law or custom to the contrary
thereof heretofore in the said province notwiths^anding. And upon such summons
and default of appearance recorded as aforesaid, and such person and persons
not appearing within forty days after, it shall and may be lawful for such
court of judicature, to proceed to trial of twelve lawful men, to judgment
against such defaulters, and issue forth execution against his or their estate,
real and personal, to satisfy such penalty or penalties, to such debt and
damages so recorded, as far as it shall or may extend.

CHAP. XIX.
THAT there shall be in every court, three justices or commissioners, who shall
sit with the twelve men of the neighborhood, with them to hear all causes, and
assist the said twelve men of the neighborhood in all cases of law; and that
they the said justices shall pronounce such judgment as they shall receive from
and be directed by the said twelve men, in whom only the judgment resides, and
not otherwise.

And in cases of their neglect and refusal, that then one of the twelve, by
consent of the rest, pronounce their own judgment, as the justices should have
done: And if any judgment shall be passed in any case, civil or criminal, by
any other person or persons, or any other way than according to the agreement
and appointment; it shall be held null and void; and such person or persons so
presuming to give judgment, shall be severely fined, and upon complaint made to
the general assembly, by them be declared incapable of any office or trust
within this province.

CHAP. XX.
THAT in all matters and causes, civil and criminal, proof is to be made by the
solemn and plain averment of at least two honest and ^^^table persons; and in
case that any person or persons shall bear false witness, and bring in his or
their evidence contrary to the truth of the matter, as shall be made plainly to
appear; that then every such person or persons, shall in civil causes, suffer
the penalty which would be due to the person or persons he or they bear witness
against: And in case any witness or witnesses on the behalf of any person or
persons indicted in a criminal cause, shall be found to have borne false
witness, for fear, gain, malice, or favor, and thereby hinder the due
execution of the law, and deprive the suffering person or persons of their due
satisfaction; that then and in all other cases of false evidence, such person
or persons shall be first severely fined; and next, that he or they shall
forever be disabled from being admitted in evidence, or into any public
office, employment or service within this province.

CHAP. XXI.
THAT all and every person and persons whatsoever, who shall prosecute or
prefer any indictment or information against others, for any personal injuries
or matter criminal, or shall prosecute for any other criminal cause (treason,
murder and felony only excepted) shall and may be master of his own process,
and have full power to forgive and remit the person or persons offending
against him or herself only, as well before as after judgment and condemnation,
and pardon, and remit the sentence, fine and punishment of the person or
persons offending, be it personal or other whatsoever.

CHAP. XXII.
THAT the trials of all causes, civil and criminal, shall be heard and decided
by the verdict or judgment of twelve honest men of the neighborhood, only to
be summoned and presented by the sheriff of that division or propriety where
the fact or trespass is committed; and that no person or persons shall be
compelled to see any attorney or counselor to plead his cause, but that all
persons have free liberty to plead his own cause if he please: And that no
person or persons imprisoned upon any account whatsoever, within this province,
shall be obliged to pay any fees to the officer or officers of the said prison
either when committed or discharged.

CHAP. XXIII.
THAT in all public courts of justice for trial of causes, civil or criminal,
any person or persons, inhabitants of the said province, may freely come into
and attend the said courts, and hear and be present at all or any such trials
as shall be there had or passed, that justice may not be done in a corner, nor
in any covert manner; being intended and resolved by the help of the lord, and
by these our concessions and fundamentals, that all and every person and
persons inhabiting in the said province, shall as far as in us lies, be free
from oppression and slavery.

CHAP. XXIV.
For the preventing of fraud, deceit, collusion in bargains, sales, trade and
traffic, and the usual contests, quarrels, debates and utter ruin, which have
attended the people in many nations, by costly, tedious, and vex^^ous law
suits, and for a due settlement of estates.

IT is agreed, concluded and ordained, that there be kept a register at London,
within the nation of England; and also another register within the province of
New West-Jersey; and that all deeds, evidences, and conveyances of land, in the
said province of New-West-Jersey, that shall be executed in England, may also
be there registered; and once every year, the register of the said deeds and
conveyances, so registered, shall be duly transmitted under the hands of the
register, and three proprietors, unto the commissioners in New West-Jersey, to
be enrolled in the public register of the said province: As also that the
chief register, which the said proprietors have deputed or chosen, or shall
depute or choose, failing, that the commissioners shall depute or choose, or
which the general assembly of the said province, hereafter mentioned, shall
depute or choose, shall keep exact entries and registers, in fair books, or
rolls for that purpose to be provided, of all public affairs; and therein
shall record and enter all grants of land, from the proprietors to the
planters; and all conveyances of land, house or houses, from man to man; as
also all assignments, mortgages, bonds, and specialties whatsoever; and all
leases for land, house or houses, made or to be made, from landlord to tenant,
and from person to person; which conveyances, leases, assignments, mortgages,
bonds and specialties, which shall be executed in West New Jersey, shall be
first acknowledged by the grantor, assignor and obligor, before the said
commissioners, or two of them at least, or some two of their lawful deputies,
for the time being; who shall under their hands, upon the back side of the said
deed, lease, assignment, mortgage or specialty, attest the acknowledgment
thereof as aforesaid; which shall be a warrant for the register to record the
same; and such conveyance or specialty, if sealed, executed, acknowledged
before three proprietors, in the nation of England or Ireland, and recorded or
registered there, within three months after the date thereof; or if sealed,
executed and acknowledged in the said province, or elsewhere out of England,
and recorded or registered within six months after the date thereof, shall be
good and effectual in law; and for passing or transferring of estates in lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, shall be as effectual as if delivery and siezen
were executed of the same: And all other conveyances, deeds, leases or
specialties, not recorded as aforesaid, shall be of no force nor effect. And
the said register shall do all other thing or things the said proprietors by
their instructions shall direct, or the commissioners or assembly shall ordain,
for the good and welfare of the said province.

CHAP. XXV.
That there may be a good understanding and friendly correspondence between the
proprietors, freeholders, and inhabitants of the said province, and the Indian
natives thereof.

IT is concluded and agreed, that if any of the Indian natives within the said
province, shall or may do any wrong or injury to any of the proprietors,
freeholders or inhabitants, in person, estate, or otherways howsoever; upon
notice thereof, or complaint made to the commissioners, or any two of them,
they are to give notice to the sachem, or other chief person or persons, that
has authority over the said Indian native or natives, that justice may be
done, and satisfaction made to the person or persons offended, according to law
and equity, and the nature and quality of the offense and injury done or
committed.

And also in case any of the proprietors, freeholders, or inhabitants, shall
any wise wrong or injure any of the Indian natives there, in person, estate, or
otherwise; the commissioners are to take care, upon complaint to them made, or
any one of them, either by the Indian natives, or others, that justice be done
to the Indian natives, and plenary satisfaction be made them, according to the
nature and quality of the offense and injury: And that in all trials wherein
any of the said Indian natives are concerned, the trial to be by six of the
neighborhood, and six of the said Indian natives, to be indifferently and
impartially chosen by order of the commissioners; and that the commissioners
use their endeavor to persuade the natives to the like way of trial; when any
of the natives do any ways wrong or injure the said proprietors, freeholders or
inhabitants, that they choose six of the natives, and six of the freeholders or
inhabitants, to judge of the wrong and injury done, and to proportion
satisfaction accordingly.

CHAP. XXVI.
IT is agreed, when any lands is to be taken up for settlements of towns, or
other ways, before it be surveyed, the commissioners or the major part of them,
are to appoint some persons to go to the chief of the natives concerned in that
land, so intended to be taken up, to acquaint the natives of their intentions,
and to give the natives what present they shall agree upon, for their good will
or consent; and take a grant of the same in writing, under their hands and
seals, or some other public way used in those parts of the world: Which grant
is to be registered in the public register, allowing also the natives (if they
please) a copy thereof; and that no person or persons take up any land, but by
order from the commissioners, for the time being.

CHAP. XXVII.
THAT no ship master or commander of any ship or vessel, shall receive into his
ship or vessel, to carry unto any other nation, country or plantation, any
person or persons whatsoever, without a certificate first had and obtained
under the hands and seals of the commissioners, or any two of them, that the
said person or persons are clear, and may be taken on board, signifying that
the said person or persons names have been put up in three public places of
the province, appointed by the commissioners for that purpose, for the space of
three weeks, giving notice of his or their intention to transport themselves.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That men may peaceably and quietly enjoy their estates.

IT is agreed, if any person or persons shall steal, rob, or take any goods or
chattles, from or belonging to any person or persons whatsoever, he is to make
restitution two sold, out of his or their estate; and for want of such estate,
to be made work for his theft, for such time and times as the nature of the
offense does require, or until restitution be made double for the same; or as
twelve men of the neighborhood shall determine, being appointed by the
commissioners, not extending either to life or limb.

If any person or persons, shall wilfully beat, hurt, wound, assault, or
otherways abuse the person or persons of any man, woman or child, they are to
be punished according to the nature of the offense; which is to be determined
by twelve men of the neighborhood, appointed by the commissioners.

CHAP. XXIX.
For securing estates of persons that die, and taking care of orphans.

First. IF any person or persons die, the commissioners are to take care, that
the will of the deceased be duly performed, and security given by those that
prove the will; and that all wills or testaments be registered in a public
register appointed for that purpose; and the person or persons that prove the
same, to bring in one true inventory under their hands, of all the estate of
the deceased, and to have a warrant under the hand of three commissioners, and
the public seal of the province, intimating, that they have brought in an
inventory of the estate, and given security; then, and not before, are they to
dispose upon the estate.

Second, If any person die intestate, leaving a wife and children; the
commissioners are to take security from the person that shall administer, to
secure two parts of the estate for the children, and the third to the wife, if
there be any; and if there be no child, then half to the next of kin, and the
other to the wife.

Third. If the parents of children be dead, and no will made, then the
commissioners are to appoint two or more persons to take the charge of the
children and estate, and to bring an inventory of the estate to be registered;
and that the said persons are to make good to the children, what part of the
estate shall come unto their hands, and to give a true account of their
receipts and disbursements, to be approved of by the commissioners.

Fourth, If parents die, leaving child or children, and no estate, or not
sufficient to maintain and bring up the said child or children, in that case
the commissioners are to appoint persons to take care for the child or
children, to bring them up in such manner as the commissioners shall appoint,
and the charges thereof to be borne by the public stock of the province; and
if none be established, then by a tax to be levied by twelve men of the
neighborhood, with the consent of the commissioners, or the main part of them.

CHAP. XXX.
In cases when any person or persons kill or destroy themselves, or be killed
by any other thing.

IT is agreed, if any man or woman shall wilfully put hand, and kill him or
herself, the estate of such person or persons is not to be forfeited, but the
kindred, heirs, or such other as of right the estate belongs to, may enjoy the
same; or if any beast or ship, boat, or other thing, should occasion the death
of any person or persons, nevertheless the said beast, ship, boat, or other
thing, is not to be forfeited; but those to whom they belong may enjoy the
same. Provided always, that the said beast did not wilfully kill the said
person, or has been known to attempt, or addicted to mischief, or has been
found to hurt or kill any person; then the said beast is to be killed.

CHAP. XXXI.
ALL such person or persons as shall be upon trial found guilty of murder or
treason, the sentence and way of execution thereof is left to the general
assembly to determine, as they in the wisdom of the lord shall judge meet and
expedient.

The general assembly and their power.

CHAP. XXXII.
THAT so soon as divisions or tribes, or other such like distinctions are made,
that then the inhabitants, freeholders, and proprietors resident in the said
province, or several respective tribes or divisions, or distinctions aforesaid,
do yearly and every year, meet on the first day of October, or the eighth
month, and choose one proprietor or freeholder for each respective propriety in
the said province (the said province being to be divided into one hundred
proprieties) to be deputies, trustees, or representatives, for the benefit,
service, and behoof of the people of the said province; which body of deputies,
trustees or representatives, consisting of one hundred persons chosen as
aforesaid, shall be the general free and supreme assembly of the said province
for the year en^^ing, and no longer: And in case any member of the said
assembly, during the said year, shall decease, or otherwise be rendered
incapable of that service; that then the inhabitants of the said proprieties,
shall elect a new member, to serve in his room, for the remainder of the said
year.

CHAP. XXXIII.
And to the end the representative members of the yearly assembly to be chosen,
may be regularly and impartially elected.

THAT no person or persons who shall give, bestow or promise, directly or
indirectly, to the said parties electing, any meat, drink, money or money's
worth, for procurement of their choice and consent, shall be capable of being
elected a member of the said assembly: And if any person or persons, shall be
at any time corruptly elected, and sufficient proof thereof made to the said
free assembly, such person or persons so electing or elected, shall be reckoned
incapable to choose or sit in the said assembly, or execute any other public
office of trust within the said province, for the space of seven years thence
next ensuring: And also, that all such elections as aforesaid, be not
determined by the common and confused way of cries and voices; but by putting
balls into ba^loting boxes, to be provided for that purpose, for the prevention
of all partiality, and whereby every man may freely choose according to his own
judgment, and honest intention.

CHAP. XXXIV.
TO appoint their own times of meeting, and to adjourn their sessions from time
to time (within the said year) to such times and places as they shall think fit
and convenient, as also to ascertain the number of their quorum; provided that
such numbers be not less than one half of the whole, in whom (or more) shall be
the full power of the general assembly; and that the votes of two thirds of the
said quorum, or more of them, if assembled together as aforesaid, shall be
determinative in all cases whatsoever coming in question before them, consonant
and conformable to these concessions and fundamentals.

CHAP. XXXV.
THAT the said proprietors and freeholders, at their choice of persons, to
serve them in the general and free assemblies of the province, give their
respective deputies or trustees, their instructions at large, to represent
their grievances, or for the improvement of the province; and that the persons
chosen, do by indentures under hand and seal, covenant and oblige themselves to
act nothing in that capacity, but what shall tend to the fit service and behoof
of those that send and employ them; and that in case of failure of trust, or
breach of convenant, that they be questioned upon complaint made, in that or
the next assembly, by any of their respective electors.

And that each member of the assembly, chosen as aforesaid, be allowed one
shilling per day, during the time of the sitting of the general assembly, that
thereby he may be known to be the servant of the people: Which allowance of one
shilling per day, is to be paid him by the inhabitants of the propriety or
division that shall elect him.

CHAP. XXXVI.
THAT in every general free assembly, every respective member has liberty of
speech; that no man be interrupted when speaking; that all questions be stated
with deliberation, and liberty for amendments; that it be put by the chairman,
by them to be chosen, and determined by plurality of votes: Also that every
member has power of entering his protest, and reasons of protestations. And
that if any member of such assembly shall require to have the persons names
registered, according to their yeas and no's, that it be accordingly done: And
that after debates are past, and the question agreed upon, the doors of the
house to be set open, and the people have liberty to come in to hear, and be
witnesses of the votes, and the inclinations of the persons voting.

CHAP. XXXVII.
AND that the said assembly do elect, constitute and appoint ten honest and
able men, to be commissioners of estate, for managing and carrying on the
affairs of the said province, according to the law therein established, during
the adjournments and dissolutions of the said general free assembly, for the
conservation and tranquillity of the same.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
THAT it shall be lawful for any person or persons, during the session of any
general free assembly in that province, to address, remonstrate or declare, any
suffering, danger or grievance, or to propose, tender or request, any
privilege, profit or advantage to the said province, they not exceeding the
number of one hundred persons.

CHAP. XXXIX.
TO enact and make all such laws, acts, and constitutions, as shall be
necessary for the well government of the said province, (and them to repeal)
provided, that the same be as near as may be, conveniently agreeable to the
primitive, ancient and fundamental laws of the nation of England. Provided
also, that they be not against any of these our concessions or fundamentals,
before or hereafter mentioned.

CHAP. XL.
BY act as aforesaid, to constitute all courts, together with the limits,
powers and jurisdictions of the same (consonant to these concessions) as also
the several judges, officers and number of officers belonging to each court, to
continue such time as they shall see meet, not exceeding one year, or two at
the most, with their respective salaries, fees and perquisites, and their
appellations; with the penalties that shall be inflicted upon them for the
breach of their several and respective duties and trusts; and that no person or
persons whatsoever, inhabitants of the said province, shall sustain or bear two
offices in the said province, at one and the same time.

CHAP. XLI.
THAT all the justices and constables be chosen by the people; and all
commissioners of the public seals, treasuries and chiefjustices, ambassadors
and collectors, be chosen by the general free assembly.

CHAP. XLII.
THAT the commissioners of the treasury of the said province, bring in their
account at the end of their year, unto the general free assembly, there to be
seen and adjusted; and that every respective member carry a copy thereof unto
that hundred or propriety he serves, for to be registered in the capital
public court of that propriety.

CHAP. XLIII.
BY act as aforesaid, to lay equal taxes and assessments, and equally to raise
money or goods, upon all lands or persons within the several proprieties,
precincts, hundreds, tribes, or whatsoever other divisions shall hereafter be
made and established in the said province, as often as necessity shall require;
and in such manner as to them shall seem most equal and easy for the
inhabitants; in order to the better supporting of the public charge of the
said government, as also for the public benefit and advantage of the said
people and province.

CHAP. XLIV.
BY act as aforesaid, to sub-divide the said province into hundreds,
proprietors, or such other divisions and distinctions, as they shall think fit;
and the said divisions to distinguish by such names as shall be thought good;
as also within the said province to direct and appoint places for such and so
many towns, cities, ports, harbors, creeks, and other places for the
convenient lading and unlading of goods and merchandise, out of the ships,
boats, and other vessels, as shall be expedient; with such jurisdiction,
privileges and franchises to such cities, ports, harbors, creeks or other
places, as they shall judge most conducing to the general good of the said
province and people thereof; and to erect, raise and build within the said
province, or any part thereof, such and so many market towns and villages; and
also appoint such and so many markets and fairs, and in such place and places,
as they shall see meet, from time to time, as the grant made and assigned unto
the said proprietors will permit and admit.

In testimony and witness of our consent to and affirmation of these present
laws, concessions and agreements: We, the proprietors, freeholders, and
inhabitants of the said province of West New Jersey, whose names are under
written, have to the same voluntarily and freely set our hands, dated this
third day of the month commonly called March, in the year of our lord one
thousand six hundred seventy six.

Gawen Lawrie, Wm. Penn. Wm. Emley, Josh. Wright, Nicho. Lucas, Wm. Haig, Wm.
Peachee, Rich. Matthews, John Harris, Francis Collins, Wm. Kent, Benj. Scot,
Tho. Lambert, Tho. Hooton, Henry Stacy, Edw. Byllinge, Rich. Smith, Edw.
Nelthorp, John Penford, Dan. Wills, Thomas Olive, Tho. Rudyard, William Biddle,
Robert Stacy, John Farrington, Wm. Roydon, Rich. Mew, Percival Towle, Mahlon
Stacy, Tho. Bodd, Sam. Jenings, John Lambert, Will. Heulings, George Deacon,
John Thomson, Edw. Bradway, Rich. Guy, James Nevill, Wm. Cantwell, Fospe
Ontstout, Machgijel Baron, Casper Herman, Turrse Psese, Robert Kemble, John
Corneliesse, Gerrat Van Jumne, Wm. Gill Johnson, Mich. Lack ouse, Markus Algus,
Evert Aldricks, Hendrick Everson, Jilles Tornesen, Claas Jansen, Paul Doequet,
Aert Jansen, John Surige, Tho. Smith, James Pearce, Edw. Webb, John Pledger,
Rich. Wilkison, Christo. Sanders, Renear Van Hurst, William Johnson, Charles
Bagley, Sam. Wade, Tho. Woodrose, John Smith, Tho. Pierce, Will. Warner, Joseph
Ware, Isaac Smart And. Thomson, Thomas Kent, Henry Jenings, Rich. Wortsaw,
Christophe, White, John Maddocks, John Forest, James Vickory, William Rumsey,
Rich. Robinson, Mark Reeve, Thomas Watson, Sam. Nicholson, Dan. Smith, Rich.
Daniel, Will, Penton, Will. Daniel, Robert Zane, Walter Peiterson, Anthony
Page, Andrew Bartleson, Woolley Woollison, Anthony Dixon, John Derme, Tho.
Benson, John Pain, Rich. Briffington, Sam. Lovett, Henry Stubbens, Will.
Willis, George Haselwood, Roger Pedrick, Will. Hughes, Abra. Van Highest.
Hipolitas Lefever, Will. Wilkinson, Andrew Shenneck, Lause Cornelious, Sam.
Hedge, Will. Massler, John Grubb, John Worlidge, Edw. Meyer, Tho. Barton, Robt.
Powel, Tho. Harding, Matthew Allen, Bernard Devenish, Thomas Stokes, Thomas
French, Issac Marriott, John Butcher, George Hutcheson, Tho. Gardener, Tho.
Eves, John Borton, John Pain, Eleazer Fenton, Samuel Oldale, Will. Black,
Anthony Woodhouse, Dan. Leeds, John Pancoast, Francis Belwicke, Will. Luswall,
John Snowdon, Rich. Fenemore, Gruna Jacobson, Tho. Scholey, Tho. Wright,
Godfrey Hancock, John Petty, Abraham Heulings, John Newbould, John White, John
Roberts, John Wood, John Gosling, Tho. Revell.

NUMBER III.
A brief account of the province of East-Jersey, in America, published by the
present proprietors, for information of all such persons who are or may be
inclined to settle themselves, families and servants in that country.
TO say any thing in the praise, or much in the description of a country so
well known, would seem needless: The late accounts and descriptions of the
adjacent countries, West-Jersey and Pennsylvania, which are much of the same
nature, etc. might sustice; but considering that in foreign colonies, yea, here
in England, every particular county has some excellency in soil, product or
situation, that may affect and delight many persons, beyond the places
adjacent: We may, for the satisfaction of such, give some brief account thereof.

First. This province or colony lies between thirty-nine and fortyone degrees
of latitude, being about twelve degrees more to the south than the city of
London; and is bounded south east by the main sea; east by that vast navigable
stream, called Hudson's river, which divides this from the province of
New York; west by a line of division, which separates this province from
West-Jersey; and north upon the main land, and extends itself in length on the
sea coast, and along Hudson's river, one hundred English miles, and upwards.

Second, The convenience of situation, temperature of air, and fertility of
soil, is such, that there is no less than seven considerable towns, viz.
Shrewsbury, Middletown, Bergen, Newark, Elizabeth-Town, Woodbridge, and
Piscataway; which are well inhabited by a sober and industrious people, who
have necessary provisions for themselves and families, and for the comfortable
entertainment of strangers and travelers; and this colony is experimentally
found generaly to agree with English constitutions.

Third. For navigation, it has these advantages, not only to be situate along
the navigable part of Hudson's river, but lies also fifty miles on the main
sea; and near the midst of this province, is that noted bay for ships, within
Sandy-Hook, very well known not to be inferior to any harbor in America, where
ships not only harbor in greatest storms, but there ride safe with all winds,
and fail in and out thence as well in winter as summer.

Fourth. For fishery, the sea banks there are very well stored with variety of
fish; for not only such as are profitable for transportation, but such also as
are fit for food there, as whales, cod-fish, cole and hake fish, large
mackrell, and also many other sorts of flat and small fish. The bay also, and
Hudson's river, are plentifully stored with sturgeon, great bass, and other
scale fish, eels and shellfish, as oy^ters, etc. in great plenty, and easy to
take.

Fifth. This country is also plentifully supplied with lovely springs,
rivulets, inland rivers and creeks, which fall into the sea and Hudson's river;
in which is also much plenty and variety of fresh fish and wate^ fowl.

Sixth. There is great plenty of oak timber, fit for shipping, and masts for
ships, and other variety of wood, like the adjacent colonies, as chestnut,
walnut, poplar, cedar, ash, sir, etc. fit for building within the country.

Seventh. The land or soil (as in other places) varies in goodness and
richness; but generally fertile, and with much smaller labor than in England:
It produces plentiful crops of all sorts of English grain, besides Indian
corn, which the English planters find not only to be of vast increase, but very
wholesome and good in its use; it also produces good flax and hemp, which they
now spin and manufacture into linen cloth. There Is sufficient meadow and marsh
to their uplands; and the very barrens there as they are called, are not like
some in England; but produce grass fit for grazing cattle in summer season.

Eighth. The country is well stored with wild deer, conies and wild fowl of
several sorts, as turkeys, pigeons, partridges, plover, quails, wild swans,
geese, ducks, etc. in great plenty; It produces variety of good and delicious
fruits, as grapes, plumbs, mulberries and also apricots, peaches, pears,
apples, quinces, water melons, etc. which are here in England planted in
orchards and gardens; these, as also many other fruits, which come not to
perfection in England, are the more natural product of this country.

Ninth. There is also already great store of horses, cows, hogs, and some
sheep, which may be bought at reasonable prices, with English moneys or English
commodities, or man's labor, where money and goods are wanting.

Tenth. What sort of mines or minerals are in the bowels of the earth, after
time must produce, the inhabitants not having yet employed themselves in search
thereof; but there is already a smelting furnace and sorge set up in this
colony, where is made good iron, which is of great benefit to the country.

Eleventh, It is exceedingly well furnished with safe and convenient harbors
for shipping, which is of great advantage to that country, and affords already
for exportaion, great plenty of horses, and also beef, pork, pipe staves,
boards, bread, flower, wheat, barley, rye, Indian corn, butter and cheese,
which they export for Barbados, Jamaica, Nevis, and other adjacent islands, as
also to Portugal, Spain, the Canaries, etc. Their whale oil and whale finns,
beaver, mink, raccoon and martin skins, (which this country produces) they
transport for England.

Twelfth. The situation and soil of this country may invite many who are
inclined to transport themselves into those parts of America: For,

1. It being considerably peopled, and situate on the sea coast, with
convenient harbors, and so near adjacent to the province of New York and
Long Island, being also well peopled colonies, may be proper for merchants,
tradesmen, and navigators.

2. Its likewise proper for such who are inclined to fishery, the whole coast
and very harbors mouths being fit for it; which has been no small rise to the
New England people, and may be here carried on also with great advantage.

3. For its soil, its proper for all industrious husbandmen, and such, who by
hard labor here, on rack rents, are scarce able to maintain themselves, much
less to raise any estate for their children, may, with God's blessing on their
labors, there live comfortably, and provide well for their families.

4. For carpenters, bricklayers, masons, smiths, mill-wrights, and
wheel-wrights, bakers, tanners, tailors, weavers, shoe-makers, hatters, and all
or most handicrafts, where their labor is much more valued than in these
parts, and provisions much cheaper.

5. And chiefly for such of the abovementioned, or any other who upon solid
grounds and weighty considerations, are inclined in their minds to go into
those parts; without which their going there cannot be comfortable, or answer
their expectation.

Thirteen, The Indian natives in this country are but few, comparative to the
neighboring colonies; and those that are there, are so far from being
formidable or injurious to the planters and inhabitants, that they are really
serviceable and advantageous to the English, not only in hunting and taking the
deer, and other wild creatures, and catching of fish and fowl fit for food, in
their seasons, but in the killing and destroying of bears, wolves, foxes, and
other vermind and peltry, whose skins and furrs they bring the English, and
sell at less price than the value of time an English man must spend to take
them.

Fourteen, As for the constitutions of the country, they were made anno dom.
1664, and in the time of John lord Berkely, and sir George Carteret, the late
proprietors thereof; in which such provision was made for liberty in matters of
religion, and property in their estates; that under the terms thereof, that
colony has been considerably peopled, and that much from the adjacent
countries, where they have not only for many years enjoyed their estates,
according to the concessions; but also an uninterrupted exercise of their
particular persuasions in matters of religion: And we the present proprietors,
do determine, so soon as any persons here in England, or elsewhere, are willing
to be engaged with us, we shall be ready and desirous to make such further
additions and supplements to the said constitutions, as shall be thought fit,
for the encouragement of all planters and adventurers, and for the further
settling the said colony with a sober and industrious people.

Fifteen, Having with all possible brevity, given an account of the country, we
shall say something as to the disposition of lands there.

1. Our purpose is, if the lord permit, with all convenient expedition, to
erect and build one principal town; which by reason of situation must in all
probability be the most considerable for merchandise, trade and fishery in
those parts; it is designed to be placed upon a neck or point of rich land,
called Ambo point, lying on Rariton river, and pointing to Sandy-Hook bay, and
near adjacent to the place where ships in that great harbor commonly ride at
anchor; a scheme of which is already drawn, and those who shall desire to be
satisfied therewith may treat for a share thereof.

2. As for encouragement of servants, etc. we allow the same privileges as was
provided in the concessions at first.

3. Such who are desirous to purchase any land in this province, free from all
charge, and to pay down their purchase moneys here, for any quantities of
acres; or that desire to take up lands there, upon any small quit rents to be
reserved; shall have grants to them and their heirs, on moderate and reasonable
terms.

4. Those who are desirous to transport themselves into those parts before the
purchase, if any thing there present to their satisfaction, we doubt not but
the terms of purchase will be so moderate, equal and encouraging, that may
engage them to settle in that colony.

Our purpose being with all possible expedition to dispatch persons thither,
with whom they may treat; and who shall have our full power in the premises.

As for passage to this province, ships are going hence the whole year about,
as well in winter as summer, Sandy-Hook bay being never frozen: The usual price
is five pounds per head, as well masters or servants, who are above ten years
of age; all under ten years, and not children at the breast, pay fifty
shillings; sucking children pay nothing; carriage of goods is usually forty
shillings per ton, and sometimes less, as we can agree; the cheapest and
chiefest time of the year for passage, is from midsummer till the latter end of
September, when many Virginia and Maryland ships are going out of England into
those parts; and such who take then their voyage, arrive usually in good time
to plant corn sufficient for next summer.

The goods to be carried there, are, first, for people's own use, all sorts of
apparel and household stuff, and also utensils for husbandry and building:
secondly, linen and woollen cloths and stuffs, fitting for apparel, etc. which
are fit for merchandise and truck there in the country, and that to good
advantage for the importer, of which further account will be given to the
enquirer.

Lastly. Although this country, by reason of its being already considerably
inhabited, may afford many conveniences to strangers, of which unpeopled
countries are destitute, as lodging, victualing, etc. yet all persons inclining
unto those parts, must know, that in their settlement there, they will find
their exercises; they must have their winter as well as summer; they must
labor before they reap, and, till their plantations be cleared (in summer
time) they must expect (as in all those countries) the musketos, flies, gnats,
and such like, may, in hot and fair weather, give them some disturbance, where
people provide not against them; which, as land is cleared, are less
troublesome.

And all such persons who desire to be concerned, may repair to Thomas Rudyard
or Benjamin Clark, in George Yard, in Lombardstreet; where they may view the
constitutions, the scheme of the intended town, the map of the country, and
treat on terms of purchase. William Penn, Robert West, Thomas Rudyard, Samuel
Groom, Thomas Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Willcocks, Ambrose Rigg, John Heywood,
Hugh Hartshorne, Clement Plumstead, Thomas Cooper, are the present proprietors
of East-Jersey; but their purpose is to take in twelve persons more, to make up
the number of proprietors twenty-four.

Proposals by the proprietors of East-Jersey, in America, for the building of a
town on Ambo Point, and for the disposition of lands in that province; and also
for encouragement of artificers and laborers that shall transport themselves
thither out of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

FORASMUCH as Ambo Point, is a sweet, wholesome, and delightful place, proper
for trade, by reason of its commodious situation, upon a safe harbor, being
likewise accommodated with a navigable river, and fresh water, and has by many
persons of the greatest experience and best judgment, been approved for the
goodness of the air, soil and situation:

We, the proprietors, purpose by the help of Almighty God, with all convenient
speed, to build a convenient town, for merchandise, trade and fishery on Ambo
Point; and because persons that has a desire to plant there, may not be
disappointed for want of proposals, we, the proprietors, offer these following:

First. We intend to divide fifteen hundred acres of land upon Ambo Point, into
one hundred and fifty lots; which lots shall consist of ten acres the lot; one
hundred of the lots we are willing to sell here, and fifty we reserve for such
as are in America, and have long desired to settle there.

Secondly. The price of each lot will be fifteen pounds sterling, to such who
purchase before the 25th of December, 1682; and to such who purchase
afterward, before the 25th of December, 1683, twenty pounds sterling.

Thirdly, Every lot is to be as equally divided as the goodness of the place
does require, and the situation can admit.

Fourthly, The most convenient spot of ground for a town, shall be divided into
one hundred and fifty equal shares, and set out into streets, according to
rules of art; and no person shall be preferred before another in choice,
whether purchasor or proprietor.

Fifthly, We reserve four acres for a market place, townhouse, etc. and three
acres for public wharfage.

Sixthly, Each purchaser is obliged to build a dwelling house in the place
designed for the town, and to clear three acres of up land, in three years, or
else the proprietors to be rein^tated in such lots wherein default is made,
repaying the purchase money.

Seventhly, We the proprietors do within a year, hope, by God's assistance, to
build for each of us, one house upon Ambo point; which we intend shall stand in
an orderly manner, according to the best and mo^^ convenient model.

And in pursuance of the design of the propositions abovesaid.

Eighthly, And for the encouragement of carpenters, joiners, brick and tile
makers, bricklayers, mafons, sawyers, and laborers of all sorts, who are
willing to go and employ themselves and servants, in helping to clear ground,
and build houses upon the general account of and for the proprietors,

The said proprietors will engage to find them work, and current pay for the
same, in money or clothes, and provision, of which there is plenty (as beef,
po^k, corn, etc.) according to the market price at New York, during the space
of one year at least, next after the 25th of December, 1682; in which time
(through God's blessing and their industry) they may have got wherewith to buy
cows, horses, hogs, and other goods, to stock that land, which they in the mean
time may take up, according to the concessions; neither shall such persons pay
rent for their said land, so long as they are employed in the proprietors work;
and their wages shall at all times be so much as other such artificers and
laborers, in the said province usually have; nor shall they be obliged to work
for the proprietors longer than they find encouragement so to do.

Ninthly. And for the more ready and certain employing those workmen and
laborers that shall transport themselves to East-Jersey, this is to let all
laborers and persons that shall transport themselves know, they must upon
their arrival upon that place, repair to the register of the abovesaid
province, and enter themselves according to their respective qualities and
designs, and thereupon they shall be entered into the service and pay of the
proprietors.

For disposition of land in East Jersey.

The governor of East Jersey, by and with the advice of his council, is to
direct, that all lands to be set and laid out for counties, tribes, cities, or
parishes, according to the general concessions of the said province, be bounded
and set out in manner following, viz. That all such lands be divided into seven
equal lots or parts; one of which seven parts is to be first set out by lot for
the use of the proprietors; and the other six parts to be taken up according to
the following concessions.

First. That the planting of the said province may be the more effectually
promoted, We do hereby grant unto all persons who shall transport themselves,
their wives or children, unto East-Jersey, and settle there according to the
following concessions, by the twenty fifth of December 1684, twenty-five acres
of land for each head, whether wife, child or servant, which servant shall be
bound to serve the term of three years at least within the said province; and
for every such master of a family, fifty acres; the said persons so imported
are to be registered in the secretary's book of entries to be kept for that
purpose; and the importer to pay to the secretary for fees of attending that
service, and entering them, twelve pence each head; and every servant, male or
female, who shall be so imported and registered by the 25th of December 1684,
shall, at the expiration of their time, have liberty to take up the quantity of
thirty acres for their own uses; and all the aforesaid importers, and persons
imported, who are hereby allowed to take up land, shall have and enjoy the
same, under the terms and concessions following:

Secondly. Forasmuch as this province is already considerably peopled and
improved (there being seven towns at least already settled upon it by English
people) and that no person is constrained by our concessions, to take up and
pay for land which is barren and unprofitable; nor can it be reasonably
supposed, that people should in this province; be now exposed to the like
hazards and difficulties that others must look to meet with in those
plantations that are less inhabited and more remote, and for situation by sea
and land, not so commodiously placed for trade: Therefore we think it very
reasonable and moderate, that all and every person and persons, shall have his
and their respective quantities of lands set out at two pence an acre, yearly
rent, to be paid into our receivers office, either in money sterling, or in
such commodities as the growth or trade of the province affords at the
merchants price there; but whosoever is willing to buy off his yearly rent, and
become a freeholder, may so do, paying after the rate of twelve years purchase,
which comes to fifty shillings for a lot of twenty-five acres, and so paying
after the same rate, for a greater or lesser quantity.

Thirdly, And forasmuch as it will be most commodious for planters to live
together, whereby they may be a meet help to each other: It is ordered, that
all the purchasers and takers up of land, shall sit down by some village or
township already laid out, or to be laid out hereafter, in the said province;
and having chosen the village or township, which shall be most convenient and
profitable for their business, the surveyor general shall set forth to the said
persons, such quantity of lands, to them granted out of the aforesaid six
parts, which are not then taken up; they paying to the said surveyor general,
the usual rate of surveying in the said province; and if any person going or
sending over, is willing to have a greater parcel of land than twenty five
acres, he may purchase, but not more than one hundred acres; he paying down, at
the sealing of his grant, for the same, after the rate of ten pounds by the
hundred acres; and so more or less for a greater or lesser quantity.

Fourthly, And if any person is willing to buy land, and yet for the present is
not disposed to plant there; he may so do, paying down here for his grant to
the proprietors, according to the rate aforesaid. Provided, that all those
persons, who by these concessions shall take up land, be enjoined to build one
dwelling house, on some part of their land, within the space of seven years,
next after the 25th of December, 1682; and in case of default, one half of
their land to return back to the proprietors.

NUMBER IV.
Governor Coxe's narrative relating to the division line, directed to the
council of proprietors of West-Jersey.
I Was desired to give a meeting to the proprietors of East-Jersey, where were
present, governor Berkeley, lord Campbell, lord Melford, secretary of state for
Scotland, mr. Penn, mr. Ward, and six or eight more; they presented me the
original of an agreement between the commissioners of both Jersies, in order to
run the partition point; and withal a map; whereby it is obvious at the first
glance, that above a third part of that land, which was ever accounted to
belong to West-Jersey, is allotted to, and comprehended within the limits of
East-Jersey: They desired my concurrence to this agreement, as being first in
its own nature a most just and equal division or quantity: Secondly, agreed on
by commissioners, on both sides: Thirdly, according to mr. Byllinge's
instructions, who had empowered his commissioners to make an equal division: I
answered in behalf of your colony and of myself, that first, the division was
very unjust in its own nature; and secondly, that if it were otherwise; yet I
did apprehend, they, who made the agreement, were not legally or sufficiently
empowered.

And first, as to the injustice of the division; I declared, I thought they
ought to have regard unto the letter of the agreement between sir George
Carteret and mr. Edward Byllinge; the line was to run from Little Egg-Harbour,
unto the most northerly branch of Delaware river, in forty one degrees forty
minutes: They denied there was any such branch; I showed them in their own map,
made by mr. George Keith, a river running into Delaware, whose head is near
another of Esopus river; they urging that to be a most unconscionable division,
and that it would cut off two thirds of their country; that in the map printed
from that original, whereon the partition line was drawn, they had a far
greater scope of land; I offered them to calculate the proportion of land in
both Jersies, from the map or chart; and upon the division, they should have a
like proportion unto what was therein allotted them; which would have been
about the third of the whole: They approved not thereof: I proffered lastly, to
comply with the second line, which was proposed by our arbitrators, whereby we
gave them a large tract of land, whereunto they had no right; which showed,
that we were both willing to come to an agreement, in our demands, moderate,
favorable and friendly, in our concessions: I added, that the lands actually
in their possession, or sold unto others before the line was agreed to be run,
should be annexed unto, and for the future, accounted part of their country;
which, according to their own confession, were some of the most rich,
healthful, and pleasant tracts of land in either Jersies: Neither would this
please; they insisted upon the agreement, and would either have it performed or
sue the bond: I was somewhat perplexed how to preserve our own right, and
secure our friends from harm; but being willing, as I have been, to deny myself
any private benefit for public utility, when they pressed they had either
power or not: If power, then all were obliged; if not, they in particular: I
answered, they might apprehend themselves to have power; but really had it not;
as appears by the protestation of the body of the proprietors and inhabitants
of West-Jersey, wherewith the lord Campbell had acquainted me: And they
themselves are likewise sensible, that they proceeded not only beyond but
contrary to their commission; and as for the bonds, they could not be sued, so
long as they did upon no overt act oppose such agreement; and the very utmost
they could require from them, was so much land as came to their share upon a
new division, according to the deed of partition, whereunto they had signed. I
then proceeded to consute their pretensions from an equal division, showing
there was not the least foot steps for such a claim in the deed of partition: I
desired them to consider, that West-Jersey proprietors gave above eighteen
thousand pounds for the land, which cost not EastJersey proprietors much above
four thousand pounds, and for many years last past, proprieties of West-Jersey
have been valued very little below those of East-Jersey; which was merely upon
the account of the opinion all persons; had the proprietors of East-Jersey,
themselves not excepted, that our part exceeded theirs at least two-thirds in
quantity of land: I was my self almost two years, owner of an entire propriety
in East Jersey, and continually heard their complaints; nor did I ever hear any
mention of a right to an equal division, as to quantity of land, only valuing
themselves upon the goodness of their land, and convenience of harbors; which
were open all the winter. And as for the pretension, that mr. Byllinge gave
commission for an equal division; we could produce hundreds of witnesses, that
his great argument unto all purchasers, was, that West Jersey was three times
as large as East, and equal I am a witness, that he intended only equitable
according to the agreement or deed of partition; which diverse can testify. But
I added withal, that if he had given a commission, I thought it not valid,
without the consent and concurrence of the major part of the proprietors;
before he sold the land, he might have disposed it at pleasure, and receded
from his own rights; but having sold the land, the proprietors were to take
care, they had their due, according to the deed of partition; upon which terms
they bought: For mr. Byllinge, when he granted the pretended commission of
division, was possessed only of one single propriety, as he confessed unto
diverse, having disposed of seventy, by absolute sale, and mortgaged the other
twenty nine for eight thousand pounds; and tho (...) was not willing to suspect
any thing of mr. Byllinge; yet let any consider whether it was fit, that an
indigent person, when he had sold his land, should have it in his power to give
away the moiety, under pretense of a power to adjust the division, for which he
might receive a great sum of money, if favorably determined on the behalf of
those with whom we contended: And therefore, no division can be accounted just
and legal, which has not the consent and concurrence of the majority of the
proprietors: I declared unto them, we had thereupon appointed a general
meeting, and we should acquaint them with the result of our consultation, if
they complied with our proposal; and that it be likewise assented to by the
majority of the proprietors in West-Jersey, it should become a final decision,
and be entered in both our records, as upon such occasion is usual; on the
contrary, if they would not hearken to a fair and just proposal, wherein we
shall recede considerably from our right; we will declare ourselves free; and
maintain the line according to the deed, until they can, either by course at
common law, or by an appeal unto his majesty, make an alteration: And the
owners of about forty proprieties in and about the city, do request all those
who are present in West-Jersey, to lay claim unto, and account as your own just
right, all that land from Egg-Harbour, to the north branch of Delaware,
according to the letter of the agreement in the deed of partition, until the
proprietors of East-Jersey have totally abandoned all pretensions unto this
last, subtly contrived, pretended agreement; for if they have recourse to the
common law, I am very confident, above two parts of three, will become
undoubtedly ours. If they appeal to the king; we have not only confidence in
his common justice, and unbiassed respect unto all his subjects, but a
particular hope, that his majesty will remember the time and manner, and other
circumstances of the division; how sir George Carteret assured his highness (he
being duke of York) that he chose the least part, because near unto his
government of New York. It is likewise well known, and can be attested by
diverse, that sir George Carteret did value his share, though by him acknowledged
not half so large as the other; yet abundantly preferable, upon the account of
its being well settled with a sober and industrious people, which would invite
others to come there, Whereas the other was a de^^rt, and so little esteemed
for some time, that land in East-Jersey sold ordinarily eight, and often ten
times the value which was given for land in West-Jersey: It had the advantage
of seven fair towns, inhabited by 3500 people; as appears by a list I have:
They well accommodated with corn and stock, able to supply at easy rates,
new-comers with corn and cattle; which cost the first settlers of West-Jersey a
third more: Besides the neighborhood of New York, a place of great trade,
where they could be readily supplied with whatsoever clothes, utensils, etc.
they wanted.

I flattered myself with hopes, that Mr. Penn, a person of great ability and
interest among the proprietors of New Jersey, and who has often prosessed a
great kindness for the inhabitants of West-Jersey, would have afforded me some
assistance, and moderated at the least the violence of the current, upon the
pretended agreement; but he has frustrated my expectation, by complying with
them in all things, and signed with the rest; which I consess was extremely
surprising to me; and will, I doubt not, appear a little ^^range to diverse
amongst you: I could not imagine any considerate indi^^crent person could
approve so unreasonable and surreptitious an award: But I perceive, that which
most influenced him, is a persuasion that the division ought to be equal in
quantity, and is confirmed therein by a passage in Mr. Byllinge's commission
for settling bounds; wherein he uses the word equal; and is persuaded, being
herein influenced by Mr. Keith's false map, of which I have sent you a copy,
that Mr. Reid's proposal is very fair and an exact equal division of the
country. I do not herein charge Mr. Penn with any fault, who I believe acts
according to his convictions; but I only acquaint you herewith, that you may
understand your own misfortune; for had not Mr. Penn embraced our interest, we
should probably have made a more speedy and advantageous agreement; the
proprietors being mightily fortified by his countenance and authority, to
adhere to the late award, only as a great argument of their moderation and
justice: They have made an order signed likewise by Mr. Penn, that if upon a
new survey, it appears this agreement give them the greater moi^ty, they will
refund so much as may reduce it to an exact quantity. It was a great defect on
your part, to agree upon a division either with New York or East-Jersey, until
you had a most exact survey of the country; they of New York and East Jersey,
have in this respect, exercised the highest prudence, knowing the whole country
to a little, and thereby have both overreached you. I have seen their draughts,
than which nothing can be more exact; but they dare not yet print them, till
they have adjusted the affair with you, left their own maps should rise up
witness against them: And considering how curiously and diversely Rariton
south, and Passaick river are branched, I judge their country, quantity for
quantity, double the value of ours: I never yet saw any maps of West-Jersey, in
the least comparable to these of East-Jersey: I have sent you a pattern of one
part of their country, though they have a draught of every parcel, and ten times
more large and particular than this. I do therefore make it my serious advice,
and earnest request, that you will, with all speed, cause a very particular map
to be made of your country; I do not mean of every propriety or plantation, but
a true account of the length, with a note, if any part of the country be
extraordinary barren; where those harrens are, and of what extent: I had almost
forgot to tell you a pretty policy of Mr. Keith and John Reid, I suppose by
direction from some of their superiors: The draughts they produce for division,
are not in the least according to truth, nor according to those they sent their
proprietors, whereof I having been two years of East Jersey, have most certain
knowledge, and exact copies of their own draughts, to compare them; but in
those maps they produce for division, they make our country toward the sea and
bay, near double the bigness it really bears, and their own almost half as
little as really it is; thence arguing for the reasonableness of addition unto
the true line; and indeed that which they pretend an equal division, to say
nothing of it; exceeding ours, generally speaking in goodness; it is above a
fifth part greater in quantity, so that having received upon all hands, so
unfair dealings, I declare it unto you all, as my opinion and advice; and if I
have any authority amongst you, I entreat and require, that you treat not with
them any further about any accommodation, nor own that pretended to be already
made; but stand by the letter of the agreement between sir George Carteret and
Mr. Byllinge, viz. That the line be run directly from the east side of Little
Egg-Harbour, unto the most northerly branch of Delaware river, in forty one
degrees and forty minutes: And I question not, but we shall bring them to more
reasonable terms than any they have hitherto proposed; at least no pains nor
cost shall be wanting on my part; and I have the concurrence of all our
proprietors, Mr. Penn excepted, whom I could any ways meet with or consult: And
whereas I am very credibly informed that the proprietors of East-Jersey, have
ordered lands to be taken up in diverse places near the new pretended line of
partition; that having possession, upon a review they may have a more spacious
claim; if any attempt of this nature be (...), I do not only protest against
it, but request and desire that all the inhabitants of West-Jersey do the same;
and at the same time, the surveyor of West-Jersey, or his deputy, do
immediately take up in my name, all that land which is westerly of the
Millstone and Rariton river, which was not actually in their possession of
East Jersey, at the time of their pretended award between Mr. Emley and Reid:
You will better understand my mind by the enclosed map, which is a copy exactly
drawn from one of their originals; and we favor them very much in going no
further, (for according to strictness, our line runs within three ^^les of
Perth city) and by allowing them that great tract of most excellent land, from
thence to the meeting of Millstone and Rariton river. I shall add one thing
more, which seems to me of the greatest consequence: I beseech you let there
be no animosity or indignation, severe censure, or spightful reflections, on
those who gave their consent unto the award made by Emley: For my part, I am
fully satisfied in the honesty and fairness of their intentions; but the best
of men may be overreached by cunning designing persons, forget what is past, and
live together as becomes christians, and neighbors and countrymen. As I have
taken care that the public shall not suffer by their act, so I shall likewise
endeavor to secure them from any trouble, only they cannot act in conjunction
with the rest of the proprietors; concerning which I shall give them particular
instructions; in the interim, I remain your most affectionate friend The papers
here and before introduced, relating to the division line between East and
West-Jersey, appeared to be those best adapted to give a general insight into
the proceedings; and the reader may rest assured that they were not selected
with the least partial biass to either side of the question; but if contrary to
expectation, it should be hereafter found that any thing material to the
purpose is omitted, upon its being properly pointed out, endeavors will be
used, with the utmost candor, to have such (...) supplied, or the matter
otherwise rectified, as far as opportunity may allow.
, DAN. COXE.

NUMBER V.
The council of proprietors of West-Jersey, to governor Burnet.
To his excellency William Burnet, esquire captain general and commander in chief
of the province of New Jersey, etc. and the honorable his majesty's council
there met.

IN obedience to an order of council, appointing a time to the proprietors for
exhibiting their reasons, why the bill for repealing an act for running and
ascertaining the line of partition between the eastern and western division of
New Jersey, now lying before the council, should not pass. We for ourselves,
and in behalf of those for whom we are concerned with, other the proprietors of
New Jersey; humbly beg leave to represent as follows, viz.

That king Charles the second having by letters patent in the year 1663,
granted to his brother, his royal highness the duke of York, and his heirs and
assigns, all those tracts of land in America, of which the colonies of New York
and New Jersey, now consist; his royal highness by good deeds and conveyances
in the law, granted all that part called the province of New Jersey, as it is
now bounded by the sea, Hudson's river, Delaware bay and river, and a strait
line running from the latitude of 41 degrees, on the west side of Hudson's
river, to the latitude of 41 degrees 40 minutes, on the east side of Delaware
river; unto the right honorable John lord Berkeley, and sir George Carteret,
and to their heirs and assigns forever.

That the said lord Berkeley, by like deeds, granted his moiety or half part of
the said tract or province, unto John Fenwicke, in trust for Edward Byllinge;
and the said Fenwicke, by other like deeds duly executed, declaring the said
trust, granted nine tenth parts or ninety hundredth parts of all the said
moiety, which the said lord Berkeley had conveyed to him as aforesaid, unto
William Penn, Gawen Lawrie, and Nicholas Lucas, in trust for the said Edward
Byllinge.

That the said sir George Carteret, and the said Edward Byllinge, and trustees,
upon a full and absolute agreement among themselves, for dividing the said
premises into two equal parts in value, by indenture quintipartite; dated the
first of July, 1676, did accordingly divide the said land, by a line to he run
from little Egg-Harbour, to a certain station point in the latitude of 41
degrees 40 minutes, on the most northerly branch of Delaware river; by which
the easterly part was ascertained to sir George Carteret, and the westerly to
said Edward Byllinge and trustees.

That after the said partition so agreed, the said Edward Byllinge, and
tustees, proceeded to grant and convey the said Edward Byllinge's part or
share, being nine-tenth parts of the western moiety, unto several purchasers,
under whom most or all the lands of the said western division are held,
excepting only Salem tenth; and that the proprietor of the said tenth acquiesed
also in the same, can be sufficiently proved: And in all and every of those
deeds of conveyance, the said indentures quinti-partite, and divisions made
thereby, are recited as the foundation on which all those grants respectively
are made in the said westerly part or division.

That after the said sir George Carteret's decease, his widow and executrix,
who was thereunto fully empowered, granted all the easterly part of the said
province, to certain purchasers, called the proprietors of East Jersey, by
sundry deeds and conveyances, all which deeds in like manner recite the
aforesaid indentures quintipartite, as the foundation on which all those grants
in the eastern division are made respectively.

That it is only by force of this agreement and partition, executed as
aforesaid, that the proprietors of the western division are limited to the
western part of the said province, on the side of Delaware; and that the
proprietors of the eastern division are limited to the eastern part of the said
province toward Hudson's river and the sea; for had no such division been
agreed on, as is recited in all the respective deeds of conveyance to the
proprietors, those of the western division, might with an equal right, have
claimed the land toward Amboy, etc. and those of the eastern might have
claimed the lands toward Burlington. But the said quinti-partite indenture
being executed as aforesaid, before the sales to the proprietors were made, and
recited in all the deeds of conveyance, became an absolute limitation; so that
neither on the one part nor on the other, any purchasor could claim otherwise
than according to that limitation, by which their lands were actually conveyed.

That notwithstanding this legal, clear and absolute partition, which is
binding on every proprietor of the eastern division, and at least on all the
nine-tenth parts of the western division, sold by Edward Byllinge, or his
trustees, and from which, those who are skilled in the law, well know it is
impossible legally to recede, without the joint concurrence of every individual
interested on the purchases made under Edward Byllinge, and trustees, and under
sir George Carteret; for it is well known, that no majority without the whole
will in these cases determine the point; yet there have been some persons found
from time to time, who on partial views to themselves, have labored to
introduce some other sort of division; and considerable numbers have been so
far unhappily imposed upon, as to imagine a change thereof might be
practicable, from which unfortunate deception, attempts have been made to alter
it, and some lines for that purpose have been run, and settlements thereupon
made, without due regard to the true bounds of the respective divisions; which
introduced such confusion, that the value of lands near the boundaries, have
been much lessened, and the people discouraged from making improvements, where
the right to the soil itself was liable to be questioned, as not lying within
the division, under which it was purchased.

That the mischevious consequences and manifest irregularities of those
attempts, as well as their injustice and inconsistency with law and reason;
being at length maturely considered under the administration of your
excellency's honorable predecessor, brigadier Hunter; a bill was prepared, not
only for causing the aforesaid partition line, directed by the quinti partite
indentures as aforesaid, to be actually run, as the only legal division that
could be made, and which might well at any time have been run, by the tenor of
the proprietors general deeds, without any leave, if means could have been
readily found to defray the charge; but it was also more especially provided in
the said bill, for the settlement of all those who by any mistake had seated
themselves, or taken up their lands, without the bounds of their respective
divisions, in which they ought to have been surveyed, that they should all be
served in their respective possessions, by the exchange of an equivalent,
granted by each division to the other; which method was judged to be the only
practicable means of making all those inhabitants easy and safe, in all their
improvements and estates; and accordingly the said bill, though at first
exploded in the assembly, as being brought into the house somewhat too late in
time; yet when admitted, was passed by the governor and council, and by the
same house, without one dissenting vote. And in pursuance thereof, with the
concurrence and assistance of the several provinces concerned, the station
point, at the latitude of 41 degrees 40 minutes, upon Delaware, was fixed, and
random lines were carefully run along the whole distance of the two extreme
points, that the true line itself might be run with the greater certainty and
ease: It was therefore astonishing to us, to find (as your excellency and
honorable council have been pleased to make known to us) that it should enter
into any man's thoughts, to solicit the repeal of an act grounded on so solid
and unmovable a foundation in law on one part, and on such justice and equity
on the other, as we have here humbly represented; and this even without the
least offer of any other plan for remedy of the evils under which this province
has so long labored for want of a due settlement in the premises.

Nor can we conceive what motives could possibly induce any inhabitant of the
province, to endeavor to sap the very foundation of all our settlements,
unless there should be any of the opinion, that a just, regular and final
determination of the boundaries, and a clear and quiet establishment should not
quadrate with their particular interests; and that they may hope for greater
advantages from their own boundless claims in a state of confusion: That there
may be something of this kind in view, we have but too great reason to
apprehend from the strenous endeavors used of late to diffuse groundless
jealousies and false insinuations among the people of the western division, as
if the lesser proprietors would by the late act, be in danger of losing their
fourth dividends, while the greater would be secure in the possession of
theirs; the absurdity of which the act itself, with the common method of taking
up those lesser fourth dividends, will fully evince; as also introduce new and
extraordinary methods of splitting the smallest shares for qualifying votes for
the council of proprietors, who at this time consist of a number of men, whose
shares (one gentleman only excepted) will not, as we are well assured, amount
to two proprieties in the whole; nor were their electors much differently
qualified, as upon a scrutiny, may be fully made to appear.

But as your excellency's principal concern, is the peace and prosperity of the
people, committed by his majesty to your care; and no subjects can be more
deeply interested in the same, than his majesty's honorable council for the
same province; and as your wisdom we doubt not will as clearly see, as your
justice will dispanse, and order what may most conduce to those desirable ends;
in a firm dependence therefore on both these, we shall crave the liberty to
pray, that the said bill now lying before the council, for repealing that most
useful act, may be rejected; and that instead of yielding to what might engage
his majesty's province in future confusions, your excellency and the council,
together with the assembly, would be favorably pleased to encourage such other
proposals as may be made, for happily ending all manner of controversies and
disputes, concerning the estates of the people of the said province.

John Ladd, for himself and Col. John Allford; John Budd, for self and Boulton;
John Kay, Wm. Cooper, Francis Rawle, jun. Charles Brogden, Samuel Lippincott,
John Snowdon, jun. Isaac De. Cow, for himself and Samuel Barker; Matthews
Gardener, Isaac Pearson, William Pancoast, William Biles, Isaac Watson, William
Rawle, Thomas Sharp, for self and John Dennis; John Estaugh, for the London
company, John and William Dimsdale, Peter Rich, Benjamin Hopkins and self;
William Biddle, Hugh Sharp, Henry Hodge, Robert Rawle, George Budd; James Logan
for proprieties, William Penn's family 12, John Bellers 1, Amos S^tretle 1,
myself Richard Hill for Nath. Stanbury, Mary Willson.

NUMBER VI.
Reasons and proposals for an amendment of the quinti partite line, and the act
made for the confirmation thereof.
First. BECAUSE the act was passed without the knowledge or consent of numbers
of the proprietors, and the allowing or disallowing the line, being matter of
property, and of great consequence to them; it is conceived to be against
natural justice to pass any law, to dispose of their private property without
their consent.

Second, Because there was another line more fairly and equally agreed to by
the governors, and majority of the proprietors of each division, and actually
run at great expense.

Third, Because the act is desicient in diverse instances, and particularly in
this; that though by the act, the quantity of land in each division, is to be the
same, yet the quality thereof is not regarded, and may be extremely different;
the eastern division being well known to contain considerable more good land
than the western; which, with the addition of Staten-Island, which it is
presumed is their right, will make their share considerable more in value than
what must fall to the western proprietors; and particular persons may be very
much prejudiced thereby; for an equal number of acres of land, up at (...), or
in any of the upper parts, would scarcely be thought an equivalent to any
individual, for the loss of a tract in the lower part of the province.

Fifth. That several tracts of land, since the making of that act, have been
taken up both by western and eastern proprietors, which the line, when run, may
cast into the opposite division from that they were thought to be; and as this
mistake would not have happened but from the neglect of running the line, it
would be hard they should suffer, and would therefore be proper to fall on
measures to secure them in their possessions.

Sixth, The commissioners and surveyors are not limited from, but have it in
their power to give away (under pretense of an equilate) the estate of any one
proprietor, if in the fourth dividend, though it should amount to 10 or 20,000
acres, and that before sold or disposed of.

Seventh, That many of the proprietors and purchasers in West-Jersey, had,
before the making of that act, sold several tracts of land, surveyed and
recorded in right of a fourth dividend, which may fall to the eastward of the
quinti partite line, though they were to the westward of the line agreed to by
Coxe and Barclay, (which at that time was universally esteemed to be the true
line) yet by this act the purchaser may be ousted of his freehold, and the
vender liable to be used and put to great charge; which is an inconveniency
proper to be considered and redressed.

It is therefore proposed, that the proprietors of each division, should
consent to an amendment of the above grievances, and that an equivalent be
given to the western proprietors, for the loss of that gore of land between the
quinti partite line, and that commonly called the scotch line, up to the South
branch of Rariton; and also for so much of that tract of land dying in the
forks of the north branch of Rariton, held under eastern rights, should it be
confirmed to the eastern proprietors pursuant to that act, it being always
received to be in the western division by the agreement made between Coxe and
Barclay.

NUMB. VII.
At a council of proprietors held at the city of Perth-Amboy, August 17, 1742.
PRESENT.

John Hamilton, esquire president. Robert Hunter Morris, esquire for Mr. Ashfield's
propriety. Mr. Alexander, Mr. Johnston. Mr. Burnet, Mr. Dunstar. Mr. Peter's,
for Messrs. Penns. Mr. Leonard. Mr. Nevill. Mr. Smythe. Mr. Foreman.
THIS board having had under consideration, at its several meetings in and
since September last, the paper delivered by the western, proprietors,
entitled, reasons and proposals for an amondment of the quinti partite line,
and the act made for the confirmation thereof, have hitherto delayed coming to
any resolutions; in order that all the members might thereby have an
opportunity of weighing and giving their judgments in a matter so nearly
affecting their interest; and the same being now maturely considered at a full
board, it is unanimously agreed, to return the following answers to the several
articles of the said paper.

To the first, it is the opinion of this board, that though the act might have
passed without the knowledge and consent of some of the proprietors of the
western division of New Jersey, yet they have reason to believe, it was warmly
follicited by such as were owners of a great number of the shares, and past
with the consent of a greater number of those proprietors, than ever has been,
or can be got to agree to any alteration of that act: As to the quinti partite
line, the deed of 1676, by which it was agreed on, having been executed by all
the then proprietors of the eastern and western divisions of New Jersey, did
legally establish that partition line; and being so established, it wanted not
the authority of that act to make it binding on all parties thereto, and their
assigns; nor does that act, as we conceive, by establishing that line, dispose
of any man's property.

To the second, this board has been informed, and believes, that in the year
1686, the lieutenant governors of the eastern and western divisions of
New Jersey, entered into bonds of arbitration, to stand to the award of John
Reid and William Emley, concerning the partition line between East and West
Jersey; and that those arbitrators made an award of the course which such line
should run from little Egg Harbor; and that the following year George Keith,
surveyor general of the eastern division; did, as we believe, at their expense,
actually run the line so awarded, from little Egg Harbor, to Dobies
plantation, on the south branch of Rariton; which is upwards of sixty miles.

This board has likewise been informed, and believes, that another partition
line was afterward agreed on between the chief governors doctor Coxe and
Robert Barclay; but has not heard of any part thereof being afterward actually
run; and it appears not by any thing on our records, that either of those two
lines were made binding on the proprietors of either division, or with consent
of the majority of the proprietors; and had they been with such consent, yet
could they not thereby have appeared to alter the quinti partite line before
agreed to by all the proprietors.

To the third, we know nothing in the act that supposes the quantity of land in
each division to be the same; nor do we conceive after the execution of the
quinti partite deed, that the proprietors of either division had any concern
with the quantity or quality of the land of the other division; though were it a
matter proper to be enquired into, we have reason to believe, that the western
division would be found to contain a much greater number of acres, even
including Staten-Island, than the eastern division.

To the fourth, there has been many applications from the eastern to the
western proprietors, to join in the running the quinti partite line according
to the act, and the eastern proprietors have always been ready to join in that
work; and if any mistakes have happened such as the article sets forth, its but
reason they should suffer, seeing the proprietors of both sides were
sufficiently warned by that act, of the danger of such mistakes, and ought to
place their loss thereby to the account of those who have been the cause of the
delay of the running of the line.

To the fifth and sixth, we are of opinion, that the act was principally
framed, with a view to prevent the inconveniences set forth in these articles,
and is sufficiently worded to answer the ends.

As to the equivalent proposed by the said paper to be given to the western
proprietors, we conceive, that the act has fully provided a remedy for an
equivalent to that division, to which it shall be found to belong.

And upon the whole, as the act was passed with the consent of a very great
number of proprietors, especially of the western division, and as the act has
received the royal assent, so that no alteration can be made therein but by the
king's express assent first had: And as it might be of very dangerous
consequence, to alter, or attempt the altering any part thereof; and as we
believe the consent cannot be had of so great a number of the proprietors to
any alteration, as there was to the making of the act; we cannot agree to any
the least alteration therein; and hope the western division proprietors will
join with the eastern proprietors in the running of the line, and estimating
the equivalent, pursuant to the act: And that the work may be begun this fall,
and carried on in the manner proposed by the minute of this board, of the 28th
of May, 1741, (whereof a copy was then sent to the western proprietors) or in
such other reasonable mannner as can be agreed on; and hope, that we may not be
laid under any necessity of running the line exparte, or of taking any
compulsory method for settling the equivalent; and in hopes that things so
disagreeable, might have been avoided, we have hitherto delayed the having
recourse to them.

Ordered, that Mr. Johnston, Mr. Nevill, Mr. Burnet, Mr. Leonard and Mr. Smyth,
or any three of them, be a committee to agree with the western division
proprietors, upon the time, ways, and means for running the said line, pursuant
to the act; having regard to the former minutes of this board concerning the
same, and to employ the persons necessary for the work in behalf of the eastern
proprietors; which committee are to be ready at Perth-Amboy at any time, until
the end of March next; to meet or correspond with a committee of the western
proprietors for the above purpose.

Ordered, that if any other of the members of this board, be at Perth-Amboy,
that they be admitted into the said committee.

Lawr. Smyth, register to the council of proprietors.

NUMBER VIII.
To the King's most excellent majesty. The remonstrance and humble petition of
your majesty's most loyal subjects, inhabiting in your majesty's province of
East New Jersey, in America.
Humbly shows,

THAT whereas your majesty's humble petitioners did remove and settle
themselves into the said province of East New Jersey, and by virtue of a
license from the honorable colonel Richard Nichols, governor of the said
province, under his then royal highness the duke of York, to purchase lands of
the native pagans; did, according to the said license, purchase lands of the
said natives, at their own proper costs and charges; and whereas since his said
royal highness did sell and transfer all his right and interest to the said
province of East New Jersey, to certain proprietors; by whose license, several
others your majesty's loyal subjects, have also since purchased lands at their
own proper costs and charges, of the native pagans of the same place; whereby
they humbly conceive they have acquired and gained a right and property to the
said lands so purchased; yet notwithstanding, your majesty's loyal subjects are
molested, disturbed and dispossessed of their said lands, by the said
proprietors or their agents; who under pretense and color of having bought the
government, with the soil, have distrained from, and ejected several persons
for and under the pretense of quit rent, and lord's rent; whereby your (...)
liege subjects have been sued, and put to great trouble and charges, and have
been compelled to answer to vexatious actions; and after they have defended
their own rights, and obtained judgment in their favor, could not have their
charges, as according to law they ought to have; but have been forced to sit
down under the loss of several hundreds of pounds sustained by their unjust
molestations

And further, notwithstanding your majesty's liege subjects have purchased
their lands at their own proper costs and charges, by virtue of the aforesaid
license; yet the said proprietors, governors or agents, without any pretended
process of law, have given and granted great, part of the said lands, by
patent, to several of the said proprietors and others, as to them seemed fit.

And notwithstanding their pretense to government, yet they left us from the
latter end of June, 1689, till about the latter end of August, 1691, without
any government, and that too in the time of actual war; so that had the enemy
made a descent upon us, as we were without any military officers to command or
give directions, in order to our defense, or magistrates to put the laws in
execution; and during the whole time, the said proprietors have governed this
your majesty's province, they have never taken care to preserve or defend us
from the native pagans, or other enemies, by sending or providing any arms,
ammunition or stores; but rather have provoked and incensed the said natives to
make war upon us, by surveying and patenting their lands, contrary to their
liking, without purchasing the same from them, or making any satisfaction in
consideration thereof; and sometimes when the said natives have sold and
disposed their lands, as to them seemed meet, they the said proprietors have
disposed of the same to others, or else found them who had the property in it,
to purchase it of them, upon their own terms; which the said natives have
highly resented, and often complained of, and (may justly be feared) wait only
for an opportunity to revenge it upon the inhabitants of this your majesty's
province.

And further to manifest the illegal and arbitrary proceedings of the said
proprietors, in contempt of your majesty's laws, and against their own
knowledge, signified in a letter by them to the council here in East
New Jersey, wherein they say as follows: We have been obliged against our own
inclinations to dismiss colonel Hamilton from the government, because of a late
act of parliament disabling all scotchmen to serve in places of public trust
and profit, and obliging all proprietors of colonies to present their
respective governors to the king, for his approbation; so we have appointed our
friend Jeremiah Basse, to succeed colonel Hamilton in government, whom we have
also presented to the king, and by him he is owned and approved of.
Notwithstanding which letter, they have superseded the said Jeremiah Basse
(whom they wrote was approved by your majesty) and have commissionated the said
colonel Hamilton, without your majesty's royal approbation; although removed
before by them, as a person disabled by law; who now by virtue of their, the
said proprietors commission only, would impose himself upon us as governor; and
when in government before, superseded by the aforesaid Basse, was by them
continued about a year after the 25th of March 1697, without taking the oath
enjoined by law; and does now presame to exercise government, not having
legally taken the said oath, or having your majesty's royal approbation. The
said proprietors of East New Jersey, have also, in contempt of your majesty's
known laws, commissionated a native of Scotland to be secretary and
attorney general of this your majesty's province; (being both places of the
greatest trust next to the governor) and one of the same nation to be clerk of
the supreme court of this your majesty's province; which may be of ill
consequence, in relation to the act of trade and navigation, and to the great
hindrance of your majesty's loyal subjects, (the power of government being
chiefly in the hands of natives of Scotland) from informing against any illegal
or fradulent trading, by Scotchmen, or others in the province.

We your majesty's loyal subjects, laboring under these, and many other
grievances and oppressions, by the proprietors of this your majesty's province
of East New Jersey; do in most humble manner, lay ourselves before your majesty
(the fountain of justice) humbly imploring your majesty will be graciously
pleased, according to your princely wisdom, to take into consideration our evil
circumstances, under the present proprietors, (if the right of government is
invested in them) and that your majesty will be graciously pleased to give your
toyal orders to the said proprietors, that with your majesty's royal
approbation, they commmissionate for governor, a fit person qualified according
to law, who as an indifferent judge, may decide the controversies arising
between the proprietors and the inhabitants of this your majesty's province;
and settle all the differences, which at present they labor under; and your
majesty's petitioners as in duty bound, shall ever pray.

John Royce, Samuel Walker, Vincent Rugnion.

Memorandum. Besides these three, there are 221 more in the original.

NUMBER. IX.
To the right honorable the lords of the council of trade and foreign
plantations.
The memorial of the proprietors of East New Jersey, in America.

THE proprietors having in all their applications to this honorable board,
showed an aversion to have any controversy with his majesty; as by their
several expedients in their memorials laid before your lordships may appear;
and considering how often the near neighborhood of East-Jersey to New York,
(the most important frontier belonging to the crown of England, in
North America) has been urged upon them, to induce them to a resi^nation of
their government; they do hereby declare themselves ready to surrender the same
to his majesty; although the government was the chief motive of purchasing the
said province, which they did by the opinion and advice of eminent council,
learned in the law; upon the credit of which, and the confirmation by king
Charles the second, of the title to the grantees, their heirs and assigns, as
absolute proprietors and governors (as by his proclamation hereunto annexed
does appear) they have buried great part of their estates in building, and
planting the country; and at their own expense maintained the government for
several years past, as well as before his majesty's happy succession to the
crown, as ever since; and have not received any returns whatsoever, for all
their labor and cost to this day. In consideration of the premises, the
proprietors do, in humble confidence, rely on his majesty's justice and
goodness, to confirm to the proprietors and planters respectively, the
following rights and privileges; to render them (at least) as easy under his
majesty's government, as when under the proprietors; toward which they presume
to enumerate the following particulars, viz.

First, That his majesty will be graciously pleased to confirm to them, the
soil and lands of the said province and the quit rents reserved upon the grants
made, or to be made to the planters or others.

Second, That upon the annexation of the government of the said province, to
that of New York, the port of Perth Amboy may be established, for entering
ships, and importing goods there, and exporting goods from thence, without
being obliged to enter their ships at any other place; paying the same, or like
custom to his majesty, as are or shall from time to time, be payable at
New York.

Third, To have free liberty to trade with any Indians, or other inhabitants of
America, without interruption; and the proprietors to have the so ^^privilege
(as always has been practiced) of purchasing from the Indians, all such lands
lying within East-Jersey, as yet remain unpurchased from them.

Fourth, All necessary officers and courts of justice, for administration of
justice, in cases criminal and civil, to be appointed and hold in East-Jersey,
in the same manner as is practiced within the government of New York; and that
the inhabitants may not be obliged to go to New York, or be impleaded there,
for any criminal or civil matter arising within East-Jersey, nor be compelled
to serve upon juries, or in any ministerial office within the province of
New York.

Fifth, That a superior court be held twice a year, at Perth-Amboy, before
which writs of error, or appeals (in the nature of writs of error) from other
courts within the province, may be brought and determined.

Sixth, That the public register, and all records relating to the said
province, may be kept at Perth-Amboy, and not removed to any other place; and
that the constituting of the secretary and register, and the surveyor general
of the said province of East New Jersey, remain in the proprietors.

Seventh, That the same number of counties be continued in East Jersey, as
there are at present, and by the same names; and that ea^n county in East
Jersey, may choose and send as many representatives to the general assembly, to
be held for New York and East-Jersey, as are or shall be chosen by any county
in New York; and if any more counties shall be hereafter created or appointed
in New York, as many may be created and appointed in East-Jersey.

Eighth, That a proportionable number of the inhabitants of East-Jersey, may be
appointed to be of the governor's council, at all general assemblies, and to
have votes therein.

Ninth, That the twenty-four proprietors may be lords of the soil, and hold
courts for the lands in their proprietyships, and appoint all officers that
relate thereunto.

Tenth, No person or persons whatsoever, to be molested or deprived of any
civil right or privilege, or rendered incapable of holding any office or
employment in the government, because of their religious principles; the
province being planted by protestant people of diverse persuasions, to whom that
liberty was an original encouragement

Eleventh, That all wills of persons dying within East Jersey, and letters of
administration of estates lying there, may be made and granted by the chief
judge of East Jersey, for the time being, who is to reside there, and a
register thereof kept at Perth-Amboy.

Twelfth, That the proprietors still have their powers continued, to grant
markets and fairs in the said province.

Thirteenth, Lastly, all lands, goods and chattles of felons, felons of
themselves, deodands, fugitives, persons outlawed and put in exigent, waifs,
estrays, treasure trove, mines and minerals, royal mines, wreeks, royal fish,
that shall be forfeited, found or taken within East-Jersey, or by the
inhabitants thereof, within the seas adjacent, to remain to the proprietors,
with all other privileges and advantages, as amply as in the grant and
confirmation to them of the fourteenth of March, 1682.

And because many of the proprietors of East-Jersey, are also proprietors of
West-Jersey; it is humbly desired, that colonel Andrew Hamilton, may be
dispatched by this board, to the government of West-Jersey; his presence being
much wanted there, for the convenience of his majesty's subjects in that
province.

Signed by order, and on behalf of the proprietors. WILLIAM DOCKWRA, secretary
and register.

NUMBER X.
Opinion and answer of the lords commissioners for trade and plantations, to
the memorial of the proprietors of E. N. Jersey, in America, signed by Mr.
Dockwra, and received from him the 5th of July, 1699. Taken from the books in
the plantation office.

ARTICLE I. WE have no objection to what is herein desired.

ARTICLE II. We conceive his majesty may do what is herein proposed, in case
the proprietors accept of a new charter, with such conditions as are
reasonable, with relation to their propriety; but that it is very improper for
his majesty to oblige himself to a compliance with this article by any clause
in the new charter.

ARTICLE III. The first part of this article is unreasonable; since it may
happen to be sometimes advisable to restrain this liberty: But the proprietors
of East-Jersey may have the same liberty granted them of trading with the
Indians, as is granted to the inhabitants of New York, or any other plantation
in America, under his majesty's immediate government; what relates to the
purchasing of land may be allowed.

ARTICLE IV. The first part of this article, we conceive, may be fit to be
allowed, (provided the officers be appointed by the king's governor) but not
without appeals in civil matters, to the king's governor and council, and to
the king in council; nor so as to hinder trials in criminal matters, by his
majesty's especial commission, to be executed either in New York, or
East-Jersey, as shall be thought fit; New York and East-Jersey being to be
accounted one province, without distinction, except as to the propriety of
lands, and the dominum utile.

ARTICLE V. This article we think fit to be allowed of, provided there be a
further appeal to the governor of New York, and council, which is to consist as
well of the inhabitants of East-Jersey, as of those of New York, indifferently.

ARTICLE VI. What relates to the public register and records, to be kept at
Perth-Amboy, may be allowed; but the not removing them to any other place, upon
any account whatsoever, when the public service shall require it, seems
unreasonable; and the proprietors constituting of the secretary and register
(which the king does every where appoint) does not seem fit to be allowed; nor
is it fit there should be more than one chief secretary, both for New York and
New Jersey, who may appoint a deputy to officiate in his absence from either
place.

The surveyor general has a more particular reference to the proprietors and
their lands; so that their constitution of such an office, may be allowed.

ARTICLE VII. We have no objection against the number of counties; but the rest
of this article seems to be wholly unreasonable; and in case East-Jersey be
allowed to send one sixth part of the representatives of the general assembly,
and West New Jersey one sixth more (which would be one full third of the whole
number of the representatives for New York and the Jersies) it is as much as
can well be allowed; since otherwise these two Jersies under proprietors, would
come in competition with New York itself, and out-vote that part of the
province when united; so that one third of the number of representatives for
the Jersies, and two thirds for New York (or thereabouts) seems a reasonable
proportion.

ARTICLE VIII. This may be reasonable; but then the proportion must be agreed
on, so as to answer that of the preceding article.

ARTICLE IX. We have no objection to this article, in case those officers be no
other than such as constitute a court baron or leet in England.

ARTICLE X. This article must be regulated by acts of parliament, and the usage
of New York itself.

ARTICLE XI. The probate of wills is usually in the king's governor; but he may
appoint commissaries for executing the same in any part of his government.

ARTICLE XII. We have no other objection, than that this power is usually in
the governor.

ARTICLE XIII. This article may be reasonable, except as to the goods and
chattels of traitors, fugitives, and persons outlawed, which is matter of
state; nor can right accruing to the proprietors from the seas adjacent, be
well circumscribed; the grant also of 1682, ought to be duly considered, and
such particulars therein as are proper, may be allowed of without such a
general and undetermined reference.

NUMB. XI.
To the right honorable the lords of the council, of trade and foreign
plantations.

The humble memorial of the proprietors of the province of East New Jersey, in
America.

THE proprietors in all their applications to your lordships, and particularly
in their last proposals, having expressed a great readiness of complying with
his majesty's pleasure, in relation to their government, so as their properties
might be preserved to them, by such concessions on his majesty's part, as are
necessary to that end; are surprised at the dubious answer returned by your
lordships to the second article of their proposals, concerning the
establishment of a port at Perth-Amboy, for entering ships and importing goods
there, and exporting goods from thence without being obliged to enter their
ships at any other place. For the principal objection that has been always
made, to the allowance of a port in East-Jersey, arising from the non-payment
of customs there, and the detriment accruing to the trade of New York; by
reason thereof the proprietors conceived, that by submitting to pay the same
customs as are paid at New York, they had effectually answered that objection,
and prevented all others; and that they being his majesty's subjects, and
equally entitled to his favor and protection with the inhabitants of New York,
might under the payment of such duties, freely enjoy those conveniences for
trade, which God and nature have allotted to their colony, and they have
purchased with their money, and which has not been denied to any other American
plantation; though paying no customs, but permitted as a natural right. The
proprietors therefore crave leave (in pursuance of that sincerity and plainness
wherewith they have all along addressed to your lordships on this occasion) to
declare, that the obtaining a port to be continued forever, was their main
inducement to consent to a surrender of their government; and therefore, they
insist, that in the new charter to be granted them by his majesty, there be an
express clause inserted, whereby Perth-Amboy shall be established a port
forever, for entering all ships coming into, and going from East-Jersey, for
importing and exporting goods; and that such port shall not be forfeited or
taken away for any misdemeanor whatsoever, but only the persons guilty of the
misdemeanor, shall be accountable and punishable for it.

This is the only thing that makes the province of any value to the
proprietors, or give them hopes of re-imbursing their purchase money, and other
expenses in improvements; and if your lordships think it too great a privilege
for them, who have been faithful subjects to his majesty, and contributed to
the defense of the frontiers during the late war in America, more than they
were able to bear; the proprietors cannot be accessory to their own ruin, by a
voluntary surrender; but must endeavor to vindicate their rights in a legal
manner, and seek redress by such other measures as they shall be advised to,
and are consistent with their duty to his majesty.

The proprietors do further crave leave to mention, that if their desire of a
port is once granted, they do not foresee any great difficulty, to adjust with
your lordships the other articles mentioned in their memorial.

Signed on the behalf of the said proprietors, and by their order. WILLIAM
DOCKWRA, Secretary and Register.
London, 15th January, 1699-1700.
NUMBER XII.
To their Excellencies the lords justices of England.

The humble petition of the proprietors of the provinces of East and
West-Jersey, in America.

Shows,

THAT your petitioners, as they were advised by their council, being legally
entitled to the government of those provinces, by virtue of several grants from
the late king James, when duke of York, the declaration of the late king
Charles the second, under the great seal of England, and of several acts of
state and orders of council, admitting their right, have, for many years
appointed governors there, and particularly colonel Andrew Hamilton, who
administered the government, to the great service of the crown, and universal
satisfaction of the inhabitants, until an act of parliament passed in the
seventh and eighth years of his present majesty's reign, entitled, an act for
preventing frauds, and regulating abuses in the plantation trade.

Upon which law some doubt arising, whether a native of Scotland (as col.
Hamilton is) were capable of being a governor of the plantations; your
petitioners, for avoiding any color of offense against that act of parliament,
appointed one Jeremiah Basse governor of those provinces; but the lords of the
committee of trade and plantations, making then some scruple concerning your
petitoner's right of government; mr. Basse had not such a formal approbation of
his majesty, as that act directs; and though your petitioners were at the same
time honored with instructions from the then lords justices, and lords
commissioners of the treasury, for their governors conduct, which were
produced, and published by mr. Basse, as a testimony of his being nominated
governor with the knowledge and implicit consent of his majesty and his
ministers of state; yet for want of an express approbation in writing, the
inhabitants refused to obey him; and he returned to England: Whereupon your
petitioners, who had been informed of the opinions of his majesty's late
attorney and present solicitor general, that a native of Scotland was not
disabled to execute any office in the plantations, were induced to re-appoint
the said col. Hamilton (then in England) governor of those provinces, whom your
petitioners presented to the lords of the committee of trade and plantations,
humbly remonstrating to them, the necessity of sending a governor for
preservation of the public peace, and praying their lordships recommendation
of him for his majesty's approbation; but their lordships having resolved to
controvert your petitioners right of government, by a trial at law, declared
they could not consent to such an approbation, without prejudice to his
majesty's right; yet in regard to the necessity of the people's being under
some government till the right was determined, their lordships delivered their
opinion, that col. Hamilton, acting according to the laws of England, your
petitioners might be safe in commissionating him, and he in executing their
commission; under the security of which approbation, col. Hamilton went over,
and reassumed the government of those provinces; but some sactious and
^^bulent persons, impatient of any government, oppose his administration,
because he is not approved of by an order of council, according to the express
letter of the act of parliament, and have made so great divisions and
confusions there, that the public peace is daily violated, and the public
justice obstructed.

That your petitioners have agreed, and are ready to surrender all their right
of government to his majesty, upon such terms and conditions, as are requisite
for preservation of their properties and civil interests, and which they humbly
hope will be allowed to them.

Your petitioners therefore most humbly pray, that for the preservation of the
public peace of those provinces, your excellencies will be graciously pleased,
immediately to approve of col. Hamilton to be governor of the provinces of East
and West Jersey, until the terms of surrender can be adjusted; and your
petitioners shall ever pray.

Jos. Brooksbank, Dan. Coxe, jun. Tho. Heart, Joseph Ormston, Joseph Ormston, as
having procuration, Miles Forster and Edward Antill, Gilbert Molleson, Tho.
Barker, Tho. Lane, Paul Dominique, Tho. Skinner, John Bridges, Michael Watts,
E. Richier, Clem. Plumstead, Tho. Cooper, Walter Benthal.

NUMBER XIII.
Representation of the lords of trade.
To their excellencies the lords justices.
May it please your excellencies,

IN obedience to your excellencies commands, signified to us by Mr. Yard, upon
several papers laid before your excellencies, relating to the state of his
majesty's provinces of East and West-Jersey, in America: We have considered all
the said papers, together with others of the like nature, that were already in
our hands; and having likewise heard what the proprietors and others had to
offer; we thereupon most humbly report to your excellencies,

That those countries which are now known by the name of East and West
New Jersey, were granted, together with several other territories, by king
Charles the second, by letters patents, bearing date the 12th day of March,
1664, to the then duke of York, his heirs and assigns; together with full and
absolute power and authority, to him, his heirs, deputies, agents,
commissioners and assigns, to correct, punish, pardon, govern and rule, all
such persons as did then, or should at any time thereafter, reside within the
said territories, according to such laws, orders, ordinances, directions and
instruments, as by the said duke of York, or his assigns, should be
established; and with several other clauses relating to the government and
defense of the same.

That the said duke of York did thereupon grant, convey and assign, the said
provinces, (by the names of Nova-Caesaria of New Jersey) to John lord Berkeley
and sir George Carteret, their heirs and assigns, with all and every the
appurtenances thereto belonging, in as full and ample manner as the same was
granted to him, by the aforesaid letters patents of king Charles the second.

That his said majesty king Charles the second, by other letters patents, dated
the 29th of June, 1674, did again grant and convey to the said duke of York,
all the said lands and territories, in the same manner as before expressed; and
that several sub divisions and sales, having in the mean while been made by the
said lord Berkeley, sir George Carteret, and others claiming under them; he the
said duke of York, did, by indenture, dated the 6th day of August, 1680, grant
and confirm the province of West New Jersey, with all the appurtenances
thereunto belonging, to Edward Byllinge, of West^^^ster, gent, in whom the
title thereunto then was, and to his heirs and assigns forever; and did in like
manner, by indenture, dated the 14th day of March, 1682, grant and confirm the
province of East New Jersey, with all the appurtenances thereto belonging, to
(...) Earl of Perth, William Penn, esquire and several other persons, in whom the
title to the same then was; and to their heirs and assigns forever; and by each
of the said indentures, did likewise give, grant, and assign unto the aforesaid
respective grantees or assigns, all and every such and the same powers,
authorities, jurisdictions, governments, and other matters and things
whatsoever, which by the aforementioned respective letters, patents, or either
of them, were granted or intended to be granted, to be exercised by him the
said duke of York, his heirs, assigns, deputies, officers or agents.

That the present proprietors, who derive their respective titles to their
several shares and proportions of the soil of these provinces, by several mean
conveyances, from and under the aforementioned grants to Edward Byllinge, and
to the Earl of Perth, and other persons to whom the duke of York had
immediately conveyed the same; do in like manner, and by virtue of diverse such
mean conveyances, claim the same powers and rights of government as were
granted by king Charles the second, to the duke of York; and by him to others,
according to the tenor of the aforesaid indentures.

That nevertheless, we do not find, that any sufficient form of government has
ever been settled in those provinces, either by the duke of York, or by those
claiming under him, as aforesaid; but that many inconveniences and disorders
having arisen from their pretense of right to govern. The proprietors of East
New Jersey, did surrender their said pretended right to the late king James, in
the month of April 1688; which was accordingly accepted by him.

That since his majesty's accession to the crown, the proprietors both of East
and West New Jersey, have continued to challenge the same right as before; and
did in the year 1697, apply themselves to us, in order to their obtaining his
majesty's approbation of the person whom they desired to have continued
governor of the said provinces, but at the same time refused to enter into
security to his majesty, pursuant to the address of the right honorable the
house of lords, of the 18th of March, 1696, that the person so presented by
them the said proprietors, should duly observe and put in execution, the acts
of trade; yet nevertheless proceeded, from time to time, to commissionate whom
they thought fit, to be governor of those provinces, without his majesty's
approbation; according to what is required by the late act, for preventing
frauds and regulating abuses in the plantation trade.

That in this manner having formerly commissionated col. Andrew Hamilton,
afterward mr. Jeremiah Basse; then again superceding their commission to mr.
Basse, and renewing or confirming that to col. Hamilton; and ever since that
also, some of them having sent another commission to one capt. Andrew Bown: The
inhabitants sensible of the defect and insufficiency of all those commissions,
for want of his majesty's authority, have upon several occasions, some of them
opposed one of those governors, some another, according as interest,
friendship, or faction had inclined them.

That the inhabitants of East New Jersey, in a petition to his majesty, the
last year, complained of several grievances they lay under, by the neglect or
mismanagement of the proprietors of that province or their agents, as
particularly, that from the latter end of June 1689, till about the latter end
of August 1692 (which was a time of actual war) they had not taken any manner
of care about the government thereof, so that there having been neither
magistrates established to put the laws in execution, nor military officers to
command, or give directions, in order to the defense of the province, they were
exposed to any insults that might have been made upon them by an enemy; unto
which they also added, that during the whole time the said proprietors have
governed, or pretended to govern that province, they have never taken care to
preserve, or defend the same from the Indians, or other enemies, by sending or
providing any arms, ammunition or stores, as they ought to have done; and the
said inhabitants thereupon, humbly prayed his majesty would be pleased to
commissionate some fit person qualified according to law, to be governor over
them.

That it has been represented to us, by several letters, memorial^, and other
papers, as well from the inhabitants as proprietors of both those provinces,
that they are at present in confusion and anarchy; and that it is much to be
apprehended, left by the heats of the parties that are amongst them, they
should fall into such violences as may endanger the lives of many persons, and
destroy the colony.

That the greatest number of the proprietors of both those provinces residing
in this city, being hereby sensible of the necessity of his majesty's
authority, for the preserving of peace and good order in those countries, have
lately presented a petition to your excellencies; in the preamble whereof,
though they still seem to assert their title to the government of the said
provinces; yet nevertheless in the end, declare they have agreed, and are ready
to surrender the same to his majesty, upon such terms and conditions as are
requisite for preservation of their properties and civil interests; and they
therefore humbly pray, that for the preservation of the public peace, your
excellencies would be graciously pleased, immediately to approve colonel
Hamilton, to be governor of both the said provinces of East and West
New Jersey, until the terms of surrender can be adjusted.

That in a late memorial See the memorial which follows.
presented to your excellencies (and signed not only by the same person, but by
others likewise, who would not join in the prayer of the petition) having again
prefaced their own pretended right to government; they do in like manner
declare their readiness to surrender the same, in humble hope and confidence
(as they express themselves) that his majesty will be pleased to grant them all
reasonable privileges, which are necessary to preserve their civil rights, and
the interests of planters, and which are not inconsistent with his majesty's
service, or royal authority; after which they proceed to propose, and
particularly enlarge upon, several articles relating to the method of settling
both the said provinces, and uniting them under one government.

That the proprietors of East New Jersey, residing there, have signed and sent
over hither, to a gentleman whom they have constituted their agent and attorney
in that behalf, an absolute and unconditioned surrender of their right to the
government of that province, so far as the same is in them, and so far as they
are capable of doing it for others concerned with them in that propriety.

That in relation to the aforesaid articles, we have been attended by several
of the proprietors here; who have further personally declared to us, that their
intention in proposing the same, is only to secure their rights, in such things
as are matter of property; and that they unanimously desire to surrender the
government to the king, and submit the circumstances thereof to his majesty's
pleasure. But in relation to the aforementioned petition, that colonel Hamilton
may at present receive his majesty's approbation to be governor of those
provinces, the said proprietors are so divided amongst themselves, that whereas
some seem to insist upon his approbation, as one principal condition of their
surrender, others in the same manner insist upon his exclusion.

Upon all which, we humbly represent unto your excellencies, that not being
satisfied, that the aforementioned grants from the duke of York, (the only
title upon which the said proprietors claim a right to government) without any
direct and immediate authority from the crown, were or could be of any validity
to convey that right, (which we have been informed is a power unalienable from
the person to whom it is granted, and not to be assigned by him unto any other;
much less divided, sub divided, and conveyed from one to another, as has been
done in the present case) We did thereupon humbly represent to his majesty, the
18th of April, 1699, that a trial might be had in Westminster Hall, upon a
seigned issue, whereby their claim to the right of government might receive a
determination.

That no such determination having yet been made, nor any proceedings (that we
know of) had, upon the forementioned surrender; but it being generally
acknowledged, both by the inhabitants and proprietors of the aforesaid
provinces, that the disorder and confusion they are now fallen into, are so
great, that the public peace and administration of justice is interrupted and
violated; and that whilst those disorders continue, there neither is, nor
possibly can be, any due provision made, for the guard and defense of that
country, against an enemy, we are humbly of opinion, that it is very expedient
for the preservation of those territories to the crown of England, and for
securing the private interest of all persons concerned, that his majesty would
be pleased to constitute a governor over those provinces, by his immediate
commission; which together with the instructions, to be also given to the said
governor, may contain such powers, authorities and directions, as may be
necessary for the establishing there a regular constitution of government, by a
governor, council, and general assembly, with other civil and military
officers; and for securing to the proprietors and inhabitants, all their
properties and civil rights, in as full and ample manner, as the like are
enjoyed by any plantation, under governors appointed by his majesty's immediate
commission; together with such clauses and further provisions, as may be
thought reasonable, in order to prevent the interfering of that colony with the
interest of his majesty's other plantations; as the proprietary governments in
America have generally done.

And we further humbly offer, that draughts of such a commission and
instructions may be prepared; and that they may be also shown to the
proprietaries of those provinces, in order to their acquiescence, and the
surrender of their pretended right to government, in such manner and form as
may be effectual in law, to the final extinguishing of their pretenses; or in
case of their refusal, in order to such other proceedings as shall then be
thought fit.

All which nevertheless, is most humbly submitted.

Phil. Meadows, Jo. Poliex^en, Abr. Hill, Mat. Prior. Whitehall, October 2,
1701.

NUMBER. XIV.
The humble memorial of the proprietors of the provinces of East and
West-Jersey, in America.
THOUGH the proprietors are advised by their council, that their right to ports
within those respective provinces, was fully asserted, and their past
administration of the government of those provinces, as fully justified at the
late trial had in the court of king's bench, between mr. Basse and the earl of
Bellemont; they are notwithstanding, ready and desirous, in obedience to his
majesty's pleasure, to surrender all right of government there; in humble hope
and confidence, that as his royal wisdom prompts him to resume the American
proprietary governments into his own more immediate administration; so his
justice and goodness will incline him to grant the proprietors all reasonable
privileges, which are necessary to preserve their civil rights, and the
interest of the planters, and which are not inconsistent with his majesty's
service, or royal authority.

To which they humbly propose and pray,

First. That his majesty will grant and confirm to them their lands and
quit-rents, with such other liberties, franchises and privileges, as were
granted to them by the late king James, when duke of York, or have been granted
by his majesty to other proprietors of provinces in America, except the powers
of government.

Second. That his majesty will grant to them, the sole power of purchasing from
the Indians, all lands lying within these provinces, which remain unpurchased
from them; and that all other persons who have purchased, or shall purchase
lands, either with or without license first had from the proprietors, and who
have not already taken patents, shall be obliged to take patents of such lands
from the proprietors, under a moderate quit-rent; and in default thereof, their
title from the Indians to be declared null and void. This the proprietors
humbly conceive will be necessary, as well to vindicate his majesty's royal
right, as their own property under him; because the planters have lately taken
up and promoted an opinion, that the king's right to all American countries
discovered by English subjects, is only notional and arbitrary; and that the
Indian natives are the absolute independent owners, and have the sole disposal
thereof: And some of the planters who have made such purchases of land from the
Indians, refuse to take patents from the proprietors, grantees of the crown;
and others, who have taken patents, refuse to pay the quit rents reserved.

Third. That the inhabitants of both provinces may have the same liberty of
trading with the Indians, as the inhabitants of New York, or of any other
plantation in America, under his majesty's immediate government, do or shall
enjoy.

Fourth. That the port of Perth-Amboy, in East-Jersey, and the ports of
Burlington and Cohansie, in West-Jersey, may be established ports of those
respective provinces forever; and that no ship bound to any of those places,
shall be obliged to enter at any other port; nor any ships to be laden there,
shall be obliged to clear at any other port; and that officers may be appointed
at such port, for collecting the customs, and seeing the acts of navigation
duly executed.

Fifth. That the proprietors may appoint surveyors general, and other officers,
for surveying, and recording of the surveys of land granted by and held of them.

Sixth. That the proprietors of East-Jersey may hold three markets in every
week forever, on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, for all manner of cattle,
goods and merchandises, at Perth-Amboy; and four fairs in every year there, to
begin the Monday in the months of (...) and each fair to continue six days; and
that the proprietors of West-Jersey may hold the like number of markets in
every week forever, on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, at Burlington, in West
Jersey; and four fairs in every year there, to begin the (...) Monday in the
months of (...) and each fair to continue six days.

Seventh. That East and West Jersey may be erected into one distinct
government, and have one general assembly, for making laws for the good of both
provinces, to fit alternatively, at Perth-Amboy in East-Jersey, and Burlington
in West-Jersey; and that such general assembly may be elected every year in the
month of (...) and may meet on the first Monday in October, and oftener if need
be.

Eighth. That the general assembly may consist of thirty-six representatives,
to be chosen in manner following, viz. two by the inhabitants, householders of
the city or town of Perth-Amboy, in East-Jersey; two by the inhabitants,
householders of the city or town of Burlington, in West-Jersey; sixteen by the
freeholders of East-Jersey, and sixteen by the freeholders of West-Jersey; but
that no person shall be capable of being elected a representative by the said
freeholders, or afterward of sitting in general assembly, who shall not have
one thousand acres of land, of an estate of freehold in his own right, within
the province for which he shall be chosen; and that no freeholder shall be
capable of electing such representatives, who shall not have one hundred acres
of land there in his own right of an estate of freehold; and that this number
of representatives shall not be enlarged or diminished, or the manner of
electing them altered, otherwise than by act of general assembly, and the
approbation of his majesty, his heirs and successors.

Ninth. That the governor's council may consist of inhabitants of both
provinces; whereof an equal number to be chosen out of each province.

Tenth. That all necessary officers, and courts for administration of justice,
in cases criminal and civil, be established in each province; and that one
supreme court may be held for both provinces, twice in every year, at
Perth-Amboy in East-Jersey, and Burlington in West-Jersey, alternatively; in
which courts all writs of error from any other courts within these provinces,
shall be brought and determined; and that this court may consist of the
governor's council, and the three capital judges of each province, (except such
of them who pronounced the first judgment, sentence, or decree) or of any seven
of them, whereof two of the council, and three judges, for the time being,
shall be five; and every member of the court, who shall be present, shall have
an equal vote; saving that where the court shall be equally divided in their
opinions, the eldest of the council shall have a decisive vote.

Eleventh. That no appeal to the king may lie in personal actions, where the
cause of action is of less value than two hundred pounds.

Twelfth. That all protestants may be exempt from all penal laws relating to
religion; and may be capable of being of the governor's council, and of holding
any other public office, though they do not conform to the discipline of the
church of England, or scruple to take an oath; and that an instruction be given
to the governor, for procuring a law to pass in the general assembly, for
substituting some proper declaration in the place of an oath.

Thirteenth. That his majesty will be pleased to permit the proprietors to
nominate the first governor.

Fourteenth. That all such further privileges, franchises and liberties, as
upon consideration, shall be found necessary to the good government and
prosperity of the said provinces, and increasing the trade thereof, may be
granted to the proprietors.

JOSEPH ORMSTON.
August 12, 1701. Joseph Ormston, having procuration from Miles Forster and
Edward Antill, Gilbert Molleson, Thomas Barker, Clement Plumstead, Thomas
Cooper, William Dockwra, Walter Benthal, Edward Ritchier, Joseph Brooksbank,
Daniel Coxe, jun. Thomas Lane, Paul Dominique, John Bridges, Michael Watts,
Thomas Skinner, Thomas Heart.



FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 35, line 14, some copies, for was read were 40, l. 13, some copies, for
was r. masters right 55, l. 35, r. in the month called 87, l. 27, for disposed
upon r. be disposed of 93, l. 28, dele had 100, l. 6, r. 1678 116, l. 29, for
Hoarkill was legally r. passengers to it were properly 118, l. 1, for would r.
could 136, l. 16, for have r. had 145, l. 8, for 1754, r. 1755 166, l. 21, dele
twelve 196, in the note, r. see the act reciting 411, and 412, in the margin,
for 1710, r. 1719 437, l. 12, for Haover, r. Hanover 438, l. 9, for rank r. age
439, last line, for 427, etc. r. 428, etc. 488, l. 4, dele some copies, in many
490, l. 13, for and r. particularly 500, l. 34, dele both 512, l. 6, for
Imprimus some copies, r. Imprimis

