A VINDICATION OF THE British Colonies, AGAINST The Aspersions of THE Halifax
GENTLEMAN, IN His Letter to a Rhode Island FRIEND.

Sed fugite, o miseri, fugite, atque ab litore funem Rumpite!
Clamorem immensum tollit, quo pontus et omnes
Intremuere undae penitusque exterrita tellus
Italiae curvisque immug^it Aetna Cavernis.
-- fluit ae^ rivis, au^ique metallum
Vulnificusque chalybs vasta furnace liquescit
-- Alii ventosis follibus auras
Accipiunt redduntque, alii stridentia tinguni
Era lacu: gemit impositis incudibus antrum.
Illi inter sese multa vi brachia tollunt
In numerum versa^tque tenaci forcipe massam.
VIRGIL. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, 1765.

A VINDICATION of the British Colonies, against the Aspersions of the Halifax
Gentleman, in his Letter to a Rhode Island Friend.
IT had been long expected, that some American pen would be drawn in support of
those measures which to all thinking men must appear to be very extraordinary.
Those who are above party, can peruse the speculations of a Whig or a Tory, a
Quaker or a Jacobite, with the same composure of mind. Those who confine
themselves within the bounds of moderation and decency, are so far respectable.
All who grow outrageous, are disgustful. The "head of a tribunitian veto, with
a mob at his heels, and a grand Asiatic monarque, with a shoal of sychophants
clinging about him, like the little wretches in the well known print of Hobb's
Laviathan, may be objects of equal diversion, derision and contempt. Mankind
ever were, are and will be divisible, into the great and small vulgar. Both
will have their respective heads: The laws of nature are uniform and
invariable. The same causes will produce the same effects, from generation to
generation. He that would be a great captain, must for a season exult in the
honor of being a little one.

"Bred on the mountains had proud Julius been,
"He Would shone a sturdy wrestler on the green."
The Halifax gentleman having discovered that governor H -- pk -- ns is
"totally unacquainted with style and diction," and yet "eagerly fond to pass
upon the world for a man of letters," great perfection might be reasonably
expected in the composition of the friendly epistle. Instead of this, are found
inaccuracies in abundance, declamation and false logic without end; verse is
retailed in the shape of prose, solecisms are attempted to be passed off for
good grammar, and the most indelicate fustian for the fine taste. The whole
performance is truly Filmerian. The picture is very well charged with shade and
thick darkness, intermixed with here and there a ray of light; now and then a
flash, and once in a while is heard a little rumbling thunder from a few
distant broken clouds.

"Some future bard may sing the present times,
"And HE be made the hero of the song*
These two lines are crowded together in one short sentence, in a prosaic form.
(page 4.)

The gentleman (page 5.) has given us a portrait of the English nation. It
contains but a dozen lines, and expresses or plainly implies the following
wonderful group of ideas, viz. "A high pitch of glory and power, envy and
admiration of surrounding slaves, holding fast the balance of Europe, a rival
in arts and arms of every period ancient and modern, impatience, jealousy,
pride and folly, prodigality, particularly in laying wagers to the value of
kingdoms, and a quick sensibility and consciousness of dignity, which renders
plain simple truth intolerable." As the English nation expired about sixty
years since, in the union of the two kingdoms, it is needless to enquire whether
this be a just character of that once brave and generous, free and loyal
people: But if this should be intended for a filial compliment to
Great Britain, it is a very indifferent one. In the late war America joined in
the stakes: The bet was not for the safety of the colonies alone: It was for
the salvation of Great Britain, as well as the plantations, i. e. for the whole
community. Cornwall raises and pays one company of dragoons, Devonshire
another. Is Cornwall more obliged to Devonshire than Devonshire is to Cornwall?
They are both obliged by the strongest ties of duty and loyalty, to the
gracious Prince who protects and defends both: To each other they owe, but love
and good will.

I cannot think Mr. H -- k -- s, or any other of the writers, who have the
misfortune to fall under the sore displeasure of the Halifax gentleman, ever
really intended to encourage so groundless a claim as an independent,
uncontrollable Provincial legislative. Most of them it is well known expressly
disavow such a claim. It is certain that the Parliament of Great Britain has a
just, clear, equitable and constitutional right, power and authority, to bind
the colonies, by all acts wherein they are named. Every lawyer, nay every Tyro
knows this. No less certain is it that the Parliament of Great Britain has a
just and equitable right, power and authority, to impose taxes on the colonies,
internal and external, on lands, as well as on trade. This is involved in the
idea of a supreme legislative or sovereign power of a state. It will however by
no means from thence follow, that it is always expedient, and in all
circumstances equitable for the supreme and sovereign legislative to tax the
colonies, much less that it is reasonable this right should be practiced upon
without allowing the colonies an actual representation. An equal representation
of the whole state is, at least in theory, of the essence of a perfect
parliament, or supreme legislative.

There is not the least color of a contradiction between the passages from the
"rights of the colonies" cited pages 6 and 7. It must indeed be confessed and
lamented, that the last citation involves a sophism, unworthy the pen from
whence it fell. But the critic with all his sagacity has not pointed where the
fallacy lies. He has reduced his Honor's argument to the form of a syllogism,
which is conclusive. "The people of Great Britain have not any sort of power
over the Americans;" "The house of commons have no greater authority than the
people of Great Britain, who are their constituents;" " ergo, the house of
commons have not any sort of power over the Americans." This I take to be
literally true. Yet by the following reduction, the fallacy of his Honor's
argument will appear, "the common people of Great Britain have no sovereign
absolute authority over their fellow subjects in America;" The house of commons
alone have no greater authority than the common people of Great Britain; ergo,
the British parliament, the King's Majesty, Lords and Commons, have no
sovereign absolute authority over the subjects in the colonies. Who does not
see the fallacy of this conclusion? The inquiry was not of the sole and
separate power and authority of the house of commons, but of the authority of
that august and transcendent body the parliament, which is composed of the
three branches of the grand legislature of the nation, considered as united.
But all this shows that the last citation at most is but an implicit, and is
far from an "express, denial of the authority of parliament," and should by
that candor that is inseparable from a liberal mind, have been imputed to mere
inadvertency.

We come now to the rationale of the epistle. "I have endeavored (says the
gentleman) to investigate the true, natural relation, if I may so speak,
between the colonies and their mother state, abstracted from compact, or
positive Institution." What a parade is here? What "a solemnity" does "he give
to his performance"? "If I may so speak". Who would not think the world was
about to be favored with some extraordinary discovery, too mighty for the
powers and precision of language.

Let us attend the course of the bubble. "But here" (adds he) "I can find
nothing satisfactory: Yet till this relation is clearly defined upon rational
and natural principles, our reasoning upon the measures of the colonies
obedience, will be desultory and inconclusive." "Every connection or relation
in life has its reciprocal duties; we know the relation between a parent and a
child, husband and wife, master and servant, and from thence are able to deduce
their respective obligations". "But we have no notices of any such precise
natural relation between a mother state and its colonies, and therefore cannot
reason with so much certainty upon the power of the one or the duties of the
other." If, as the gentleman tells us, he could not find any thing
satisfactory, he could only guess what reasoning would follow: And I leave it
to his readers to determine, whether he has not proved that he guessed very
rightly. He has placed the relation of master and servant among what he calls
natural relations. In a state of nature, where all are equal, I believe the
gentleman would be as much puzzled to find his master or servant, as others now
may be to find his equal. It Is a little strange he should attempt to reason on
a subject, of which, he confesses, he could find no "satisfactory notices." But
he seems determined to flounder on through thick and thin, be his reasonings
"desultory" or conclusive.

"The ancients (says he) have transmitted (for handed down; it is a wonder it
had not been transported) to us nothing that is applicable to the state of the
modern colonies, because the relation between these (and their mother state
should have been added) is formed by political compact. Brave! "And the
condition of each variant in their original and from each other." Better and
better still! If condition means the present state, and I think it can mean
nothing else, what a delectable piece of jargon does the close of this period
make. It amounts to this. "The present state of each modern colony is variant
in its original, and from each other." Be this as it may; if the relation of
modern colonies to their mother states, is founded on political compact, how
came the gentleman to beat his brains to find out "their natural relation
abstracted from compact or positive institution?" To what purpose he has done
this he tells us when he confesses he can find nothing " satisfactory" about
it. Are not natural and merely political or civil relations different things?
Is it not a little jargonical and inconsistent, in one breath to talk of
"investigating the true, natural, clearly defined relation of the colonies to
their mother state, abstracted from compact or positive institution"; and in
the next to affirm that so far as relates to modern colonies, this relation
depends, or "is founded on political compact"? Was there a natural relation
between ancient states and their colonies, and none between the modern states
and their colonies? Is not a "political compact," the same thing with a
"positive institution." Is this "freeing a subject from embarrassment"? Well
might the gentleman "shun the walk of metaphysics"? I wish he had not so much
avoided that of logic. He every where seems to consider power and duty as
correlates. Surely he should be the last man to charge his adversary with
"vague and diffuse ((...)) talk of" those levelling notions "rights and
privileges." He bewilders himself for half a poor creeping page more, abruptly
sings a requiem to his sweet soul, composes the surges of his "philosophically
inquisitive mind" fatigued with its late flight after natural and political
relations, and very gravely contents himself with considering the "colonies
rights upon the footing of their charters." This foothold, by a new and bold
figure in rhetoric, he calls "the only plain avenues that lead to the truth of
this matter."

-- "facilis descensus Averni:"
The gentleman is at a loss (page 8.) to "conceive how it comes to pass that
the colonies now claim any other or greater rights than are expressly granted to
them" by charter. Is the gentleman a British-born subject and a lawyer, and
ignorant that charters from the crown have usually been given for enlarging the
liberties and privileges of the grantees, not for limiting them, much less for
curtailing those essential rights which all his Majesty's subjects are entitled
to, by the laws of God and nature, as well as by the common law, and by the
constitution of their country?

The distinction (page 8.) between personal and political rights, is a new
invention, and, as applied, has perplexed the author of it. He every where
confounds the terms rights, liberties and privileges, which in legal as well as
vulgar acceptance, denote very different ideas. This is a common mistake with
those who cannot see any difference between power and right, between a blind
slavish submission, and a loyal generous and rational obedience, to the supreme
authority of a state.

The rights of men are, natural or civil. Both these are divisible into
absolute and relative. The natural absolute personal rights of individuals, are
so far from being opposed to political or civil rights, that they are the very
basis of all municipal laws of any great value. "The absolute rights of
individuals regarded by the municipal laws, compose what is called political or
civil liberty." "The absolute liberties of Englishmen, as frequently declared
in parliament, are principally three. 1. The right of personal security,
personal liberty, and private property." "Besides these three primary rights,
there are others which are secondary and subordinate, (to preserve the former
from unlawful attacks) 1. The constitution or power of parliament. 2. The
limitation of the King's prerogative (and to vindicate them when actually
violated). 3. The regular administration of justice. 4. The right of
petitioning for redress of grievancess. 5. The right of having and using arms
for self-defence." See Mr. Blackstone's accurate and elegant analysis of the
laws of England. The gentleman seems to have taken this and some other of his
distinctions from that excellent treatise very ill understood. The analysis had
given this general view of the objects of the laws of England. I. Rights of
Persons. II. Rights of Things. III. Private wrongs. IV. Public wrongs. Rights
of persons are divided into these, 1. of natural persons; 2. of bodies politic
or corporate, i. e. artificial persons, or subordinate societies. The rights of
these are by the Letter-writer strangely confounded with the political and
civil rights of natural persons. And because corporate rights so far as they
depend upon charter, are matters of the mere favor and grace of the donor or
founder; he thence infers (p. 9.) That "the colonies have no rights independent
of their charters," and that "they can claim no greater than those give them."
This is a contradiction to what he admitted in the preceding page, viz. That
"by the common law every colonist has a right to his life, liberty and
property." And he was so vulgar as to call these the "subjects birthright."
But what is this birthright worth, if it depends merely upon a colony charter,
that, as he says, rightly eno', may be taken away by the parliament? I wish the
gentleman would answer these questions. Would he think an estate worth much,
that might be taken from him at the pleasure of another? Are charters from the
crown usually given for enlarging the liberties and privileges of the grantees
in consideration of some special merit and services done the state, or would he
have his readers consider them like the ordinances of a French monarque, for
limiting and curtailing those rights which all Britons, and all British
subjects are entitled to by the laws of God and nature, as well as by the
common law and the constitution of their country, so admirably built on the
principles of the former? By which of these laws, in contradistinction to the
other, are the rights of life, liberty, and estate, personal?

The gentleman's positions and principles, that "the several New England
charters ascertain, define and limit the respective rights and privileges of
each colony," and that "the colonies have no rights independent of their
charter," and that "they can claim no greater than those give them," if true,
would afford a curious train of consequences. Life liberty and property, are by
the law of nature, as well as by the common law, secured to the happy
inhabitants of South-Britain, and constitute their primary civil or political
rights. But in the colonies, these and all other rights, according to our
author, depend upon charter. Therefore those of the colonies who have no
charter, have no right to life, liberty or property. And in those colonies who
have charters, these invaluable blessings depend on the mere good ^^^l, grace
and pleasure of the supreme power, and all their charters, and of course all
their rights, even to life, liberty and property, may be taken away at
pleasure. Thus every charter in England may be taken away; for they are but
voluntary and gracious grants of the crown, of certain limited, local,
political privileges, superadded to those of the common law. But would it be
expedient to strike such a blow, without the most urgent necessity? "In all
states there is (and must be) an absolute supreme power, to which the right of
legislation belongs: and which by the singular constitution of these kingdoms
is vested in the King, Lords, and Commons." Blackstone.
Now Magna Charta is but a law of their making, and they may alter it at
pleasure; but does it thence follow, that it would be expedient to repeal every
statute from William the conqueror, to this time? But by the gentleman's
principles, this may be done wantonly, and without any reason at all. Further,
by his logic the parliament may make the monarchy absolute, or reduce it to a
republic; both which would be contrary to the trust rereposed in them by the
constitution* which is to preserve, not destroy it; and to this, all are sworn,
from the King's Majesty in his coronation oath, to the meanest subject in the
oath of allegiance. Into such absurd and treasonable doctrines must the
gentleman run, in order to be consistent. Nay, all the vagaries of Filmer,
Mannwaring and Sibthorp, and of the whole tribe of King Adam's subjects will
follow. As 1. That Adam was the first monarch of this earth. No Prince has a
title to his crown but he who can prove himself to be the eldest heir male of
the body of Adam. That all other Princes are usurpers and tyrants. That
according to Filmer, God has given to every father over his children, and much
more to every Prince over his subjects, a power "absolute, arbitrary and
unlimited, and unlimitable over the lives, liberties and estates of such
children and subjects; so that they may take or alienate their estates, sell,
castrate or use their persons as he pleases, they being all his slaves, and the
father or prince, lord proprietor of every thing, and his unbounded will their
law." This is the substance of one of Mr. Locke's inferences from these words
of Filmer; "God has given to the father a right or liberty to alien his power
over his children, to any other; whence we find the sale and gift of children
to have been much in use in the beginning of the world, when men had their
servants for a possession and inheritance, as well as other goods (and
chattels); whereupon we find the power of castrating, and making eunuchs (for
singing songs like Lillibullero, etc.) much in use in old times." Obs. 155.
"Law is nothing else, but the will of him that has the power of the supreme
father." Observe. p. 225.
Horrid blasphemy! The Lord omnipotent reigns, but to whom has he committed
his supreme power and authority? The Pope claims to be but Lord Lieutenant of
Heaven, and before Sir Robert, none but the Devil ever had vanity or folly
enough to contend for the whole power of the supreme father. According to
Filmer, and his followers, among which the Halifax gentleman is a close
imitator; "they that shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and
their daughters* whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan", did no more
than they had a right to do. Upon such principles Pharaoh was a pious virtuous
Prince. And the drowning the infants in the Nile, was as justifiable a piece of
preventive policy as seizing the ships of the French without a declaration of
war. The Philistine rulers too acted very commendably in depriving the Hebrews
of the use of iron, it being very certain that any the most polite people
without the free use of this invaluable metal, would in one century return to
the savage state of the Indians. "If the example of what has been done, says
Mr. Lock be the rule of what ought to be, history would have furnished our
author with instances of this absolute fatherly power, in its height and
perfection, and he might have showed us in Peru, people that begot children, on
purpose to fatten and eat them." Mr. Lock has recited a story of this kind, so
horrid, that I would for the honor of the human species think it incredible,
and but the mere flight of imagination in Gracilasso de Vega; like Swift's
proposal to the people of Ireland, to fatten their children for sale in Leaden
Hall-market, as almost the only branch of commerce that would give no offense
to the good people of England. See the story cited by Mr. Lock in his treatise
on government, Cap. II. and VI. The Filmerians often preach the principles of
anarchy in one breath, and those of despotism in another. The gentleman (page
9.) says, "The individuals of the colonists participate of every blessing the
English constitution can give them." "As corporations created by the crown,
they are confined within the primitive views of their institution." "Whether
therefore their indulgence is liberal or scanty, can be no cause of complaint;
for when they accepted of their charters, they tacitly submitted to the terms
and conditions of them." This is admirable! To be sure a liberal indulgence
could be no cause of complaint. I have heard of a scanty allowance, and it
often happens in a transportation across the atlantic: but what is a scanty
indulgence? I am in doubt under what species of Hellenism to rank it. Is it
Doric or Ionic? Attic I am sure it is not. But at present I am content it
should pass as very good English, for a poor pittance of bread, water, stinking
beef and coarse clothes, instead of the roast beef of old England, praised and
sung by such authors as delight in compositions like Lillibullero. Has a
servant no reason to complain that his allowance is scanty, that he is half
naked, and more than half starved, while his less faithful and less loyal
fellow servants is well fed, plump, gay, and clothed in purple and scarlet and
fine linen, faring sumptuously every day, upon the spoils of his neighbor?
But admitting the former has no right to complain, or utter a single sigh, the
forced effect of "submissive fear and mingled rage," I cannot for the heart of
me conceive how he "participates of every blessing" of his fellow servant;
unless the gentleman will contend that half a loaf is equal to a whole one, and
that Martyn and Jack were really a couple of scoundrels, for denying that the
crusts Lord Peter would have palm'd upon them" were very good Hamstead-down
mutton. That "the colonists do not hold their rights as a privilege granted
them, nor enjoy them as a grace and favor bestowed, but possess them as an
inherent indefeasible right" as Mr. H -- k -- s very justly asserts, is a
self-evident proposition, to every one in the least versed in the laws of
nature and nations, or but moderately skilled in the common law, except the
learned gentleman of Halifax. Even the King's writs are divided into those
which the subject has a right to, ex debito justitiae, and those which depend
upon mere grace and favor. These may be denied, the others cannot. The
essential rights of British colonists stand on the same basis with those of
their fellow subjects of the same rank in any of the three kingdoms.

What the gentleman adds, viz. "that this postulatum of Mr. H -- pk -- s cannot
be true, with regard to political rights," by which he evidently means the
peculiar privileges of subordinate powers granted by charter, is (asking his
pardon) mere impertinence, and in a gentleman of his sense, could arise only
from a certain set of prejudices, having so far blinded him as to make him
confound the ideas of corporate subordinate privileges, with essential, natural
and civil rights, as is above most abundantly demonstrated, and clearly appears
from his own words. (page 10.) "The force of an act of parliament, over the
colonies, is predicated upon the common law, the origin and basis of all those
inherent rights and privileges which constitute the boast and felicity of a
Briton". I wish he had said the justly boasted felicity of a Briton; because in
that case, I should not have suspected him of a Filmerian sneer in this place,
which jealousy his dogmas elsewhere will justify. The inherent, indefeasible
rights of the subject, so much derided and despised in other parts of the
performance, are here admitted, in jest or in earnest: I care not which. The
origin of those rights is in the law of nature and its author. This law is the
grand basis of the common law, and of all other municipal laws that are worth a
rush. True it is, that every act of parliament, which names the colonies, or
describes them as by the words "plantations or dominions" binds them. But this
is not so strictly and properly speaking by the common law, as by the law of
nature, and by the constitution of a parliament, or sovereign and supreme
legislative, in a state. It Is as true, that when the colonies are not named or
described by an act of parliament, they are not bound by it.

What is the reason of all this? Qui haeret in liter^ haeret in cortice. Surely
the bare naming of the colonies has no magical charm or force in it. That the
colonies should be bound by acts of parliament wherein they are named, is an
exception from a general rule or maxim. What is that rule or maxim? It is that
the colonies being separate dominions, and at a distance from the realm, or
mother state, and in fact unrepresented in parliament, shall be governed by
laws of their own making; and unless named in acts of parliament, shall not be
bound by them. Quia non mittunt milites ad parliamentum, says Lord Coke. Yet as
a mark of, and to preserve their dependency on, and subordination to, the
mother state, and to prevent imperium in imperio, the greatest of all political
solicisms, the mother state justly asserts the right and authority to bind her
colonies, where she really thinks the good of the whole requires it; and of
this she remains the supreme judge, from whose final determination there is no
appeal. The mother state has also an undoubted right to unite a colony to
itself, and wholly to abrogate and annihilate all colony or subordiate
legislation and administration, if such alteration shall appear for the best
interest of the whole community. But should this be done needlessly and
wantonly, and without allowing the colonies a representation, the exercise of
the power that would otherwise be just and equitable, would cease to be
distinguished by those amiable qualities. Should a mother state even think it
reasonable to impose internal, as well as external taxes, on six millions of
subjects in their remote dominions, without allowing them one voice, it would
be matter of wonder and astonishment: But it could not be said that the supreme
legislative had exceeded the bounds of their power and authority; nor would
this render a petition undutiful and seditious. Those six millions must on such
an event, unless blind, see themselves reduced to the mortifying condition of
mere ciphers and blanks in society. Should all this ever happen to the British
colonies, which God forbid, might it not be truly and safely affirmed that the
representation in the house of Commons would be very unequal? The right of a
supreme power in a state to tax its colonies, is a thing that is clear and
evident; and yet the mode of exercising that right may be questionable, in
point of reason and equity. It may be though it to be unequal and contrary to sound
policy, to exercise the right, clear as it is, without allowing a
representation to the colonies. And though a representation would avail the
colonies very little in this generation; yet to posterity, it might be an
invaluable blessing. It may also in future ages, be very beneficial to
Great Britain. Is it to be believed, that when a continent of 3000 miles in
length, shall have more inhabitants than there are at this day in
Great Britain, France and Ireland, perhaps in all Europe; they will be quite
content with the bare name of British subjects, and to the end of time,
supinely acquiesce in laws made, as it may happen, against their interest, by
an assembly 3000 miles beyond sea, and where, should they agree in the
sentiments with the Halifax gentleman, it may be though it that an admission of an
American member, would "fully and defile the purity of the whole body?" One
hundred years will give this continent more inhabitants, than there are in the
three kingdoms.

Many great and good men have complained of the inequality of the
representation in Great Britain. This inequality can never be a reason for
making it more so; which however is the method of reasoning adopted by the
Halifax gentleman. At his rate, it would be just that half the counties and
boroughs in Great Britain, which now return members, should be curtailed of
their right. If so, why not half the remainder, and so on 'till the house of
commons will be reduced to a single member; and when he was split, one branch
of the legislature would be annihilated. By a like process, the house of Lords,
the second branch of the legislature, might be destroyed. This would be a
shorter cut to absolute and unlimited monarchy, than ever Filmer was fortunate
enough to invent. This brings us to the consideration of the Maxim, that "no
Englishman can be taxed but by his own consent, in person or by his
representative". "This dry maxim, taken in a literal sense, and little
understood like the song of Lillibullero, has made all the mischief in the
colonies," says the gentleman; (page 11.). I cannot conceive how this, or any
other dry maxim, or the song of Lillibullero like it, well or ill understood,
can make any mischief in the colonies. What notable harm has the song of
Lillibullero wrought in the colonies, or what like it has this "dry maxim"
effected? "It is (says the gentleman, page 11.) the opinion of the house of
commons, and may be considered as a law of parliament, that they are the
Representatives of every British subject wheresoever he be." Festina lent
domine! This may be true in one sense. The supreme legislative indeed
represents the whole society or community, as well the dominions as the realm;
and this is the true reason why the dominions are justly bound by such acts of
parliament as name them. This is implied in the idea of a supreme sovereign
power; and if the parliament had not such authority, the colonies would be
independent, which none but rebels, fools or madmen will contend for. God
forbid these colonies should ever prove undutiful to their mother country!
Whenever such a day shall come, it will be the beginning of a terrible scene.
Were these colonies left to themselves, tomorrow, America would be a mere
shambles of blood and confusion, before little petty states could be settled.
How many millions must perish in building up great empires? How many more must
be ruined by their fall? Let any man reflect on the revolutions of government,
ancient and modern and he will think himself happy in being born here in the
infancy of these settlements, and from his soul deprecate their once
entertaining any sentiments but those of loyalty, patience, meekness and
forbearance, under any hardships that in the course of time they may be
subjected to. These, as far as may be consistent with the character of men and
christians, must be submitted to. If it is the opinion of the present honorable
house of commons, that they in fact represent the colonies, it is more than I
know. Should this be their opinion, the gentleman may if he pleases, "consider
it as a law of parliament": But I should rather choose to consider it only as
the very respectable opinion of one branch of the supreme legislative. The
opinion of the house of Lords, and then above all the sanction of the King's
Majesty must be superadded, and the concurrence of both is absolutely necessary
to make any opinion of the house of commons an act or law of parliament. It Is
humbly conceived, that it was not as representatives in fact of the colonies,
that the house of commons granted his Majesty an external tax on the colonies,
in the instance of the late act. Nor if before this time an act for granting
internal taxes on the colonies should be passed, could I conceive that the
house of commons are our representatives in fact. As one branch of the supreme
legislative they have an undoubted right to originate any bills that by naming
them shall bind the colonies when passed into an act; let it be for levying
internal or external taxes, or for any other regulation that may appear
needful. But I cannot find it affirmed or declared in one act of parliament,
history or journal of parliamentary proceedings, nor in one English law book,
that a British house of commons are in fact the representatives of all the
plebeian subjects, without as well as within the realm. Lord Coke indeed says,
that "the house of commons represent all the commons of England, electors and
non-electors"; but he no where asserts that the house of commons in fact
represent the provincials of Ireland and other dominions out of the realm. He
says, however, the people of Ireland are not represented in the English
parliament, and assigns that as the very reason why, in general, acts of
parliament are confined to the realm. Though from the necessity of the thing,
in several cases, by naming them, the provinces are bound. In the fourth
institute, speaking of the truly high and most honorable court on earth, and
never more so than in the present state of the British parliament and nation;
his lordship says, "This court consists of the King's Majesty, sitting there
as in his royal political capacity, and of the three estates of the realm; viz.
of the Lords spiritual, Archbishops and Bishops being in number 24, who sit
there by succession in respect of their counties, or Baronies parcel of their
bishoprics, which they hold also in their politic capacity; and every one of
these, when any parliament is to be holden, ought, ex debito justitiae, to have
a summons. The Lords Temporal, Dukes, Marquistes, Earls, Viscounts and Barons,
who sit there by reason of their dignities, which they hold by descent or
creation, in number at this time 106, and likewise every one of these being of
full age, ought to have a writ of summons ex debito justitiae. The third estate
is the commons of the realm, whereof there be knights of shires or counties,
citizens of cities, and burgesses of burghs. All which are respectively elected
by the shires or counties, cities and burghs, by force of the King's writ, ex
debito justitiae, and none of them ought to be omitted; and these represent all
the commons of the whole realm, and trusted for them, and are in number at this
time 493. -- 4. Inst. 1.

Here is not one word of the house of commons representing or being trusted by
or for, the provincials of Ireland, or the colonists in America. And though in
page 4 of the same Institute, he says, " in many cases multitudes are bound by
acts of parliament which are not parties to the election of knights, citizens,
and burgesses, as all they that have no freehold, or have freehold in ancient
demesne, and all Women having freehold or no freehold, and men within the age
of twenty one years etc." -- This, etc. may be supplied with female infants,
lunatics, idiots and bedlamites in general. Yet this will not prove that these
non-electors are in fact represented, and in fact trust the representatives in
the house of commons. In estimation of law they are justly deemed as
represented. They have all fathers, brothers, friends or neighbors in the
house of commons, and many ladies have husbands there. Few of the members have
any of these endearing ties to America. We are as to any personal knowledge they
have of us, as perfect strangers to most of them, as the savages in Calafornia.
But according to our letter writer, we are not only in law but in deed
represented in the house of commons. How does he support this? Why he has
dreamt, that some one house of commons in some former reign, once though it they
were in fact our representatives. That "the opinion of a house of commons is a
law of parliament": Therefore "it is determined by act of parliament, that we
are, and shall believe we are in fact represented in the house of commons."
Here Is more logic. Suppose some future house of commons should be of opinion,
that they were the true and proper representatives of all the common people
upon the globe, would that make them so, and oblige all mankind to believe and
submit to it? Would a fiction of the common law of England satisfy the
innumerable multitudes on the face of the whole earth, that they were in fact
represented, and consenting to all such taxes and tributes as might be demanded
of them? Will any man's calling himself my agent, representative or trustee,
make him so in fact? At this rate a house of commons in one of the colonies
have but to conceive an opinion that they represent all the common people of
Great Britain, and according to our author they would in fact represent them,
and have a right to tax them. It Is strange the gentleman can see no difference
between a literal sense of a fundamental principle or "dry maxim" as he calls
it, and no sense at all. Does it follow, because it is "impracticable that each
individual should be in fact represented," that therefore there should be no
representation at all, or a very unequal one? Because the little insignificant
isles of Jersey, Guernsey and Man, have never obtained a representation, is it
reasonable that the whole kingdom of Ireland and the Plantations should be
forever excluded from returning members to the British parliament, even should
the parliament impose external and internal taxes on them, and take from them
every subordinate power of local legislation? If this would be equal and
rational, why might not Wales have been excluded from returning members, why
may they not be excluded now, and Devonshire and Cornwall, and every other
County and borough share the same fate? Matter of fact is one thing, matter of
right another. The people of a state may in fact be very unequally represented;
but few men would like our author in effect contend that it were best they
should not be represented at all. Has the gentleman forgot the maxim, "that
equity is equality." It Is hoped he will not consider this as a levelling
principle, as it has been more than once called. How astonishing is it, that
the instances (page 12.) of the unequal representation in Great Britain, to
which he might have added, those of "ten Cornish barns, and an ale house"
should be brought as an argument to prove that "the right of being represented
in parliament" is "an utopian privilege" a "phantom" a "cloud in the shape of
Juno"? -- This is far from a fine compliment to the honorable house of commons,
of which as one of the branches of the supreme legislative, and of the
privilege of sitting with them, it would have been more decent to have made a
different choice of expressions. To atone for this indelicacy, the next moment
the pendulum vibrates as far the other way.

In page 13, The parliament is represented as so pure and perfect, that " the
beauty and symmetry of this body would be destroyed, and its purity defiled, by
the unnatural mixture of representatives from every part of the British
dominions." "Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and the dwellers of Mesopotamia, etc.
would not in such a case, speak the same language". "What a heterogenous
council would this form"? "What a monster in government would it be"? Let me
add, was ever insolence equal to this? Are the inhabitants of British America
all a parcel of transported thieves, robbers and rebels, or descended from
such? Are the colonists blasted lepers, whose company would infect the whole
house of commons? There are some in the colonies who value themselves on their
descent. We have the names of Tudor and of Stuart, of Howard, Seymor and of
Russell; who boast an unsullied descent, from our ancient princes and nobles,
or at least claim the honor of being of the same blood. Can none of these be
returned as members without breading a plague in the house. If this writer is
an european, his insults upon the British colonies are quite unpardonable; if
he be a native, he is an ungrateful parricide. Is he a venal hireling of a
party, his employers on either side the atlantic should discard him as a mere
Sir Martyn Marplot? Depend upon it, one such letter as his, if known to breath
the sentiments of the great, would tend more to disgust the colonies against
the conduct of their superiors, than a hundred thousand such pamphlets as the
author scolds at. Parliaments are not only "as ancient as our Saxon ancestors"
but as old as the common wealth's of Israel, Greece and Rome 4 Inst. 2.3.
; nay as old as the first compact for changing a simple democracy into any
other form of government. "Attendance in parliament" is not therefore, as the
gentleman conceives, a "duty arising from a tenure of lands or the feudal
system" but from the nature of man, of society, and of all original, just,
social and civil compacts for forming a state. "So that the privilege of
sitting in it, i. e. in a parliament or grand council of a nation, is not
"territorial" in the sense of the letter writer, nor in its nature confined to
Great Britain". What is there, what can there be, that should naturally and
necessarily confine the privilege of returning members, to the inhabitants of
Great Britain, more than to those of London and Westminster?

The gentleman (p. 14.) says, "the parliament may levy internal taxes, as well
as regulate trade, there is no essential difference." By regulating trade, I
suppose he means, according to the common sophism, taxing trade. Even in this
sense, it is admitted the parliament have the same right to levy internal taxes
on the colonies, as to regulate trade; and that the right of levying both, is
undoubtedly in the parliament. Yet it is humbly conceived and hoped, that before
the authority is fully exerted in either case, it will be though it to be but
reasonable and equitable, that the dominions should be in fact represented.
Else it will follow, that the provincials in Europe, Asia, Africa and America,
ought to all generations to content themselves with having no more share,
weight or influence, even in the provincial government of their respective
countries, than the Hotentots have in that of China, or the Ethiopians in that
of Great Britain.

I should be glad to know how the gentleman came by his assurance, that "a
stamp-duty is confessedly the most reasonable and equitable that can be
devised." (ibid.) Some few may be of this opinion, and there never was a new
invented tax or excise, but its favorors and partisans would highly extol, as
the most just and equitable device imaginable. This is a trite game "at ways
and means". But bold assertions will not pass for clear proofs, with
"philosophically inquisitive minds." "If the shaft is sped," and the aim so
good, I wonder the gentleman should even faintly pretend to "desire not to see
a stamp-duty established among us," or "wish to prevent the blow." Were I
convinced, as he is, that it is reasonable and best that the colonies should be
taxed by parliament, without being allowed a representation; and that it is
become not only necessary to levy internal taxes on them; but that the art of
man could not devise so equitable and reasonable a tax as a stamp duty; I
should heartily pray for its establishment.

The gentleman no where discovers his temper more plainly than in his
comparison of Greece and Rome, in their conduct toward their colonies. It Is
well known the Grecians were kind, humane, just and generous toward theirs.
It Is as notorious that the Romans were severe, cruel, brutal and barbarous
toward theirs. I have ever pleased my self in thinking that Great Britain,
since the revolution, might be justly compared to Greece, in its care and
protection of its colonies. I also imagined that the French and Spaniards
followed the Roman example. But our letter- writer tells quire a different
story. He compliments the nation, and comforts the colonies, by declaring that
these "exactly resemble those of Rome." "The Roman Coloniae," says he, "did not
enjoy all the rights of Roman citizens." "They only used the Roman laws and
religion, and served in their legions; but had no right of suffrage, or bearing
honors." "In these respects, adds he, our English colonies exactly resemble
them." "We enjoy the English laws and religion, but not the right of suffrage
or of bearing honors in Great Britain."

Is this enjoying the rights, liberties and privileges of British-born subjects
within the realm, to all intents, constructions and purposes? I find all this
confirmed to the colonists, not only by the common law, and by their charters,
but by act of parliament. Where does the gentleman find it decreed that the
British " Coloniae" "have no right of bearing honors in Great Britain"? Has
not the King's majesty the fountain of honor, an undoubted right by his
prerogative, to confer any rank he may be graciously pleased to bestow on his
American subjects, as well as on those in Great Britain? Cannot the word of a
King as easily make even a Halifaxian letter-writer, or his Rhode Island
friend, a knight of the garter or thistle, as if either of them had been droped
and drawn their first breath in one of the three kingdoms.

The gentleman may in his anger wish for the laws of "Draco to be enforced on
America," and in his fierce anger, for the "iron rod of a Spanish inquisitor."
These may be sudden gusts of passion, without malice prepence, that only hurt
his cause, and which his employers will not thank him for. But hard, very hard
must his heart be, who could employ all his stock of learning in a deliberate
attempt to reduce the rights of the colonists to the narrow bound of a bare
permission, to "use the English laws and religion without a suffrage in things
sacred or civil, and without a right to bear honors in Great Britain," "except
that of being shot at for six pence a day, in her armies at home, as well as
abroad." What is the English religion? Pray wherein does it differ from that of
Scotland, Ireland and the Plantations? If it differs, and the colonies are
obliged to use the religion of the metropolis on her embracing paganism, so
must the colonies. Since the revolution, all dissenters, both at home and
abroad, papists only excepted, have enjoyed a free and generous toleration.
Would the gentleman deprive all protestant dissenters of this invaluable
blessing? If he is an American by birth, what does he deserve of his country
for attempting to realize to this and to all future generations, the dreary
prospect of confinement to the use of the laws and religion of a region 3000
miles beyond sea, in framing which laws, and in forming the modes of which
religion, they shall have no voice nor suffrage; nor shall they have any
preferment in church or state, though they shall be taxed without their consent,
to the support of both.

-- aes triplex
Circa pectus erat. --
The gentleman has been at great pains in order to represent the merchants of
America, as a parcel of infamous smugglers. He says, "smuggling had well nigh
become established in some of the colonies." It Is notoriously known who have
been the great abettors and patrons of smugglers, and who have shared the
greatest part of the profits. All the riot at Ephesus proceeded from certain
collectors of the revenues of Diana of the Ephesians; the shrine-makers and
silver-smiths were but their tools. The craft was in danger, but if it had been
only that of Demetrius and his journeymen, we might not have heard of that
day's uproar. It Is a very unjust aspersion to charge the American merchants in
general, with a design to elude and evade the acts of trade. I cannot so well
tell how matters have been managed at Halifax or Rhode Island; but in some
other colonies, only a few favorites have been indulged in the lucrative crime
of smuggling, which, after an eminent writer, the gentleman calls a crime
"against the law of nature"; it is a wonder it had not been recorded from some
old commentator, crimen lesae Majestatis, high treason. The like indulgence, as
far as I can learn, has in Rhode Island, been confined also to a few choice
friends. The article of Melasses is every where to be excepted. It was known at
home, that the importation of this was universally tolerated, paying about one
tenth of the duties imposed by the old act. The connivance became very general.

I have perused Mr. H -- k -- s book over and over, but cannot find the least
reflection on Dr. Spry, nor do I think any was intended. The Dr. perhaps may
thank the gentleman for bringing his name into question; but I doubt
notwithstanding the gentleman's assertions to the contrary, whether the Dr's
"appointments place him above any kind of influence." I believe he is under the
influence of honor and conscience, a clear head, and a good heart, all which
the gentleman seems too much a stranger to: And should the Dr. also be under
that influence, which flows from a general aversion, and contempt of flattery
and falsehood, he must conceive an opinion of his Halifax neighbor, that will
be very mortifying to one who hopes to make his court to the great, and to the
Dr. among the rest, by abusing the colonies. The Dr. has been in America some
months, but I have not heard of one cause that has been tried before him. This
is a tolerable proof either, that smuggling was not so common a thing as the
letter-writer asserts, or that those who used to be concerned in it, are
reformed. I think it proves both.

In the 21st, and last page but one of the letter, the gentleman betho't
himself, and having in a manner finished his epistle, makes an apology for not
following Mr. H -- k -- s "with somewhat more, of method". His excuse is that
"Mr. H -- k -- s has not divided his argument with precision". He then
formally proceeds to a curious, and as he doubtless thought, precise division
of the argument. "The dispute, says he, between Great Britain and the colonies,
consists of two parts. First, the jurisdiction of parliament: And secondly, the
exercise of that jurisdiction: His Honor has blended these together, and no
where marked the division between them. The first I have principally remarked
upon". I know of no dispute between Great Britain and her colonies. Who is so
hardy as to dispute the jurisdiction of the Parliament? But were there a
thousand disputes between Great Britain and the colonies; if the colonists in
general were as the letter-writer represents them, "a simple, credulous, and
hitherto loyal people", in danger of "having their minds embittered, and their
affections alienated from Great Britain, by a few pamphlets": And if "from the
pride of some, and ignorance of others, the cry against mother country had
spread from colony to colony, and it were to be feared that prejudices and
resentments were kindled among them, which it would be difficult ever
thoroughly to sooth or extinguish", all which insinuations are however very
injurious; what would this prove against "The Rights of Colonies examined", or
any other of the pamphlets that have been lately published in America? Mr. H --
k -- s, pages 10 and 11 of his book, speaking of the general concerns of the
whole British empire, says, "These, it is absolutely necessary should have a
general power to direct them; some supreme and overruling authority, with
power to make laws, and form regulations for the good of all, and to compel
their execution and observation. It being necessary some such general power
should exist somewhere, every man of the least knowledge of the British
constitution, will be naturally led to look for, and find it in the parliament
of Great Britain; that grand and august legislative body, must from the nature
of their authority, and the necessity of the thing, be justly vested with this
power". Is not this a very clear admission and acknowledgment of the
jurisdiction, power, and authority of parliament over the colonies? What could
put it into the gentleman's head to think the jurisdiction of the parliament,
was a matter in dispute? I have perused a pamphlet published in Connecticut
relating to their rights, but can find no question made of the jurisdiction of
the parliament. "The Rights of the British Colonies asserted and proved" I have
also read. This was published before either Mr. H -- k -- s, or that from
Connecticut. These, so far as I can find, are all the pamphlets that have been
published in America, upon the proposed new regulations of the colonies. From
the knowledge I have of the sentiments of the "head of the tribunitian veto", as
the gentleman is pleased to describe him, I take upon me to declare, that I
have heard him in the most public manner declare his submission to the
authority of parliament; and that from his soul he detests and abhors the
thought of making a question of their jurisdiction.

The following passages from "The Rights of the British Colonies asserted and
proved", may serve to show how careful a hand the Halifax gentleman is at a
matter of fact.

"I also lay it down as one of the first principles from whence I intend to
deduce the civil rights of the British colonies, that all of them are subject
to, and dependent on Great Britain; and that therefore as over subordinate
governments, the parliament of Great Britain has an undoubted power and lawful
authority* to make acts for the general good, that by naming them, shall and
ought to be equally binding, as upon the subjects of Great Britain within the
realm. "When the parliament shall think fit to allow the colonists a
representation in the house of commons, the equity of their taxing the
colonies, will be as clear as their power is at present of doing it without, if
they please." "No such claim (i. e. of an independent legislative) was ever
though it of by the colonists. They are all better men and better subjects; and
many of them too well versed in the laws of nature and nations, and the law and
constitution of Great Britain, to think they have a right to more than a
provincial subordinate legislative. All power is of GOD. Next and only
subordinate to him, in the present state of the well-formed, beautiful
constructed British monarchy, standing where I hope it ever will stand, for the
pillars are fixed in judgment, righteousness and truth, is the King and
Parliament." "From all which, it seems plain, that the reason why Ireland and
the plantations are not bound, unless named by an act of parliament, is,
because they are not represented in the British parliament. Yet, in special
cases, the British parliament has an undoubted right, as well as power, to bind
both by their acts. But whether this can be extended to an indefinite taxation
of both, is the great question. I conceive the spirit of the British
constitution must make an exception of all taxes, until it is though it fit to
unite a dominion to the realm. Such taxation must be considered either as
uniting the dominions to the realm, or disfranchising them. If they are united,
they will be entitled to a representation, as well as Wales: If they are so
taxed without a union, or representation, they are so far disfranchised". "The
sum of my argument is, That civil government is of God: That the administrators
of it were originally the whole people: That they might have devolved it on
whom they pleased: That this devolution is fiduciary, for the good of the
whole; That by the British constitution, this devolution is on the King, Lords
and Commons, the supreme, sacred and uncontrollable legislative power, not only
in the realm, but through the dominions: That by the abdication, the original
compact was broken to pieces: That by the revolution, it was renewed, and more
firmly established, and the rights and liberties of the subject in all parts of
the dominions, more fully explained and confirmed: That in consequence of this
establishment, and the acts of succession and union, his Majesty GEORGE III. is
rightful king and sovereign, and with his parliament, the supreme legislative
of Great Britain; France and Ireland, and the dominions thereto belonging: That
this constitution is the most free one, and by far the best, now existing on
earth: That by this constitution, every man in the dominions is a free man:
That no part of his Majesty's dominions can be taxed without their consent:
That every part has a right to be represented in the supreme or some
subordinate legislature: That the refusal of this, would seem to be a
contradiction in practice to the theory of the constitution: That the colonies
are subordinate dominions, and are now in such a state, as to make it best for
the good of the whole, that they should not only be continued in the enjoyment
of subordinate legislation, but be also represented in some proportion to their
number and estates, in the grand legislature of the nation: That this would
firmly unite all parts of the British empire, in the greatest peace and
prosperity; and render it invulnerable and perpetual". Rights of the British
Colonies, asserted and proved, pages 32, 48, 59, 61, 64. Can the gentleman read
these passages, and say they imply any question of the power and authority of
parliament? Will he not blush, when he reflects, that he has indiscriminately
asserted that these pamphlets "have a tendency to embitter the minds of a
simple, credulous and hitherto loyal people, and to alienate their affections
from Great Britain, their best friend and alma matter"? Can terms expressive of
greater loyalty or submission to the jurisdiction and authority of parliament
be conceived, than many that are to be found in those pamphlets? Yet the
gentleman has the effrontery to talk of the "frequent abuse poured forth in
pamphlets against the mother country", and laments that before his "not one
filial pen in America had been drawn in her vindication". How grand we look!
Are not his dragoons enough, but he must fight with his pen too? I believe he
must be a man of parlous courage; and yet he is modest withal. He says he has
"no ambition of appearing in print", though he is the only loyal subject his
Majesty has in his American dominions, and master of the only filial pen,
worth a button. If this be true, well might he call his countrymen a parcel of
scoundrels, rebels, smuglers and traitors. I shall take leave of my gentleman,
by desiring him to reflect, in his cooler hours, and well consider what would
soon be his fate, if the Americans should treat him as he most richly deserves.

I too have seen in all the pride of May,
A flaunting sing song genius toujour gay;
Whose life was one short senseless pretty dream,
Frisk on the margin of a mighty stream,
Till circling dances seize his tender brain:
He falls! he dies! alas a calf is slain! " Narcissus, in contemplating his own
image, was turned into a daffodil. Who can think of this, and feel no pity for
the pride and weakness of man, that is born of a woman".

"So have I seen, on some bright summer's day,
"A calf of genius debonnair and gay,
"Dance on the brink, as if inspired by fame,
"Fond of the pretty fellow in the stream".
Four Lines of Dr. Young, very modestly applied to Governor H -- k -- s, in the
5th page of the Letter from Halifax, as above cited, with the Allusion to
Narcissus.



Postscript.
SINCE the above sheets were finished, two or three pieces have been published
in the Providence Gazette. The first of these has furnished us with a clear
and concise account of the several principal reasonings and arguments upon the
subject of internal taxes to be imposed on the colonies by parliament, while
they are unrepresented in the house of commons. The sum is.

1. That it is the incontestible right of the subject in Great Britain, not to
be taxed out of parliament; and every subject within the realm is in fact or in
law represented there.

2. The British colonists being British subjects, are to all intents and
purposes entitled to the rights, liberties and privileges of the subject within
the realm, and ought to be represented in fact as well as in law, in the
supreme or some subordinate legislature, where they are taxed; else they will
be deprived of one of the most essential rights of a British subject namely
that of being free from all taxes, but such as he shall by himself or
representative, grant and assess.

3. As the colonies have been erected into subordinate dependent dominions,
with subordinate powers of legislation; particularly that of levying taxes for
the support of their respective subordinate governments, and at their own
expense, have not only supported the civil provincial administration, but many
of them have, to their utmost ability, contributed both in men and money for
the common cause, as well as for their more immediate defense against his
Majesty's enemies, it should seem very hard that they should be taxed also by
parliament, and that before they are allowed a representation in fact, and
while they are quite unable to pay such additional taxes.

4. The immense commercial advantages resulting to Great Britain from her
plantations, the revenues thence arising to the crown the taxes we pay by the
consumption of an infinity of British manufactures, may be though it a reasonable
return for the protection received, as it is really all that at present is in
our power to yield.

5. If the colonies could and ought to yield greater aids toward the national
expense. yet it should seem but reasonable either to allow them 1. To raise
such further sums as may be required, by taxing themselves in the most easy way
and manner their several provincial legislatures could devise. Or, 2. at least
to allow them a representation in the house of commons. This with some
animadversions on the present state of commerce, with the extension and
enlargement of the admiralty jurisdiction in America, is the substance of all
that has so much incensed the Halifax gentleman. Governor H -- k -- s has no
where said that "the colonies have rights independent of, and not controulable
by, the authority of parliament."

See Providence-Gazette, Feb. 16. According to the gentleman, "it will follow
that we may enjoy personal liberty, and yet be slaves in a political sense; and
so vice versa, we may be personally slaves, and yet have a political right to
liberty. Life, liberty and estate being personal rights, are (by the gentleman
admitted to be) secured to us by the common law. I do not remember to have
heard that the colonies ever contended for more; and yet (by this personal and
political distinction) our estates may be taken away from us against our
consent, without any violation of our personal right; and all this for want of
a political right."

Providence Gazette, February 16, 1765. "The gentleman confidently maintains
that acts of parliament derive their force from the common law; and for that
reason he says, they are obligatory on the colonies. I ask him, how it is
possible that the parliamentary power which controuls, alters and amends the
common law at will, can derive its support from the common law?"

Providence Gazette 23d February. The power and authority of parliament is from
the constitution, and above all other laws, but those of God and nature.

"There may be a natural relation between two subjects that exist by nature;
but mother country and colony exist only by policy, and may, and no doubt have
a political relation to each other; but can have no natural one"

Providence Gazette March 2. This remark is ingenious, and the manner in which
it is elucidated is diverting; but I fear it is not solid. There is nonsense and
contradiction eno' of all conscience in the Halifax gentleman's attempt to
investigate: the "natural relation between colonies and their mother state,"
without denying the existence of such a relation. Our allegiance is natural,
and if this be admitted of each individual in a colony, as it must be, it would
be strange to deny a natural relation between two whole bodies, between all the
respective parts of which a natural relation is admitted. Society is certainly
natural, and exists prior to, and independent of any form of civil policy,
always excepting family societies and simple democracies. As there is a natural
relation between father and son so is there between their two families; and so
is there between a mother-state or metropolis, and its colonies The natural
relation between two independent states or societies, is the basis of the law
of nations; and all its obligations are thence deduceable. It would be strange
that a natural relation should subsist between two neighboring states, and
none be between a metropolis and a colony. I can see no absurdity in supposing
both natural and political relations to subsist between a mother state and its
colonies, any more than supposing two qualities in one and the same subject.
The same man may be choloric and humane another is calm and inveterate. The
same two men may be father and son, fellow men, fellow subjects,
fellow-citizens and brother-aldermen. Political relations are but modifications
of those which are founded in nature, and from whence rise duties of universal
obligation.

I cannot suppress all my indignation at a remark in the close of the Halifax
letter which should have been taken notice of before, but it escaped me. "It
may become necessary for the supreme legislature of the nation to frame some
code, (and canons might have been as properly added) and therein adjust the
rights of the colonies, with precision and certainty, otherwise Great Britain
will always be teazed with new claims about liberty and privileges." Page 22.

If I mistake not, there is in the air of this period, the quintessence of a
mere martial legislator; the insolence of a haughty and imperious minister; the
indolence and half thought of a petit maitre; the flutter of a coxcomb; the
pedantry of a quack, and the nonsense of a pettifogger. A strange gallimaufry
this: but I am not answerable for it, or for any other of the exhibitions of a
monster monger. We want no foreign codes, nor canons here. The common law is
our birth right; and the rights and privileges confirmed and secured to us by
the British constitution, and by act of parliament, are our best inheritance.
Codes, pandects, novells, decretals of Popes, and the inventions of the D -- I,
may suit the cold bleak regions Brandenburgh and Prussia, or the scorching
heats of Jamaica or Gambia; but we live in a more temperate climate, and shall
rest content with the laws, customs and usages of our ancestors, bravely
supported and defended with the monarchy, and from age to age handed down.
These have, and ever will finally triumph over the whims of political and
religious Enthusiasts; the extremes of which are libertinism and despotism,
anarchy and tyranny, spiritual and temporal, from all which may God ever
preserve us. I must recommend it to the Halifax gentleman, before he publishes
any more epistles, diligently to read over Swifts Tale of a Tub, and to take
special note of Lord Peter's method of reasoning with his brethren. He will
there find all the forms of syllogism, from the sorites to the categoric. Of
the last form, he will find this, to prove that a little learning puffs
little men up.

"Words are but wind,
Learning is nothing but words,
Ergo. Learning is nothing but wind."
Of the former kind of argumentation, he will find a species he seems to be
peculiarly fond of.

"In the midst of all this clutter and revolution, in comes Lord Peter, with a
file of dragoons at his heels, and gathering from all hands what was in the
wind, he and his gang, after several millions of scurrilities and curses, not
very important here to repeat, by main force, very fairly kicks them (Martyn
and Jack) both cut of doors, and would never let them come under his roof, from
that day to this".

Tale of a Tub. 79.104. CORRRECTIONS.
PAGE 7. in some of the Copies, dele the Words for diffusive. Page 13. for
Hamstead, read Banstead.


