The Espousing of Souls to Christ the great End of the Gospel Ministry. A
SERMON Preached at Holles, February 27, 1765. AT THE INSTALMENT of the Reverend
Peter Powers, A.M. For the Towns of Newbury and Haverhill, at a Place called
Coos, in the Province of New Hampshire.

By Himself.

Published at the desire of many who heard it, to whom it is humbly dedicated
by the unworthy Author.

Then says he to his Servants, The Wedding is ready, -- go ye therefore into
the Highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the Marriage. Mat. xxii. 8,
9 PORTSMOUTH, in New Hampshire, Printed and Sold by DANIEL and ROBERT FOUL,
1765.

The espousing of Souls to Christ, the great Design and Business of the Gospel
Ministry.
Second CORINTHIANS, XI. 2. For I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may
present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ.


THE exceeding Riches of divine Grace in our blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
afford us matter for Wonder, Love and Admiration. That the Lord Jesus Christ
should so wonderfully condescend, for our Salvation, as to be born of a poor
Virgin, be made of a Woman, made under the Law, that he might redeem them that
were under the Law: that he should humble himself to all those ignominious
Circumstances in which he lived and died; he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, when, with infinite Ease, he
could have spoken all his Persecutors into the very Deeps of Hell. This is
wonderful. But what is still more astonishing, and speaks the Heights and
Depths of infinite boundless Love, is that he should wed such vile Worms of the
Dust, such polluted Monsters, who have played the Harlot with many Lovers, and
take them into the Arms of his Love, yea into his Bosom, to all the Indearments
of that wonderful Relation in the new and everlasting Covenant, in which Christ
and Believers are one. That Christ should be a Husband for Souls, a loving,
kind and tender Husband, expressed in his GIVING HIMSELF for them: And that he
should so give himself a Ransom for them, that he might purchase to himself a
glorious Church without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing, must appear to be
infinite Love and Condescension. And this is the very Case; the Lord Jesus
Christ seeks this in all he has done, and is doing as Mediator. This is the
End, the important End of the Gospel; and for this noble, glorious Purpose are
the Ministers of it sent forth; and thus we read 2. Cor V. 20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you, in
Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled unto God. And according to this, says the
Apostle in the Text, I have espoused you to one Husband, i. e. I have been the
Instrument of it. I have drawn up the Contract fairly before you, and have
besought, and prayed you, in Christ's Stead, to be reconciled to God; and I
persuade my self that I have been so happy as to be instrumental of bringing
many of you into that blessed Marriage Covenant with Christ: And this was one
great View I had in it that I might at last present you as a chaste Virgin to
Christ, present you holy and pure, true and faithful to him, according to the
true Intent of the Covenant, to his Acceptance and Glory, and your Joy and
Comfort.

Therefore was the holy Apostle Jealous over them with a godly Jealousy, i. e.
he had a tender Fear and Concern for them, when their false Teachers were
endeavoring to seduce and lead them away from the Simplicity of the Gospel,
and to undervalue him, although he had been the Instrument of their Conversion
from Heathenism to Christianity, and had planted the Gospel among them with
indefatigable Pains and Industry. Acts 18.3, 9, 10, 11.
And indeed it must give every true and faithful Minister a very painful and
affecting Concern to see the LORD's FLOCK carried away captive; and in Danger
of being devoured with greedy Wolves: to see them that they have labored to
espouse to one Husband, Christ, snared and led away after other Lovers; for how
shall they present such as a chaste Virgin to Christ.

That they may be the happy Instruments of Souls being espoused to Christ, and
present them finally, to him, pure, holy and spotless is the great Design of
their Office. For this they are Ambassadors. And O how blessed to be succesful!
How greatly to be desired?

Suffer me then to treat this noble and divine Subject under the following
Propositions, viz.

I. As it is the great Design, so it should be the earnest Desire and Endeavor
of the Ministers of Christ to espouse Souls to him, as to one Husband.

II. Those Ministers who are made the happy Instruments of espousing Souls to
Christ shall have the great Honor, the unspeakable Satisfaction, Joy and
Comfort of presenting them as a chaste Virgin to him.

I return to the first Proposition.

I. As it is the great Design, so it should be the earnest Desire and Endeavor
of the Ministers of Christ to espouse Souls to him, as to one Husband.

Here I would, by divine Help, show,

1. What it is for Souls to be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. That this is the great End and Design of the Gospel Ministry. And therefore,

3. That it should be the earnest Desire and Endeavor of Ministers to espouse
Souls to Christ.

1. I am to show what it is for Souls to be espoused to the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

And this, surely, can be nothing less than to be united to him in the Covenant
of Grace, by Faith.

It has pleased God, in his infinite Love, to think upon our fallen guilty
Race, who had broken the Covenant of Works, and brought themselves thereby,
under it is severe and terrible, though infinitely righteous, Curse. When that
holy Covenant could afford us no Help, but, on the contrary, doomed us to
eternal Woes: the very Moment we might expect the tremendous Displays of divine
Justice, behold, the blessed Jesus appears in the precious Promise! God says
Help upon one that is mighty to save, able to save all, even to the uttermost,
that come unto God by him. God reveals his most gracious Covenant for his
chosen People, in and through Christ, who is the Mediator of the New Testament,
that by Means of Death, for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were
under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise of
eternal Inheritance* ^eo. 9 15.


It is indeed very wonderful that ever the glorious JEHOVAH should take such a
Method for our Salvation. That ever there should be such a Thing as an
everlasting Covenant, between the Father and the Son, for our Redemption: that
the eternal Son of God should be the Mediator of the new Covenant, the Covenant
of Grace, in which all true Believers are united to Christ, by a divine Faith.
By this most gracious Covenant are the Faithful saved from deserved Wrath, and
raised up to sit together in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, to his eternal
Glory.

This is a Covenant that has it is Foundation all laid in Grace; for it is a
Covenant of Mercy for Covenant Breakers; a Covenant of Grace for guilty, Hell
deserving Creatures, for ever incapable of helping themselves in any Measure at
all. And O how great this salvation! God the Father lays the Foundation, and in
the Fullness of Time gives his own only Son out of his Bosom; Christ comes, and
lays down his Life, and purchases all the Blessings of the Covenant: the holy
Spirit is given to open our Eyes, and to turn us from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto God; that we may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and
Inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith that is in Christ. Acts
26.18.
The poor Soul is taken most freely, out of his unregenerate State, in the Day
of God's Power; cut off from the wild Olive, and graffed into the true; planted
in Christ; born from above, being begotten again to a lively Hope by the
Resurrection from the Dead, and made a Partaker of the divine Nature.

To bring this to pass, God is pleased to write to us the great Things of his
Law, and thunder forth the terrible Curses thereof from Mount Sinai. To set
Home, upon the Conscience, the awful Truths of his holy Word, and awaken the
secure Sinner by a Spirit of Conviction; to show him his lost Estate, his
guilty, filthy Circumstances; that he is justly deserving of the divine
Displeasure, and going to Destruction, and unable to help himself.

It is true that God has appointed various Duties to be done; the Word,
Sacraments and Prayer are the outward and ordinary Means by which Christ
communicates to us the Benefits of Redemption. And these Duties are to be
attended as proper Means of Grace, yet will never save a Soul, nor can they
give Relief to one under such distressing Circumstances. No, without Faith it
is impossible to please God, or to gain any true Comfort to the Soul. True God
is pleased to order the Word of Faith, the blessed Gospel to be preached to
them that are in such a Condition; so God has written to us the great Things of
his Gospel, and to us is the Word of this Salvation sent. Christ was sent, and
his Ministers are sent to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the Opening of
the Prison to them that are bound; and not only so but also to call even to the
Ends of the Earth to look unto Christ and be saved; to behold the Lamb of God,
which takes away the Sin of the World. And hence we find the Apostles Paul and
Silas, exhorting the trembling Jailer to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
he should be saved. Acts 16.31.
Nevertheless the Arm of the Lord must be revealed, or the Gospel Report will
not be believed even by the convinced Sinner. In the Day of God's Power his
stubborn Will shall be bowed, and the Word of the Gospel be made the effectual
Means of his Conversion and Salvation. The Eyes of his Understanding are opened
to a divine Discovery of the blessed Redeemer in his Mediatorial Fullness and
Glory. To behold his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father
full of Grace and Truth; and of his Fullness to receive, and Grace for Grace. To
receive him as the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes: to cast his whole Soul upon him and rest upon him, as the only
Propitiation for our Sins, and not for our's only, but also for the sins of the
whole World. To acquiesce, most heartily and freely, in the only Way of
Salvation by him. To take him upon his own Terms, or Proposals of Agreement,
embrace him by Faith and Love, and cleave unto him with a cordial Affection,
from a Sense of his infinite Worth and Excellence, divine Amiableness and
transcendant Beauty and Glory. Thus are Souls espoused unto Christ as to one
Husband, joined unto him, and made one with him in the new Covenant, ordered in
all Things, and sure: And these be they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes. I proceed to show,

II. That it is the great End and design of the Gospel Ministry to espouse
Souls to Christ.

Now if the Ministers of the blessed Jesus, are sent to preach the Gospel, to
preach Christ Jesus the Lord, to preach Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward the Lord Jesus Christ, it must be the Design of their Ministry to bring
Souls to espouse the Lord Jesus Christ.

It is not here to be supposed that it lies in their Power to bring Souls to
espouse the Lord Jesus Christ, but that Christ does it by them, and they should
desire and endeavor to be instrumental of it. The gospel Covenant is that only
in which Souls are espoused to Christ. And it is this that Ministers are to
preach; and they are to make Use of the Gospel Arguments and Motives for this
great Purpose. To exhibit the sweet and powerful Invitations, Calls and
Promises of it, that by these they may be sweetly compelled to come to the
Marriage of the King's Son, and partake of the great Gospel Supper. Moreover,
Ministers are Ambassadors of the blessed Jesus. So our Apostle, Now then, we
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled to God. Great and sovereign Princes sometimes
send their Ambassadors into foreign Countries, to obtain, by Suit, a Bride for
themselves. And the Lord Jesus does so likewise, he sends his Ministers to seek
a Bride for himself; to invite and call Souls to a Marriage with him in the
Covenant of Grace. Hence we find our blessed Savior discoursing of the Kingdom
of Heaven by Way of Similitude likning it to a certain King that made a
Marriage for his Son, and sent forth his servants to invite and call Guests to
the Wedding, Mat. 22.1, 10. We have the same Thing in Substance in Luke 14.16,
24. This, this is the great Thing they are sent upon to bring Souls to the
Marriage, and must gather them even out of the Highways and Hedges, that our
Lord's House may be filled. O then how should the Love of Christ constrain
them! Methinks I hear the blessed Jesus saying, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou
me? -- Feed my Sheep. -- Feed my Lambs. O how much have Ministers to do to
watch for Souls as they that must give Account? How should they watch every
Opportunity to commend their glorious LORD in all his Beauty, transcendant
Beauty, Glory and Excellency; and become all Things to all Men, that by all
Means they may gain some to Christ?

Moreover, it is the great Thing that Christ's Heart is upon. Our dear Lord and
Master has his Heart upon this as the great Thing in which his Glory as
Mediator and Head of the Church consists. O how was his Heart upon it, in the
Days of Eternity; when he was daily his Father's Delight, and was rejoicing
always before him? Then he rejoiced in the habitable Part of his Earth, and his
Delights were with the Sons of Men. Prove. 8.30, 31.
And surely his Heart must be greatly upon it, when he came down, and
tabernacled in Flesh, and dwelt among us. When he humbled himself in such an
amazing Manner in his Birth, Life and Death for our Sakes. Submitted to all
Ignominy and Sorrow: was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. Isa. 53,
3.
He bore the Malice of wicked Men and Devils; and suffered the Hidings of his
Father's Face. Was stricken, Smitten of God, and afflicted; was wounded for our
Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities. The Chastisement of our Peace
was laid upon him, that by his Stripes we might be healed. And O how was his
Heart upon espousing us to himself, when for the Joy that was set before him,
he endured the Cross, despising the Shame; and was so straightened till it was
accomplished?

And when we consider him as an Intercessor, consider him in all his Offices;
in all the indearing Characters in the blessed Gospel; and in all the Offers,
Pains and Care of it in sending his Ambassadors to preach Peace by Jesus
Christ, and pray us in his Stead to be reconciled to God, must we not be
constrained to say that his Heart was upon espousing Souls to himself; and of
bringing many Sons and Daughters unto Glory? and if this be the Case, how
evidently does it appear to be the great Work and Business of Ministers, the
very End and Design of their Office to win Souls to Christ.

Furthermore, as it is absolutely impossible that even Souls should be saved
any other Way, than, by a Mystical, and vital Union with the Lord Jesus Christ;
so the very Business of his Ministers must be about it. Indeed there is no
other Way of Salvation for Sinners, but by the only Redeemer; and no other Way
of being saved by him, but by Faith in him, which Faith is the very Act of the
Soul whereby it receives him as both Lord and Christ, or, as he is represented
and offered to us in the Gospel. And thus we become interested in his Merits.
As the Bride becomes interested in her Husband's Estate and Privileges by
Marriage, so the believing Soul becomes, entrusted in the Righteousness and
Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ by Marriage with him. Faith brings the Soul into
a Union to Christ, and to a Participation in his Estate, if I may so say, and
thus it is that we are justified by Faith alone; and that by him, all that
believe, are justified from all Things, from which they could not be justified,
by the Law of Moses. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of
Works? Nay; but by the Law of Faith. Romans 3.27.
Therefore let him that glories, glory only in the Lord. And let Ministers be
careful to preach Righteousness by Faith, without the Deads of the Law; yet be
constant in affirming, that they which have believed in God be careful to
maintain good Works; yea and that whosoever would find the Mercy of God, must
seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near.

I proceed to the third Thing proposed,

3. To show that it should be the earnest Desire and Endeavor of the Ministers
of Christ, to espouse Souls to him. And if it is their Work and Business, and a
Work of so great Importance, they ought to go about it with their Hearts
engaged in it, with very ardent Desires that it might be accomplished, and
should use their utmost Endeavors to promote it, that their great Masters
Interest may be advanced. Here,

1. It should be their earnest, fervent Desire. Ministers should not take the
Oversight of the Flock of Christ by Constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
Lucre, but with a ready Mind, ready to lay down their Lives in the glorious
Cause, to lay down their Lives for the Brethren. The Love of Christ and Souls
should constrain them; and not the Love of this vain, transitory World. O how
should the Ministers of Christ travail in Birth for their dear People with St.
Paul, 'till Christ be formed in them? Gal. 4.19.
Such should be their Desires, earnest, painful Desires for the Conversion of
Sinners to God, and very especially of those committed to their more immediate
Care. If they are the Friends of the Bridegroom, (as indeed they should be) how
greatly should they desire to have the Weeding furnished with Guests: And the
King of Zion crowned in the Day of his Espousals, the Day of the Gladness of
his Heart. Surely, not to desire it a above every worldly Advantage, above
their Honor, or Ease, or any Thing secular, must be highly criminal in the
Sight of God, who has sent them out upon such Business. Jerusalem's Peace
should be preferred above their chief Joy. Psalm. 137.6.


Therefore,

2. They should earnestly endeavor to bring about the blessed Match between
Christ and Souls.

What indefatigable Pains should the Ministers of the blessed Jesus take, to
espouse Souls to him in the Gospel Covenant? Here let me say,

Much Pains should be taken in the Study, that beaten Oil may be brought into
the Sanctuary. Wise Preachers will give good Heed, seek out, and set in Order
their Discourses: they will seek to find out acceptable Words, even Words of
Truth. Eccles. 12.9, 10,
They should give themselves to Reading, Meditation and Prayer. Ministers
should be praying Men. We will give ourselves continually to Prayer, and to the
Ministry of the Word, say the APOSTLES. And they should study to show
themselves approved unto God, Workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth. 2 Timothy 2.15.
O how great Need is there that Ministers should be furnished with a good Fund
of Knowledge, both human and divine? They should search the Scriptures and
other Writings with unwearied Attention and Diligence. They should have good
Learning, as well as true Grace; and labor to improve in their Studies, that
their Profiting may appear unto all, while they bring forth out of their
Treasures Things new and old.

They should also labor most fervently in the Pulpit. When they come to stand
before God and his People to Minister in holy Things, with what Gravity and
Decency, Solemnity and Reverence should they be clothed? What a holy Zeal and
heavenly Fervor should they put on; and, in the Strength of the Lord declare
all his Works, declare all the Council of God? And give to every one his
Portion in due Season?

They should preach the Law, for by it is the Knowledge of Sin; by it are the
careless and carnal, the vicious and profligate, and every unregenerate Sinner
to be awakned, that they may flee from the Wrath to come. And they should
preach the Gospel, sound the Jubilee Trumpet, proclaiming Liberty for the
insolvant Debtor, the poor miserable Bond Slave to go out free, and possess the
rich Inheritance among the Saints in Light. And, O how earnest and fervent
should they be in inviting and calling them that are bidden to the Wedding?
yea, and how instant in Season and out of Season, taking every Opportunity,
that, by all Means, they may gain some to Christ? And, O how sweet and joyful,
to bring one Guest to the Wedding!

Again how faithful should they be in Administering the Seals of Gods gracious
Covenant, to his visible People? And also in warning and admonishing the
ignorant and scandalous; and in dispensing the Discipline of Christ's House
according to his Mind?

Again, what Pains and Endeavors should be used in visiting and catechizing,
and, in private, instructing and feeding the Flock of Christ? Surely their
Conversation should be savory, and Administer Grace to the Hearers* And they
should be examples to the Flock, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. 1. Tim. 4.12.
In all Things showing themselves Patterns of Good Works. Tit. 2.7.


And,

How winning should Ministers be in their Preaching, Conversation and
Behavior? How wise and prudent? How kind and tender, courteous and affable,
apt to teach, ever ready to advise and counsel; to remove Doubts and
Difficulties, direct under Trials and Temptations? to strengrhen the weak,
encourage the faint and timorous, comfort the sorrowful distressed Christian,
and alarm the secure Sinner, as well as detect the close Hypocrite? And never
should the Servant of the Lord rest easy while there is a Soul out of Christ.
It should be his fervent Desire, and most diligent Endeavor to have all
espoused to him; for, O how cutting the Thought to loose one Soul! Would to God
that all might be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth as it is Jesus!

Thus having briefly spoken to the first Proposition, I proceed to the other,
viz.

II. Those Ministers who are made the happy Instruments of espousing Souls to
Christ shall have the unspeakable Satisfaction, the great Honor, Joy and
comfort of presenting them as a chaste Virgin to him.

Indeed every true and faithful Minister of Christ shall be glorious in the
Eyes of the LORD, though Israel be not gathered; and great shall be their Reward
in Heaven. God will reward them, not so much according to their Success, as
according to their Faithfulness. Yet, certainly they that be wise shall shine
as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness,
as the Stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.
It is not only possible, but probable that they will have some additional
Honors and Comforts, some Joys which may exceed; Joys in their spiritual
Children, whom they have begotton through the Gospel. But here let me observe,

1. That some Ministers have been, are, and doubtless will be, the happy
Instruments of espousing Souls to Christ. God is pleased graciously to bless
their Labors for the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners. It is not in them,
let them labor ever so faithfully, but of God alone that sheweh Mercy. Paul
himself may plant, and Apollos water in vain, except God gives the Increase.
Without the Father draws, no Man can come to Christ; for the carnal Mind is
Enmity against God, the will set in Opposition against him. There must,
therefore, be the Day of God's Power to bring the Sinner to a Gospel
Submission. And that Christ's faithful Ministers have good Ground to expect. A
most wonderful Promise our dear Lord and Master has left for them, LO, I am
with you always, even to the End of the World. Mat. 28.20.
And as God has been pleased to make such abundant Provision in the Gospel, and
so many precious Promises of the Spirit to be poured forth, as Floods, and as
Waters upon the dry Ground, we may well look for glorious Days of Reformation;
and therefore that God will make some, at least, of his faithful Mininers happy
Instruments of bringing many Sons and Daughters unto Glory.

It is so commonly, if not always, that where Christ sends his Ministers, he
has chosen Vessels to be called in, and brought Home to himself: and wherever
it is so, he will undoubtedly bless their Labors for gathering in his Harvest.
It has pleased God, by the Foolishness of preaching (though not by foolish
Preaching) to save them that believe. He is indeed all in all, and the
Instrument nothing but an Instrument, and no more of an Instrument than he is
pleased to make it: but blessed be his Name, he is many times pleased to make
his Ministers wonderful Instruments of a glorious Reformation. What Wonders
were done by the preaching of the Apostles and Ministers, in the first Ages of
Christianity? And what great Things have been done many times since, when the
Gospel has been preached in it is Power and Purity? What was done by the
Instrumentality of Luther, Calvin and others about 250 years ago. A Reformation
which has not been lost to this Day. And how has God succeeded the Labors of
some of his Ministers in our Day, for the building up of his Kingdom and
Interest among us? True, we have great Reason to mourn many sorrowful Things,
as the Prevalence of Errors and Divisions, and the awful Profanity and
Wickedness of Multitudes in the Land; and that after, yea in the Midst of great
Judgments and Mercies, Nevertheless there are a goodly Number, who evidence, by
their Virgin Purity and Chastity, that they are espoused to one Husband, even
Christ.

Therefore,

2. Such ministers of Christ as are instrumental of espousing Souls to him
shall present them to him as a chaste Virgin.

Here,

1. I would speak of the Time when they shall present them.

2. Show how they shall present them to Christ

1. I am to speak of the Time when the faithful Ministers of Christ shall
present believing Souls to him.

And it may be said that they are presenting them in their daily Prayers, and
in the Administration of the holy Ordinances of the Gospel. But then, the Time
referred to is very likely the great and last Day, the Day of Judgment. Then
shall they come, and appear before their LORD and Master to give Account of
their Stewardship, and then shall they say, Here Lord am I, and the Children
which thou have given me. I have delivered to them thy Word; And through thy
Grace, they have received it, believed in thy Name, and obeyed thy Will. They
have kept thy Word. And now LORD, let them be glorified with thee according to
thy most gracious Promise. This will undoubtedly be the Time, when, in a very
especial Manner, they shall present them before the LORD JESUS CHRIST; and then
shall they be led in to the King in Raiment of Needle Work, in the pure and
fine Linen which is the Righteousness of Saints.

2. I am to show How the Ministers of Christ shall present those whom they have
espoused to him, and that is as a chaste Virgin. So they shall present them
pure and holy; for they shall be perfectly holy, being made free from all Sin:
yea, they shall be really and positively holy, being washed, justified and
sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.
The holy Image of the blessed God is in stamped, and completed upon them; and
they are transformed by the renewing of their Minds by the Holy Ghost. And how
great is this Purity and Holiness? It Is the Price of Christ's Blood, and the
Labor and Operation of the blessed Spirit, who creates the Soul anew, and forms
it after the divine Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness. Not
only are they Partakers of the divine Nature, but their whole Nature and Temper
is divine and heavenly. All the Graces of the Spirit are grown up to
Perfection, and Sanctification is completed; so there is no Alloy, no
Remainders of Corruption, but a perfect Soundness in every Part.

They shall also present them free and entire Believers espoused to Christ, are
espoused to him only, being divorced from all other former Lords, who had
Dominion over them. They were once as base, vile Harlots, with their Affections
set upon many Lovers; but the Wonders of divine Grace have made them as a
chaste Virgin, spotless, innocent, pure and clean. They are married to Christ,
and kept pure and entire: they are brought to be wholly for Christ, and for no
other. Their Love is pure Virgin Love, undivided sound and unblemished. And
they are now, presented to Christ, without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing.
These are the wise Virgins, who shall go with the Bridegroom, when he shall
come, into the Marriage Chamber, and be for ever with the LORD. Such shall the
Ministers of Christ present unto him, and in such a Condition shall they
present them at that great Day. Suffer me once more to observe,

3. With what great Satisfaction the Ministers of Christ shall present these
chaste Virgins to him. The APOSTLE speaks, in our Text, as if it was his great
Desire that he might so present the Corinthian Church to Christ. He was
therefore, jealous over them with a godly Jealously, least he should be
disappointed of presenting them in this Manner. And surely, if it was a Matter
of no great Importance; if it would be no great Satisfaction, Joy or Comfort to
him, he would not be so concerned about it. We must therefore conclude that the
true and faithful Ministers of Christ, will have abundant Satisfaction, when
they come before their LORD and Master, with a Here LORD am I, and the Children
which thou have graciously given thy Servant. They must have great
Satisfaction, Joy and Comfort in the Glory and Honor of their dear and blessed
LORD, in so many Seals of their Ministry; so many joined to him in the Covenant
of Grace, espoused to him, as a chaste Virgin to one Husband. They must have
their Joy fulfilled, when they behold them received into the Presence of their
glorious LORD, to behold his Glory, and partake of the Blessings of the
Marriage Feast. And will it be no Honor, Joy or Comfort, to have so many Stars
in their Crown? Verily, they are their Joy and Crown, Phil. 4.1.
especially in the Day of the Lord.

How blessed will the true Ministers of Jesus Christ be at that great Day, who
will then have not only their own Salvation to rejoice in, but the Salvation of
so many precious Souls, through their Instrumentality? And now to look back upon
all their Labors and Sufferings in the glorious Cause of the blessed Jesus; and
all the Dangers and Difficulties through which they, by the Help of divine
Grace, have led the Flock of Christ, must be refreshing and comforting. And if
any shall have an Additional Happiness they will: If any shall have a larger
and weightier Crown of Life and Glory such Ministers will have. And then he
that sowed, and they that reap, shall rejoice together. And as a Father has a
peculiar Joy in his Children, so these Fathers in Christ will have a peculiar
and special Joy in their spiritual Children. And very likely good Ministers of
Christ, will have something special to do, in leading, and assisting the Church
of God, in Heaven, to all Eternity; may go before in the heavenly Worship and
Services. The four Beasts, or rather the four living Creatures in the Rev. IV.
supposed to intend, or to be Representatives of, the Ministers of Christ, are
represented V. 6. as full of Eyes before and behind; and in V. 8. full of Eyes
within, which may denote their exquisite Knowledge and Discerning in divine
Things; that they look, not only within, to themselves and for themselves, but
before and behind them, even to all that are about them. And V. 9, 10. We read
that when those living Creatures give Glory and Honor, and Thanks to him that
sat on the Throne, who lives for ever and ever, the Four and Twenty Elders,
which are supposed to represent the Church, fall down before him that sat upon
the Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, etc. Thus the four
living Creatures, the Ministers of the Gospel, lead the Four and Twenty Elders,
the Church, in the heavenly Worship.
Indeed, we, poor short sighted Creatures can know, in this our imperfect
State, but very little of those Things: God has reserved the Discovery of them,
chiefly for that blessed Period before us; but doubtless the Satisfaction of
the Friends of the Bridegroom, at that Day, will be great, and their Joy will
be full, to see the Spouse of Christ brought Home, through so many Tribulations;
and led in to the King, who will wipe away all Tears from her Eyes, and lead
her to living Fountains of Water.

IMPROVEMENT.
I. Is there such a Thing as a Marriage Union of precious Souls, Sinners of
Adam's Race, with the LORD JESUS CHRIST?

1. Hence What abundant Reason have we for Wonder, Admiration and Praise? That
the LORD JESUS CHRIT, the eternal Son of God, should take such as we are, even
his worst Enemies, into so near a Relation to himself, is amazing Grace,
mavelous Love, Love beyond all Expression, and Condescension, without a
Parallel. For the greatest King in the World to marry the poorest Virgin in his
Empire, is no Condescension, compared with this. For the highest sovereign
Monarch among the Kings of the Earth, to stoop to marry the vilest Harlot among
his worst Enemies, his open, and avowed Enemies, would look like Condescension,
and may be some faint Shadow of this; but really there would then be an
infinite Disproportion; for it would be but one of his Fellow Worms; and their
Natures are the same. But for the God of Nature, the Creator of the Universe,
by whom all Things do consist, to veail his Divinity in Humanity, and freely
submit to all those cruel Sufferings which our dear Redeemer did; and then take
such vile Creatures, his worst Enemies, and the Bond Slaves of the Devil into
his Bosom, is truly astonishing, and marvelous. Such his Grace finds them, but,
how glorious is the Change at once made when they are brought Home to Christ in
Regeneration and Conversion in Justification, Adoption and Sanctification? They
are then made Children and Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ,
Romans 8.17.
to an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and that fades not away. Surely we
may well cry Grace, Grace to it from the Bottom to the top Stone. And let his
Name have endless Praise.

2. What Honor and Dignity is conferred upon every true Believer? That they
should be brought into such a Union with the Prince of Life, such a Relation to
the blessed God and only Savior Jesus Christ, be joined to the Lord in an
everlasting Covenant, be made one with Christ, taken so near to him, and raised
up to sit together in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.6.
To sit with him in his Throne, even as -- he is set down with his Father in
his Throne, Rev. 3.21.
how great the Honor and Dignity?

If the Christian had been set over all the World, or had been exalted to rule
and command all the Angels in Heaven, it would not have been equal to the Honor
that he is now raised to in his Marriage with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God
over all blessed for ever. And is it not a great Honor to be made a Partaker
of the divine Nature, and invested with all the Privileges of the Gospel
Covenant? These, these are Honors that are high and noble, and truly divine for
which every Child of God should be thankful.

3. We also see here the wonderful Love of God and Christ to his People.
Behold, says the Apostle, what Manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the Sons of God 1. John, 3, 1.
Here in, verily, is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. Chap. 4.10.
Herein is Love, that Christ, when we were his bitter Enemies, should die for
us. His Love was stronger then Death.

And that he should take our defiled Souls, our guilty Persons into his Bosom;
that he should make such rich and ample Provision for us, as if a common Place
in Heaven was not good enough for us, when we most justly deserved the very
Deeps of Hell, and the full Vials of the Wrath of God to be poured upon us for
ever and ever* O the Height and Depth, the Length and Breadth of this
unmeasurable Love! How full of Wonders, amazing Wonders!

Again,

4. How mysterious and wonderful the Way and Manner of a Sinner's Justification
before God? That infinite Wisdom should pitch upon such a Method for the Glory
of divine Justice and the Honor of the great Redeemer, that it must be brought
about by our Espousals to Christ, when we were infinitely unworthy, and ill
deserving. That we should be brought into such a Relation to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thereby become interested in his Riches and Righteousness, speaks
the Wisdom of God, and the exceeding Riches of his Grace; and shows how he can
be just, and, yet, the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Let us admire
and adore, wonder, love and praise.

5. This also affords a most plentiful and free Invitation to poor, miserable
and enslaved wretched Sinners, to come and join themselves to the Lord Jesus
Christ, in an everlasting Covenant. And O that they would be persuaded to come,
and be bethrothed unto the Lord in Righteousness, and in Judgment, in
Lovingkindness and in Mercies. Hos. 2.19.
If any thing can be alluring and inviting this must be. Indeed there is every
suitable and proper Motive to induce Souls to come and be saved: Yet nothing
will avail, till the LORD shall, in the Day of his Power, open their Eyes and
turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God. LORD,
what is Man! But,

II. Is it the great End and Design of the gospel Ministry, to espouse Souls to
Christ? Hence,

1. How deeply concerned should Ministers be to prosecute that great and good
Design? Surely with Aaron they should bear the People upon their Hearts before
the Lord continually; Exodus 28.30.
and wrestle and plead for the Blessing. They should labor with the greatest
Assiduity with every one under their Care, and with others as they shall have
convenient Opportunity, to bring them to comply with the Gospel Call, and
Invitation, and come to the Marriage of the King's Son.

2. How great a Blessing is the Gospel Ministry? if such be the noble and
glorious Designs there of as the espousing of Souls to the blessed Jesus, and
preparing a Bride to be presented faultless and blameless before the Presence
of his Glory at last, it must be a great and rich Mercy to enjoy the Gospel
Ministry. O how wonderfully are many favored with Ascension Gifts, and yet how
insensible of the Mercy of God therein! Even some of the most faithful
Ministers of Christ are illy treated, and their Counsel despised and rejected
by those whom they would fain espouse to the blessed Jesus. But let such know
that the Time is coming when they shall know that there has been a Prophet
among them. It will be very terrible by and by for such as receive not the
Testimony of the Gospel Ministers. Christ will take all that is said and done
against them, as said and done against himself. Therefore let People beware how
they conduct toward Christ's Ministers, and see that they esteem highly of
their Office, and be very thankful for them. They should esteem them great
Blessings, and the richest Treasures they possess, next to spiritual Blessings.
And they should be much in Prayer for them, love and honor them as their Lord's
Ambassadors: hearken to the Word they preach in the Name of the Lord, and the
private Counsels and Instructions they give them, and do as the noble Bereans,
search the Scriptures and see whether they speak according to that unerring
Rule, or not.

III. Should it be the earnest, fervent Desire and Endeavor of Christ's
Ministers to espouse Souls to him? Hence,

1. Ministers should be holy and good Men.

If such be their Work and Business, and they are to go forward in it with
fervent and earnest, hearty Desires for the Glory of God in the Salvation of
Souls, they had need to be godly and gracious, holy and righteous Men: For what
Desires can a wicked Man have for the Glory of God, the Interest of the great
Redeemer and the Good of precious Souls? True, he may have many Desires from
selfish Views, or Ends. But will such an one travail in Birth like the Apostle,
till Christ be formed in his People? Gal. 4.19.
Will he wrestle and plead as Jacob and Moses till he obtains the Blessing? Can
he out of Love to Christ, with Peter, feed Christ's Sheep and Lambs? Rather
will he not regard the Fleece more than the Flock? And instead of preaching
Christ Jesus the LORD, will he not preach himself? O how great Danger, that
while the blind lead the blind they will both fall into the Ditch? Indeed such
an one may preach good Truths, and even to Edification, but all the while he is
a Stranger to those Truths and knows them not in their Spirituality and Glory.
But,

2. Ministers greatly need the Presence of Christ, and the Assistances of his
Spirit with them. If, as we have heard, such is to be their Labor, and
Endeavor for the Conversion and Salvation of Sinners, they really need the
Presence of Jesus Christ with them, even his promised Presence; Mat. 28.30.
and the Holy Ghost quickening, inlightning, sanctifying and comforting them.
This will wonderfully strengthen and help him in his great and difficult Work.
How will his Soul be full of heavenly Matter, and his Tongue as the Pen of a
ready Writer, Psalm. 15.6.
and the holy Fire of Love and Zeal, burn Seraph like in the Presence of the
eternal Jehovah? Then will he be strong in Grace that is in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy
2, 1.
and with heroic Courage and Fortitude engage in the Work of the Lord his God,
and plead his Cause against the mighty. He will labor, and not faint; and
improve all his Time and Talents for the Interest of the great Redeemer, and
the Good of Souls. Therefore, what Reason have they to be humbled to the Dust,
and mourn the Want of the divine Presence? And how earnestly should they seek
it; and not allow themselves to live easy and contented without it? For
Ministers to be cold and dead, lifeless and slothful is a greater Sin than for
a private Christian, a more heinous Sin against their Lord and Master, and a
great Injury to the Interest of Souls. O that our Hearts and Lips were ever
touched as with a live Coal from the Altar. 6 Isa. 6, 7.


3. How few Ministers do their Duty as they ought? How great Reason have they
to be humbled, and ashamed before the Lord, and cry with the Prophet My
Leanness, my Leanness! And how should they look to the great Atonement for
themselves as well as the People! Blessed be God, there is enough in our great
High Priest for the Priesthood, as well as the Congregation. Were it not so, we
could not hold up our Faces before the LORD. Here is our Refuge. But O let us,
who are Ministers, bewail our Barrenness and Unprofitableness, look over our
Ministry, and view our short comings, which may be seen in every Part of our
Ministry; and let us fly to the Blood of the Covenant with an O God deliver me
from Blood Guiltiness. Psalm. 51.14.
And would to God that we, and every Minister, might be more concerned to be
found faithful! A very sad Account the unfaithful Minister will have to give up
at last. And instead of a goodly Number of precious Souls, espoused, through
his Instrumentality, to one Husband, to present, as a chaste Virgin to Christ,
he stands with a ghastly Number, whose Blood is required at his Hands. Tremble,
my Soul, at the awful Thought! Blow the Trumpet in Zion, and warn the wicked of
his Ways!

IV. Shall those Ministers who are instrumental of espousing Souls to Christ,
finally have the unspeakable Joy and Satisfaction of presenting them, at last,
unto him? How should this animate and support every Minister in his great and
difficult Work?

Ministers have a very great and difficulty Work, a weighty Work that lies
heavy upon their Souls. A very great and difficult Thing it is to bring Souls
to espouse the Lord Jesus Christ. Many make light of the Invitation, and will
not come to the Wedding. Ministers have various Tempers and Constitutions to
deal with; a Flood of Errors and Corruptions to withstand, and guard against:
Temptations to remove by all possible proper Means. Hard Hearts, stupied
Consciences; worldly, carnal, loose, profane and profligate Sinners to deal
with; and what not? for the Children of apostate Adam have run into thousands
of Disorders, and wild Mazes of Sin and Error, out of which they must be
brought, or they will inevitably perish. And there is a Legion, yea Legions of
Devils, ever in busy Employ to prevent the Success of the Gospel. Besides, the
good Minister has a bad Heart of his own to grapple with, which renders his
Work the more difficult. And how many more Difficulties has every true Minister
of Jesus Christ? How many Discourgements, and Heartbreaking Considerations?
yet, blessed be God, he has an over balance for them all. In due Time he shall
reap if he faint not. He that goes forth, and weepeth, bearing precious Seed,
shall doubtless come again with Rejoicing, bringing his Sheaves with him Psalm.
126, 6,
. The thought of winning Souls to Christ, and of presenting them at last, as a
chaste Virgin to him, affords a wonderful Support and Comfort under every
Discouragement. To be the happy Instrument of the Conversion of one Soul is a
great Thing: to be the Instrument of Good to one of the least of all Christ's
Household, is a Matter of so much Importance, that a Minister's Labor cannot be
said to be in vain; no, but eternal Honor will redound to God, and Good to that
Soul, yea, and a glorious Reward too to the good Minister himself. Let them
therefore, be animated in their Work, and take Comfort in it. It is a good
Work; a glorious Work; the Work of the Lord. Let them labor and not faint;
press forward, and look to Jesus their Lord and Master, Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our Faith Heb. 12.2.
, and endure as seeing him that is invisible, Chap. 11.27.
knowing that great is their Reward from their Father which is in Heaven Mat.
5.12.
.

And now as I am going to take the Care of one of Christ's little Flocks in the
Wilderness, what shall I say to myself upon so solemn an Occasion? Sensible, in
some Measure of my great Insufficiency for these Things, I would humbly bow my
Neck to Christ's Yoke, depending upon his abundant Grace to be sufficient for
me in the great and important Work; and would engage to persevere in it, by his
Help, without which, I see, I can do Nothing.

In my early Days I freely gave up myself to the blessed Jesus, with a fervent
Desire to serve him in the Work of the glorious Gospel. The ardent Desire of
espousing Souls to Christ, was the prevailing Motive with me, to devote myself
to study under many Disadvantages, and caused me to persevere until I entered
upon the Work. And blessed be God who has in any Measure, owned my worthless
Endeavors for the good of Souls.

Indeed it has pleased a holy, righteous and sovereign God, in his all wise and
all governing Providence to call me to leave that dear People in Norwich, to
which I lately stood in the pastoral Relation, to the great Grief of us both.
Yet through Grace, I esteem this with all my Sorrows but my light Afflictions,
and not worthy to be compared with the Glory to be revealed.

And as I am now called to leave my Friends, to go a considerable Distance into
the Wilderness, to an infant Plantation, where the Gospel is so greatly needed,
I cheerfully comply, hoping in God's own Time, to see the Wilderness and the
Desert to rejoice, and blossom as the Rose, so that the Glory of Lebanon, the
Excellency of Carmel and Sharon shall be given to it* that they shall see the
Glory of the Lord, and the Excellency of our God Isa. 35, 1, 2. See the rest of
the Chapter.
. If through the abundant Grace of God, I may be the happy, though unworthy
Instrument of espousing Souls to Christ, and may at last, present them as a
chaste Virgin to him, it will be the Sum of all my Desires. To this End I
earnestly ask an Interest in all your Prayers, and humbly commend myself to the
Grace of God in Christ Jesus my Lord.

And now my Reverend Fathers and Brethren, may I, your most unworthy Brother in
the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ Rev. 1.9.
, be suffered humbly to bespeak your tender Care and Concern for the Spouse of
our royal and worthy Lord and Master Jesus Christ. O that it might be our
Study, Prayer and Labor to espouse Souls, precious and immortal Souls to
Christ. Can we be easy to live, to preach, to pray or Converse to no such
blessed Effects? Should we not travail in Birth again for our dear People, till
Christ be formed in them? O to see the Kingdom of our dear Lord advanced,
Religion flourishing, the Land, Emmanuel's Land, a Mountain of Holiness and a
dwelling Place of Peace, and Truth, and Righteousness; and the Beauty of the
Lord upon his People, how fervently to be desired! Let us think no Pains too
great, no Labor too hard to win Souls to Christ. Let us lie at the Throne of
Grace and take no Denial there, and lie upon our People, and take no Denial of
them. For Zion's Sake, let us not hold our Peace, and for Jerusalem's Sake let
us not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns Isa. 62.1.
. And let us think often of the presenting Time, which is at Hand; and God of
his infinite Mercy grant that we may present a glorious Number as a chaste
Virgin to Christ, and meet a Well done, good and faithful Servants, enter into
the Joy of your LORD. Once more,

Let me address this numerous Congregation in the Name of the Royal Bridegroom,
and invite you all to come and be espoused unto this one Husband. I beseech you
in the Bowels of Christ, by all his Worth and Excellency, and by all the
Blessings and Comforts of his Love, and by the Dreadfulness of his Wrath, that
ye delay not the Matter, but come to a present Resolve for Christ. As ever ye
would be presented faultless and blameless before the Presence of his Glory
with exceeding Joy, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for the royal Bride from
the Foundation of the World, now consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace.
And the Lord be with you, AMEN.

P. 11. l. 4. from bottom, for even Souls, r. any Souls. P. 12. l. 7 for
entrusted, r. interested. P. 13. l. 6 for Weeding, r. Wedding. P. 14. l. 19 r.
warning: l. 26. r. Faith. l. 27. r. Purity. P. 15, l. 26. r. Apollos, as in
some Copies.

FINIS.

