A DISCOURSE UPON THE INSTITUTION OF MEDICAL SCHOOLS IN AMERICA; Delivered at a
Public ANNIVERSARY COMMENCEMENT, held in the COLLEGE OF PHILADELPHIA May 30 and
31, 1765.

WITH A PREFACE Containing, amongst other things, THE AUTHOR's APOLOGY For
attempting to introduce the regular mode of practicing PHYSIC in PHILADELPHIA:
By JOHN MORGAN M.D.

Fellow of the Royal Society at LONDON; Correspondent of the Royal Academy of
Surgery at PARIS; Member of the Arcadian Belles Lettres Society at ROME;
Licentiate of the Royal Colleges of Physicians in LONDON and in EDINBURGH; and
Professor of the Theory and Practice of Medicine in the College of PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Corner of Market
and Front-Streets, MDCC, LXV.

TO SAMUEL POWEL, ESQUIRE, Of PHILADELPHIA.
SIR,
THE following discourse was written for the most part at Paris, and served as
an agreeable relaxation from the severer studies in which I was, at that time,
engaged. Our traveling together gave me an opportunity of submitting the
performance to your critical eye, and it affords me a singular satisfaction to
acknowledge, that, in several particulars, it has been greatly amended by your
candid and judicious remarks.

UPON such an occasion as this, I should deem myself ungrateful indeed, was I
to withold the little tribute I have in my power to pay to that genuine worth
and disinterested friendship, which I have experienced in you.

SURE I am that a person of your amiable disposition, whose heart glows with
the utmost warmth of social affection, whose mind is enriched with the
treasures of ancient and modern learning, and whose taste has been improved and
refined, by an acquaintance and conversation with men of the first rank in life
and of the greatest abilities in the learned world, must be eminently useful to
mankind, and particularly adorn and bless the land wherein providence calls him
to reside. With great reason, therefore, may we hope to see you become a
distinguished ornament to society. With great reason may the place of your
nativity claim the advantages which arise from such abilities, and from a
genius that was formed and nurtured in her own bosom. Your country has much to
expect in waiting the return of a son blessed with so many useful endowments;
and I well know that, amongst your many other virtues, the love of your country
prevails too much in your breast to let her sustain a disappointment.

OPULENCE and generosity seldom go hand in hand. The gifts of fortune are
rarely accompanied with a spirit to employ them in deeds of charity and
disinterested benevolence.

IT is yours, Sir, to soar above the sordid views of vulgar minds, and enjoy
the sublime pleasures of a tender and sympathizing humanity, which always
carries its own reward, in the satisfacton that flows from the exercise of so
precious a gift of divine bounty.

THERE are no connections in life more honorable than those which we form with
men of learning and virtue. I cannot but congratulate myself, therefore, on the
strict intimacy with which you have so long indulged me, and, at the same time,
be thankful to you for the advantages it has often procured me in foreign parts.

DURING an absence of five years from my country and friends, whilst I was
engaged in such pursuits as were indispensably necessary to fit me for more
extensive usefulness in my profession, the almost uninterrupted enjoyment of
your company, or correspondence, contributed much to make such a separation
more easy and supportable. It will always give me unspeakable pleasure to
reflect upon the variety of scenes through which we have passed, and the
entertainment and improvement we have met with, in visiting the principal
cities and seats of science in Great Britain, Holland, France and Italy; places
celebrated for the birth or residence of men of the most illustrious genius in
the world, and distinguished for the cultivation of manners, polite arts and
literature.

THESE are the several considerations that have induced me to present you with
this performance. Happy should I have thought myself, if a little more leisure
had enabled me to render it somewhat more worthy your notice. Such as it is,
however, I request you to accept it as a small testimony of my personal regard
and affection for you. Whatever may be the merit or success of the work itself,
I shall always rejoice that it has given me an opportunity of telling the
world, how much I respect your character, and what an high value I place upon
your friendship.

I am, Dear Sir, Your most affectionate friend and obliged humble servant, JOHN
MORGAN.

PREFACE.
THE delay in publishing my address on the institution of Medical schools arose
from the indispensable calls of business. It has given me an opportunity,
however, of hearing the opinion of many people upon the address; but more
particularly upon what relates to my proposed method of practicing physic.

MY intention with regard to the latter, having been made known by general
conversations only, I find has been often misunderstood. No wonder then, if, in
consequence thereof, it has been sometimes greatly misrepresented.

THIS has determined me to commit to the press the plan of practice by which I
design to regulate myself as much as possible; and to deliver my sentiments
very briefly on the expediency of a regular and distinct practice in the
several branches of Medicine. The public will then be able to judge more
clearly of the propriety of those measures, which from a full persuasion of
their great utility, I venture to recommend.

First, I purpose to confine myself, in practice, to those cases which belong
most immediately to the office of a Physician, that I may prescribe for and
attend such cases to greater advantage. I shall therefore avoid, all I can,
interfering in the proper business of surgery viz. m^^ual operation.

I DO not mean however to refuse to innoculate for the smallpox, where my
patients or their friends object to employ another hand to make the incision.
This may frequently happen, although there is no more difficulty of art
required in it, than in cutting an issue and inserting a pea, or than in
cupping and bleeding.

Secondly, I propose, in such cases as shall be required, to attend in
consultation with other Physicians, on the same terms as those of character
enter into consultation with one another.

Thirdly, I shall give my opinion in writing on the complaints of patients at a
distance from Philadelphia, whenever the history of the case is properly drawn
up and transmitted to me for advice.

Fourthly, In such cases of surgery as require consultation, or the use of
medicines, I am willing to attend, to prescribe, consult, or advise; but not to
perform any operation myself, or dress any wound.

IN REGARD TO THE APOTHECARY AND SURGEON.
IT may be proper here to acquaint the public, that, for the better carrying on
this plan into execution, Mr. David Leighton, a gentleman of abilities and
integrity, educated in Great Britain both in pharmacy and surgery, has
accompanied me hither. To him I send to make up my prescriptions. But patients
are allowed to choose any other apothecary to put up their medicines, or what
surgeon they please for the operative part. What I expect from them is a proper
compensation for my advice and attendance as a physician. The medicines and
operations are to be considered as a distinct and separate charge. Mr. Leighton
has imported a large assortment of medicines, in which no expense has been
spared to have every thing of the best in its kind. They have been prepared
with particular care by Messrs Silvanus and Timothy Bevan, Druggists in London,
whose known skill and reputation in that business are too well established,
both in Great Britain and America, to need further recommendation.

Mr. LEIGHTON will oblige himself to put up such prescriptions as are ordered,
in the best manner, and with the utmost fidelity and care, as well as at the
most moderate rate.

AS TO FEES.
I always mean that these shall be moderate, adapted to the circumstances of
this place, of the patient and the attendance he may require.

As a rule of conduct to such as are quite unacquainted with the regular
practice of physic, let them inform themselves what is the united expense for
Medicines and attendance, as charged by the practitioners of eminence in this
place. In such cases as can be exactly ascertained, I shall require no more
from them, than they would be obliged to pay to others, as in the case of
innoculation and attendance in the small pox; allowance being made for the
Medicines. The same rule, as far as it can be observed in fevers and other
disorders, might be applied.

PRACTITIONERS in many cases make an advanced charge on their Medicines, so as
to include for attendance. This is done to make up for the patients deficiency
in fees, than which, when it is willful and not the effect of ignorance in the
patient, nothing can be more equitable, or more expedient, except charging for
attendance under its proper name. For Practitioners must be paid for their time
and attendance, as well as for their Medicines, under whatever name they make
the charge. Indeed the most extensive practice otherwise would be insufficient
to support a family in a becoming manner, as the greatest part of their time is
employed in visiting the sick. The paying of a physician for attendance and the
apothecary for his Medicines apart is certainly the most eligible mode of
practice, both to patient and practitioner. The apothecary then, who is not
obliged to spend his time in visiting patients, can afford to make up medicines
at a reasonable price; and it is as desirable, as just in itself, that patients
should allow fees for attendance, whatever it may be thought to deserve. They
ought to know what it is they really pay for Medicines, and what for physical
advice and attendance.

NOBODY, I believe, will deny that the practice of rating Medicines, at such a
price as to include the charge for Medicines and attendance, is liable to gross
impositions on the part of ignorant medicasters, too many of whom swarm in
every city. Patients who are kept in ignorance of what price Medicines are,
considered separately, and what is the value of physical skill and attendance,
naturally think the original cost of Medicines, which are comparatively cheap,
to be very dear, and undervalue the skill of a physician, his toil of study and
his expense of time and money in his education, which have often amounted to
very large sums and to many years spent abroad in quest of knowledge, as if
they were of no consideration.

THE levelling of all kind of practicioners so much with illiterate pretenders,
who have art enough to gain employ, however ill qualified in that of healing
diseases, has a tendency to deter persons, otherwise of just and liberal
sentiments, from putting themselves to a further expense to gain knowledge,
than what is sufficient to make money. This is to make a vile trade of physic,
instead of a noble profession, which as it certainly is, so it ought to be
esteemed.

I HAVE been told more than once, upon reasoninrg on the subject, that people
here are used to this method and don't love to change old customs. What is it
more than to say, "Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur

IF people choose to be deceived, even let us keep them, in their deception."?

INSTEAD of making a charge of fees, I willingly leave to the patients
themselves to give what they please, upon my dismission from further
attendance, or as soon after their recovery as shall be thought convenient,
without specifying any demand, unless where patients particularly require it.
This I look for to prevent the necessity of making a book charge of fees, which
is never done in any liberal profession.

BY thus leaving the fee in a great measure, of wholly, to the free will and
circumstances of the patient, a physician may be employed by the middling class
of people as well as the rich.

MANY who have no adequate notion of the true value of attendance, or what rule
is observed by others, may wish rather to be directed what fee to pay for
attendance, being desirous on one hand, to avoid the appearance of being
deficient in generosity, and on the other hand willing to recompense the
physician for his care, without unnecessary prodigality. Such persons, upon
intimation of their desires, it is to be hoped, will always find themselves
fully satisfied in this particular.

AS to attending poor patients gratis, and giving them my best advice; I shall
chearfullv take my share of that kind of practice with my brethern of the
faculty. For I shall always esteem it a favorable circumstance, that puts it
in my power to administer relief to persons, whose indigence forbids them to
expect it upon any other terms.

THESE articles, I presume, will effectually remove the objection which has
been most strongly urged, viz. that my method of practice would only suit the
wealthy; and will prove that the expense to the patient is not greater, on the
plan I have adopted, than in the common method of practice.

IT is true that, upon my first arrival, I expressed my desire of being paid
for a certain number of visits, at a pistole the first visit, as a retaining
fee, and a dollar for every visit afterward. -- It was not my intention to
require more than one fee per day, although I might wait on the patient oftener,
nor yet every day that I visited once, where a disease of a lingering nature,
or requiring particular care, would render my attendance expensive. A retaining
fee I expected to receive from the rich, not from the poor; and had firmly
resolved in no case to receive more, fees, than sufficient to pay me for the
value of my time and trouble of attendance. But for want of suitable
opportunities of rendering this better known, I daily found that my good
intention was in some measure frustrated.

THIS, and the advice of some judicious friends to endeavor to prevent the ill
effects of prejudice, made me resolve to attempt such an alteration as might be
better suited, at this time, to the customs and circumstances of the people.

THE preceding plan I have ever since constantly followed, to my entire
satisfaction, and I hope to that of my patients. Truth requires of me to
acknowledge to the public, that I have always found, as far as my practice has
hitherto given me an opportunity of judging, that the insinuation, which has
been made to deter me from this mode of practice, viz. that people are too
narrow minded here, and show no generosity to a physician, only employing a
doctor because he is cheap or lives near to them, is utterly groundless. In
most instances I have found their generosity has much exceeded my expectations.

ONE article more I have to mention under this head. It may frequently happen,
in visiting my friends and acquaintance who employ me in their families, that
themselves, their children or servants, may have slight complaints, for which
they would be glad to have advice, but do not think them of importance enough
to call in a physician, who may expect fees for little ailments. Such persons
may always command my advice in these masters without a fee.

THE NECESSITY OF REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
IT will be readily acknowledged by every one that allows himself to reflect
upon it, that some regulation in regard to a Physicians attendance upon the
sick is now become highly requisite, Formerly, when the city did not occupy
much above half the extent, practice was much more manageable than it is at
present. Living was then cheap. Within my own memory, every article of expense
was less by almost one half. So that what suited the circumstances of the place
and people then does not suit them now. Yet we may believe the knowledge of
Physic has been cultivated all along with considerable application. A medical
education is at least become much more expensive, and a man has little chance,
if he keeps free from empiricism, to get a tolerable living by physic now,
unless he has spent some years in an expensive education in Europe. Is it not
then more equitable to be paid for attendance, than to live by advancing the
price of medicines?

I AM not urging these as arguments for a more expensive practice, but for an
improvement of it, by separating physic from surgery and pharmacy, which I
think incompatible with them, at least according to the plan of education I
have followed, by the advice of some of the most eminent and skillful judges of
medical science of any in Great Britain.

WHAT reasonable objection can be then offered against an improvement in the
present method of the practice of physic, which, to a man in great business, is
by every one allowed to be the most slavish profession known in this part of
the world.

EVERY mechanic has a certain portion of time allotted to him for a relaxation
from business, and for the enjoyment of social happiness, Physicians have next
to none, but they are obliged to be at the call of the sick, every hour in the
night as well as of the day. Were they born slaves to the public and not
children? or, for such a voluntary surrender of their liberty and ease as is
necessary to practice conscientious]y, are they to have no compensation? Is it
thought an unreasonable demand to be paid for a toilsome, but necessary
attendance, amidst objects of the most moving distress, which deprives them
much of the company of their own family and of a number of gratifications,
which every other profession allows of without detriment? Where is the
encouragement for a man to banish himself from all the endearing ties of
friends and relations, to spend the prime of life, and often the bulk of his
fortune, to administer more skillful aid to the calamities of his distressed
fellow mortals, if he is to be considered as entitled only to the same gratuity
with those who employ all their time at home, in getting money, instead of
spending it for the public good? or is he to be allowed no more, than if, in
acquiring this knowledge, he had been supported at a public expense? -- let
unbiassed reason and justice determine.

I am sorry that the objections, which have been made to my proposed method of
practice, have laid me under the disagreeable necessity of mentioning the kind
of education I have had to qualify me for my profession, and to afford me a
reasonable expectation of a living from my advice and attendance.

IT is now more than fifteen years since I began the study of medicine in this
city, which I have prosecuted ever since without interruption. During the first
six years I served an apprenticeship with Dr. JOHN REDMAN, who then did, and
stills continues to enjoy a most justly acquired reputation in this city for
superior knowledge and extensive practice in physic. At the same time I had an
opportunity of being acquainted with the practice of other eminent physicians
in this place, particularly of all the physicians to the hospital, whose
prescriptions I put up there above the space of one year. The term of my
apprenticeship being expired, I devoted myself for four years to a military
life, principally with a view to become more skillful in my profession; being
engaged, the whole of that time, in a very extensive practice in the army,
amongst diseases of every kind. The last five years I have spent in Europe,
under the most celebrated masters in every branch of Medicine, and spared no
labor or expense to store my mind with an extensive acquaintance in every
science, that related any way to the duty of a physician; having in that time
expended, in this pursuit, a sum of money, of which the very interest would
prove no contemptible income. With what success this has been done others are
to judge, and not myself.

Thus I have arrived at the middle age of life, in endeavoring to lay up
treasures of useful knowledge, before I commence a settled practice; and yet I
have been told, that to expect to gain a support here by my medical advice and
attendance only, without becoming a surgeon and apothecary too in order to help
out, is to forget that I was born an American. I am very happy that my country
has always discovered too much of a laudable ambition to excel in every branch
of polite literature, and has taken too much pleasure in the reputation of her
sons, to fill me with apprehension that an education in physic will be
accounted too expensive, such as I have thought necessary to qualify myself for
practicing my profession with ease of mind to myself and with benefit to the
community.

As far as I can learn, every body approves of my plan for instituting medical
schools, and I have the honor of being appointed a public professor for
teaching, physic in the college here. Can any man, the least acquainted with
the nature of that arduous task, once imagine it possible for me to acquit
myself in that station, in an honorable or useful manner, and yet be engaged
in one continued round of practice in surgery and pharmacy, as well as physic?

To prepare for a course of lectures every year requires some leisure, and a
mind undisturbed with too great a variety of pursuits. So that my usefulness as
a professor makes it absolutely necessary for me to follow that method of
practice, which alone appears to be calculated to answer that end. Quick caren
alterna requie durabile nen est, Haec reparat virez, fessaque membra novat.


ON THE ADVANTAGES OF A SEPARATE AND REGULAR PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, SURGERY AND
PHARMACY.
In the more laborious occupation of life, as in building a house or a ship, a
great variety as well as a great number of artizans are employed, but all in
different departments.

IN the less laborious callings we observe the like prudent regulations, thus
in making a pipe, a button or a pin, a variety of hands, no less commonly than
five, six, or seven different artists unite their industry. By this means they
finsh more work in a limited time, and can afford to sell it at a cheaper rate,
than they could, if every individual was employed in all the separate branches.
But each having a particular province assigned to himself, while all conspire
in one uniform plan, they become more skillful and dextrous in their respective
parts, and all more usefully subservient to one end. Are the good qualities of
accuracy, dispatch and cheapness, not to speak of the greater perfection of the
work, no recommendation to the manner of doing it?

WHY should the more difficult, but more ingenious and liberal arts, scorn to
be taught wisdom from their example? Is it easier to understand the intricate
structure of the animal frame, the work of God, than to learn the construction
of any machine, as a watch or clock, the work of human invention? Or are the
springs and movements of the former, so divinely adjusted, more easily managed
and put to rights when in disorder, than the wheels of the latter? or does the
preservation of this in a sound state require less study, knowledge, and
conduct?

THE human body is certainly one of the most compound machines in nature.
Medicine is one of the noblest and most difficult of arts, made up of a number
of sciences different from each other. The practice of physic requires
deliberation, reasoning, judgment, and experience. Surgery calls for different
powers and qualifications rarely uniting in one man. Are these then all to be
blended with the apothecary, the botanist, and chemist, which ought to be, and
are each of them separate and distinct in their very nature? Whilst we labor
amidst such a variety of pursuits, all improvement must be at a stand. Whereas,
let each cultivate his respective branch apart, the physician, surgeon,
apothecary etc. the knowledge of medicine will be then daily improved, and it
may be practiced with greater accuracy and skill as well as a less expense.

PREJUDICE may here ask, how can a physician practice with advantage, if he
does not equally pursue every branch of his professon? or how shall he know
that the Medicines are good, which he orders, if he does hot prepare them
himself?

ANSWER, It is not only expedient, but necessary that a physician should have a
general and extensive knowledge of the whole art, and be acquainted with the
principles of every branch of his profession. Thus the general of an army
should be acquainted with every part of military science, and understand the
whole detail of military duty, from that of colonel down to a private sentinel.
But there is no need that he should act as a pioneer and dig in a trench. Where
a proper subordination is wanting, there is a perversion of all practical
knowledge. No more then is a physician obliged, from his office, to handle a
knife with a surgeon; to cull herbs with the botanist; to distill simples with
the chemist; or compound drugs with the apothecary. Can he be more sure however
that his Medicines are genuine, if he does not collect his own herbs and roots
as a botanist, or distill with the chemist, than he can, if, omitting these, he
should stick to the plaister-pan and spatula, or the pestle and mortar?

BUT practitioners in great business never do, or can do the business of an
apothecary in this place, themselves. They have apprentices for the purpose.
After visiting the sick, do not their apprentices make up their prescriptions?
I would ask, is not an apothecary thoroughly acquainted with the art of
compounding and making up Medicines as skillful in it as an apprentice? Is not
a man educated in the profession to be trusted in preference to one who is only
learning that business? or has the master, who may be called from place to
place to attend other cases of surgery, or see other patients, always time to
wait for medicines to be made up under his eye?

THESE queries are easy enough for every one to decide upon, without being
brought up to the study of physic. Will he not therefore do a worthy action,
whoever shall steadily apply himself to remove the difficulties which are in
the way of regular practice? Will he not do real service to his country and
mankind, for the good effects of which posterity may thank him? Who then would
hesitate to rank himself amongst the foremost class of those who shall be
concerned in a work of such real benefit to the public?

HAVING thus fully explained the method I propose for practicing physic in this
place, I appeal to the impartial judgment of the public to decide upon the
question. Is it to be deemed an idle innovavation, or is it not rather an
improvement of practice in Philadelphia, to adopt a plan conformable to what is
observed in great Britain and all polished countries, as far as the
circumstances of this place admit? I profess myself open to conviction, and
shall allow due weight to every reasonable argument that may be opposed to my
plan. When I am rationally convinced that I have been in an error, I shall
readily acknowledge and retract my sentiments, which I hope, till then, I may
be allowed to continue, without being charged with an innovating spirit.

WHAT remains yet to be done is to endeavor to elucidate a few passages, which
have been thought exceptionable in the discourse by particular persons.

IN some paragraphs, the opinions and practice of the faculty of physic in this
place have been thought to have been too indiscriminately condemned.

FAR be it from me to merit this charge, or to have entertained sentiments
derogatory from a set of gentlemen, many of whom I rank amongst my principle
friends in the city, and highly esteem for their integrity and abilities in
their profession, to which they do great honor. To have made a nominal
distinction was never my design. It cannot therefore in justice be imputed to
me as a fault to have avoided, all I could, every thing which had the least
appearance of particularity, and to have endeavored to suggest an improvement
of practice, without aiming at practitioners.

I DOUBT not that every practitioner here of education, experience and
integrity, has pursued the plan which, in his opinion, was best suited to the
place and people. But as circumstances alter, so does the propriety of
particular established customs, which gradually give way to others better
suited to those changes which happen in a course of years. May I not hope to
meet with the same candor that I show to others, and be admitted to act from
the same honest principles, in recommending what I think an improvement of
practice, that I allow those who have pursued a plan different from mine?

WHEREVER there is the least appearance of being particular, or wherever I have
spoken expressly of the practitioners of this town, it has been in the most
becoming manner and without the least censure, well knowing how much I myself
need the indulgence of others.

"Mecum habito et novi quam sit mihi curta suppellex."

IN confirmation hereof, I shall adduce a few instances to which the reader may
refer. Thus I have said, p. 18. "and here we may congratulate ourselves, that
in this, and some of the large neighboring towns, we have a number of skillful
physicians and expert surgeons, qualified by genius, education and experience,
to take charge of the health of their fellow creatures." And p 30. "The city of
Philadelphia, adorned with a set of eminent practitioner draws to it a great
number of pupils, from the neighboring parts, to learn the arts of physic and
surgery." Indeed the only part in which I have been particular, and there it
was unavoidable, is in speaking of the physicians of the hospital, which I have
done in terms of the highest respect. p. 31.

It is true, I have endeavored, as well as I was able, lo describe the
mischievous effects that ensue from ignorance and presumption, when young men
enter upon the practice of Medicine before they are duly insructed in the
important duties of the profession, See p. 23. 24.

I have likewise urged the necessity of joining study with practice, and
availing ourselves of the medical discoveries and improvements made by others.
On the authority of a very learned society, I have also disapproved of the
conduct of those, who, from prejudice affecting a simplicity, (which might
often mislead them) disdain those persons who divide their time between study
and practice. I have likewise added, on the same authority, that novices
enlightened by the discoveries, which these practitioners shut their eyes
against, would in their turn with reason despise them, when grown old in their
errors," see p. 42 and 47.

BUT I have no where intentionally aimed the shaft of censure at any one, or
attempted the character of a particular man; much less have I dared to attack
indiscriminately a whole body of men. As far as I have engaged in painting the
errors or faults of any, I have endeavored to represent general actions of
men, such as they are, and not the picture of individuals. Yet, as Le Sage has
justly remarked, there are some persons who cannot read, and I say there are
others who cannot hear, without making an application of those vicious or
ridiculous characters which they learn from an author. With him I declare to
all who have such a malicious propensity, that they are in the wrong to apply
the portraits which they may find here exhibitted; nor let any reader take for
his own what may equally belong to another, otherwise he will foolishly expose
himself, as Phaedrus says, "Stulte nudabit animi conscientiam."

THE notice I have here given is, I hope, sufficient therefore to exculpate me
from the groundless charge of having unjustly reflected upon, or censured the
conduct of others,

SOME, It is said, have thought, that I have described the difficulties of
attaining to the knowledge of physic in too strong terms, and have enumerated
so many qualifications as requisite to acquire any considerable knowledge of
the medical art, that I rather deter students, than encourage them in
attempting to complete their studics and to become skillful in their profession.

TO these I reply, that I have been far from exaggerating matters, and have
lest much unsaid, on purpose to avoid discouraging their eager pursuit. If we
cannot arrive at absolute perfection in science, let us not abandon ourselves
to a criminal indolence, but strive to approach that degree of knowledge which
is attainable by industry, and we cannot fail of being eminently skillful in
the healing art and highly useful to mankind.

OTHERS, I am informed, as if they were afraid of engaging in too great an
expense, have said that I have insisted too much on the necessity of students
attending lectures in every different branch of medicine. They seem to imagine
if they hear lectures upon Anatomy only, the branch which I have first
mentioned in my discourse, that they can easily make themselves matters of all
the other branches of medicine by reading. I blush for those who thus expose
either their ignorance or their avarice. Why are fhey not equally contented
with such a share of knowledge in anatomy, as they can gain from books, since
this science can be better painted to the eye, than some of the other branches
of medicine, which are altogether as necessary to be known by a physician? Are
not anatomical plates and descriptions as intelligible to a student, as the
philosophical studies of chemistry, physiology, and pathology are, from a mere
course of reading? or is it of less consequence to gain a systematic knowledge
of the materia medica, or practice of medicine, than of anatomy, which is of no
other use to a physician than as it contributes its share toward explaining
what diseases are? The others furnish him with the means and manner of
performing the cure, and require, at least, as much labor and explanation as
anatomy itself demands.

THE worthy and learned Doctor Lewis is of opinion, "that the medicinal
history, or the knowledge of the powers and effects of medicine in the human
body, though apparently a most essential branch of the healing art, has been
far more incuriously cultivated, and still perhaps continues less cleared from
the errors of former ages than any other science." Another writer on the same
subject says, "it is an idle supposition to set out upon, that there are the
works of good chemists and good naturalists extant, and that from those a
sufficient system of information on this important head may be compiled. To
compile with judgment requires as much knowledge of the subject as to write
well upon it. No man is qualified to execute this to advantage, who is not able
to have written what he borrows. Even the best and most authentic books on
these subjects have their errors, most of them too many; and while he who is
himself defficient in the knowledge of the subject, cannot but be liable to
take in these with the rest, it is evident what sort of dapendance ought to be
placed on his collections."

WHATEVER anatomical skill a man may boast, yet if he is ignorant of the
virtues of Medicines, or of their changes from differently compounding them
together, or knows not what are the true indications in the cure, or relief of
diseases, he may value himself for expertness in diffection, but every sensible
man will hold him cheap as a physician.

NOBODY, who is anxious to be skillful in the divine art of healing, will be a
niggard of the necessary trouble and expense of rendering himself intelligent
in every thing his profession requires he should know. Whoever is sparing of
these has no cause of complaint, if he is rewarded only according to his merit,
unless he would invert scripture and the laws of reason, and casting his eyes
on those who have sowed plentifully in knowledge and reaped but little
pecuniary advantage from thence, think, from sowing sparingly, he has a better
title to expect that his ignorance should be rewarded with a bountiful harved.

A Synoptic view of the following DISCOURSE, to serve as an INDEX.
INTRODUCTION, Page 1 -- 4. A Plan of the Discourse, Page 4. A Definition of
Medicine, Page ibid. Distinction between Physic and Surgery, Page 5. The
various Branches of Knowledge which compose the Science of Medicine enumerated,
Page ibid. Definition of Anatomy, Page 6. Its Importance in Medical Science,
Page 6 -- 8. Materia Medica and Botany, why termed the natural History of
Medicine, Page 8. Definition and Importance of the Materia Medica, Page 9.
Botany, its Definition and Use, Page 10. Chemistry, Philosophic and
Pharmaceutic, Page ibid. Pharmaceutic Chemistry, its Definition and Use Page
ibid. 11. The Theory of Physic of Medical Institutions, What is meant by that
Name Page 11. Physiology, what, Page ibid. Its Importance, Page 12. Pathology,
its Definition and Connection with the former, Page 13. Praxis or Practice of
Medicine, its Definition, Page ibid. A general knowledge of all the proceeding
necessary in learning the Art of Physic, Page 14. The Order recommended in the
Study of them, Page 16. Pre-requisites to the Study of Medicine, Page 17 -- 18.
A general View of the State of Physic in America and Obstacles to its Study
Page 18 -- 23. Effects of ignorant and presumptious Practice, Page 23 -- 24.
Arguments for instituting Medical Schools, Page 27. The Tendency of such an
Institution, Page 27 -- 28. Circumstances favorable to such an Undertaking;
Page viz. Eminent Practitioners in Philadelphia, Page 30. The Practice of the
City Hospital, Page 30 -- 31. Flourishing State of Literature in the College,
Page 32. Situation and populous Condition of Philadelphia, Page ibid. Increase
of the Colonies, Page 33. Steps already taken toward instituting Medical
Schools, And other Steps recommended to be taken, Page 34 -- 38. Objections
Considered. -- Infant State of the Colonies, Page 38. -- The mixed Practice of
the differrent Part of Medicine, Page 39. The regular Mode of Practicing Physic
recommended, Page 40 -- 45. Advantages to be expected from the proposed
Institution -- To Students of Medicine, Page 46 -- 50. -- To the College, Page
51. -- To the City of Philadelphia and the Province Page 52 -- 53. -- To the
Neighboring Colonies, Page 54. Address to the Students of Medicine, to animate
them in their Studies. Page 54 -- 56. -- To the Trustees of the College,
recommending the Institution of Medical Schools to their Patronage, Page 56 --
63.
TO THE TRUSTEES Of the COLLEGE, AND THE CITIZENS Of PHILADELPHIA.
GENTLEMEN,

THE cultivation of Science, and the progress of arts have justly merited the
regard of every age and country. I esteem myself happy, therefore, that I have
an opportunity of delivering my sentiments before so candid and learned an
audience, upon a subject which respects the advanceement of the most useful
knowledge, and the growing credit of this institution; -- a subject as
important as can well be imagined to employ our serious deliberation, or
animate our warmest pursuit.

WHAT I am to propose is a scheme for transplanting Medical Science into this
seminary, and for the improvement of every branch of the healing art.

IT must be confessed that in a knowledge of the supreme Being, and of the
duties which we owe to him, consists the sublime of true philosophy.

THIS is the most interesting pursuit of rational creatures, as it regards the
soul and constitutes the highest happiness.

A KNOWLEDGE of the duties which we owe to society, resulting from the relation
in which we stand to one another, is an object of the next importance. After
this, whatever relates to the welfare of the body deserves our most immediate
concern. -- Life, when burdened with disease, is but a complication of woes.
Health is that choice seasoning which gives a relish to all our enjoyments. As
the end of medical science is to restore and preserve health, the welfare of
every individual, of whatever age or sex, is concerned in the improvement of it
amongst them.

MEDICINE is a science as important in its object, as it is difficult in the
acquisition. It is very extensive in its researches, and presupposes the
knowledge of many other sciences. The cultivation of it requires no small
abilities, and demands of those who engage in the arduous pursuit an enlarged
and benevolent mind. But notwitstanding these difficulties, this science must
still be productive of very great advantages and honor to a seminary of
learning, to a city and to a country; where the wisdom of well concerted laws,
and the encouragement given to the promoters of it, are sufficient to procure
it an effectual estabishment.

A THIRST of knowledge and a spirit of inquiry are natural to man. It merits
our endeavors to direct these to worthy objects. Whilst we are anxious to
inform ourselves what were the customs of former ages, by what boundaries
distant kingdoms are limited, what were the rites and ceremonies of barbarous
nations, or what flowers bloom in the remote Indies; -- shall we have no desire
of studying what more immediately relates to ourselves? shall we neglect to
examine into the divinely curious and amazing structure of our own bodies? are
we not concerned in applying our pursuits, to find out the nature of those
multiplied calamities to which the human frame is unavoidably exposed, and the
means of removing or asswaging those calamities?

TO hint at the means whereby we may accomplish the institution of medical
schools in this city, and to point out some of the most considerable advantages
it must be attended with, is the task in which I am here to engage. Upon a
subject so new in this place, and so pregnant with the most interesting
consequences, I flatter myself you will hear heartily what I have to impart;
and let the goodness of my intention apologize for any inaccuracies in the
execution.

IT may be proper, in the first place, to give a general view of the boundaries
of medicine, and the different provinces of this extensive science; to show its
present condition in America; the difficulties which accompany its study, and
the impracticability of making any great progress therein, till it is put on a
better footing. These being explained, the means of effecting that end, and the
benefits arising from thence will be more easily apprehended.

ACCORDING to the learned Gaubius, Medicine is the guardian of life and healthy
against death and disease. Gaub. Institut. patholog. Medic.
To be more particular. The Art of healing consists in a thorough knowledge of
the human economy; what constitutes health; what are the diseases, as well
internal as external to which the body is exposed; their seat, causes, and
symptoms; and the means of applying with skill, judgment, and address, the
various remedies adapted to cure or mitigate them.

FROM this view of medicine, we readily percieve Its great extent; we learn the
principles on which is founded the division of it, into the Study of Physic,
more properly speaking, and into Surgery.

THE former is conversant about the cure of inward diseases, and such
complaints as require the use of medicines. The latter principally regards
external disorders, and those inward maladies which need the manual assistance
of a dexterous operator to relieve them. We likewise understand the reason of
so many distinct branches of medical study; the previous knowledge of which,
both in the Physician and Surgeon, are requisite in order to qualify them for
successful practice.

THE necessity of discriminating between physic and surgery will more
manifestly appear when we consider, that they are distinct in their nature, and
that either of them is an art, sufficient of itself to engage the industry of
one man to cultivate.

THE various branches of knowledge which compose the science of medicine, are
Anatomy, Materia Medica, Botany, Chemistry, the Theory of medicine, and the
practice.

THESE will be fully known by defining them separately; by showing what weight
they bear in the balance of healing arts; their relation to each other; and
how far the knowledge of them respectively contributes toward the cure of
diseases.

ANATOMY, taken in a general sense, consists in knowing the structure of the
animal body; considered in particular, it implies a knowledge of the frame and
organization of the human body. It teaches of what kind of substance all the
parts are composed; it shows their figure, texture, firmness, connection, and
relation to each other. From this source we derive our first knowledge of the
feat of diseases; of the proper or improper arangement of parts; of the danger
or safety of an operation; and learn the best manner of performing it with
dexterity and success; In studying the art of healing we commonly begin with
Anatomy, and very justly, for, unacquainted with this, it is impossible to
learn the functions of the body in a healthy state, to know of what kind its
diseases are, or how to remedy them.

IT is Anatomy that guides the doubtful step of the young votary of medicine
through an obscure labyrinth, where a variety of minute objects present
themselves in such a group as, at first, to perplex his imagination. It is
Anatomy which unravels the first difficulties in his pursuit; it lays open to
his view the diversity of parts, their combination, disposition, subordination,
and movements. These, however intricate they may appear, all concur to
establish the most perfect harmony in the human frame, which the attentive
inquirer finds from Anatomy, to be created with the most geometrical exactness,
according to laws prescribed by unerring wisdom.

IN short, Anatomy is to be esteemed one of the principal pillars, on which we
are to raise the supperstructure of medical science, as well physic as surgery.
Those who would engage in either cannot apply themselves too early, or with too
much attention, in order to become skillful anatomists.

CAN any one pretend to style himself a Surgeon, or to perform any operation
with safety, if he knows not the structure of the part he is to operate upon?
If he is ignorant of the muscles which give it motion, or of the nerves which
give it sensation, by cutting through the tendon of a muscle, or by dividing
some principal nerve, he may forever deprive the patient of life, or movement
in the part. If he knows not the course and distribution of its vessels, he may
wound some considerable artery, and from the loss of blood may occasion
dangerous accidents. Perhaps speedy death will be the consequence of his
rashness.

WITH what propriety can any one arrogate to himself the title of Physician, if
he is ignorant of Anatomy? how shall he be able to discover the seat of a
disease, or what chance has he of being in a condition to remedy it? Nor is a
superficial acquaintance with Anatomy sufficient for either Physician or
Surgeon. The latter, (that he may not mistake what is natural for a disease,
and in attempting to relieve an imaginary evil, bring on a real one;) ought to
know the smallest hollow or protuberance of a bone; which serve in many
instances to direct him, how far he may operate with safety, as the situation
of the nerves and blood vessels are often to be referred to them. It is
requisite for a physician to search out every the least particular in the
structure of all the internal parts, that he maybe in a condition to
distinguish the nature of the disorder with which it is affected. As a skillful
Pilot informs himself of the least bank of sand or shoal where he is to avoid
navigating his ship; so every follower of medical pursuits should be
intelligent in the minutiae of Anatomy, if he wishes to practice with ease to
himself, and to the benefit of his patient.

THE Materia Medica and Botany may very properly be termed the natural history
of medicine, as from these branches of science we derive our knowledge of that
part of natural history, which more immediately relates to the health giving
arts. How worthy of a Physician, a Philosopher or a Gentleman, is the knowledge
of the different productions of nature taken in its full extent? I cannot too
earnestly recommend this study to young men, to qualify them for every useful
profession that is conversant about natural objects, and especially for the
study of medicine. But it behooves me to speak more particularly of medical
natural history, if I may be allowed to adopt that term in the sense I have
already used it; and first of Materia Mediea.

MATERIA MEDICA treats of the natural history, and medical virtues, of all
those bodies which are employed in diet, or in medicine. It considers the
changes they undergo when applied to the human body, either internally or
externally; and the effects they produce on the system.

IT is beyond contradiction an object of great importance, to both Physician
and Surgeon, to be well acquainted with the Materia Medica, as it belongs to
this to consider the nature of aliments, the choice of medicines, and a
knowledge of their action in the vessels, and how they preserve or restore
health.

PHYSIOLOGY, Pathology, Chemistry, the Materia Medica, and indeed the several
branches of medicine lend a mutual aid to one another, in a greater or less
degree.

BOTANY is a knowledge of the natural history of vegetables. It may therefore be
considered as part of the Materia Medica, as far at least, as it is connected
with the knowledge of medicine.

BY the Science of Botany we learn to methodize the vegetable part of the
creation, and to range vegetables in different classes, subdividing them into a
variety of orders, genera, and species. Such a systematic, or botanic
arrangement, as it is called, has taught us this general observation, that all
plants of the same natural order have in a degree some common virtue. Botany
thus lessens the difficulties we must otherwise have been at in discovering
their medical virtues. I need not therefore dwell on the importance of this
study to a Physician and a Philosopher.

CHEMISTRY is either Philosophic, or Pharmaceutic. The former considers the
particular properties of bodies, and explains their effects. It is
distinguished from natural philosophy, as this latter is only conversant about
the general properties of bodies.

PHARMACEUTIC CHEMISTRY, is that branch of philosphic Chemistry, which regards
the particular properties of such bodies as are appropriated to medicine. It
considers their virtues in a simple state, or those which they acquire by
combination, and in this has a close connection with the Materia Medica.

THERE are indeed but few substances which are used as Medicines, simply and
singly, in their natural state; but they are commonly compounded by art. As it
belongs to Pharmaceutic Chemistry to treat of the separation of the parts of
medicinal substances from one another, and of the new properties arising from
the composition or resolution of those bodies, it is manifest that this science
is of essential use. Whatever skill we may boast in investigating the nature of
a disease, or in understanding the structure of the body, yet without a
knowledge of the instruments which are to be used, and of their properties and
action upon the body, whereby they produce a change from sickness to health,
other knowledge avails little in the cure of diseases.

THE THEORY of PHYSIC, more commonly termed Medical Institutions, comprehends
under it, the important doctrines of Physiology and Pathology.

PHYSIOLOGY teaches the uses of the several parts in the human body, it treats
of all the functions, vital, animal, and natural, in a sound state. The
illustrious Haller very properly denominates it animated Anatomy.

IT is the application of natural philosophy to Anatomy, and may very well be
defined A philosophic knowledge of the human body, or a science of all the
conditions arising from the structure of its parts. It has a foundation both in
Anatomy and Philosophy. -- Anatomy, in a more limited view, considers the
structure of the dead body only; but Physiology teaches the functions of the
living body. The distinction will be more easily apprehended from observing,
that a person may be a good practical Anatomist, and yet be ignorant of
Phyfsology; but it is impossible to be a good Physiologist, without being an
able Anatomist.

THE great stock of literature, as well as genius, which is requisite to become
an adept in this science, and the important nature of the subject it treats of,
point out its dignity and excellency.

AS every disease we labor under is a disorder of the vital, animal, or
natural functions; a thorough acquaintance with these in their sound state is
implied before we can pretend to understand their morbid affections, or how to
remedy them.

PHYSIOLOGY gives us the clearest light in the cure of diseases, which is the
grand object of all our inquiries in medicine. The study of it is most
entertaining, and engages our closest attention from the many curious subjects
with which it abounds.

PATHOLOGY treats of the vital, animal, and natural functions in a morbid
state, as Physiology does in a sound healthful condition. It traces out the
seat of diseases, examines their causes and effects, shows their differences,
explains their symptoms, and all the different phoenomena, which result from
various affecttions of the system, it prognosticates the event, and indicates
the general method of treatment. In short, it forms a system of precepts in the
art of healing. It is the immediate guide to practice, and a very capital part
of medical knowledge.

THE smallest reflection is sufficient to discover the intimate connection of
Physiolgy and Pathology, and the subserviency of the former to the latter.

LET no man lay claim to the dignified title of Physician, who is not
thoroughly conversant in the medical institutions. Without this knowledge, we
have no better right to take upon us the cure of diseases, than a blind man to
judge of colors, or a deaf man of sounds.

THE PRAXIS, or PRACTICE OF MEDICINE, is immediately conversant about diseases
themselves, and treats in the most particular manner of their nature, specific
difference, their causes and symptoms, and especially the method of curing
them, or alleviating the severity of them when incurable.

THIS part therefore, as it teaches us the universal application of the
precepts derived from a just reasoning and accurate observations made upon
diseases, is unquestionably to be accounted the finishing part of Medicine.

As the end of our pursuits is more noble than the means, the importance and
dignity of practice are therefore evident; and in as far as the knowledge of
the other branches are not considered in subserviency to this, they are merely
speculative; though they must be allowed to afford a speculation of a very
sublime nature.

MEDICAL Science is one whole, of which all the branches I have enumerated are
the several parts. They may be considered as the links of a chain that have a
mutual connection with one another. Anatomy, Materia Medica, Botany, Chemistry,
and the Institutions, are only the ladder by which we are to mount up to
practice, A general knowledge, at least, in each one of them, is useful to both
Physician and Surgeon; particularly to the former, who in proportion as he is
more intimately acquainted with them all, will become more skillful in the
healing science. For, although he confines himself to his proper province of
prescribing for diseases, yet ought he to understand the principles of the
entire art, and more especially he ought to be very conversant in practice.
Seeing the life and health of mankind is the object of medicine, ignorance of
the practice is a grand defect in a Physician, and an unpardonable crime, as
attended with irreparable injuries.

THE great extent of medical science, which comprehends under it so many
different branches, makes it impossible to learn it thoroughly without we
follow a certain order. Whilst we neglect this, all our ideas are but crude
conceptions, a rope of sand, without any firm connection. Should the student,
as chance or whim might direct, sometimes apply himself to one branch,
sometimes to another; or read indiscriminately even the best authors on the
differrent parts of Medicine; for want of method, all his knowledge would be
superficial; though he might take as much pains as would suffice to make him
eminently skillful, had he from the beginning pursued a well concerted plan.
What progress could we make in Mathematics, if we did not proceed step by step,
and in a certain order?

THE knowledge of the more intricate and hidden truths of science are to be
developed by degrees. We can only arrive at them by the assistance of other
more obvious truths, which they are connected with, and which lead us to them
by a certain chain of facts, observations, and just deductions in a train of
strict reasoning. Medical truths rise out of one another, in some measure, like
the propositions of Euclid. If we did not understand the demonstration of the
first, we should not be able to percieve the proof of the more intricate ones
that follow, which can only be explained by means of them, as a certainty of
the latter depends upon the evidence of the former. What would require years of
study to gain a supperficial acquaintance with, if we followed no just plan,
may be attained within as few months, by pursuing a regular system; so much
does method contribute to facilitate our progress.

THE order which I would recommend in the study of Medicine is to begin with
Anatomy; then what I have called medical natural History, viz. The Materia
Medica and Botany; Chemistry should follow; the Institutes come next; and the
Study of Practice should complete the work.

THUS I have sketched out a general plan of studying Medicine, which it will be
of the highestconsequence for students to observe. It belongs to the teachers
of the several branches, to give more minute directions with regard to the
particular conduct of each respective one. It will not be improper however to
observe here, that young men ought to come well prepared for the study of
Medicine by having their minds enriched with all the aid they can receive from
the languages, and the liberal arts. Latin and Greek are very necessary to be
known by a Physician. The latter contains the rich original treasures of
ancient medical science, and of the first parents of the healing arts. The
former contains all the wealth of more modern literature. It is the vehicle of
knowledge in which the learned men of every nation in Europe choose to convey
their sentiments, and communicate their discoveries to the world. As it is the
best known of the dead languages, it is chosen as the most proper one, by the
various nations of Europe, for a medium of intercourse amongst the learned,
that is equally attainable by every one of them Hence it becomes indispensably
necessary for a Physician, who is to derive his knowledge from so many
different sources, to be well acquainted with Latin.

THE French language has prevailed much in Europe. The advantages which we may
reap from the writings of many eminent men, and of many learned societies,
which are published in French, make the knowledge of this language very
valuable also to a Physician.

AN acquaintance with Mathematics and natural Philosophy we cannot dispense
with, since we can go but small lengths in natural or medical inquiries without
their assistance. Happy are we to have all these taught in such perfection in
this place. Destitute of that general knowledge which unveils to us the
operations of nature, we cannot penetrate into those truths, that form the
rules by which we ought to conduct ourselves, in the cure of diseases.

THERE is no art yet known which may not contribute somewhat to the improvement
of Medicine; nor is there any one which requires more assistance than that of
Physic from every other science. Let young men therefore, who would engage in
the pursuit of Medicine or Surgery, make use of all their industry, to possess
themselves in good time of these acquisitions. They are necessary to facilitate
a progress in the healing arts; they embellish the understanding, and give many
peculiar advantages, unattainable without them.

So much being said of the nature of medical knowledge, we are the better
prepared to form a judgment on the subject proposed. Let us now take a general
view of the state of Physic as hitherto practiced in America.

AND here we may congratulate ourselves, that in this, and some of the large
neighboring towns, we have a number of skillful physicians and expert
surgeons, qualified by genius, education, and experience, to take charge of the
health of their fellow creatures. Under these it is the custom of medical
students to enter as apprentices, in order to learn their practice, and get an
acquaintance with their profession. This it must be allowed is a great
advantage; but if we add to it, a casual conversation sometimes with the most
able masters whom they can have access to consult, an intercourse with one
another, and a reciprocal communication of sentiment and observation, together
with reading what authors they can procure on the various subjects of which
this science treats; these make the sum total of the best medical education in
America. How lame and insufficient it is must appear to all who have the least
intelligence in these matters; but will be seen more evidently, I imagine, as
we examine it more nearly.

IF, as I before observed, it is necessary that a plan be marked out for
directing Students, and that they should be taught a regular course of every
distinct branch of Medicine; the infant state of the colonies, and the want of
professed teachers, have hitherto cloged medical pursuits in America with
innumerable obstacles.

NEVER yet has there offered a coalition of able men, who would undertake to
give complete and regular courses of Lectures on the different branches of
Medicine; and such an extensive field it is, as requires the united efforts of
several cooperating together, to cultivate it with success. As well might a
parent take upon himself the private tuition of his son, and to make him master
of all the different languages, arts, and sciences, which are generally deemed
requisite, previous to his entering upon the higher studies of Law, Physic and
Divinity; as that a Physician, engaged in an extensive practice, should
undertake to deliver to his apprentices, in a regular manner, the precepts of
his art in all its branches. This is as impracticable as it is unreasonable to
expect. In spite of himself and his inclination to qualify young men in the
profession, they must of necessity be left, for the most part, more to their
own ingenuity, and precarious application, than a good man could wish. These
are difficulties which he would rejoice to have removed; but they are evils
which have hitherto been without a remedy. The fatigue, the greatness of
expense, and the want of leisure time, which physicians involved in business
cannot command, are bars, which those most willing to perfect students cannot
get over.

YOUNG men, who are limited to the present opportunities of improvement in
America, cannot enter upon the stage of action, but with unfavourable prospect,
and they must unavoidably be in continual perplexities. For seldom can we hope
to see those who from too great forwardness, or too narrow circumstances,
engage untimely in the practice of their profession, ever become more than
servile imitators of others. They blindly pursue an uncertain tract, in which
they must constantly wander, since it is so often obscured, and insufficient to
conduct them any great length.

A contracted view of Medicine naturally confines a man to a very narrow
circle, and limits him to a few partial indications in the cure of diseases. He
soon gets through his little stock of knowledge; he repeats over and over his
round of prescriptions, the same almost in every case; and, although he is
continually embarrassed, has the vanity to believe that, from the few maxims
which he has adopted, he has within himself all the principles of medical
knowledge, and that he has exhausted all the resources of art. This is a notion
subversive of all improvement. It flatters the imagination of the indolent, as
it dispenses with those toilsome labors which are necessary to the production
of truth; and chains him down to a dangerous rotine of practice, unworthy the
name of art.

THE industry of many centuries have already been employed to bring Physic to
that degree of perfection at which it is now arrived. It will still require a
long time to remove the obscurities which yet veil many parts of it. The
application of many, amongst the greatest of men, has hitherto been
ininsufficient to clear up all our doubts in medicine. How then can it be
supposed that any one, untutored in this art, can by his own natural abilities
ever reach the bounds of what is already known in it? The great multiplicity of
diseases, which beset the human race, present us with a field too vast and
unknown for individuals to cultivate by themselves. Their causes are frequently
so latent, and the usual resources of art so often fail the most skillful, as
to compel them to seek out new paths in which they may proceed.

FOR a man of the most finished genius to enter upon practice, having only that
stock of knowledge with which his own observation and experience could supply
him, unenlightened by those discoveries which others have made, would be an act
of presumption. Had this been sufficient to conduct us to the summit of our
art, it would have been in a state of perfection many ages ago.

OBSERVATION and physical experiments should blend their light to dissipate
obscurity from medicine. This is the more needful, as nature commonly offers
herself to our notice under a cloud, and requires that we should follow her
steps with scrupulous attention, watch all her motions, and trace her through
every meander she makes, in order to discern clearly the tract she keeps in.
Vid. Preface to the memoirs of the royal Academy of Surgery at Paris.
In a course of observation, the mind is but a mere spectator, and only sees
external appearances. We must aid these with the light of Philosophy to unveil
knowledge fully. We must dive into the bottom of things by repeated and
different experiments, and, as is were, force nature to yield herself up to our
inquiries.

To accomplish this demands the brightest talents, a liberal education and
great experience. We cannot suppose then that a Student of ordinary parts can,
by any means of himself, acquire sufficient skill in medicine to take charge
properly of the lives oi mankind.

THE almost infinite number of objects, to which he ought to be no stranger,
pass before him so very slowly, that the longest life would offer to his
contemplation but a very inconsiderable share of those, with which he may be
made acquainted, in the several branches of his profession, by the instruction
of able masters. Shall a novice then hope, merely by his own abilities, to
raise a superstructure comparable to that already built up to his hands, which
has exhausted the ingenuity and invention, and employed the industry of some
thousand years? Where will the most extensive practice be sufficient; and how
comparitively little will the most enlarged faculties contribute, to furnish
him with a ten thousandth part of the materials?

SHOULD we for a moment turn our eyes upon the man, who dares to enter upon the
practice of Physic, without being properly initiated in the science, or
instrucled in the important duties of the profession, he would soon present us
with a melancholy prospect. If not past all feelings of humanity, what
compunctions of conscience, what remorse would not fill hit breast from
practicing at random and in the dark, not knowing whether his prescription
might prove a wholesome remedy, or a destructive poison. To discover the nature
of an uncommon disease, or to account for an unusual symptom, puzzles his
invention. -- Ignorant of every true principle, from which, by a just
reasoning, he might be able to deduce practical interrences, he knows not what
prognostic to make, or what plan of treatment to observe. -- Unsteady and
irresolute, he attempts a variety of means; such as either avail not, or such
as heighten the danger of the disease, already too violent. -- He may thus
interrupt the salutary attempts of nature, or, not knowing how to second them,
tamper with the life of his patient, and idly waiting to see what nature
herself is capable of doing, neglect to succor her, till it is too late, and
the fatal hand of death is just closing the gloomy scene. -- Wretched is the
case of those whom chance, or misinformed judgment, shall throw into 1 is
hands, to fall victims of his temerity. -- Great is the havoc which his
ignorance spreads on every side, robbing the affectionate husband of his
darling spouse, or tendering the tender wife a helpless widow; -- increasing
the number of orphans; -- mercilessly depriving them of their parent's support;
-- bereaving the afflicted parents of their only comfort and hope, by the
untimely death of their beloved infants, and laying whole families defolate.
Remorseless foe to mankind! actuated by more than savage cruelty! hold, hold
thy exterminating hand. --

GLAD should I be to moderate this too exact description of the effects of
ignorant and presumptuous practice; but what judgment can we pass on those, who
have been scarcely instructed in the first elements of medical science, and yet
force themselves into practice, as if they meant to sport themselves with human
life, and human calamities?

A VERY judicious person Mons. Sue, professor of Anatomy.
has remarked, that Medicine is the science concerning which people in common
take upon them to reason most, without having the least notion. -- Who, that
has not made Mathematics his study, will presume to argue upon any of the
difficult calculations of Algebra? But when medical subjects are the topic,
doubtless we are masters of them without study. It must be confessed indeed, if
we know much about medicine without being educated in it, that our ideas of it
are truly innate.

ABSTRACT truth is at all times but a simple undivided object, yet has ten
thousand counterfeits to impose upon the unwary. No wonder that the impatient
ardor of youth, who cannot brook delay, or always take the necessary time to
distinguish truth from falsehood, aspiring to reach the top of science by a
rapid flight, hurries them on in a too unguarded manner, when left to
themselves, and thus precipitates them into the grossest errors. In medicine,
as in other sciences, if they do not let out on sound principles, they pass on
from error to error and multiply mistakes, unable to divest themselves of their
first prejudices, which, being confirmed by habit, become a second nature.

Easy it is to fall into errors, hard to recover ourselves from them.

Facilis descensus Averni; sed revocare gradum, hoc opus, hic labor est.
Virgil: AEn. vi


WITH greater case we may sow just principles in the beginning, than clear away
the rank weeds of popular prejudices, after having had time to take deep root,
and fix themselves firmly in the minds of students.

LET us now turn our views to the growing state of this and the neighboring
colonies; let us reflect on the great number of inhabitants scattered through
such an extensive tract of country, who are destitute of all the aids of
medical science. Let us consider further, that in many large towns and
villages, there are a number of persons entrusted with the practice of medicine
and surgery, who, being destitute of all means of acquiring the true principles
of their profession, remain in a pitiful state of ignorance in it, without any
prospect or opportunity of correcting their errors, or greatly improving their
knowledge. We cannot then remain untouched with sentiments of compassion; we
cannot avoid feeling part of their distress, or forbear to wish that a remedy
were found for so great a misfortune.

NOR is this so desirable an object quite beyond our reach. The institution of
schools for teaching the several branches of the healing arts mus have a very
great tendency to effect our wishes. To the full accomplishment of these
nothing can contribute more powerfully, than the resolution the trustees of
this seminary have taken, to countenance this scheme which I have had the
honor of proposing; and their encouragement of such persons as, upon due
information, they shall find qualified to take upon them the important offices
of professors, in the various branches of Medicine.

ALTHOUGH we may not be in a condition to enter upon every part of this great
undertaking immediately, yet we may lay a foundation, which cannot fail of
being built upon shortly by those who follow us. Time will perfect what is
properly begun. What indeed is all science, but the accumulated observations
and discoveries of a succession of many people, framed into a system? When this
is once accomplished, every individual may then avail himself of the labors of
others, and thus arrive, in a compendious manner, at a competent knowledge of
any art. This is happy for us, seeing life is short, and the human mind
necessarily occupied with a great number of pursuits, very different from our
particular professions, which would not allow us otherwise to go any great
lengths.

FROM the union of ingenious men the arts find resources, never to be met with
in the labors of individuals, with whom the most useful truths are frequently
buried; whilst societies form a kind of magazine, which collects together all
the knowledge of the learned, and consecrates it to public utility. It
establishes a commerce for the community, which never perishes, but from age to
age is a fruitful source of new acquifitions. Preface to memoirs of Royal Acad.
of Surgery.
What rapid progress have we not sometimes seen in science from a conspiration
of counsel and industry? Thus institutions, which have appeared inconsiderable
at first, improve fast, and make hasty strides toward importance and grandeur.
This very Seminary, of late only a collection of private schools, although of
so short a standing, has increased its reputation and usefulness, so far as to
attract the notice of our mother country; and already begins to flourish,
beyond what could reasonably be expected in so short a time.

OF what consequence the united efforts of men learned in their profession are,
the medical college of Edinburgh afford a remarkable instance. Within the space
of little more than forty years, the present professorships in Medicine were
first formed. A few gentlemen from Scotland, then prosecuting their medical
studies at Leyden, concerted a plan, and undertook, themselves, the important
charge of instituting schools for teaching the various branches of Medicine.
They met with countenance and support from the patrons of the university, and
by the great abilities, assiduity, and experience of those gentlemen, and some
few of their successors, the reputation of that place is raised to such a
height, that, to their immortal honor, it already rivals, if not surpasses
that of every other school of Physic in Europe. The names of Drummond, Dick,
Clerk, Rutherford, Sinclair, Alston, Plummer, Monroe, Whytt, Cullen, Hope,
Black, and some others, are now known wherever the knowledge of Physic is
cultivated; and they are revered at home as parents and guardians of the
healing arts. There is a great resort of medical students at the university of
Edinburgh, as well from Great Britain, Ireland, and the West Indies, as from
the Continents of Europe and America. These bring to the university and city
considerable advantages, and, in return, carry the fame of their learning and
their professors to every quarter of the globe. Were it necessary I could
easily enumerate many similiar instances of the improvement of science; but
these, I imagine, will suffice for the present.

WHY should we be deterred from establishing like institutions of Medicine in
this seminary, especially as so many circumstances conspire to invite and
encourage so important an undertaking. I shall briefly enumerate the most
interesting of them.

THE city of Philadelphia, adorned with a set of eminent practitioners, draws
to it a great number of pupils, from the neighboring parts, to learn the arts
of Physic and Surgery. We may reasonaably expect, that from the proposed
institution, the number of students, who shali resort hither to partake of
these advantages, will be gradually augmented.

BESIDES men of great abilities and eminence, under whom they may see private
practice, the hospital of this city is a great persuasive to determine a
concourse of medical students to this place. It would be doubly useful to them,
and increase their motive of repairing here, if they could be first properly
initiated in the principles of their profession, by regular courses of lectures
duly delivered.

THIS noble charity, maintained by the donations of the benevolent at no small
expense, supports a great number of sick of both sexes. As there are six
physicians of the most unquestionable skill, integrity, and character, who,
moved by the tender principles of humanity, have taken upon them the charge of
attending the sick gratuitously; pupils here meet with such a number of cases,
both chronic and acute, treated so judiciously, and so agreeable to the rules
of art, as cannot fail very much to facilitate the knowledge of their
profession.

IT is a most favorable circumstance to the undertaking which I have
suggested, that of these six physicians, no less than five of them are trustees
of this college. We may from hence, I think, safely infer, that every thing in
their power may be hoped for, to second the medical institutions of the
college, by uniting with them the advantages of the hospital, and thus
rendering the education of youth in the healing arts as complete as possible in
this city; to which nothing can contribute more than a course of clinical
practice and clinical lectures, by physicians of knowledge and experience.
Besides those who are apprentices to, or under the immediate tuition of the
hospital physicians, every student of Medicine in town is admitted to see their
common practice in the hospital, upon paying a certain sum annually during his
attendance there. It were to be wished that some of those gentlemen, so
skillful and experienced in the healing arts, enriched with useful
observations, which only time, and an extensive practice can furnish, would
undertake to give a course of clinical lectures, in order to explain the
hospital practice; the students paying such reasonable fees to those clinical
teachers as may be thought adequate to their trouble. This is a step of the
greatest and most obvious utility to both hospital and student, consonant to
reason and the usage of some of the best hospitals in Europe.

From my personal acquaintance with many of the managers when I attended the
hospital some years ago, I am persuaded they would readily encourage this plan.
Their known benevolence and ardent desire of contributing all in their power
toward the improvement of medical arts, as well as relief of the sick; and
thus uniting two of the most valuable purposes of such a foundation, lead me to
think so.

When two such important institutions, as a medical college and a well
regulated hospital, contribute mutually to the advantage of each other, all
ranks and conditions of people would no doubt most cheerfully unite in support
of a common interest, so beneficial to useful literature, and so advantageous
to the province in general.




THE flourishing state of literature in this college, and the perfection in
which the languages, mathematics, and polite arts are taught here, are strong
inducements for such young men as propose engaging in the study of Medicine, to
enter the college. Because when medical lectures are given under the patronage
of the trustees and faculty, at the same time that students are prosecuting
other parts of learning, they will have greater advantages there than hitherto
they have enjoyed. Thus the motives of repairing to Philadelphia for the study
of Medicine and Surgery will multiply in proportion.

THIS city, so large, in such a thriving state, and so extremely beautiful and
pleasant in its situation, as well as so nearly central to all the colonies on
the continent, has peculiar advantages in respect to the resort of students;
which added to the advantage of the college, hospital, and the different
courses of lectures, could not fail of bringing a concourse of strangers to
this place.

THE establishment of a medical library in this college would prove another
great benefit to students, and tend likewise to influence their resort hither.
Proper means may possibly be suggested to accomplish this, without any great
additional charge to the college. The pupils that attend lectures, for whose
advantage it is intend^^, may, upon being matriculated, afford each of them to
contribute annually a small sum. This from a number of pupils, in a succession
of some years, would be of considerable service toward procuring a medical
library. Perhaps the physicians of Philadelphia, touched with generous
sentiments of regard for the rising generation, and the manifest advantages
accruing to the college thereby, would spare some useful books, or contribute
somewhat as a foundation on which we might begin.

THE growth of this and the neighboring colonies calls aloud for a medical
institution. The increasing number of inhabitants demands an increase of those
who exercise the profession of Medicine and Surgery, and ought to be an
argument with all of us, who regard either the present or future advantages of
the country, to attend seriously to the importance of the subject.

THE scheme of establishing medical lectures, which I now subject with all
deference to your consideration, has been communicated to some very competent
and unbiassed judges in England, who not only deem it practicable, but a
laudable and useful enterprise. The great and well known Dr. Fothergill, the
justly celebrated Dr. Hunter, and the learned Dr. Watson, men distinguished for
their superior knowledge in literature, and particularly eminent in every thing
which relates to medical science, have esteemed the improvement of such
knowledge amongst us worthy of notice, and the institution of lectures in every
branch of Medicine as deserving the patronage of all who wish well to arts and
sciences. It would therefore argue great inattention in us to neglect the first
opportunity that offers, of giving effect and stability to the design. Nor can
we defer the execution of it at this time, without risquing the loss of the
noble prospect which it affords, not easily to be retrieved.

IT is with the highest satisfaction I am informed from Dr. Shippen, junior,
that in an address to the public as introductory to his first anatomical
course, he proposed some hints of a plan for giving medical lectures amongst
us. But I do not learn that he recommended at all a collegiate undertaking of
this kind. What led me to it was the obvious utility that would attend it, and
the desire I had of presenting, as a tribute of gratitude to my alma matter, a
full and enlarged plan for the institution of Medicine, in all its branches, in
this seminary where I had part of my education, being amongst the first sons
who shared in its public honors. I was further induced to it from a
consideration, that private schemes of propagating knowledge are instable in
their nature," and that the cultivation of useful learning can only be
effectually promoted under those who are patrons of science, and under the
authority and direction of men incorporated for the improvement of literature.

SHOULD the trustees of the college think proper to found a professorship in
Anatomy, Dr. Shippen having been concerned already in teaching that branch of
medical science is a circumstance favorable to our wishes. Few here can be
ignorant of the great opportunities he has had abroad of qualifying himself in
Anatomy, and that he has already given three courses thereof in this city, and
designs to enter upon a fourth course next Winter.

I PROPOSE in a few months to employ myself in giving a course of lectures on
the Materia Medica, in which the pharmaceutic treatment of medicines, as well
as their virtues, will be described, and the doctrines of the chemical
properties of bodies will be considered, as far as it useful to give a general
idea of Chemistry, and as is consistent with a course of the Materia Medica.
Next year I design to attempt a course of lectures upon the Institutes or
Theory of Medicine, which will be illustrated with practical observations.
Possibly in a few years more, persons duly qualified may offer to undertake
full and complete courses of every branch of medicine; and a plan may be
adopted, conformable to that which is followed in the, so justly celebrated,
school of physic at Edinburgh.

THE regular distribution of literary honors upon the deserving is a step,
which is neglected in no institution that promises fair to be extensively
useful. As it is sometimes prejudicial to attempt a scheme entirely out of our
reach, so, on the other hand, a too contracted plan often mars the work
altogether, or frustrates the great utility which might be derived from a more
finished model. Let us aim then to distinguish worth with adequate rewards, and
confer due honors on real merit. This will, render the institution complete,
and give all possible encouragement to pupils.

As you have hitherto been so careful not to prostitute the honors of this
seminary on any occasion by conferring them on the undeserving; and have made
degrees in arts not an unmeaning title, but an honorable badge of distinction,
you have given solid reputation to those who have been educated here. You have
thus conducted them with ecclat to the study of the learned professions, or
ushered them into other useful spheres of life with luster and advantage. The
same regard being had to the higher degrees of literature would increase these
good effects. In a short time, every person would be ashamed to think of
pracrising physic, who had not industrously cultivated the best opportunities
of instruction. He would otherwise be marked out by every intelligent man, as
one who had never been properly initiated in his profession, and, consequently,
as unequal to the task which he had presumptuously engaged in.

IF the several parts of the design, which I have pointed out as practicable to
execute, meet with that attention which they seem to merit, it is not to be
doubted that, in a short time, medicine will put on the form of a regular
science, and be successfully cultivated in the College. And supposing we are
not able to meet with gentlemen already in circumstances to engage in every
part of the work, we may however hope that a laudable ambition, sentiments of
honor, and the interest of the public weal will prompt some of the rising
students, among ourselves, of more than ordinary talents; to cultivate with the
utmost application the particular branches of medicine, to which they find
their genius more especially point. It is to be hoped that they will avail
themselves of every opportunity of improvement by going abroad, and on their
return, transplant hither, to the great emolument of the community, every
different branch of knowledge relative to their profession. Is it not probable
that such a plan as this laid before them will open the views, spur on the
ambition, and allure the industry of students, so that we may hope to see, in
some years, a number of gentlemen, natives of America., qualified to fill the
most difficult and important parts of their profession, with usefulnefs and
applause?

IT may perhaps be objected, that the colonies are yet in so infant a state
that any attempt to establish medical schools is premature. It may be imagined,
that it will prevent many from going abroad, to obtain a more complete
education. Let it be considered, that every one, whose circumstances allow of
this, will have a plan before them, and every incitement to render their
education as perfect as possible, Many who are not in a condition to support
the expense of being educated abroad, by being instructed here in the first
elements of their profession, and informed what further remains to be done,
have it in their power to finish their studies abroad afterward with
advantage. This class perhaps includes the greatest part of medical students.

THE saving of money may be thought more necessary at this juncture, when the
check which our commerce has received makes it so scarce amongst us.

SOME there are indeed, and not a few, who cannot by any means afford the
expense of crossing the Atlantic, to prosecute their studies abroad. The
proposed institution will therefore prove highly beneficial to every class of
students in Medicine.

THERE is a difficulty indeed in the way of the undertaking of great weight,
which it were to be wished could be surmounted; I mean in case all the
different branches of medicine should be blended in the practice of any
professor. This evil would call aloud for a remedy. The love of humanity
prompts every ingenious man, engaged in that part of medical pursuits which he
likes best, to prosecute it with assiduity and constancy. The bounds of life
are the only limits to his industry. He devotes himself entirely to a toilsome
study, but which ceases to appear so to him, when the interefts of humanity are
the fruits of his labors. There are men fo intent upon improving favorite
studies, that a labor of very many years is but a constant exercise of the
eyes and hands, by which the science in general is greatly enriched, whilst
they themselves remain in a shameful indigence and obscurity, neglected by
those to whom their labors prove so beneficial. Memoirs of the Royal Academy
of Surgery.


WHILST Medicine from the greatness of its object, the preservation of the
species, is one of the most useful subjects of knowledge to a state, and at the
same time one of the most extensive and difficult; we just regret that the very
different employment of Physician, Surgeon, and Apothecary, should be
p^^^iscuously followed by any one man, however ^^^at his abilities. They
certainly require very different talents. The infant state of a place, is
sometimes used as an argument, not in support, but as an apology for such
measures. The longer we follow any faulty custom, the more difficult we find
the task to break through the shackles of it, even when it enslaves us to our
greatest detriment.

EVERY mechanic art, and almost every employment in life, serve as instructive
lessons to the practicioners of Medicine. The construction of a watch, the
building of a house, may the making of a pin, are striking examples of the
truth of this assertion. In each of them a number of different artists are
employed, who confining themselves every one to his own branch of business, the
whole work is more quickly finished, and more highly improved. The length, to
which human skill may arrive, when thus properly directed is amazing. Why then
should we continue to follow such a variety of different occupations as are
generally crowded together in the practice of the healing art? The mutual
interest of patient and practitioner seem to require a different procedure. The
chief argument alleged for it, viz. that it is less expensive, is altogether
fallacious, and, unless I am much out in my conjectures, it will be found a
very difficult task to prove the assertion. But granting it to be truly so,
yet when life is the object at stake, a notion of cheapening health, and a
disparagement of the practitioners skill, argue a sordid mind, and will, in the
end, always discover a most mistaken plan of economy.

IF Physic, Surgery, and Pharmacy were in different hands, practitioners would
then enjoy much more satisfaction in practice. They would commonly be less
burdened with an over hurry of business, and have an opportunity of studying
the cases of the sick at more leisure. Would not this tend to the more speedy
relief of diseases and the perfection of medical science, as every Physician
would have more time by study, observation, and experience united, to cultivate
that knowledge which is the only foundation of practice? "This knowledge,
sought out by Philosophy, drawn from nature and the operation of Medicines, and
founded upon the causes of our complaints, upon observations of their signs and
upon die laws of the animal economy, form the true Theory, without which,
there is neither art nor method in the treatment of diseases. But how great is
the force of prejudice, that practitioners, who affect a seducing kind of
simplicity, should look upon those persons with disdain, who divide their
application between study and practice; they inspire a contempt for Theory,
whereby they impose on the public who are no judges of its usefulness, Thus the
most gross ignorance finds, in credulity, a too sure means of decrying that
knowledge which can alone direct our steps with certainty. Ought we then to
endeavor to render the art complete, by attending only to the progress of that
experience which is acquired by practice, which frequently begets so much
vanity and seduces the vulgar?" Mais tell est la force de Prejuges: Ces
Praticiens, dis je, qui se parent d'une simplicite seduisante, regardent avec
dedain ceux qui partagent leur application enter l'etude et la pratique; ils
inspirent du mepris pour la theorie, et tn imposent au public, qui n'en cauroit
connoitre l'utilite. C'est ainsi que l'ignorance la plus grossiere trouve dans
la credulite un moyen toujours trop sur pour fletrir le scavoir, qui peut seul
assurer nos pas.

Doit on en attendre les progres at cette experience qui s'acquiert par la
seule pratique, qui inspire si souvent tant de vanite et qui seduit le
vulgaire? etc. etc.

Vid. mem. de l'Acad, royal; de Chirurg; de Paris,


Let us rather commend those who would be afraid of making no further advance
in the healing arts, if they were compelled to abandon study and to give
themselves up wholly to practice; and who examine themselves every year, to
know what progress they have made in die knowledge of diseases, The great
BOERHAAVE, whose example is worthy of imitation, laid it down to himself, as an
inviolable law, to divide his time between study and practice.

WHERE abilities and the love of a profession unite, there is the furest
presage of success. But unhappy is the Physician, who has a soul turned to
philosophical inquiries, who loves to search into the causes, and investigate
the phoenomena of diseases; and yet is at the same time diverted from these
useful researches, by other occupations to which he has an aversion. How
disagreeable! how cruel a case is it to be forced, incompliance with cu^^om, to
stifle the tender feelings of humanity; to take the knife into his unsteady
hand; and in spite of reluctant nature within him, to be obliged to perform
some painful and tedious operation on the suffering patient! better consigned
to one whose inclination, experience, and address, qualify him for the irksome,
but needful task!

ON the other hand, a spirit of intrepidity and a particular turn of mind carry
many beyond the horrors which get the better of others. Fired at the same time
with a like love of humanity, and filled with desires of relieving the
calamities to which external violence, and innumerable accidents both from
within and from without subject our lot, they apply themselves with the most
laudable zeal and assiduity, to improve that essential part of the healing art
which is capable of giving effectual aid by the painful, but wholesome severity
of manual operation.

TO render any person dextrous in the operations of Surgery, however intrepid
he may naturally be, it is necessary that he should practice them often, and
devote himself to them. This is inconsistent with the occupation of a Physician
involved in a multiplicity of business, and requiring leisure to study the
cases of his patients, who linger under a complication of evils widely
different.

IT is to lovers of humanity like these, so differently occupied, that some owe
the movement of their limbs, others the mitigation of obstinate diseases, and
others the prolongation and pleasure of their lives.

THE business of Pharmacy is entirely different from either. Free from the
cares of both, the Apothecary is to prepare and compound medicines as the
Physician shall direct. Altogether engaged in this, by length of time he
attains to that nicety of skill therein, which he never could have arrived at,
were his attention distracted by a great variety of other subjects.

THE wisdom of ages approved by experience, the mstd certain test of knowledge,
has taught us the necessity and utility of appointing different persons for
these so different employments, and accordingly, we find them prosecuted
separately in every wise and polished country, to the great advantage of each,
and to the unspeakable emolument of the community! Indeed the benefits which
these preservers of the human race, improving each his profession apart, have
shed abroad in the world, somewhat resemble the great blessings of nature, the
light and air; they are so common we all enjoy them, and, for the most part,
without appearing sensible of their unspeakable value.

I appeal to the common sense of mankind. The common sense of mankind, duly
informed, gives its verdict against a promiscuous profession of different
occupations. When a country has made some advances in other arts, and begins to
flourish in knowledge, perhaps not without some luxury, it is high time that
medical science should be practiced with regularity. It would be unpardonable
in the professors to let it remain at a stand, as if they had already attained
the summit of human wisdom. This would curb every laudable attempt to improve
polite literature amongst the rising generation. In general, languid is the
prosecution of study, when there is but little prospect of seeing our labor
crowned with success.

LET us now consider in a brief manner the advantages we may hope for from the
execution of our design. These are greater, and more in number, than strike our
notice at once. We shall first consider the benefits which the STUDENTS of
MEDICINE will derive from it.

IN a place so remote as Philadelphia from every school of Physic, we cannot
expect a very early inintelligence of all the medical discoveries and
improvements which are made in Europe. In establishing medical colleges, the
professors of each branch will find it incumbent on them to keep up a
correspondence with the learned abroad. They will thus get speedy accounts of
every thing new which may relate to their particular provinces. By improveing
this knowledge, they can diffuse it amongst their pupils, and, by their means,
more readily propagate it through every part of the country.

THAT this will be of the greatest utility is manifest, if we rely on the
authority of the most celebrated academicians. They strongly recommend "to let
none of those discoveries escape us, which are daily brought to light by the
labors of masters in the art. Without this care, say they, the most consummate
practitioner, within the space of twenty years, will be ignorant of those
truths which are then familiar to novices: the labors of others will thus
become a source of labors to himself, and, without new study, his knowledge
will decay into ignorance. Thus the celebrated practitioners in the time of
Harvey, content with the knowledge which they had acquired from their
predecessors, shut their eyes against the light which this great man presented
to them. They had made a long career in the exercise of their art, without
knowing the circulation of the blood, which exposed so many errors in the books
of the ancients, and so many false steps in their proceedings; whilst Novices,
enlightened by this discovery, with reason despised these haughty practitioners
who grew old in their errors." Il faudroit encore ne laisser echapper aucune
des decouvertes qui naissent tous les jours des travaux des maitres de l'art:
sans cette etude, le Praticien le plus consomme ignorera dans l'espace de vingt
annees des verites qui seront familieres a des novices: les travaux des autres
sont done une source de travaux pour lui; et sans une nouvelle etude, son
sctavoir meme seroit fletri par son ignorance.

Tells etoient des Praticiens celebres contemporains d'Harvee. Contens des
connoissances qu'ils avoient puisees dans les Ecrits de leurs predecesseurs,
ils fermerent les yeux a la lumiere que leur presentoit ce grand homme; ils
parcoururent ume longue carriere dans l'exercise de leur art, sans connoitre la
circulation du sang, qui devoile tant d'erreurs dans les livres des anciens, et
tant de faux pas dans leur march. Des Novices, eclaires par cette decouverte,
meprisoient avec raison ces praticiens dedaigneux qui vieillissoient dans leurs
erreurs.

Vid mem, de l'Acad; royal; de Chirurg; de Paris.




STUDENTS are apt to be disgusted with any art, when, at their first entrance
upon it, they find it beset with difficulties which to them appear
unsurmountable; but when these begin to clear up, their eager pursuit of
knowledge increases daily with growing pleasure. A regular course of
instruction prompts them to an eager pursuit of learning: it sheds forth
conviction upon the mind, and improves the confidence of the diligent; a
confidence founded on the just principles of demonstration and reason. It is
very certain that oral instructions and ocular illustrations render science
easier, are more convincing, and make a more durable impression than the best
wrote treatises.

A course of reading and observation is not sufficient, without other
instruction, to qualify young men for practice; since many of the books of
medicine are full of obscurity, or crowded with absurdities, which puzzle the
unexperienced reader, and often lead young minds astray.

As the most precious metals in a state of ore are mixed with dross, so the
choice truths of Medicine are frequently blended with a heap of rubbish. How
valuable and necessary is an experienced professor who knows how to clear this
away; to present those truths simple and pure from mixture; to trace them out
under the various appearances they put on at different times, and to discover
to students the clue of reasoning which they ought to pursue, in winding
through a labyrinth of obscurity, before they can arrive at a clear knowledge
of the more difficult parts of their profession! That is to teach them how to
philosophize justly in medicine.

THE greatest genius left to itself is like the earth, when destitute of the
sun, incapable of bringing its productions to a perfect maturity. A course of
regular instruction is to the mind like the rays of light darting through the
obscurity of Chaos. It dispells the clouds that envelope the understanding, and
enables the diligent student to penetrate into the secret recesses of nature.
Thus prepared, he is in a situation to enrich himself with those treasures of
knowledge which the observers of nature have heaped together for many ages. He
has a torch put into his hand to light him to the true science of curing
diseases.

As the practice of teaching is requisite, in order to be able to explain the
difficulties of any science, and render the communication of its precepts
familiar to others, it is necessary that persons should devote their time very
much to it. This can only be done to good purpose, so that students may reap
ample advantages therefrom, by means of instituting public professorships.

THE business of a Professor is to place before students in a full light, at
their first entrance upon any study, the true object of that study, and to
ascertain their proper pursuit. In performing this, he first explains to them
the terms of art, and renders the language and ideas thereof familiar. He
afterward directs them to what is the most proper course of study, and to the
best authors to be consulted on the subjects of which he treats. He points out
the mistakes which any of them may have run into, and puts them upon their
guard against such errors as are apt to mislead students. He supplies the
defects of those authors, And mentions what new light the latest disquisitions
and discoveries have thrown upon every subject. He thus points out the road
which leads to science, and prevents the young votary from running into a maze
of doubts. He confirms his steps, smooths the rugged path he has to tread,
assists him in climbing the steep ascent, and, before dismission, informs him
how he is to conduct himself, in order to reach at length to the summit of his
profession. Having a plan before him, a fixed end in view, and the means of
attaining it within his reach, the student, impeled on with irresistible ardor,
presses forward, eager to reach the goal of knowledge and the height of all
medical seize; and since he is so well instructed in his career, has the
apparent prospect of wished for success.

ANOTHER manifect advantage of public lectures is, that they bring together a
number of students of the same class of knowledge. If the professor is a man
who labors to improve the growing mind, he has it in his power to kindle an
ambition in the breast of his pupils. An opportunity is put into his hands of
examining the progress they make. They become acquainted, and sometimes form
societies under the eye and direction of their teachers and masters. They
converse, and write discourses on such literary and medical debates as tend
greatly to their mutual improvement.

As to what regards students themselves, these several particulars I am
persuaded are sufficient to convince every judicious person of the necessity of
instituting, in this seminary, professorships in all the branches of the
healing arts.

THE great advantage which may be expected to accrue to the SEMINARY itself,
from the establishment of medical schools, is the advancement of the grand
design of such a seminary in general, and the improvement of some of the most
useful branches of literature, that can embellish any seat of learning. If
wisdom and profitable science are the glory, the ornament, the highest
attainment of humane nature, and give the strongest evidence of a people being
enriched with generous and refined sentiments, by which all polished nations
are ambitious of being distinguished; then, most certainly, it becomes an
object of the first consideration with us to determine, whether the cultivation
and patronage of this science are worthy our most ardent pursuits, and whether
we shall improve this opportunity which is now put into our hands for that
purpose. It is needless to inform you of what consequence it is to take the
lead in a design fo interesting, so noble and important.

THE reputation of every sort of useful learning must be of great benefit to a
CITY, as it will draw, from all parts, persons that have a relish for
literature, who will always prefer a place of education, in which the greatest
number of advantages coincide.

THE resort of strangers to any city for the cultivation of science must give
it proportionably a pre-eminence over others. An education in any place begets
that place an interest, and as it were naturalizes strangers to it. In return
for a dispensation of knowledge, it collects a tribute of riches as well as of
affecttion from all quarters.

AMONGST the benefits to be derived to the PROVINCE from the establishment of
medical schools, I cannot pass over a particular one, which ought to fire the
ambition, and animate the industry of every student who has chosen to devote
himself to the cultivation of the healing arts.

WE live on a wide extended continent of which but the smallest portion, even
of the inhabited part, has yet been explored. The woods, the mountains, the
rivers and bowels of the earth afford ample scope for the researches of the
ingenious. In this respect an American student has some considerable advantages
over those of Europe, viz. The most ample field lies before us for the
improvement of natural history. The countries of Europe have been repeatedly
traversed by numerous persons of the highest genius and learning, intent upon
making the strictest search into every thing which those countries afford;
whence there is less hopes or chance for the students who come after them to
make new discoveries. This part of the world may be looked upon as offering the
richest mines of natural knowledge yet unriffled, sufficient to gratify the
laudable thirst of glory in young inquirers into nature. The discovery must
greatly enrich medical science, and perpetuate the glory of the authors to
latest time.

HOW many plants are there, natives of this soil, possessed of peculiar
virtues? how many fossils to enrich the cabinets of the curious? how many
natural substances, objects of new trade and commerce to supply materials for
various arts, as well as to enlarge the bounds of Medicince? what means are so
likely to bring them to our knowledge as medical researches and careful
experiments, prosecuted by those instructed how to make them, and how to profit
themselves of the discovery? A spirit of inquiry into these things would be put
on foot as the natural tendency of such an institution, and prove the most
likely mrans of bringing to light the knowledge of many useful things, of which
we yet remain ignorant, the more readily, as natural history is one of the most
essential studies to prepare a person for prosecuting medicine with success,
and one of the most distinguished ornaments of a physician and man of letters.

FROM all these different views, I presume none will deny the expediency, and
necessty if I may so say, as well as the exceeding great benefits of the
proposed institution to this seminary, city and province. Nor does the utility
of it stop here. We may not only hope to profit ourselves, but, in very many
instances, contribute hereby to the advantage of the COLONIES, the vicinity and
connections of which with ours might encourage many students to resort hither.
Thus the reputation and influence of this institution, becoming at length more
universal, might extend themselves as from a center, and include distant places
within the circle of its usefulnefs.

FOR a few moments, suffer me here to bespeak the attention of THE STUDENTS OF
MEDICINE.

HAVING now kid before you an obje6t worthy of your most earnest regard; the
nature of the studies in which you are to engage; their extent, difficulty,
importance and dignity being now pointed out, and a plan suggested to you,
whereby your labors may meet with a more certain success; consider well,
Gentlemen, how much depends upon your own diligence. -- Think how necessary it
is to employ all your attention in order to accomplish so valuable an end. --
To this end place before your eyes the illustrious examples of great men, who,
by pushing their researches into the bosom of nature, have extended the bounds
of useful science. Tread in their steps, become indefatigable in the
cultivation of medical literature, and be earnest to bring it to perfection.
The rewards of the rich, the countenance of the great, and the justly merited
esteem of the good and the virtuous, which outlasts the fleeting years of
humane date, will not be wanting for your encouragement. You will be in a
condition to practice the healing arts with skill and reputation, and to
transmit your knowledge, and the benefits thereof, to a succession of others.
What is a most pleasing reflection, thosse who have been distressed by irksome
diseases, and relieved by your skill, will own themselves indebted to you for
the life you have prolonged; -- You will be ever remembered as the ornament and
boast of your profession, and be justly styled guardians of the health of
mankind.

THESE considerations ought to animate you in the noble pursuit, and determine
you to persevere therein with unshaken firmness and constancy. Be not
dispirited at the difficulties which present, or the obstacles you are to
encounter. Let them serve rather as a spur to your industry. They will not
stand in the way of men who are determined to surmount all opposition in their
course. Regard them as left by others for you to master. Was there no
difficulty remaining, you would have less scope for a genius of investigation;
less honor in being barely followers of others. Both science and honor offer
one fate to their votaries. They reward the courage of the brave and of the
steady, and repel the faint hearted and irresolute. You have an ample field
before you to cultivate. Inspired by a love of science, your diligent inquiry
into natural causes and effects must produce discoveries; and these discoveries
prompt you with fresh alacrity to new researches; an employment as delightful
and honorable as it is advantageous.

ORDER requires that I should now address myself in particular TO THE TRUSTEES
OF THE COLLEGE.

To you HONORED SIR, The governor of Pennsylvania, who is president of the
trustees.
and you GENTLEMEN who are trustees of this seminary, the respected patrons of
literature, who alone can give force and stability to undertakings of such
moment as this, I beg leave to return my warmest acknowledgements for the
disposition you have shown of encouraging every attempt to promote science in
this plate; for your ready concurrence, with my proposal of instituting medical
schools in this seminary; and for the honor you have conferred on me, in
appointing me a professor of the Theory and Practice of medicine. My gratitude
cannot be manifested in a better manner, than in showing the most scrupulous
regard to the improvement of medical learning, and diligently prosecuting every
measure which may be thought conducive to that end. I flatter myself nothing in
my power shall be wanting to answer the great purposes of the institution.

THE learned Provost, vice Provost and faculty of the college have employed
their unwearied care incultivating every branch of academical knowledge; and
thus, with a success answerable to their wisdom and perseverance, have carried
this seminary to a very high pitch of reputation. Their industry I shall set
before me as an example worthy of imitation, and shall consult with them, in
framing such rules as may be thought expedient for the better regulating of
physical exercises, and fixing the medical schools on the most respectable
footing. From their experienced judgment, and warm attachment to the interest
of the college, I have room to hope for all the assistance they can yield me in
carrying the design into execution.

Being assured of this, it is yours to perfect the plan which I have briefly
sketched out. Under your patronage we may hope that Medicine will put on the
form of a regular science, and be cultivated with ardor and success; and that
your influence will be employed to promote the several branches of it; to the
establishment and perfection of which are annexed consequences, of the highest
concern to the American colonies in general, to this province, this city, and
this seminary in particular. It belongs to you to collect the scattered powers
that are necessary to be united, in an attempt so important; and to transplant
hither some of the most noble and beneficial sciences that mankind are blessed
with, the seeds of which, so opportunely sown, will certainly produce a
luxuriant growth of the most profitable knowledge.

PERHAPS this Medical institution, the first of its kind in America, though
small in its beginning, may receive a constant increase of strength, and
annually exert new vigor. It may collect: a number of young persons, of more
than ordinary abilities; and so improve their knowledge as to spread its
reputation to distant parts. By sending these abroad duly qualified, or by
exciting an emulation amongst men of parts and literature, it may give birth to
other useful institutions of a similar nature, or occasional rise, by its
example, to numerous. societies of different kinds, calculated to spread the
light of knowledge through the whole American continent, wherever inhabited.

SURE I am that you regard the rising youth as the growing hopes of the
country. You ardently wish that they may become eminent, in every qualification
which can render them an ornament, or a blessing to their fellow creatures. You
are, no doubt, anxious to encourage a spirit of literature amongst them, and
are attentive to procure them every advantage that may enable them to fill the
higher offices of lite, and especially the learned professions, with ability
and dignity. Nor do I imagine you will neglect any occasion, such as this which
now offers, to answer these salutary purposes. Destitute of culture, the
imagination of youth shoots wild and unprofitable; but, directed by art and
improved by science, a natural genius is like a rich soil, the fruitful source
of many benefits to a country.

WHILST the studies of youth are prosecuted under the encouragement and
patronage of men distinguished by their literature and worth, they have the
highest motives that can animate the pursuits of a generous mind. They consider
themselves as under the notice of the public, to which every ingenious person
labors to approve himself.

A LOVE of fame and a laudable ambition allure him with the most powerful
charms. These passions have, in all ages, fired the souls of heroes, of
patriots, of lovers of science, have made them renowned in war, eminent in
government and peace, justly celebrated for the improvement of polite and
useful knowledge. They have powerfully influenced the perfection of arts, the
advancement of commerce and the prosperity of cities. They have heightened the
character of particular people to such a degree, as to make them regarded by
other countries with admiration and esteem. Such I hope will be the consequence
of your patronizing Medical science in this place.

THE difficulties of executing the proposed plan are inferior, far inferior to
the glory of being first in such an undertaking. What grand enterprise was ever
accomplished without any difficulties?. If we have but resolution to master
those which obstruct our design, they will only serve to heighten the luster of
its achievement. Seize then the opportunity of executing a scheme so glorious
in itself, and of such importance to this places as you have given a beginning
to the task, I doubt not to see it fully perfected in due time.

As the interest of literature and the interest of this province are concerned
in it, the undertaking will meet with assistance and support from every lover
of science and every worthy citizen. They will unite their mutual aids to
render the foundation of it solid and permanent. The good of the community, the
welfare of our fellow creatures, and the common ties of humanity will suggest
the most powerful arguments in favor of it, with every person of a patriotic
generous disposition. When, by an early and well placed assistance, every one
of us may contribute to save the lives of thousands; of thousands yet unborn;
and, in some sense, give being to thousands more who shall spring from them;
who does not feel himself warmly engaged in a design of such public utility?

THE conscious reflection of contributing to instruct the rising generation,
and to (...) them for public service, of cultivating the healing arts amongst
us, and thus aswaging the calamities of disease, and relieving many miserable
objects who labor under a load of poverty and sickness, cannot fail of giving
an exalted pleasure to a benevolent mind. They experience it in the highest
degree, who are most blessed with the refined sentiments of a tender and
feeling humanity.

THE present Era will be ever memorable in the annals of history, for the
reputation of British valor, and the success and glory of the British arms, as
well as distinguished by the reign of a King, the boast and joy of his people.
Under his auspices, letters are cultivated, the arts flourish, and the sciences
are protected with a paternal care. His regard for literature has been
particularly extended to this seminary. Let us unite every power within us to
render ourselves worthy of such royal bounty, and multiply, all we can, the
benefits which our gracious sovereign has intended we should reap from it, by
the most diligent culture of every species useful knowledge. This will be a
proof of the veneration we have for our monarch, who delights in the happiness
and welfare of his subjects, the most distant of whom are near to him; and will
testify how anxiously we desire to become, under his government, benefactors of
mankind. The improvement of a science, useful as that of Medicine, adds luster
to a throne, an will perpetuate, to the latest posterity, the names of those
who shall patronize and improve it.

OH! let it never be said in this city, of in this province, so happy in its
climate, and its soil, where commerce has long flourished and plenty smiled,
that science, the amiable daughter of liberty and sister of opulence, droops,
her languid head, of follows behind with a slow unequal pace. I pronounce with
confidence this shall not be the case; but, under your protection, every useful
kind of learning shall here fix a favorite seat, and shine forth in meridian
splendour. To accomplish which may every heart and every hand be firmly united,

Hoc opus, hoc studium parvi properemus et ampli, Si patriae volumus, si nobis
vivere cari. Q. HORAT. FLAC. Epist. Lib. 1. 3.
FINIS.

