The Blessedness of PEACEMAKERS represented; and the Danger of PERSECUTION
considered;

IN TWO SERMONS, On Mat. v. 9. PREACHED at PHILADELPHIA, the 3d Wednesday in
May, 1759, before the Reverend the SYNOD, of New York and Philadelphia, BY
GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Ephesians iv. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit (...) the bond of
peace.

Luke ix. 55.56. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the son of
Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Quae domus tam stabilis, quae tam firma civitas est quae non odils, atque
disidiis funditus possit everti.

Cicero. Quicquid ad multitudinem versat, antipathiam continet, quicquid vero
ad unitatem tendit, sympathiam habet.

Scaliger. Quid tam gravibus insectamini Christum Pellis? numquid regiam sibi
vendicans potestatem, teriarum o^bem totam legionibus infestissimis occupavit,
et pacatas ab exordio nationes alias delevit ac sustulit, alias sibi parere
cervicibus com^^lit subjugatis?

Arnob. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the LONDON
COFFEE-HOUSE, the corner of Market and Front-streets. M,DCC,LXV. 1765

SERMON I.
MATTHEW V. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
children of GOD.


IT is an evidence of the degeneracy o human nature, that persons of narrow
minds and divisive practices, are applauded by any; but in the judgment of our
Lord, the Peacemakers are blessed, for they shall be called the children of GOD.

IN these words are two parts, first, a duty enjoined, peacemaking, and second,
arguments to enforce it annexed. viz. the blessing of CHRIST, and being called
the children of GOD. These parts of the text, I purpose to explain and improve.

I. THE peace here intended is that between man and man, as appears from the
23. and 24. verses of this chapter, where the phrase is explained in the
following manner, therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remebrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift, first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift; the expression
being indefinite, doubtless extends to all the connections of mankind, in
families, church and state; peacemakers therefore are such who are themselves
quiet and peaceable, who sincerely love peace and earnestly endeavor in
obedience to GOD, and regard to man to promote it, wherever their influence
reaches, through the general series of their behavior, by the use of all lawful
means.

SUCH as duly consider the value of peace to society, must needs have a high
esteem of it, which naturally tends to excite proportional desire and labor;
but without divine influence, we neither have an affecting view of things, or
an ability to act with right principles and designs: a few peaceable moods and
kind offices cannot constitute a Peacemaker, for this includes the governing
temper of the soul and general course of the conduct, these and nothing
transient, evidence the state of the mind, and determine the character.

THE extent of this duty is universal, if it be possible, says the Apostle, as
much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men; not only with such as are of
our profession and sentiments, but with all others that retain the human
species, and if, through their default, our labors for peace prove abortive,
nevertheless we shall not miss a gracious reward, which is not connected with
the success (that is out of our power) but with our disposition and endeavor.
Isaiah. lxix. 4.5.
Yet when these are crowned with success, it is a tree of life! Prove. xiii. 12.


BUT though we are earnestly to prosecute peace, yet not so far as to barter
truth and holiness to obtain it, no! we must buy the truth and not sell it, we
must follow peace with all men, and holiness; that is so far as is consistent
with holiness, and no farther; we should rather die then deny the least truth,
but there is a wide difference between our love to it and our imposing of it as
a term of communion upon others; the former is our duty, and the latter our
sin. Romans xiv. 1.


IT must be confessed it is no easy matter to procure or preserve peace among
mankind, for by our fatal apostasy we have lost that pure light, supreme love
to GOD, and sincere regard to man, which we enjoyed in our primitive state; and
in place thereof are under the governing power of darkness, enmity against GOD
and man, and immoderate self love: so that we neither know our duty in a right
manner, or are willing to do it, but have a strong proneness to the contrary:
nothing less than supernatural light and almighty power can subdue these evils
in us, and qualify us to perform acceptably the duty enjoined in our text. Yea
even after a change is wrought what infants are many in grace, they are carnal
and walk as men, while there is envying, strife, and divisions among them,
while one says he is of Paul and another he is of Apollos; who is Paul and who
is Apollos? 1 Cor. iii. 3.4.5.


THE means tending to peace are either negative or positive, of the first kind
are these following, viz. rashjudging, unscriptural terms of communion, and
uncharitable divisions; and

1st. WE should with great care avoid rashjudging, which, on insufficient
grounds, condemns the states and actions of others: this practice is as sinful
in itself as unfriendly to the peace of society, and therefore is strictly
prohibited and severely censured by God himself, as an invasion of his
province, a despising of our brother, and an anticipation of the general
judgment; who art thou that judge another man's servant? why do thou set at
naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of CHRIST;
he that judges his brother, judges the law; i. e. accuses it of imperfection
by condemning persons not for violating its precepts but his own additions;
judge not says our LORD lest ye be judged; i. e. lest ye provoke others to
recriminate and load you with invective; he may certainly expect to be judged
without mercy who has showed no mercy; the most unsullied innocence, the most
eminent and generous goodness, are not secure from the censure of this
malignant impiety, which presumes to ascribe a series of of good actions,
without the least shadow of reason, to a bad cause and design; thus the
invidious Pharisees ascribed the miraculous works of our LORD to the power of
the Devil, and represented the Savior of sinners notwithstanding all his
beneficent actions, as a rebel against the state.

2d. IN order to procure and preserve peace, the officers of churches should
beware of adding on any pretext whatsoever, new terms of communion of their own
devising, to those which the head of the church has fixed; for hereby his
authority will be confronted and the church torn into innumerable parts, we
have but one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy. It is the business
and duty of church officers, to explain and obey the laws he has given, but
they should not step into the legislator's chair. Now that the terms of stated
communion appointed by our LORD, are essentials in doctrine worship, and
discipline, together with a regular life, is evident, as I conceive, from the
following places of scripture, duly considered and compared, i. e. the 14
chapter of the Epistle of Paul to the Romans throughout, is full to this
purpose; here we are enjoined to receive the weak, but not to doubtful
disputations, and to avoid judging and dispising them. Now by the weak, it is
plain from the series of the context, that the Apostle means such persons who
though sound in the main points of faith, and serious, hold some circumstantial
or lesser errors, viz. that under the gospel all are obliged to abstain from
meats forbidden by the Jewish law, and to keep their ceremonial Sabbaths: these
the strong or more orthodox part of the church, are nevertheless obliged to
receive to communion; this precept is enforced by diverse arguments, such as
that they were sincere, and accepted of GOD, and that the substance of religion
did not consist in these things, but in peace, righteousness, and joy in the
Holy Ghost; he that in these things serves CHRIST, says the Apostle, is
acceptable to GOD, and approved of men: let us therefore follow after the
things that make for peace, and things whereby we may edify one another; for
meats destroy not the work of GOD; i. e. do not break the peace of the church,
and mar thy brother's edification, by uncharitable contentions and divisions
about small and circumstantial matters; if you have faith, about these things,
have it to yourselves, don't impose your sentiments upon others, let every man
be fully persuaded in his own mind. Romans xv. 1.7. we then that are strong,
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not please ourselves; wherefore
receive one another as CHRIST also received us to the glory of GOD. By the
infirmities of the weak, we are to understand their ignorance, frowardness, and
censoriousness, he speaks not of heresies and manifest enormities but of such
errors in doctrine and life, which proceed from ignorance and common infirmity;
with these we should bear, as we do with sick persons in their way-wardness;
Vid. Pool. in Loc.
in this manner, we should forbear one another in love (Ephesians. 4.2.)

ON the other hand we are enjoined to contend carnestly for the faith once
delivered to the Saints; to hold fast the form of sound words, and to reject
HERETICS after the first and second admonition; II. Tim. 1.13. Tit. 3.10.
and such as forsake the truth as it is in JESUS, broach false doctrines in
weighty and momentuous points, and break the peace of the church; as care
should be taken to preserve and propagate the fundamental truths of religion,
without which I see not how rational charity and comfortable communion can be
preserved, or any prospect opened for promoting the power and practice of
holiness: Vid. Pool. anot. on Jude iii.
so likewise the unity of the church should be regarded, and some mercy
exercised toward those who are sound in the main points of faith, but mistake
in some lesser things; now how can both be consistently preformed, and the
unity of the spiritin the bond of peace preserved, without observing essentials
as terms of communion? this is a medium between the dangerous extremes of a
criminal laxness, whereby foundation principles are betrayed, and rigorous
severity, whereby pious and useful persons are rejected, and the church's unity
broke: truly religious persons are of different capacities, educations, and
advances in religion, and therefore will think differently about smaller
points, and be conscience bound respecting them; if therefore no forbearance,
it is to be used, the church must be always broken in pieces! for we cannot
with safety counteract our own consciences, or follow implicitly any master but
CHRIST; seeing the various points of truth that compose the christian system,
are of very different degrees of importance and influence, as they are remote
from or near to the foundation. Is that zeal according to knowledge, which is
equal in degree for them all? or can any church make that truth a term of
communion, which CHRIST has not made, without claiming a power superior to his,
viz of rejecting those whom he commands us to receive? the absurdity and
impiety of which I need not enlarge upon; if we cannot believe and love lesser
points of truth, without imposing them upon others, then how could the Apostle
Paul believe the extent of christian liberty, and yet will to receive the weak
that denied it? Our LORD reproved the disproportioned zeal of the Pharisees,
for tything mint, anise and cummin, while they omitted the weightier matters of
the law, judgment, mercy and faith, i. e. justice, charity and fidelity; they
strained at a gnat but swallowed a camel: Mat. xxiii. 23.24.
with pretense of superior strictness, they charged the Savior of sinners,
with want of due respect to the traditions of the elders, and to the Sabbath
day, because he eat with unwashen hands, and cured The sick on sacred time; who
in return directed them to go and learn what that meant, that GOD would have
mercy rather than sacrifice Mat. ix. 13.
i. e. when a lesser duty interferes with a greater, the lesser is to be
omitted: the offering of gifts, or acts of external worship must give place to
brotherly love and compassion; which are of the last importance to society, and
accepted by the Redeemer as a kindness done to himself.

3d. ANOTHER hindrance to peace which should be with equal care avoided is
uncharitable divisions, or schisms in the church of GOD; as peace is the bond
of unity, so is unity of peace: though the body mystical has some parts which
are reckoned less honorable, yet there should be no schism in it: one part
should not say to the other, I have no need of thee. Our LORD bore with many
errors and weaknesses in his Disciples, and the Apostles neither separated
themselves, nor allowed of separation from the churches of Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Smyrna, Sardis, and Laodocea; though corrupted with odious crimes and
errors: those therefore that are least for unity and peace, are least like GOD
and least for him; they really oppose the accomplishment of CHRIST'S prayer,
and prediction, that his people may be one as he and the father are one; John
xvii. 21.
that as there is but one Shepherd, so there should be but one fold. John x. 16.
Uncharitable divisions where no sinful term of communion is imposed, are
contrary to the nature, word, and work of GOD, which are unity, love and peace:
as well as to the ordinances of GOD, baptism and the LORD'S supper, which are
designed to represent the union of the body mystical, and to be a bond of
obligation on us to preserve it. By one spirit says the Apostle we are
baptized into one body and though we are many, we are all partakers of one bread;
as tearing a part of the natural body mars its beauty, comfort and strength,
and tends to destroy it entirely! so the same fatal effects have schisms in the
church of CHRIST! for as our LORD observes, a house divided against itself
cannot stand. And therefore the Apostle with vehemence, entreats the
Corinthians, by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that there should be no
schisms amongst them. 1 Corin. i. 10.
Valuable persons are not like to be of so much use to reclaim a declining
church, when separated from it, as in a state of union, because of the mutual
prejudices which these breaches occasion, and the division of the people's zeal
and attention, from the great things of experimental and practical religion.
Alas! what multitudes are prejudiced against christianity altogether, by the
numerous schisms of the church of CHRIST, and their carnal contentions, whereby
they labor to ruin one another's reputations, provoke mutually not to love,
but wrath, and practically confine christianity to their several parties, as
though CHRIST was divided, or had many bodies! Why should a perfection in
knowledge (or principles) more than in practice be insisted on in order to
communion, seeing both are unattainable in this life? Is any branch of the
visible church infallible in its decisions about small and comparatively
doubtful points? if not, then why should any express such a zeal and confidence
about them, as seem to suppose it?

4th. PRIDE should be avoided as the grand make bate; this blows up peace in
families, church, and state; it sets men on striving who shall be greatest, and
makes them impatient of contradiction, assuming and positive; the proud man's
opinion even in doubtful matters must pass for undoubted truth, and his will
must be a law, else he is displeased. He that overvalues himself, of
consequence undervalues others, and so provokes them to slight him in return;
and hence the truth of Solomon's observation is evident, that he who is of a
proud spirit stir^eth up strife, it was this which induced Diotrephes to love
preeminence, to cast the brethren out of the church, and prate against them
with malicious words; III Epist John ix. 10
by this others were excited to speak perverse things to draw Disciples after
them, and so enlarge their sect. Acts xx. ^0.
Yet this evil so abounds among mankind, that it is hard to find a retreat from
its violence: so various and vehement are the contenders, and so plausible
their pretenses, that an honest and peaceable man may be at a loss which to
shun, or which to follow: as Tully speaks of Pompey and Caesar, "quem fugiam
nescio? quem sequar nescio?"

BUT POSITIVELY.

1st. IN order to procure and preserve peace among men, it is necessary to be
just and honest in our dealings with them, justice in its own nature, and by
common consent, is the guardian of peace; but its contrary is the source of
numberless debates and calamities; to avoid all appearances of which, we should
not insist rigorously upon small and doubtful points of right, for as such a
proceeding shows no tenderness of conscience, or regard to their interest, they
are hereby induced to conclude we are hypocrites and their enemies, and so
commence ours: Whereas a merciful recession in such cases, tends to excite
their favorable sentiments of us, and sincere affection toward us; and hence
we are commanded rather to suffer wrong, i. e. in small and doubtful matters,
than to go to law. (...).


2d. WE should be clothed with humility, and think soberly of ourselves, as we
ought to think; this disposition of mind will incline us to bear contradiction
with patience, prevent our striving for pre-eminence, and make us contented
when others are preferred before us; a humble mind is pleased with a low state;
if we learn this lesson of CHRIST, we shall find rest to our souls, amidst all
the disquietudes of the present life; this will make us modest and self
diffident, and incline us to prefer others before ourselves in love; as well as
to give them all that honor that is their due, in their several places and
relations; all which strongly tend to conciliate peace!

3d. WE should love our brethren with a pure heart fervently; this will incline
us to cover their infirmities, and to live at peace with them; love endures
all things: if we love our brethren more, we shall be willing to bear more with
them; and to provoke them less: Love is the bond that unites men safely and
comfortably in society, and hatred the source of that violence which rends and
dissolves it; we cannot easily hate those we love, nor can we long agree with
those we hate: Surely none have or can wrong us, so much as we have done
ourselves, for its worse to be made evil, than called so; worse to endanger our
salvation, than to suffer in our estate: these things we have done to
ourselves, and yet are little moved, while trifles in comparison, done to us by
others, excite the keenest resentment. What can be the cause of this partial
conduct, but an excess of love to ourselves, and a defect therein to others;
contrary to that evangelical precept, which enjoins us to love our neighbors
as ourselves, and to walk in love, as Christ also has loved us. As love is the
fulfillment of the law, so it is the scope of the gospel in all its parts, nor
are there wanting excellencies in all mankind, either natural, moral, or
religious, which should invite our respect, these we should be eager to
discover to this noble end.

4th. IN order to procure and preserve peace, it is exceeding necessary to be
candid and charitable in our thoughts of others sentiments, speeches, and
actions, and to put the most favorable interpretation on them that they can
reasonably bear. Charity, as the apostle Paul observes, thinks no evil, i. e.
is not suspicious of others, without strong presumptions or apparent evidence,
and even in that case ascribes their failures to the mildest causes, such as
ignorance, mistake, and human infirmity, rather than malicious design: this is
the treatment that every man desires for himself, and therefore should show to
others. When our Lord told his disciples, that one of them would betray him,
every one suspected not the traitor but himself, Lord is it I? but the contrary
practice, viz, easily believing evils of others, aggravating of them, and
ascribing them to the worst of causes and designs, is the fruit of murderous
hatred, and tends to banish peace from the earth!

5th. WE should treat all men with courtesy and gentleness, the law of kindness
should be in our lips, the wisdom that is from above is first pure, than
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. Put them in mind says the Apostle
to Titus, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness to all men; by long forbearing a prince is persuaded, and a soft
tongue breaks the bone: But reviling is like the piercings of a sword, which
agravates the wound it pretends to heal; it is not only a violation of peace,
but a dishonorable waging of war, like shooting arrows dipped in poison! an
inhuman practice which rather aims at the ruin than the reformation of those we
dislike. The Archangel, when contending with the Devil, durst not bring
against him a railing accusation, for he knew he was no match for Satan at that
base business!

6th. WE should also be kind in action; which, in its general course, is the
index of the thoughts, and speaks louder than words; our Lord enjoins us to
bless them that curse us, and do good to those that despitefully use us, that
we may be the children of our father which is in heaven; who makes his sun to
rise on the evil and on the good: By this godlike method, we shall do more than
others, and overcome evil with good. Nothing, besides the grace of GOD, has
such power to remove prejudices, and melt the most obdurate hearts into
kindness and peace; especially when these friendly offices are attended with a
free forgiveness of former offenses, which is enjoined by the highest
authority, and made the pre-requisite to our obtaining pardon from GOD: put on
bowels of mercy and kindness, forgiving one another, as God has, for Christ's
sake forgiven you; if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will you
heavenly father forgive yours.

IT is likewise necessary to mind our own business, and to beware of
encroaching on the provinces of others, let no man suffer as a murderer, or as
a thief, or as a busy body, or bishop 1 Pet. iv. 15.(...)
in other men's matters, while men keep within their proper spheres, order and
harmony are preserved; but the contrary, like elements out of their own orb,
produces confusion and misery!

WE should also be careful to maintain that order of government, which is
appointed by the Almighty, without which peace and comfort cannot be expected
in society, as rulers should avoid encroaching upon the rights of those they
preside over, 1 Pet. v. 3.
so the people should make conscience of their duty to their superiors of
office. Heb. xiii. 17.


I MAY add, that the friends of peace should shun disputes, especially about
small matters, that are remote from the life of religion; for these, like
prickly brambles, scratch those that handle them, and yield no savoury fruit.
Avoid says the apostle, foolish questions and genealogies; Tit. iii. 9.
charge them, before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit.
11 Tim. ii. 14.
Though disputing is in itself lawful, and sometimes necessary to defend the
truth, yet through the corruption of human nature, it is seldom so managed, as
to answer a valuable end; instead of a calm enquiry after truth, it usually
degenerates into personal invectives, which are of no service to clear up the
point in debate. He therefore that meddles with controversy, that don't concern
him, is like one who takes a dog by the ears: and he who in the management of
it don't speak the truth in love, pleads rather for his own honor than truth.
There have been so many disputes about little things, and those so ill managed,
that the more important duties of love and peace have been thereby much
impaired! It is an argument of a proud and weak mind, to be hasty and
dogmatical in speaking about things that are doubtful, for hereby we overshoot
ourselves, and are in danger of being obliged either to retract our mistake, or
defend what is indefensible. It is a reproach to pretend to know what we do
not, and to have a confidence disproportioned to the evidence of things; this
temper and behavior are as opposite to peace, as to reason and good manners.

IN a word, if we would procure peace where it is not, and preserve it where it
is, we must avoid evil speaking of others needlessly in their absence, and
listening to those that do; though the preventing of important injury to
ourselves or others, may sometimes make it a duty to blame the absent, yet this
extraordinary case is no apology for backbiting and standering. If we have any
thing to say against our brother, we should inform him of it in private, in a
humble friendly manner, which has a tendency to promote his reformation, but
any other method is like to make him worse, by inflaming his prejudices and
resentments; Solomon truly observes, that a whisperer separates chief friends,
on the contrary we should cast water on the fire of contention, by concealing
with the mantle of love, all the sins of others, which we are not obliged to
discover in order to answer a valuable end; and make all the apologies for
their mistakes, which charity suggesis, and reason admits. In particular we
should pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and that we may be able to promote and
preserve it by the use of all proper measures, in the mean time lamenting the
corruption of our whole nature, believing in Jesus, and imploring, for his
sake, pardoning and renewing grace, without which we are not like to love as
brethren; I may add, that acquaintance with church history, is of great use to
prevent or heal divisions and debates! --

HAVING spoken of the duty enjoined, peacemaking, I proceed to consider the
motives mentioned by our LORD to enforce it, the

1st. OF which is, that such are blessed, for they have the satisfaction of
enjoying themselves, by keeping peace, and of being truly serviceable to
others, by disposing them to peace; they are working together with CHRIST, who
came into the world to slay all enmities, and to proclaim peace. Though
peacemaking be sometimes a thankless office, and it is the lot of him that
parts a fray, to have blows on both sides, yet it is a good office, and we must
be forward in it. Vid. Henry in Loc.
Though misguided saints may censure peacemakers fora time, and the wicked world
may curse them, and cast out their names as evil, yet the King of the Church
and Lord of the universe, justifies them, approves of their conduct, and
blesses them, authoritatively, universally, and eternally; yea and they shall
be blessed; it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? if God be for
us, who shall be against us?

2d. They shall be called the children of God; it will be an evidence to
themselves that they are so, GOD will own them as such, and herein they will
resemble him; he is the God of peace, the Son of God is the prince of peace,
and the spirit of adoption is a spirit of peace. Since GOD has declared himself
reconcilable to us, he will not own those for his children that are implacable
in their enmity to one another; for if blessed are the peacemakers, then woe to
the peace-breakers. Now by this it appears, that CHRIST never intended to have
his religion propagated by fire and sword, or penal laws, or to own bigotry and
intemperate zeal as the marks of his disciples; the children of this world love
to fish in troubled waters, but the children of GOD are the peacemakers, the
quiet of the land: as such are like GOD, so they are beloved by him, and shall
have the portion of children, grace for grace in this life and distinguished
glory in the next; they shall have guidance and support, and all necessary
comfort (...) and an incorruptible and undesiled inheritance hereafter, which
fades not away, Amen.

SERMON II.
MATTHEW v. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
children of GOD.


SEEING according to the ancient and just maxim, that contrary's set in
opposition, illustrate each other, in order to cast light upon the laboring
subject, let us take a transient view of persecution strictly and properly so
called, in contrast with peacemaking; here observe that persecution may be said
to be two fold, viz. of the church, and of the state; the former consists in
the execution of spiritual penalties, on the account of religion, without a
scriptural foundation; and the latter in the execution of temporal, such as
fines, imprisonment, confiscation of goods, bodily pain, and death; it is the
latter of these that I have especially in view at present, and beg leave to
assert, that it is contrary to scripture, reason, and antiquity, John xviii. 36.

IN particular what can be supposed more contrary to peace, than the principle
and practice of persecution or endeavors to force uniformity in matters purely
religious, by methods of external violence, such as fines, imprisonment,
consiscation of goods, banishment, bodily pains and death? here permit me to
observe, that persecution is contrary to scripture, reason, and antiquity, and

1 st IT is contrary to scripture. When the disciples of JESUS, James and John,
applied to their LORD for leave to command fire from heaven to consume the
Samaritans, for not receiving their master, instead of complying with their
motion, though it directly concerned himself, he turned and rebuked them, and
said, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, for the Son of Man is not
come to destroy men's lives but to save them. Here the matter is brought to a
trial, a great offense is committed against our Savior himself, and yet he
would not suffer it to to be revenged by force: hereby our compassionate, and
dear Redeemer manifests his abhorrence of persecuting violent, methods, in
matters purely religious, that do not directly affect the peace and safety of
the state; and signifies that they were signs of a bad temper of mind, and
contrary to the design of his coming into the world; (see Luke ix. 54.55. and
elsewhere.) agreeable hereto our LORD peremtorily declares, that his kingdom is
not of this world, (John xviii. 36.) i. e. is not earthly, over men's bodies and
estates, but spiritual over their hearts and minds; and therefore is to be
promoted and propagated by spiritual means only, which are suited to its nature
and design, it needs not secular force to establish it, nor does it interfere
with the prerogatives of princes, or properties of their subjects: the
foundation and scepter of this kingdom is divine truth, by this and not the
civil sword, the Redeemer conquers his enemies and governs his people, hereby
he makes them willing subjects, and draws them, not as beasts by force, but
with the cords of a man, reason and arguments, and with bonds of love, (Psalm
xlv. 4. Hosea xi. 4.) the King of Zion girds on his spiritual sword, and rides
prosperously because of truth: this he came to bear witness to, not by fury and
violence, but by patient suffering: (John xviii. 36 37.) and should not those
that say they abide in him, walk even as he walked? Should not the same mind be
in them, which was in him? (1 John ii. 6. Philip ii. 3.5.) The use of FORCE
tends to CONFOUND the KINGDOM of CHRIST with the kingdoms of this world, to
change its spitiritual NATURE, and make it carnal and political: but the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, though mighty through God, to the
pulling down the strong holds of sin and Satan; and bringing every thought to
the obedience of Christ. (2 Corinthians X. 4.5.) Farther our LORD positively
commands us, that all things, whatsoever we would that men should do to us, we
should do so to them: and that because, this is the law and the prophets.
(Matthew vii. 12.) i. e. the sum of the second table of the law, which
requires justice and charity, and of the first, which is thereby supposed as
the foundation, and the substance of what is written by the prophets in
relation there to. Romans xiv. 23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
The beauty, reasonableness, and righteousness of this immutable maxim of
natural equity, diverse of the Pagans discerned and highly esteemed;
particularly Alexander Severus, the Roman emperor, had it written on the walls
of his closet, often quoted it in judgment, honored CHRIST and favored the
christians for the sake of it. Now persecution is absolutely inconsistent with
this golden rule of justice, for who that has the sober exercise of reason,
would desire such treatment in his own case?

2d. PERSECUTION is contrary to REASON, seeing Religion is a reasonable
service; (Romans xii. 1.) founded on argument, a matter of choice: (Joshua
xxiv. 15. Psalm cx. 3.) proceeding from love as its principle (2 Corinthians v.
14. Galatians v. 6.) enjoining and recommending love by its precepts and
examples, (Ephesians v. 1.2.) and directed to love as its scope: (1 Timothy i.
5.) Seeing love, that works no ill to his neighbor, is the fulfilling of the
law, (Romans xiii. 10.) the bond of perfectness, (Collosians iii. 14.) greater
than faith and hope, (1 Corinthians xiii. 13.) The use of external FORCE,
instead of befriending this RELIGION, really opposes its principles, spirit,
and end, by manifesting murderous hatred against our brother; (1 John iii. 15.)
it excites them to hate us in return, and betrays the want of proper arguments
to engage our esteem and affection. In this manner PERSECUTION disgraces the
religion of JESUS, and tends to destroy it entirely. As love is the incentive
to love, so is hatred to its contrary; both which actions speak with the
loudest voice, and give the strongest evidence; the wisdom that is from above
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy.
(James iii. 17.) but if ye have bitter envying, and strife in your hearts,
glory not, and lie not against the truth; this wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish; (James iii. 14.15.) certainly, the
wrath of man, works not the righteousness of God. (James i. 20.21.) Seeing we
must answer to Jehovah for our conduct, and others cannot screen us from his
resentment, is it not rational that we should examine and judge for ourselves,
and call no man father on the earth, in this respect? and do not the sacred
Scriptures enjoin these things upon us? (John v. 39. 1 Corinthians x. 15.
Matthew xxiii. 9.) Now can it be with reason imagined, that almighty GOD
commands us to do thus, and yet in the mean time gives authority to any to
punish or kill us for doing it, and for complying with our own judgment in
matters purely religious, after the best enquiry we can make, or judgment we
can form respecting the meaning of his word? no surely! for if this be the
case, JEHOVAH commands contradictions, and his word is a snare; if we do not
examine it, and judge for ourselves, we sin; if we do, and through fear of men,
act contrary to our judgment and conscience we are dammed; and if we do not act
contrary to our consciences in some instances we are punished or killed. But
these consequences are absurd, blasphemous, and impossible; and therefore the
persecuting principle from which they proceed is false. Is not killing people
for GOD's sake, and all pains and punishments tending hereto, the abomination
of the church of Rome, that makes desolate? Memorable are these words of our
LORD to his disciples, (John xvi. 2.3.) yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think he does God service, but these things will they do unto
you, because they have not known the father, or me. Hereby our LORD shows the
vanity of pretending to promote religion by persecution, and that however
zealous and conscientious any are therein, it proceeds from ignorance of the
Father and the Son; either absolute or comparative, they that have a
considerable degree of acquaintance with CHRIST, must needs know, that he rules
by truth and love, and not by fire and sword: So that persecuting principles
and practice, instead of being a sign of eminence in religion as some pretend,
either prove a total want of it, or at least great weakness in it.

Is it decent or consistent for Protestants, who blame the church of Rome for
their cruelty and bloodshed, to imitate this Mother of Harlots in her murderous
wickedness, by propagating her bloody principles? if external FORCE be
necessary to promote RELIGION, it will necessarily follow, that the Popish
IMPLICIT FAITH is found doctrine, that KNOWLEDGE is dangerous, and IGNORANCE
the mother of devotion: because the less knowledge we have, the more easily we
can submit blindfold, to an absolute authority: but when any do so in matters
purely religious, they admit and obey another KING in CHRIST'S kingdom; and so
commence REBELS against his supreme authority; who is the only LORD, LAWGIVER,
and MASTER of his people, by preferring others before him, and setting up their
authority in opposition to his. (James iv. 12. Matthew xxiii. 10.) Hereby the
formal reason, or chief excellency of religious obedience, viz. a supreme
regard to CHRIST'S kingly power and commanding pleasure, is destroyed; and
consequently we cease to be the servants of GOD, and become the servants of
men, from whom we must look for our reward, (Galatians i. 10. Matthew vi. 2.)

IF external FORCE be necessary to promote RELIGION, then grievous pains and
DEATH itself, are necessary to be inflicted for this purpose; because the least
degree of punishment naturally leads to, and necessarily includes the greatest,
not only by reason of the different degrees of heinousness, attending different
errors in principle and conduct, but especially on account of the increasing
aggravations of persisting long therein; which is ever called by imposers, an
obstinate and rebellious opposition to authority, and therefore must be
punished in proportion, gradually, till it issues in death: Besides it should
be considered that more or less in the degree does not vary the kind: If the
lowest degree of temporal punishment be proper and necessary, on the account of
religion; the highest must be so, when the circumstances of the case require
it; and if the highest be bad, so by a necessary consequence is the lowest, for
the general kind includes all degrees.

FROM what has been said we may reasonably conclude, that according to the
persecuting plan, the Spanish Inquisition is the perfection of christianity; or
in other words, the most pious, worthy, and effectual method of promoting it
that has been yet discovered: O horrible! but I forbear lest humanity itself
should be shocked, and its tender resentments too much moved, at the sight of a
scene of such monstrous barbarities, as are a reproach to the human species, a
scandal to the name of man! And proceed to enquire, what can the iron argument
of force convince the mind of, but the weakness of that religion, which needs
such measures to support it; and the cruelty of those that use them. It may
indeed promote ignorance, falsehood, hypocrisy, and slavery, as among the
Spaniards and Portuguese; all which are detestable, and directly contrary to
the precepts and genius of the religon of JESUS, who commands us to search for
knowledge as for hid treasures, (Proverbs ii. 3.4.) to speak the truth in love,
(Ephesians iv. 15.) to be Israelites indeed in whom is no guile, (John i. 47.)
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith be has made us free, and to beware of
being the servants of men, (Galatians v. i. 1 Corinthians vii. 23.) In a word a
claim of power to persecute, really justifies all the bloodshed of the church
of Rome, manifestly tends to rob us of all our religious liberty at a stroke,
and to promote the entire ruin of the human race, seeing the various states and
communities, of which it is composed, whether Protestant, Papal, or Pagan,
have, as such, the same authority, and there is no infallible judge on either
side to determine the points in dispute. Farther, seeing it is iniquitous to
oppress our fellow creatures, for what is right; are not fallible persons who
know but in part, in danger of committing this iniquity, when they persecute
their brethren, even for matters of doubtful speculation? is it not absurd, yea
peculiarly so, for those who say they are infallible in principle to persecute
others on the supposition of their being infallible, or in other words,
certainly right? and yet complain of others, as guilty of scandalum magnatum,
who persecute them in their turn; as if they could be both fallible and
infallible at the same time, and in respect of the same things, and had a
monopoly of persecuting authority, a right to abuse all others that differ from
them, but in the mean time that no body can touch them without great iniquity:
O no! they are noli me, tangere, fallible infalibilities: but before we can
believe this extraordinary claim, they must produce their charter, the want of
which bigotry, or red hot zeal for a party of their own cast, and confident
assertions cannot supply. What woes did our Lord denounce upon the Pharisees,
that sect of separatists among the Jews, who trusted they were righteous, and
despised others, saying stand off, for I am holier than thou: they pretended
great veneration for dead saints, by building and garnishing their tombs, and
professing that had they lived then they would not have been accessory to their
blood: while, in the mean time, they persecuted living saints. For this the
LORD JESUS pronounces a woe upon them, calls them a generation of vipers, and
threatens them with the damnation of hell, Nor is it a hard task for hypocrites
to commend the truly pious that are dead or distant, because as the proverb is,
mortuus non mordet.
(Matthew xxiii. 29.34.) But the most convincing and consistent way of clearing
ourselves from any accession by imitation, to the sheding the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus, and of manifesting our abhorrence of the persecution of
deceased saints, is not to magnify to the stars, by partial panegyricks, the
fufferings of some of our own party and nation; while millions of as brave and
noble souls, of an elder date, long before the names that now divide the
protestants were known, who drank as deep as they of the bitter cup, are
ignobly passed by in profound silence: but by unlimited proportional love and
kindness to all, of every party and nation, and especially to those that love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity: though many of them differ from us in sentiment,
whom we should not forbid to cast out devils, because they don't follow us; for
none that do miracles in Christ's name, can lightly speak evil of him, and such
as are not against him, are for him. (Matthew ix. 38.40.) and by opposing the
principles and practice of persecution, in the present time universally, as
well as disapproving of it as extensively in the past: seeing every man,
considered as a man, has as good a right to religious liberty as another, it is
as bad for us to persecute others, of a different denomination, as for them to
persecute us.

AND seeing, as was before observed, the lowest degree of punishment on a
religious account, includes the highest; it is therefore a deceitful artifice
of persecutors to go about the bush, and abuse mankind with pretenses to
moderation, as if they did not dream of death at all in the matter; O no! they
only want to exercise some pious and wholesome severities, and then come to a
period: whereas the nature of their sanguinary scheme, in case the supposed
criminal persists, cannot admit of any mercy or any period, short of blood and
death, without the absurdity of oversetting itself and do not innumerable and
awful facts irrefragably prove, that death is the tendency and fruit thereof?
this persecutors themselves, who are men of intelligence, may easily upon
deliberate enquiry discern; which if they do, and yet deny or disguise, in
order to gull simple souls who are apt to believe every fair word, and induce
them to swallow their pernicious scheme; a scheme that beheld without a mask in
its natural deformity and dangerous consequences, would shock them, and make
them stick at the swallowing of this CAMEL. I say if any use this method, they
act a very hypocritical and base part; see Job xiii. 7. will you speak wickedly
for God, and talk deceitfully for him.

AND it is as hypocritical as irrational, to pretend we don't like severities,
and are not guilty of them, because we do not inflict them ourselves
immediately; though in the mean time, we believe it is the duty of others, of a
different station, to do this cruel drudgery for us, and at our motion; are
discontented with them, and murmur against them, as lukewarm in the cause of
GOD, the cause of truth, and of religion when they do it not: i. e. because
they have either more sense, more humanity, or more religion than ourselves,
all our pious pretenses about truth and reformation notwithstanding; the
Papists tell us, that their church is a merciful church, and sheds no blood;
but who can believe them, or how can they believe themselves? while they hold
the principles, that HERETICS should be put to DEATH, and while they convict
men of heresy, and deliver them up to the secular power, for that purpose;
though with a Judas like compliment, asking that mercy may be shown them, that
is (as the event proves) that they may be burnt; O hearts harder than adamant,
lost to all sense of candor and humanity! thus the adultress after her beastly
iniquity, wipeth her mouth, and says I have done no wickedness; (Proverbs xxx.
20.) thus Pilate, after consenting to the murder of our Lord, washed his hands
before the multitude, and said I am innocent of the blood of this just person,
see ye to it; (Matthew xxvii. 24.) but how vain, hypocritical, and hateful are
these shamms; seeing it is a dictate of reason and maxim in law, that
consenters, are agents; we may therefore with justice, apply to all such, the
words of GOD himself by the prophet Jeremiah, ii. 22. for though thou wash thee
with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me,
says the Lord GOD!

OUR LORD enjoins his disciples, (Matthew xvi. 6.) to take heed and beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees; that is, of their censorious, schismatical, and
immoral persecuting doctrine, which has effects upon men's minds, like those of
leaven upon dough; puffs them up with pride of their own seize, sours
them with prejudices against their brethren, and has because of its
agreeableness to the enmity, pride, and sloth of human nature, in its present
state, a tendency to spread far and wide. Our LORD and his apostles did not
think it proper to keep pace with those masters of ceremonies and canonical
obedience; who regarded show more than substance, the form more than the power,
and the means more than the end; who instead of preferring great things to
small, preferred small to great, (Matthew xxiii. 24.) and gloried in a religion
consisting chiefly in ill nature and formalities. Hence it is that these men
had the assurance to arraign and condemn the most perfect example of unsullied
innocence, of disinterested and consummate goodness and holiness, in the life
of our Savior, that ever the creation saw. With great pretense and show of
order, orthodoxy, and piety, and with equal prejudice they censured our LORD as
erroneous, lax, and impious, because he did not observe to their mind, the
traditions of their fathers, which they were as zealous for, as Saul before
conviction, eat without washing his hands, freely conversed with publicans and
sinners, and did not conform to their ceremonious observance of the
Sabbath Day; and perceiving that his miraculous works put honor on his person,
and gave weight and influence to his ministry, both which made them uneasy: in
order to remove these effects, they scandalize the cause, It is a just maxim in
philosophy that when the cause is removed the effect ceases: sablata causa
tolluatur, this the Pharisees understood well.
and maliciously ascribe some of the most glorious and beneficent works that
ever the sun beheld, to the most base and malignant spirit, the Devil, the
prince of Devils; as if Beelzebub had forgot his implacable and native spite
against the human race, and by some strange and sudden metamorphosis, had
commenced their kindest friend and most liberal benefactor; O the degeneracy of
human nature! O the infatuating power of envy, after which the spirit of
apostate transgressors lusts! if the Pharisees had ascribed their opposition of
the works of CHRIST, to a devil in themselves, ENVY (probably) influenced by
Satan and self, they would have told the truth. Some of their cavils against
our LORD were plausible and specious, but it is not all gold that glistens,
though the doctrines of truth and holiness may be strangely darkened by artful
sophisters, through their false colorings; yet wisdom will be justified by her
children, it is to be hoped they will see through the disguise.

OUR LORD in his own defense, against the aforesaid pretexts, observes, that
they made the commandment of God of none effect through their traditions, (Mark
vii. 13.) for all their high pretenses to truth, as if they were the only
keepers of that cabinet they held such errors, as destroyed the end of all
truth, namely holiness, (John xvii. 17.) by cancelling the rule of it, the law
of GOD: where this is not, the apostie Paul assures us, there is no
transgression, (Romans iv. 15.) or sin, which is a transgression of the law, as
the apostle John declares, (1 John iii. 4.) and of consequence no holiness,
which must be a conformity to the law, because it is the contrary of sin.
Nothing can neither be conformed to, or transgressed; and thus it appears, that
instead of high advances in religion, they destroyed its substance and scope,
by making void the moral law! Farther, our LORD in his defense observes, that
he conversed with publicans and sinners not as a companion but as a physician,
(Matthew ix. 12.) advises them to learn what that means, that the almighty
would have mercy, rather than sacrifice, (Matthew ix. 12.13.) and reasons with
them, that if he cast out devils, by the prince of devils, the kingdom of Satan
would be divided against itself, and of consequence destroyed, but that if by
the spirit of God, he cast out devils, the kingdom of God in its power, was
come among them, which it would be exceeding sinful and dangerous to oppose;
(Matthew xii. 24.33.) the sum of our LORD's argument is this, that seeing the
support of the devils kingdom, like that of other kingdoms, and states, depends
upon the union and harmony of its rulers and subjects, which the needless use
of force has a tendency to mar and interrupt, it is therefore absurd to imagine
that so wise a spirit as Satan is, (in the matters that concern his dominion)
should be guilty of it, in forcibly casting out inferior demons. How weak
soever some professors of christianity are in imagining that the kingdom of
CHRIST will be promoted by needless contentions, divisions, and force, Satan
has more sagacity than to think so of his own, and more regard to it, than to
act on such a silly plan, which is as contrary to the just maxims of government
as it is to common sense! But in addition to the suffrage of scripture and
reason, give me leave to observe, that the ancient fathers have declared, in
strong terms, against all methods of FORCE, in the propagation of religion.
Tertulian says, it is not the business of religion to force religion.
Laetantius observes, that there is no need of force, because religion cannot be
forced. It is the property of sincere religion, says Athanasins, not to force
but to persuade. This eminent man was called by many of the fathers, Adamas
Ecclesiae, the adamant of the church, because of his firm adherence to the
doctrine of the trinity, in a time of grievous persecution by the heretical
Arians.
The GOD of the universe says Hilarie, does not need a forced obedience, nor
require a constrained confession. It is more equitable to persuade than compel,
and more decent for us, says Gregory Nazianzen. The christian religion says
Arnobius is content with its own strength, and rests on the foundation of truth.

Religion is one thing, and human society is another; the former is spiritual,
and the latter temporal, and therefore spiritual means are suited in nature to
the one, and temporal to the other: the end of religious society is eternal
happiness, but the end of civil is the peace and safety of the state; these
ends being different, the means conducing to them must be so likewise; it is no
matter to the state, whether its laws be obeyed freely or not, if they be but
obeyed, it is enough; now such a kind of obedience may be effected by the fear
of punishment and death; but the latter proceeding from love and choice, cannot
be forced by outward violence, and therefore any attempt of this kind is sinful
and vain.

BUT PERSECUTORS plead in their vindication, the severities of the Jewish
economy, not considering that that state was a Theocracy, God was their king
in a civil sense; their judicial or civil laws were peculiar to themselves,
suited to the present circumstances of their nation, and in some instances
impracticable by others. Idolatry being made capital by a fundamental maxim of
their political constitution, was rebellion against their king, and treason
against their state, and consequently was as such punished: Now to suppose that
their example obliges other nations, who are not in their extraordinary
circumstances, to do as they did, or justify them in it, is unreasonable and
absurd. Doctor Leland in answer to Chubb's objection, against the justice of
the Jewish law of putting idolaters to death, justly observes, that it is no
ways inconsistant with GOD's universal care and providence toward mankind, to
make extraordinary discoveries of his will to particular persons, or to a
people, -- and to establish a constitution among them, the fundamental
principle of which, is the acknowledgment and adoration of the one living and
true GOD, in opposition to all idolatry; -- and to make this the principal
condition, on which the national privileges and benefits are suspended, in
which case whosoever was guilty of idolatry in that peculiar constitution, was
justly obnoxious to the penalties inflicted upon the enemies and subverters of
the community. But where did ever Jehovah form such a civil constitution but
among the Jews? and where is the justice of executing its capital and penal
sanction, where the constitution itself does not exist? Can idolatry be
rebellion against GOD considered as the king of a nation, (in a civil sense)
where he is not king (in said sense?) Or has any nation power to make it what
it is not, or authority to punish it for what it is not? the former is as
impossible as the latter is unjust. Or can a proper authority be derived
without GOD, and against reason? no certainly! Now when a proper authority is
wanting, and there is a difference in important circumstances, how unreasonable
and unrighteous is the imitation? the church is not now blended with the
commonwealth, is not in a state of childhood, bondage, and terror, not under
the elements of the world, (Galatians iv. 1.3.) not under the law of a carnal
commandment, (Hebrews vii. 16.) not under carnal ordinances imposed till the
time of reformation; (Hebrews ix, 10.) but under a mild and gentle
dispensation. (Hebrews xii. 18.) We are not come to the mount that might be
touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, darkness, and tempest,
which made even a Moses quake; but to mount Zion, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than the blood of Abel: Christ's yoke is
easy, and his burden light, (Matthew xi. 30.) he has redeemed his people that
were under the law, under bondage, and given them the Adoption of sons, and the
spirit of adoption, so that they are no more servants, but sons. (Galatians iv.
5.7.) He has given them religious liberty, and commands them to stand fast in
it, and not to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. (Galatians v. 1.)
And hence it appears that the inflicting temporal penalties on account of
religion, even materially (though not formally, or considered as such) instead
of promoting the reformation of the gospel church, judaizes her, robs her of
her liberty and comfort, makes her carnal, brings her back to a state of
infancy, bondage, and terror, from all which a good GOD has graciously
delivered her. Why then do any tempt God by putting a yoke upon the necks of the
disciples of Christ, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? (Acts
xv. 10.) and why do they boast of bondage and carnality as if it were a
glorious thing for spiritual persons to become carnal, for men to become
infants, and christians to turn Jews? as if the proper method to make progress
in religion was to go backward as far and as fast as we can? From such an odd
ill-natured reformation, the church of CHRIST has reason to pray to be
delivered: nor would its fondest votaries like well the close application of
their own severe doctrine to themselves, but perhaps make as loud an outcry as
their neighbors. If any of us or of our pious predecessors, have had the
misfortune to be mistaken in any point of truth or duty, seeing we as
protestants, profess that we are fallible and imperfect, and that we ought to
grow in divine knowledge; if a gracious GOD should discover to us the well
meant mistake, I hope none of us for the sake of self consistency in what is
wrong, bigotry to a party, the name of orthodoxy, or false respect to our
worthy (though imperfect) predecessors, are determined to remain as ignorant as
we are, determined to resist the light, and not move a hairs breadth from our
juvenile raw notions, but to go through thick and thin to the death, though
against the remonstrances of scripture and reason; which is as inconsistent
with our profession, as dangerous, papal, and brutish. To boast of this, and be
afraid of the contrary, is to glory in our shame, and to be ashamed of our
glory.

THE religious liberty we now enjoy, under the mild and auspicious reign of our
gracious sovereign, is a very precious privilege which should inspire our minds
with the most grateful ardent sentiments and thanksgivings to GOD and man, for
their benignity and goodness; instead of ill-natured disloyal murmurings
against the state, for their justice and kindness, because others of different
religious sentiments and denominations, who have as men, as good a right to
liberty as we, enjoy it in common with us. O lamentable narrowness of soul!
which is as uncomfortable to us as criminal in itself, and unfriendly to
others. Were our minds possessed with just views of things, and our hearts with
a due degree of sincere affection to our brethren, we would rejoice in their
joy, and feel ourselves happy in their happiness; and in this generous and
truly noble temper of mind, the spirit of true religion much consists. (Romans
xii. 15. Romans xiv. 17.)

BUT because of the native horror and deformity that fit on the face of
persecuting principles, when viewed without a mask, therefore the promoters of
them, At least some of them.
with more art than honesty, either deny or disguise the charge: but for such,
who when religious liberty is enjoyed by all, In the British dominions
are industriously laboring to spread the pernicious principle of promoting
religion, considered as such, by external force, to pretend to clear themselves
of the guilt of persecution, or labor to elude the charge by the dint of
ambiguity and sophistry, is as vain as to attempt to make the same thing to
differ essentially from itself, or to wash an Ethiopian white.

THE glorious success of the gospel during the first three centuries, in
conquering multitudes to the faith of CHRIST, was not owing to narrow terms of
communion, or coercive measures; but under GOD to the holiness, brotherly love,
and patience of its preachers and professors. Tertullian speaks of their
numbers in his apology, in the following term, we have filled up all your
places, your towns, islands, forts, council-houses, camps, palace, senate,
market-house, we have left the temples only to you. The Pagan idolaters places
of worship.
Justin martyr once a famous Pagan philosopher, acknowledges that he was
induced to embrace christianity, by beholding the patient sufferings of the
martyrs. And in his apology has these words, respecting the gracious change
that the religion of JESUS wrought upon them; formerly says he, we delighted in
debauchery; now we love nothing but purity. We hated one another; but now we
pray for our enemies, and endeavor to convert our persecutors, that they may
live according to the precepts of Christ. To the same effect speaks Athenagoras
in his apology, whose words for the sake of brevity I omit. These apologies, my
brethren, were offered to the Roman Emperors, and are the most authentic
vouchers, of the reality of the facts to which they relate, that we can now
have from the christians; to which I might add the testimony even of Pagan
enemies, did the time admit. So conspicuous was brotherly love among the
primitive christians, that the heathens were astonished at it, and said, see
how the christians love one another! and so exemplary were their lives, that
even Julian, the apostate, commends them to the imitation of the Pagans. In his
letter to Arsarius, "but O! whether are fervent love to the brethren, and
substantial holiness fled away in the present times?"


THE Arabian imposter Mahomet, ingloriously spread his religion by FORCE, by
the SWORD; but the aforesaid prodig ous SPREAD of christanity through the Roman
empire, amongst all ranks and orders of men had the civil sword drawn against
it, and all sorts of temporal disadvantages and discouragements to grapple
with, during the dismal series of PAGAN PERSECUTIONS; all which it surmounted,
not by political stratagem, or external force, but by prayers and tears, which
are the arms of the church of CHRIST; by humility and holiness; by love to
their persecutors, as well as to each other; by an extraordinary willingness to
suffer any kind of torture for CHRIST's sake, and a patient enduring of them.
In the aforesaid solemn series, many thousands of christians were slain, diverse
of whom were persons of eminent dignity and endowments, natural, acquired, and
gracious; who with astonishing firmness and bravery of mind, triumphed over the
most cruel torments, their Pagan persecutors could invent and instict; and thus
their blood became the seed of the church, by which it grew and flourished;
which is a powerful argument of the excellency and divine authority of
christianity, which without the divine interposure and concurrence, would have
been long agone extinguished, by the combined policy and force of earth and
hell. The truth is, the blessed religion of the meek and lowly Jesus, has been
indeed promoted, by enduring persecution, but never by inflicting it. The
disciples of Christ should bear the cross, but where are they enjoined to lay a
cross upon others?

LET Pharisees, Pagans, Arians, Turks, Papists and others of the same stamp,
influenced by the same antichristian spirit, pride themselves in cruelty and
blood; boast of their zeal in knocking people on the head for God's sake, and
cramming their faith down their throats: but let the sincere followers of the
meek lamb of God, glory as the primitive christians did, only in the cross of
Christ! But here justice commands a pause, and constrains me to confess, to the
equal honor of the Turks, and scandal of the christian name, that the little
finger of some professors of the latter, has been heavier then the loins of the
former. The Turks allow some liberty of conscience, to those that are of
different professions and principles from themselves; but the Papists will
allow no liberty, will show no mercy to those that differ from them in
principle; but like some protestants that profess great zeal for religion, look
upon TOLERATION to be a great GRIEVANCE, and persist in their unhallowed zeal
and bloody tenets about traditions, ceremonies, and other small affairs
(comparatively) from age to age, without wavering. Tell it not in Goth, publish
it not in the streets of Askelon, least the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph! by such barbarous
severities, the beauty of Israel is slain in the high places: Worthy, pious,
and useful persons to the community, and what is still more, the loving spirit
of christianity are murdered, and one important argument of its divine
authority basely buried, by the rigid professors of it; as if the christian
religion was a scheme of fordid SLAVERY, unworthy of GOD to impose, and of men
to embrace; the very reverse of the law of nature, and humanity; but GOD
forbid! the religion of Jesus rightly understood, is a real, a valuable friend
to the law or nature, to liberty, and society, and has explained and enforced
them with greater clearness, argument, and pathos, then ever any other
institution did; and therefore is worthy of all acceptance, by every
intelligent being, who impartially examines its evidence, and duly considers
its nature and design. Such are its excellencies, harmony, and advantages to
mankind in all valuable respects, spiritual and temporal, personal and social,
that it stands in no need of the beggarly assistance of external force to
promote it. It is true, force is a weighty argument. Ay but it is to sense not
to reason: though it is as heavy as lead to the former, it is as light as a
feather to the latter; and therefore in one word, the persecuting scheme is
more fit for furies than men or any tenderness and benevolence to execute; and
more fit for asses meanly to couch to, than men of any enquiry and resolution.

But were there no examples of violence among the christians long since? I am
sorry I cannot do so much honor to christianity, as to answer in the negative.
The truth is, after the three first centuries, that golden age of the Church
expired; when Constantine the great, the emperor of the Romans, became a
christian, and with the richest profusion, and kindest intention, generously
advanced the christian Bishops to great wealth and dignity; diverse of them
became unchristian, yea, in some degree, antichristian and inhuman: they
degenerated from the primitive simplicity, humility, meekness, disinterested
holiness, and brotherly love of their proas predecessors; which were their
beauty and their strength; and sunk into the selfish, ambitious, and invidious
spirit of the world, and the god of it, who was a murderer from the beginning,
and fell by his boundless arrogance from the height of dignity and happiness,
into the depths of woe. Being intoxicated with grandeur and affluence, and
thirsting after dominion, they under the specious, but stale pretexts of zeal
for truth, order, and government, were guilty of such carnal contentions, and
that even about trides; guilty of such unsocial rudeness, and inhuman
severities, as made them instead of a comfort, a terror and torment to each
other, a reproach to themselves, an offense and derision to their enemies, a
scandal to their (professed) master, and a great obstruction to the progress of
his religion among mankind; concerning which, one as justly as witily observes,
that religion produced riches, but the daughter devoured the mother. Religio
peperit divitias, sed filia devoravit matrem. Quis talia fando, temperet a
lacrymis! Who, whose heart is not harder than adamant, can refrain from tears,
on so melancholy an occasion, so sable a scene! alas for the native enmity of
apostate mankind, against each other, the real but disguised source of all
unfriendly contentions, schisms, and persecutions! how deep is the depravity of
human nature, and how strong its proneness, ungratefully to abuse to GOD's
dishonor, its own and others prejudice, that prosperity and power it courts,
and to deny to others the liberty it desires, as well as to complain of what
itself inflicts! how awfully do grandeur and affluence eclipse, for a time, the
graces of the saints, (in general) through their mismanagement and corruption,
as well as destroy fools eternally? (Isaiah lvii. 17. Proverbs i. 32.) and
hence our LORD assures us, that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of GOD, (Matthew
xix. 24.) had this been spoken of the poor, it would have been easily and
generally believed, and earnestly attended to; but as it opposes a favorite
passion, few seem to believe or regard it. If we judge of men's sentiments and
dispositions by their speech and conduct, or as our LORD expresses it, of the
tree by its fruits, (Matthew xii. 33.) how difficult is it, to hold a full cup
even? The timber that without injury endures the storms of winter, sometimes
warps in the gentle heat of summer. Ah how is the gold become dim, and the most
fine gold changed? How is the glory departed from Israel? may not the sons of
violence of Inn^^l tribe^, with too much justice now upbraid many of the
professed followers of the meek, the lowly, the loving Lord Jesus, and say, art
thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? how art thou fallen
from Heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning? how art thou east down to the
ground, that did weaken the not ons! (Isaiah xiv. 10.12.) The principles of
candor, of justice, and a sincere regard to the churches of the Protestants,
induce me to make this farther apology, for their entertaining persecuting
principle in the beginning of the reformation, viz. that their attention was
otherways diverted by a multiplicity of important labors, and that science did
but then begin to dawn; and farther that these pious men had a mistaken notion
of the Jewish constitution, (which was a Theocrasy that no other nation ever
had) and imagined without foundation, that it gave the magistracy authority to
punish erroneous persons; propagate religion by the civil sword; this is a
melancholy blemish on the reformation from Popery, which brought great guilt,
inconsistency, and absurdity upon the Protestant body; Romans ii. 1. Wherefore
thou art inexcusable O man, whoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou
judge another thou condemnest thyself, for thou that judge do the same
things.

I speak this of my Protestant fathers and brethren, with much sorrow of heart,
and with many tears. It is in vain for any particular party of the Protestants
to deny the charge; the confessions of faith of all the national churches,
which put a sword in the magistrate's hand to punish error, and compel a
uniformity in religion by temporal pains and penalties, together with their
acting upon this plan, as appears by diverse awful facts, prove the charge. O
that my head were waters and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day
and night for the slain of the daughters of my people. (Jeremiah xxxi. 8)

THE truth is, the first reformers did many things well; they made a noble
stand against many important awful errors of the church of Rome, such as
idolatry, dependence on works in the articles of justification, and against
diverse superstitious and ridiculous ceremonies either of their own invention,
or which they borrowed from their Pagan neighbors, whom they as meanly as
inconsistently aped herein, though under the specious umbrage of christian
names.

THE reformers deserve commendation, for the great service they have done to
religion, by their bold and gallant opposition to the aforesaid abominations,
and others of the like kind, though enforced by all the artillery of the
church, in conjunction with the more formidable sword of the state; and for
their carrying on the reformation so far as they did; and we have great reason
to bless GOD while we live for the good they have done, and for their desires
that the reformation might be carried on still farther. They did not set up
themselves as an absolute standard. If any of their posterity have made this
wicked use of them and their labor, they are to blame for this, and not the
first reformers.

BUT it is notwithstanding matter of fact, that these worthy men have failed in
some things of great importance, especially in these, viz. that they did not
oppose persecution root and branch wherever, whenever, or by whomsoever it is
inflicted, whether Papist or Protestant, Jew, Turk, or Pagan; whether by the
church or state, or by both in conjunction; and likewise that they divided
among themselves, and made their churches separate parties by enclosures of
their own invention, or by making terms of communion that CHRIST never made;
whereby the body of CHRIST is rent in pieces, and several parties are set in
opposition to each other, who labor to promote their carnal factions, in the
carnal way of hatred, variance, strife, backbiting, and slander; by which the
interests of the grand enemy are promoted instead of the Mediators kingdom.

HEREIN we may, as in a glass, behold the imperfections of our forefathers, and
the folly of making them the absolute standards of our faith and practice, or
the plus ultra of our religion, as some bigots would have us; but, GOD forbid.
No, CHRIST is our master, and the Bible, the Bible is our rule! Let us, Sirs,
follow them so far as they followed CHRIST, but no farther; let us value and
imitate their excellencies, but in the mean time pity and avoid their
blemishes. As we should think soberly of ourselves, according as God has dealt
to every man the measure of faith; (Romans xii. 3.) so we should of others; let
us learn not to think of men above what is written, that no man be puffed up
for one against another; (1 Corinthians iv. 6.) My brethren have not the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, (James ii. 1.) We have no
master but CHRIST, nor should we own any other, for cursed is the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord, (Jeremiah xvii. 5.) Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that
take council but not of me, and that cover with a covering but not of my
spirit, that they may add sin to sin, that go down into Egypt, and have not
asked at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to
trust in the shadow of Egypt, therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your
shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. (Isaiah xxx. 1.2.3.
11. Chronicles xvi. 7.)

The IMPROVEMENT remains.
ARE Peacemakers blessed, and shall they be called the children of God? then by
the law of contraries, we may learn, that such are in a dangerous situation who
promote contention and division, who, instead of healing breaches, widen them,
and make new rents in the church of God, instead of covering the sin of their
brethren, needlessly expose and aggravate them, and perhaps add groundless
charges to them, which have a tendency to mar their usefulness and promote
recrimination and confusion; what contracted and distracted views of things
must such persons have, who prefer small things to great, minute points in
sentiment to brotherly love, and to the peace and union of Christ's kingdom!
who pretend to promote the good of the church, by that which directly tends to
her entire ruin; I mean unnecessary divisions; if we bite and devour one
another, we may expect to be consumed one of another. Church purity in respect
of doctrine and the power of piety are no doubt desirable and amiable, and
ought to be promoted and preserved, but how? not by methods of our devising,
but by the use of such only as divine wisdom has prescribed; a long tract of
time has fully proved, that human contrivances in matters of religion, however
well intended, have not answered their design. Let us therefore stand fast in
the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. When the zealous, but narrow
minded, and over forward disciples wanted to pluck up the tares, our Savior
forbid them, least they should do injury to the wheat, and ordered that both
should be suffered to grow together till the harvest, (Matthew xiii. 28. 30.)
Can church dividers with reason expect the approbation of Christ, or to be
accounted the children of God, who disobey his authority, and contradict his
example? No: we are on the contrary enjoined to mark those that cause divisions
and to avoid them, for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but
their own belly; and by good words and sair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple! (Romans xvi. 17.) for all their pretenses to superior piety and
orthodoxy, such as promote envying, strise and divisions are carnal, and walk
as men; men destitute of the principles of true goodness, such as glory in
their parties and factions, and say they are of Paul or of Apollos, are carnal,
who is Paul and who is Apollos? (1 Corinthians iii. 3.5.)

AND when such seperatists not only (practically) forbid those that cast out
devils, because they don't follow them, don't incline to be of their party, but
are grieved that others enjoy the liberty they themselves desire and posless,
and want to have the civil sword drawn against them, when with the disciples
they would have fire to come from heaven to consume them, they greatly heighten
their crimson impiety, by adding murder to schism! but let them hear at their
peril, the command and reproof of the great master of the church on this
occasion; Mark ix. 38.39.) And John answered him saying, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name and he solloweth not us, and we forbid him because be
follows not us; but Jesus said, forbid him not; for there is no man that
shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me; for be that
is not against us is on our part. See also Luke ix. 52.56. And he sent
messengers before his face, and they entered into a village of the Samaritans,
to make ready for him: and they did not receive him because his face was as
though be would go to Jerusalem; and when his disciples, James and John, saw
this, they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven
and consume them, even as Elias did; but be turned and rebuked them, and said
ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, for the son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives but to save them, Blesse^ Jesus how healing and merciful art
thou! how different is thy spirit from the temper of many who profess a
relation to thee!

IF there be no design of propagating persecuting principles, why is the
present toleration of the state in religious matters complained of by some
sectarians? a toleration which is agreeable to national churches, who through
mercy grow more and more moderate, and diverse among them, through increase of
light, abhor persecution in every form. This mildness which is so agreeable to
the temper of Christ himself, and the genius of his religion, seperatists with
equal ignorance, injustice and barbarity call lukewarmness in the cause of God,
as if zeal consisted in malice and murder, and the kingdom of God had changed
natures with that of the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth!

IF there be no design of propagating persecuting principles, why is the form
of covenanting by oath adopted under the gospel, in a time of religious
liberty, and urged upon societies without the concurrence of the state; while
in the mean time, the whole New Testament is overlooked, and the practice of
the christian church in the three first centuries past in silence?

IS not an Antimonian or Moravian faith, or rather sinful presumption,
consisting in a persuasion of our right to Christ and his benefits before our
union to him, as dangerous to the souls of men, as the principles of bigotry
and persecution are prejudicial to the peace and union of the church of Christ,
and to that loyalty and gratitude we owe to our gracious sovereign, and the
British state, for our present important privileges? from such a pretended
reformation, may the Lord deliver us: my sold come not into their secret, mine
honor be thou not united!

BUT on the contrary, how pleasant is it for brethren to dwell together in
unity and peace! this is like the precious ointment on the head of Aaron, that
ran down to the skirts of his garments, and diffused around an aromatic
fragrance! this is gentle, refreshing and fructifying, as the dew of Herman on
the mountains of Zion, where God commands the blessing, even life for evermore!
as union among the members of the natural body, is the foundation of their
sympathy with, and care for each other, and likewise or their mutual
nourishment, growth, strength, comfort, beauty, and usefulness; so is the union
of love, peace, and external fellowship, in the church of Christ; by this it is
a comfort to its friends and a terror to its enemies: in this situation how
goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thy tabernacles O Israel, who is this that
looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as
an army with banners. But the want of this, makes her the grief of her friends,
and the scorn of her foes!

THE truth is, a loving and pacifick temper breathes the very spirit and genius
of the religion of Jesus, is the distinguishing badge of his disciples, and an
eminent branch of that holiness without which no man shall see the Lord. This,
this by its gentle violence, its attractive charms, will do more to conquer the
most obstinate prejudices, and spread vital goodness, than the highest flights
of Pharisaical severity and unhallowed zeal about gnats, mint, annis, and
cumin. The great things of religion, the weightier matters of the law, wherein
we are happily agreed, should suffice to maintain mutual respect, and be an
enduring band of affection and union among us. Seeing these lesser differences
do not exclude persons from the love of our common Lord, they should not from
ours. Let us therefore receive one another as Christ received us. Whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule; let us mind the same
thing; and (...) in any thing we be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
thas unto you.

MY reverend fathers and brethren, permit me to excite you to bless God for the
union we are at present favored with, as a religious society; and to entreat
you to endeavor pro virili, to keep it in the bond of peace, by the sincere
and steady use of the means before mentioned; in this way we shall act becoming
the character of the ministers of the gospel of peace, and may expect our
master's blessing, and to be acknowledged and rewarded, as the genuine children
of the God of peace. God is not the author of consusion, but o peace, in all
the churches of the saints, and to this be has called us. Let us therefore,
whatever others do, follow after the things that make for peace, and things
wherewith we may edify one another. Let us seek peace, and ensure it. As peace
cannot be obtained, where it is lost, without much labor and pains; so neither
can it be preserved without them. We are all, both in respect of knowledge and
practice, imperfect creatures. We see but in part, and in many things offend
all. We are encompassed with many enemies and temptations, and converse with
such who are imperfect like ourselves; and therefore without watchfulness,
humility, candor, charity, condescension and forbearance, we can neither do
good in society, or get good by it. The accuser of the brethren, is continually
laboring to puff us up with pride as to ourselves, and leven us with prejudice
against them, on account of their infirmities and mistakes, real or imaginary,
that he may cause new schisms, which is his master plot, to wound the
Redeemer's honor and ^^terest. O what need then have we to be constantly on
our guard, to have our eye often upon our own ^^es, and to cry frequently to
God so to direct and assist us in the whole of our duty, that we may not be
suffered to give a wrong touch to his Ark, or decline in pure and fervent love
to our brethren!

BUT while we show lenity and forbearance to such as mistake in small and
doubtful matters, let us in the mean time beware that we betray not foundation
and important principles; for if so, our peace will be a confederacy against
truth, or a detestable neutrality and luke warmness in the cause of God. Let us
therefore maintain a constant testimony, especially against the corrupt and
dangerous tenets of the Socinians, Arians, Armenians and Antinomians, by an
inviolate adherence to that excellent system of divine truths contained in the
Westminster confession of faith and catechism, which we have adopted as the
confession of our faith, and for which we have reason to bless God to our
latest breath. It is awful and lamentable to see the contrary extremes that
obtain in our days, while some make not only the smallest points of truth, but
even doubtful facts of profane history, terms of their communion; others
pretend that to believe the divine authority of the holy scriptures, and that
Christ is the son of God and Savior of the world, are sufficient to communion;
while they in the mean time strenuously oppose the most important veritys, such
as the doctrine of the Trinity, the Godhead and satisfaction of Christ,
originel sin, justification by faith alone, through the imputed righteousness
of Christ and regeneration, by the supernatural agency of the holy spirit. But
what comfort or benefit can be expected in such a chaos of confusion, which
blends Papists and Protestants, Socinians, Arians, Armenians and Antimonians,
etc. in one hetrogenious body, in o^^ promiscuous crowd, although they be
divided sentiment, even in regard to the object of worship, a foundations of
hope. Is there any reason to expect (...) the religion of Jesus will be
propagated in its purity and power, when its grand peculiars are rejected, and
polished Paganism put in its place? No, surely. And is it reasonable to expect
that the church will be reformed or edified by a presumptuous faith, together
with the aforesaid schismatical narrowness, in respect to the terms of
communion, which much resembles that of the Pharisees and Donatists; a
narrowness which rejects the far greater part of Christ's body mystical,
confines his visible kingdom to a nut-shell, and forbids our joining, even
occasionally, with all that every where call on the name of the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, contrary to scripture, reason, the apostles creed, and our excellent
confession of faith, which speaks with equal beauty and catholicism on this
head. Certainly that scheme, which unnecessarily divides the church, tends to
destroy it. On this view of things, our zeal should awake; but let it be
directed by knowledge, and tempered with humility. Let us be valiant for the
truth; and to this end, let us speak in love, and exercise mercy in connection
with fidelity. Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect; be of good comfort; be
of one mind; live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
Amen. See the subjects of peace more largely handled in my Irenicum.


FINIS.

