THE JUSTICE AND POLICY OF TAXING THE AMERICAN COLONIES, IN GREAT BRITAIN,
CONSIDERED: Wherein is showed, That the Colonists are not a conquered People:
-- That they are constitutionally (...) to be taxed only by their own Consent:
-- And that the imposing a Stamp-Duty on the Colonists is as impolitic as it is
inconsistant with their Rights.

NON SIBI SED PATRIAE. BY MAURICE MOORE, ESQUIRE.

WILMINGTON, [NORTH-CAROLINA] Printed by ANDREW STEUART, and sold at his
Office, near the Exchange. M,DCC,LXV.

The Justice and Policy of Taxing the American Colonies in Great Britain,
considered.
WHETHER the Commons of England made up a part of the Saxon Wittingham Mote,
has been a subject of great dispute; and although this point has never been
fully determined, yet it seems to be agreed by the authority of two learned
writers, Spellman and Maddox.
that they were always called to attend it, whenever the exigencies of the
state made a tax necessary; without doubt, to make known their circumstances,
and to suggest to that assembly some mode of taxation that was likely to be the
least burdensome to them. This just and laudable practice prevailed 'til the
time of William the Conqueror, when that prince erected a new court or
parliament, of which the commons were no part, and changed the Allodial tenure
of the Saxons into the Feudal, and annexed certain rents or services to all his
grants, from which, together with fines and forfeitures, the crown was
abundantly supplied; it therefore seldom happened that any were taxed in this
court; but when it did, they were tallaged to one tenth part of their estate
only, and none but villeins were ever liable to be taxed at will.

This method of tallaging those who were subject to it, continued but for a few
reigns after the conquest, and then a regular parliament was established, which
consisted of the Superior and inferior Barons, Citizens and Burgesses, who it
is said, Ld. Coke.
at first sat together: But when they had formed themselves into distinct
houses, the representatives of the people laid claim to their ancient and
equitable right of taxing themselves and constituents, and have ever since,
with the greatest propriety and justice, enjoyed it.

From this slight view of the mode of imposing taxes for public benefit, so
long practiced in Great Britain, (in the course of which there has been no
other interruption, than that occasioned by the conquest) it is clearly to be
inferred, that the right of prescribing the measure and manner of raising all
taxes is a constitutional one, which was enjoyed by the ancestors of the
Colonists; and the present inhabitants of Great Britain, as early as they have
any knowledge of them from history, and has been handed down to them under the
influence of reason and justice, through a course of several hundred years.

Nothing can be more consistent with the rights and liberties of a free people,
than whenever the good of the community requires a part of the private property
of Individuals, that they should be allowed to give it in such manner and
proportions as their situation and circumstances can best afford; indeed they
cannot be free without it: for if any sublunary power in being, can deprive
them of part of their estate without their consent, the same power may take
away the whole; and if it appears to them to be a measure of justice, proscribe
'em into the bargain.

The inhabitants of the Colonies upon the Continent (other than those acquired
in the late war) have always thought, and I believe ever will think, all the
constitutional rights and liberties enjoyed in Great Britain, at the time they
departed from it, their Birthright, and that they brought them over with them
to America; among which, that of being taxed only by their own consent, is one
of the most essential.

It is certainly very natural, that those who transport themselves from one
country to another, should as well carry with them the Laws and Policy, as the
Customs and Manners of the country from whence they came. But it has been said
from the authority of a very learned Judge, Holt. Smith's case.
that the Colonies are conquered countries; and that therefore the law is what
the King pleases: but however learned and respectable the person might be who
gave that opinion, I shall not hesitate to declare that I think the subject was
not well considered, and that it was founded on no Law whatever. Puffendorff,
in speaking of the different forms of government, takes occasion of mentioning
two methods of treating the inhabitants of conquered countries: one is, when
the victor removes 'em to his own country, or gives them the same privileges
with his former subjects; the other is, when they are left to enjoy their
ancient seats, but entirely lose the sovereignty of the country. In this last
case, he says, they are subject to the conqueror; but is the circumstance of
any of the Colonies, other than those already excepted, similar to either of
these cases? They surely are not. The ancient inhabitants of the Colonies have
neither been removed to Great Britain, or left in possession of their lands;
nor did they ever submit to, or acknowledge themselves subject to any foreign
power upon earth, but have long since abandoned the country, and retired into
remote parts of America, where they are governed by their own laws and their
own magistrates. It therefore cannot be said with the least propriety, that the
laws which these Savages alone, had they staid in the country, would have been
liable to, as a vanquished people, are applicable to the present inhabitants of
the Colonies, who themselves, are the conquerors. The earth, the air and trees,
are by no means the object of any human laws whatsoever, otherwise than as they
bear respect to the concernments of men. It must then be the conquered people,
who are subject to the laws of the conqueror, and not the country. -- The
Colonists seem to stand on the same footing with those who leave their own
country, and settle themselves in a new one which was not inhabited before: If
they do, and I think it must appear so to any man who will give himself the
trouble of considering this subject, then there is the opinion of the same
learned Judge Holt. Blankard's case.
in favor of what I have advanced; which is that, the Colonists have brought
over with them every constitutional right, liberty and privilege; and if being
taxed only by their own consent is one of them, they cannot, with the least
degree of justice, be taxed by the British parliament, in which they are not
represented, no person in that assembly being authorized to signify their
consent: Few persons there, are acquainted with their circumstance, and perhaps
none know what mode of taxation would be least burdensome to them.

It has indeed pleased some of the honorable members of that august assembly
to say, that the Colonies are virtually represented in parliament; but this is
(...) doctrine which only tends to allow the Colonists a shadow of that
substance which they must ever be slaves without. It cannot surely be
consistent with British liberty, that any set of men should represent another,
detached from them in situation and interest, without the privity and consent
of the represented. The office of a representative is founded on choice, and is
intended for the benefit of the constituents: A representative is to act in
every respect as the persons who appointed him to that office would do, were
they themselves present: And has the members of the House of Commons, or any
of them, been chose by the Colonists to represent them? Has their conduct in
respect to the Stamp Duty been consistent with the interests of the Colonists?
or has that conduct been such as the the Colonists would have adopted, had
they been present in parliament? No surely: So far from it, there are very few
members of that assembly, who have ever been heard of in America. The Stamp
Duty is inconsistent with their interests, and the mode of imposing it,
destructive of their most essential rights and liberties. It is very fortunate
for the present members of parliament, that for all that can be done in the
Colonies, they have an estate for life in their office; for I believe I may
venture to say, that no Colonist in his senses, would ever desire to be again
represented by the same people.

To prove that the Colonists are within the meaning of the doctrine of virtual
representation, they have been compared to the inhabitants of several corporate
towns in England, to the East India company, the body of London merchants, to
the proprietors of the public funds, to women and children, and in short, to
all those who do not vote for the electing of members of parliament, who are
all said to be virtually represented: On the justice and truth of this
comparison entirely depends the decision of this question. It may therefore be
necessary to observe, that by the ancient English constitution, none were
actually represented in parliament, other than Shires, the Cinque Ports,
Cities, and Ancient Boroughs, and the elections for them were made by
freeholders, and those who held by free burgage tenure; all villeins,
copyholders, tenants in ancient demesne, and tenants of lords, were excluded
from electing or being elected: but at latest, in King John's time, a practice
obtained of making free boroughs by charter, by which means they became
entitled to send members to parliament, and it continued till the reign of King
Charles the Second, when the House of Commons voted the elections made by
virtue of that King's charters void, and so put a stop to the practice. From
hence it is evident that the right that those derive from their particular
species of property, peculiar franchises, and inhabitancy in particular places,
is not an exclusive one, because it either depends on that which may, through
the bounty of the crown, be extended, at least to its American subjects, or on
a certain species of property that may be bought and sold, and which the
Colonists are capable of possessing in any part of the King's dominions. If the
right of being actually represented in parliament, is constitutionally annexed
to freehold estate, the American freeholders can with no more justice be
deprived of it* than they may of their freeholds. And the power of
dispossessing them of either, cannot, from the nature of the British
constitution, (which is formed on the foundation of securing to every
individual his right, liberty and property) be lodged with any other persons in
being, than themselves: The acknowledging them to have a right of being taxed
only by their own consent, is yielding them that from which they never can
derive the least advantage, while ever that of actually choosing their own
representatives, is withheld from them.

The notion of virtual representation, may, for all I know, be consistent
enough, while it is confined to Great Britain only; its inhabitants intimately
reside together; the interest and circumstance of those who do not vote for
representatives, are the same with those that do; and are equally well known
to, and understood by such representatives. It cannot then be imagined, that
the virtually represented in Great Britain, can ever be subject to any
imposition, that will not be extended to, and equally affecting to the electors
of members of parliament: And though certain corporate towns, the East India
company, the body of London merchants, proprietors of public funds, the monied
interest, and women, are not respectively as such, actually represented in
parliament; yet many of the members of them (women excepted) are entitled to
vote for representatives; and if they were not, the influence they, and
particularly women (through whose means votes are often obtained) must
necessarily have, from their intimate acquaintance and connection with the
electors, is such as must render the choice in a great measure agreeable to
them. But has the Colonies any of these advantages? They certainly have not:
They live above a thousand leagues from Great Britain; their interest and
circumstance are not similar to those of the British inhabitants; nor have they
been well considered or understood by the British parliament. The Colonists
have suffered many impositions, as may be seen by the several acts of trade
which have been borne by them alone, and which no otherwise affected the
electors of members of parliament, than as they were obliged to receive the
profit arising from them. The Colonists cannot have the least influence either
with the electors or elected, they are almost unknown to either of them, unless
as mere vehicles of trade; in which light indeed they have been long known and
considered.

If those who have been for bringing the Colonies within the meaning of virtual
representation, by comparing them to certain corporate towns and persons in
England, had been pleased to mention why those places and people are virtually
represented in parliament, they must at the same time have proved that there is
no similitude between them and the Colonies; for all these places lay, and body
of men reside in, some county or other of Great Britain; and though nine tenths
of the inhabitants of any county should not be entitled to vote at an election,
yet are they a part of that county, and as such, may be virtually represented
by those who have been elected to represent the whole county: But here the
virtually represented know their representatives, and may, indiscriminately
with the freeholders, at any time, instruct them what part to act in cases of
importance: But I should be glad to be informed, in what county in England the
Colonies are situated? If in no one at all; who are their particular virtual
representatives? To say that they are represented by the whole body of the
House of Commons, will be to leave them without that advantage of giving their
representatives occasional instructions, which the virtually represented in
England have; for it cannot be imagined, that the conduct of the House of
Commons can ever be subject to the direction of the Colonists. The same reason
then why certain persons in England (who have been excluded from voting at
elections, merely for convenience) may be virtually represented in parliament,
does not hold good in respect of the Colonies; I therefore conclude that they
cannot be represented in the same manner: But if it should be still insisted
upon, that they are, I would then humbly propose, that the Colonies be divided
into five hundred and fifty-eight districts, and that each of them be numbered;
that for the future, all writs of election in England, shall direct the voters
to choose a person to sit and vote in parliament as real representative of the
county, city, or borough, for which such writ shall be issued; and as virtual
representative of the five hundred and fifty-eighth part of the Colonies of
such a number; and that each district be made acquainted with its particular
virtual representative. By this means the Colonists will know, to whom they are
to direct their instructions; and will so far be upon a footing with the
virtually represented in Great Britain. That the notion of the Colonists being
virtually represented in parliament, is of late date, is evident from the
numberless acts of oppression and tyranny that have been practiced upon them by
officers of the crown commissioned in England, and sent over to America, which
have been repeatedly made known, and complained of in England; and whenever it
has happened that they were conveyed to the Royal Ear in Council, it has
constantly been through the channel of the Board of Trade: But in no one
instance, that I know of, did ever the British parliament represent to the
crown any grievances felt only in the Colonies, or make application to the
Sovereign for a redress of them, and as a grand inquest for the whole kingdom,
(had they thought themselves the representatives of the Colonies) they would
never have negligently passed over a duty which was indispensibly incumbent
upon them. And that the British parliament does take cognizance of such
subjects, when they happen in Great Britain, is undeniably true; and would it
not be want of humanity, to suppose that they have always considered themselves
as the representatives of the Colonies, and yet have ever neglected to render
them an essential service, to which all those they represent, are indisputably
entitled. To the inhabitants of the Colonies I have been speaking of, the crown
has been graciously pleased to grant respectively the means of exercising their
constitutional rights, I have now before me a Charter given by King Charles the
Second to the province of Carolina, and observe, one of the principal objects
of this Charter, was to encourage the settlement of that colony, in which few
resided at the time it was granted; nor was it then likely that many would
leave their native country, wherein they enjoyed every right and liberty an
excellent constitution could afford, and come over to the deserts of America,
unless by some means or other, an enjoyment of those rights and liberties in
Carolina, could be secured to them and their posterity: One of these was, to be
taxed only by their own consent, signified in parliament by representatives
actually chosen by themselves; and as the remote situation of Carolina from
Great Britain, rendered it imposible for those who should inhabit that
province, to run over to England whenever a new parliament was to be summoned.
-- King Charles thought proper to grant, that an assembly should be called and
established by the proprietors, and that the freemen of Carolina, should
consent, by themselves, or deputies in that assembly, to all laws whatsoever,
that might respect the public state of the whole province or territory, or of
any distinct or particular county. And had the crown considered the Colonists
as being virtually represented in parliament, such a grant would have been
extremely absurd; for no set of people can be represented at one time in two
distinct and independent assemblies, which may counteract each other: This
might be to make the represented grant and refuse in one instant the same
thing, which is impossible, from the nature of the human mind. That it is a
matter entirely new in England, further appears, from the constant and repeated
applications that have been made by the Crown in the course of the last war, to
the assemblies in the Colonies, for supplies; which, if the British parliament
could have given, might as easily have been asked for in England; and in all
probability, would have been much more liberally granted; but the parliament
had not then imagined themselves the representatives of the Colonists; if they
had, would they not have interposed and asserted their right of taxing their
constituents? more especially, as the poverty of the Colonists often obliged
them to grant much less than the Crown required, and the burden became
proportionably heavier in Great Britain, as it was lighter in America; would
they not have acquainted the King that they were the Colony representatives,
and that the Colonists might be much more copiously taxed in parliament, than
it was likely they would choose to be, if their consent was to be asked in
their own provincial assemblies? Without doubt they would; but the truth is,
the notion of their being virtually represented, had not then an existence, but
has been since introduced, to cover the shackles which have been prepared for
the Colonists in their present state of inability, by those, who being wholly
attentive to themselves, forget that the Colonists are their fellow subjects;
that they were born free, and are entitled to every British constitutional
right and liberty, as well as themselves; or that to do them injustice, is as
criminal, as to deal unjustly with those they really represent. To impose a Tax
on the Colonies, in the British parliament, appears to me, to be a measure
almost as impolitic, as it is inconsistent with the rights of the Colonists;
for as they are unalterably of opinion, that such an imposition is no less
arbitrary than oppressive, it will by degrees alienate their affections from
the Mother Country; the seeds of discontent will be sowed in the Colonies, and
children will be taught to hate the name of those who have enslaved their
country; the principles of disaffection will increase with their years, and the
spirit of rebellion grow formidable with their numbers; and in the course of a
century or two, it will cost Great Britain more to keep them in their state of
subjection, than all the profits arising from them, will pay: And if it did
not, the story of Julius Caesar, is enough to show that there is danger in a
standing army abroad.

The Stamp Duty is itself a burden too great for the circumstances of the
Colonies to bear, considering the many restrictions that have been put upon
their trade, which are at present rigorously enforced throughout America: It
will occasion a discontinuance of industry, and must in the end, reduce them to
a state of beggary; they will no longer be able to purchase the manufactures of
the Mother Country, or furnish her with materials for making new ones. Great
Britain then loses a trade, from which she has derived her greatest opulence
and dignity, and this too by insisting on a measure destructive of the peace
and happiness of many thousands of as loyal subjects as any the King has. Can
this be consistent with the wisdom and humanity of a British parliament? I
think it cannot. The act imposing a Stamp Duty, will surely be repealed, as
soon its consequences are well considered. I am persuaded, the more closely
united the Mother Country and the Colonies are, the happier it will be for
both; but such an union will never take effect, but upon a foundation of
equality: They must be upon such a footing, as that each may advance the
other's interest, while he labors for his own. A very sensible and elegant
writer CATO's Letters.
in speaking of Colonies, has observed that, It is not to be hoped, in the
corrupt state of human nature, that any naton will be subject to another, any
longer than it finds its own account in it, and cannot help itself. Every man's
first thought will be for himself and his own interest; and he will not be long
to seek for arguments to justify his being so, when he knows how to attain what
he proposes. Men will think it hard to work, toil, and run hazards, for the
advantage of others, any longer than they find their own interest in it; and
especially for those who use them ill: All nature points out that course. No
creature sucks the teats of their dams, longer than they can draw milk from
thence, or can provide themselves with better food; nor will any country
continue their subjection to another, only because their great grand-mothers
were acquainted. This is the course of human affairs; and all wise states will
always have it before their eyes. They will well consider, therefore, how to
preserve the advantages arising from Colonies, and avoid the evil. And I
conceive that there can be but two ways in nature to hinder them from throwing
off their dependence; one to keep it out of their power, and the other out of
their will. The first must be by force, and the latter by using them well, and
keeping them employed in such productions, and making such manufactures as will
support themselves and families comfortably, and procure them wealth too; or at
least, not prejudice their Mother Country. -- Force can never be used
effectually to answer the end, without destroying the Colonies themselves.
Liberty and Encouragement are necessary to carry people thither; and violence
will hinder both, etc. -- I do not pretend to be politician enough to point out
the methods that will most effectually secure the dependency of the Colonies;
but I am as much convinced, that just and equitable ones may be discovered and
pursued, as I am, that force and oppression will one day or other, produce a
contrary effect. It would be no injustice that the Colonies should bear a
proportionable part of the heavy expense that has been incurred in the course
of the late war; and I am persuaded, that no man of sense in the Colonies would
oppse it; but they should be allowed to consent to it, according to their
constitutional right, in their own provincial assemblies, where they are really
represented: And in estimating such proportion of expense, their number,
circumstance, and the restrictions on their trade, should be considered: But if
the British parliament will insist on taxing the Colonists, as their virtual
representatives, then are they stripped of that constitutional right on which
their liberty and property depends, and reduced to the most abject state of
slavery: A situation, in which, it is very unnatural to think, a Mother can
take pleasure in viewing her Children.

END.
ERRATA. In p. 4 l. 23 for proportions, read portions.


