Mr. Buell's Narrative OF THE Work of GOD, AT East-Hampton, 1764.

A Faithful NARRATIVE OF THE Remarkable Revival of Religion, IN THE
Congregation of East-Hampton, on Long Island. In the Year of our Lord 1764.
WITH Some Reflections.

By SAMUEL BUELL, A. M. Minister of the Gospel there.

Psalm. xxvi. 7. That I may publish with the Voice of Thanksgiving, and tell of
all thy wondrous Works.

Psalm.clxv. 4. One Generation shall praise thy Works to another, and shall
declare thy mighty Acts.

Psalm. cii. 18. This shall be written for the Generation to come.

1 Thessalonians. i. 7, 8. For from you sounded out the Word of the Lord.

NEW YORK: Printed by SAMUEL BROWN, at the Foot of Pot-Baker's Hill, between
the New Dutch-Church and Fly-Market, 1766.

To the Flock of the Lord Jesus, IN East-Hampton, Under my Pastoral Care
Dearly Beloved,
THE following Narrative made public by the Press, to others in general, is
dedicated to you in particular. It Is now about Twenty Years, since I first
began to minister to you in divine Things: During which Space of Time (through
the Goodness of God) I have not been prevented by Indisposition, from Preaching
to you, so much as one Sabbath. What my Labors have been, and what the Success
of them, is better known to you, than to others. I have great Reason to cry
out, My Leaness! My Leaness! At the same Time in the View of what God has
wrought, and is effecting by the late and present plentiful Effusion of his
blessed Spirit, I would join with you, in undissembled Praises, unto him, whose
Mercy endures for ever, that the Word of his Truth, has been so prosperous,
in the Day of his Power. Unless the Lord in a very unusual Manner continues to
pour out his Spirit upon us, it is highly probable, that some of you, who have
had only superficial Awakenings; and some others, who have had more powerful
Convictions; together with such as may have had only counterfeit Conversions,
not having the Root of Grace within, will by and by lose your serious
Impressions, and, when Temptations and Trials come, return to Sio and Folly,
with additional Hardness of Heart; and some of you become notorious for
Wickedness, Satan's Re-Posession being seven fold. Mean while the secure and
wicked World looking on as pleased, will speak reproachfuly of the Lord's Work
among us, take Occasion to justify their Infidelity, and increase their
Prejudices against Religion, it may be to their eternal Ruin. Consequences
sufficiently shocking, to make the many pious Walkers with God among us, (who
will scarce be mentioned by the wicked World) even tremble, while they pray to,
rejoice in their God, and praise Him! Alas! For you that remain Christless and
Graceless in such a Day as this! My Heart bleeds within me, in the View of the
perishing State of your precious Souls! Upon the dreadful Supposition, you
finally go down to the Pit of outer Darkness, your eternal Misery will be
immensely aggravated, by the Light of this Day! In those gloomy Regions of
unutterable eternal Horror and Despair, it will be a Soulsinking
Soul-tormenting Reflection, that in your Probation-day, the Light of Life was
offered; but you chose the Darkness of Death. Infinitely shocking Thought! In
the Bowels of Jesus, I once more beseech you all, to view the spirituality and
Extent of God's holy Law, and bow to sovereign Mercy, and give the infinitely
ever-gracious THREE, all the Glory of your Salvation to all Eternity!
Relinquish every Rival of Jesus, and his finished Salvation: Forsake all, and
possess all, -- give up all, and enjoy all, for ever. -- As to those of you,
who entertain Hopes, (amidst your Fears) that you have passed from Death to
Life, as you aim high, and act for Eternity, examine yourselves with accurate
and impartial Scrutiny. Don't dare to presume, your State is safe, because you
have had legal Terrors, and passed out of deep Distress, into high Joys; unless
you experience a Renovation of Nature, followed with Newness of Life, and a
Course of vital practical Holiness. May all of you, who are verily new born,
walk with God, and become Imitators of him, as dear Children. Your Duty and
your Happiness is inseperably connected. I cannot conceive of two Kinds of
Happiness in God's Universe; there is none different from, and much less
opposite to, his own. The reverse is absolute Error, and certain Misery. God's
infinite Blessedness arises from his Love to himself, the Propension of his
Will to his own Glory, and the delightful View and Enjoyment of his own
infinite Excellencies. Perfectly knowing that He has in himself, an infinite
Fullness of all amiable Perfection and Goodness, He must needs primarily,
chiefly and infinitely love Himself, having an everlasting Sabbatism,
complacency, and infinite Delight in himself, enjoying himself, in an
everlasting NOW, making his own Glory his last End, in all his Designs and
Operations. Those who walk with God, and are Imitators of him, as enlightened
by the Holy Spirit, and sanctified, according to their infinitely inferior and
disproportionate Measure, see and know there is such an infinite Fullness of
amiable Perfection and Excellence in God, that it is infinitely fit and
reasonable they should love Him superlatively, delight in Him supremely, and
act with an ultimate View to his Glory, on Account of his being what he is in
Himself: And as a Fruit of divine Influence and Grace, thus they do, and thus
they give Glory to the triune God, and begin to possess substantial
Blessedness. For thus to know, love, enjoy, and glorify God, as our chief Good
and last End, is not only our Duty, our Way to Happiness, and an Evidence, and
an Effect of Holiness; but it is truly our Holiness it self, and realy our
Happiness: For in Proportion thereto is our Sanctification increased and
carried on, and shall be consumate and triumphant, and Holiness thus completed,
will be, our eternal Blessedness. Mean while, by such a Walk, we dwell in God,
and dwell in Love, and the God of Love, dwells in us by his Spirit of Love. The
Authority and Glory of God the Father, the Honor of Christ and the Eternal
Spirit, the Interest of Religion the Good of Others, your own Comfort, and all
possible infinite Obligations, require that you thus walk with God, and become
constant Imitators of Him. As all depends upon divine Influence, therefore,
Quench not the Spirit: Grieve not the Holy Spirit. Multitudes of the Lord's
People have heard of his good Work among you, and upon hearing have rejoiced,
and Glorified God in you. By Faith abide in Christ, so shall you bear much
Fruit, and so will your heavenly Father be glorified. While you have seen and
known such marvelous Effects of God's Word in his House, how often have you
drawn this Conclusion, Surely, "the Lord is in this Place"! Surely "his Word is
good; his Ways are right, and the Just shall walk in them." No doubt Satan is
enraged, to behold such Spoil of his Goods and will endeavor to disgrace and
throw an Odium upon this good Work. Histories will inform, that he has always
attempted to obscure the Glory, and obstruct the Progress of the Lord's Work.
Be not ignorant of his Devices. Watch against and resist his Temptations, as
well as your inherent Corruptions, in the Strength of the Lord. Watch against
spiritual Pride, as the first born of Hell, and the very image of the Devil.
Take Heed left there be in you an evil Heart of Unbelief in departing from the
living God. Be dead to the Love of the Honors, Profits and Pleasures of this
Life; which are the World's Trinity, but the Bane of the Life and reigning Love
of God in the Soul. Constantly eye eternal Things, and make them the Grand
terminating Objects of your Faith, and be ever under their governing Influence
in your Lives. Watch to perform the respective Duties of your Stations, in
their Number, Time and Order, and evangelically as to their Manner. Live in
Love as Disciples of Jesus; make Choice of each others Company, as fearing God,
and let your Conversation be spiritual. Do all you can, in your proper Places,
to engage others to go with you to Heaven. Love your Bibles, and your Closets,
family Religion; private praying Meetings; and public Ordinances: Rest not
without meeting with the God of Ordinances in them. Watch against Formality,
and Legality, as the grand Rivals of powerful Christianity. Be continually
looking into, and diving deeper and deeper in the boundless Ocean of the
Wonders of redeeming Love and Grace, appearing in the whole Economy of your
eternal Salvation: That Self-abasing, Self-abhorring, Soul-humbling, God
exalting, Christ extolling, Spirit magnifying, free Grace adoring Thoughts, may
abound continually, in all their mighty Force, in your Hearts. Keep up a
perpetual Correspondency with God, by ejaculatory Prayer and Praise. Let the
Glory and Love of God, inspire your Souls with unseigned Sorrow for, and Hatred
against all Sin. Think no more of real Merit in your best Frames, and Duties,
than in your worst Sins. Always go to God, as infinitely vile unworthy Sinners,
constantly making Use of Jesus the Mediator, living by Faith upon his Law
fulfilling Righteousness, the Sufficiency of his Merit and Grace. Rest in no
present Seize, but seek progressive Holiness, as the Way to have Love
perfected, slavish Fear ejected, full Assurance obtained, and preserved, and
growing divine Comforts multiplied. As having nothing, live constantly by
Faith, upon the Word, Promises, and Oath of JEHOVAH your GOD, and let it be the
Glory of your Souls, to glory only, fully and forever in Him. As Inspiration,
and Expiration, the Holy Spirit's breathing into, and the Soul's breathing out
after God, is the Life and Spirit of real Religion, constantly observe the Holy
Spirit's Accesses and Approaches, his Recesses and Withdraws, and by each learn
Dependence upon his Influence and Efficiency. As in the View of your spiritual
Poverty, Inability and Self-emtiness, seek to be filled with the Holy Spirit,
that you may see more clearly, believe stronger, love more fervently, hope more
steadily, war more successfully, obey more cheerfully, and long more ardently
for absolute Perfection. Believe the Promises and pray incessently for
plentiful Effusions of the Holy Spirit upon the Churches of Christ, and upon a
World perishing for want of divine Light and Influence: Perishing around you by
Thousands and Millions, not for want of a finished Salvation, as to meritorious
Impetration or Procurement; but for want of effectual Application by the Holy
Spirit. By what you have seen, the Lord has taught you, how easy it is for
Him, with one Turn of his Hand, with one Word of his Mouth to awaken whole
Countries of stuped and sleeping Sinners, and kindle divine Life in their
Souls. The Lord's Work will not stop thus, "there is the Sound of abundance of
Rain," in Answer to Prayer, the heavenly Influences will still be descending in
immense Plenty: The Name and Fame of Jesus. and his Salvation, shall be defused
through all Tribes and Ranks of Mankind, and whole Nations shall be new born in
one glorious Day of Divine Influence: And the ancient Decrees will bring forth
in their immortal Fullness of Blessings, and the ample Promises will unfold
themselves, in their all-surprising and all-infinite Glories, in the public
Sight of Heaven and Earth. "Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that He
would thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest." Laborers filled with the Holy
Spirit, that may prove the happy Instruments of "gathering in Fruit to
everlasting Life." Pray much for your own Minister in particular. How can he
preach in a spiritual, evangelical, and acceptable Manner, but as the Holy
Spirit condesends to afford his Aid and Assistance? How successfully, but by
his Cooperation and Blessing? It has been observed by Strangers, who have
often occasionally attended your private Meetings, that you ever pray much for
your Minister: Go on and persevere, my dear People, in praying hard and much
for him and may his Ministry among you be as Aaron's Rod, having Buds,
Blossoms, and Fruit, at the same Time! By sound Doctrine, a companied with the
divine Influences, may you be built up in Faith, Holniess and Comfort, and
continue to walk in the Truth, being knit together in one Body, in Christ with
that Love which is the Bond of Perfection here and the Glory and Felicity of
the upper World.

As to the following Narrative, so far as human Observation and Testimony, can
give an Assurance of Truth; I may justly say, I have written, what most of you
know, and testify what, in its genuine and powerful Effects, you have seen: And
as to the Substance of the Lord's Work therein narrated, what a very
considerable Number of you, profess to be experimentally acquainted with. While
I have verily thought, I ought not to be silent; but to declare these Things
thus publicly, "to the Glory of Him, who works all Things according to the
Counsel of his own Will," I persuade myself, that many of you are very
sensible, that the Favors, of the World cannot make you happy, nor its Frowns
make you miserable: "That the Favor of your God is Life, and his Loving
Kindness better than Life," and that you long for that State of Glory, where we
shall dwell for ever near him, and be for ever blessed. I hope this Naritive,
will abide in your Houses, and be often and seriously read over by you and
yours, as a Memorial of the Lord's marvelous Work of divine Grace, in our Day;
and by the Blessing of God, may it be treasured up in your Hearts, and have its
due Influence upon your Lives. May the Holy Spirit help you to persevere in
Prayer, 'till we shall yet see greater and more glorious Things than these! I
now only add, may you, my dear People, one and all, from the least to the
greatest, be so taught by God, as to become wise to your eternal Salvation!
That when I have done preaching, and you have done hearing, and both have done
with Time for ever, we may rejoice together, in the Presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at his appearing. To whose blessed Spirit, and Grace, I commend you all.

Your unworthy Pastor, SAMUEL BUELL.
East-Hampton, Sept. 25. 1765.
WE the Subscribers, being informed by our Rev. Brother, of his Design to make
public, by the Press, the following Narrative, and being desired to give our
joint TESTIMONY to the late glorious Work of God's Grace, looking upon it to be
our Duty as Watchmen standing upon the Walls of Jerusalem, not only to give the
Alarm of War, when the Enemy is approaching, but also to Sound the Trumpet of
Praise, when the King of Zion comes in a Meek Triumph, having Salvation, We
therefore take this Opportunity to declare, that according to our Knowledge of
the Nature of Christianity, and the Observations we have had Opportunity to
make, we judge that there has been of late, a blessed Outpouring of the Spirit
of God in these Parts, in awakening and converting Sinners, and in inlightning,
quickening and building up Saints in Faith, Holiness and Comfort. And
particularly we would declare to the Glory of God's Grace, that there has been
a happy Revival of Religion in the Congregations committed to our pastoral
Care; and that there is a considerable Number in them, so far as we can judge
by the Rules of God's Word, toward whom we have Grounds of Charity, that they
have experienced a saving Change in this Day, as appears by abiding
Manifestations of a serious, religious, humble Spirit and the various Fruits of
Gospel Holiness. We desire to give Glory to God, for such mavelous Effusions
of the Holy Spirit, and as laid under great Obligations for ever to admire and
extol the Riches of his Grace, in doing such great Things for us, we hereunto
subscribe.

SILVANUS WHITE, Pastor of the Church in Sauthampton. JAMES BROWN, Pastor of
the Church in Bridge-Hapton.


I Fully designed to have proposed to others of my Rev. Brethren, to have given
their concurring Testimony to the same glorious Work of God's sovereign Grace,
not doubting their ready Compliance; our remote Situation from each other, and
direct Opportunity for sending to the Press presenting, have prevented.

S. B -- L.

Attestation.
WE The Subscribers, Inhabitants of EastHampton, having had much Opportunity
for Observation, and Information, concerning the late mavelous Work of God's
sovereign Grace in this Town, and having heard and considered the Narrative
given of it by our Rev. Pastor, do give our ATTESTATION to the Truth thereof,
according to the best of our Knowledge and Judgment.

Eleazer Miller. Nathanael Hunting. Joseph Osborn. John Hunting. William
Hedges, Burnet Miller. Abraham Gardener. David Mulford.


Having suffered some Injustice, pobably by the Press, as well as by
Transcribers, with respect to a Letter I wrote soon after the Lord's Work began
so powerfully among us, which was published without my Knowledge, the Author
thinks proper to advertise, that he requests it in Point of Favor and Justice,
that if any Printer undertakes to re-print this Narrative, that he engage some
judicious Friend to inspect the Press. The Letter referred to, was printed about
three Months after 'twas wrote, in London, about the same Time in Boston, some
Months after, in New York, and also in New London. I have seen the several
Editions, and observe some Variation from the Original, and from each other, in
them all. Some few Words are left out, or altered, and some mis pointing
interrupts the Sense in some Places; but the Substance is retained. I have
often received Information, that it has been under the Lord's Blessing: And to
him be all the Glory.



A Faithful NARRATIVE, OF The surprising Work of God's Grace, AT East-Hampton,
1764.
WHEN the great Jehovah, for the illustrous Display of his adorable Attributes,
is pleased to come into his Church, by a plentiful Effusion of his Holy Spirit,
by whose powerful Influences, his own Children are eminently quickened and
comforted; and great Numbers of careless Sinners, are brought to this Soul
concerning Question, "what must we do to be saved"? And many in a Judgment of
Charity, "are translated out of Darkness into mavelous Light," such an Event
is worthy of more than silent Notice, and should be declared abroad, for a
Memorial of divine Grace and Glory. Many of my Revd. Brethren in the Ministry,
and some other Friends, have requested the Favor of a more particular Account
of the Lord's late mavelous Work of Grace among us, than as yet they have
received. Many who are waiting for the Coming and Kingdom of our Lord Christ, I
hear from various Parts, welcome the News of this blessed Work, with an Ardour
of Gratitude, and with a Transport of Delight. Some past Accounts of this Work,
have been owned of God: Which gives Ground to hope, that a more particular
Account, may have a happy Effect, by the divine Blessing, for the Revival of
Religion in other Places, and the Enlargement of the Kingdom of the Divine
Redeemer in the World. There have been some Misrepresentations of this Work,
which ought to be corrected. A copious Effusion of the Holy Spirit upon a
People, is such an Event, attends to confirm the Divinity of the glorious
Gospel of our Lord: And gives Honor to to the Holy Spirit, manifesting the
Reality of his Office and influence, in the effectual Application of
Redemption. It invites the Notice, and be speaks the Praises of the divine
Lovers of Zion's Prosperity: And also directly tends to animate their Hopes,
Strengthen their Faith, and enliven their Prayers. It moreover appears to be
the Lord's revealed Will, that such an Event in the divine Economy, should be
recorded; Not only for the present Benefit of some; but also for the future
Good of others. Thus much, I suppose, those Words which the Holy Spirit (the
great Secretary of Heaven) has left upon Record, plainly hold forth: "When the
Lord shall build up Zion, He shall appear in his Glory. He will regard the
Prayer of the Destitute, and will not despise their Prayer. This shall be
written for the Generation to come: And the People which shall be created shall
praise the Lord." This shall be known when we are dead,
And left on long Record,
That Ages yet unborn may read,
And trust, and Praise the Lord
Psalm. cii. 16:17:18.
To transmit to Posterity, present mavelous Dispensations of God's Grace, is
a Debt due to them: And may be a Means of exciting them, to trust in, and
praise Him. For these and other Reasons I have at length consented to the
Publication of the following Narrative. In doing which, I look upon my self,
under the most solemn Obligations to maintain the strictest Regard to Truth.

Perhaps, to a Stranger it may be useful previously to observe a few Things.

Our remote Situation from the Continent, I suppose, has in a Measure been a
Means of Preservation from those Errors in Doctrine; those Amusements by
Controversies; and those Corruptions in Morals, by vicious Examples, ordinarily
most prevalent, in populous Places. Yet we have been taught, that mere negative
Advantages, united with Gospel Ordinances, will not give Interest in positive
spiritual Blessings without the Concurrence of Divine Influence.

There are about Two-hundred Families belonging to the Town of East Hampton.
The Body of the Town is so Compact, that several hundred People, live within
Hearing of the Ringing of Bell, in a Season tolerably calm and serene. Living
thus compactly, has been of Advantage for the more swift Propogation of a
religious Concern in the late Day there are belonging to the Town two Villages,
the one about three Miles East, and the other as far West, from the Body of the
Town. I have been informed by the Aged among us, that the first Inhabitants of
the Town, come from both Englands: And that some of them were very pious People.

The Rev. Thomas James, was the first settled Minister in the Town. He
continued in the Ministry here, for a considerable Number of Years. After a
Vacancy of some Years, Sept. 13th. 1699. the Rev. Mr. Nathanael Hunting was
ordained, and continued in the Ministry here, 47 Years. Upon my Instalment,
Sept. 19th. 1746. He, being now aged and under growing Infirmities,
relinquished his Pastoral Relation to this People.

In the Rev. Mr. Hunting's Day, now above twenty Years since, there was a very
plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit, upon the People of this Town. The good
Effects of which abide to this Day, and as to Numbers, I trust, will abide for
ever. Some who were brought under Soul concern in that Day, have received Light
and Comfort, between that Day and this: And in some Instances the Concern of
that Day, has extended down to the present, now hopefully issuing in a saving
Change. While I have Cause to be deeply humbled for, and to lament my great
Deficiences, and Barreness as to Ministerial Fruits; I have Reason to bless the
Lord, that I have not altogether "run in Vain, nor labored in Vain." From the
first of my Ministry here, there have been Persons truly awakened, and
hopefully effectually called, from Time to Time. About 4 or 5 Years after my
Instalment, I had what I have ever since called a small Harvest of Souls. There
have been several Seasons, in which the Lord has given us some Revival of his
Work. In which my hopes run high, that it would become very general; but the
Event was not fully equal to my raised Expectations. As in a Dry Season, when
the Clouds gather and hang over us, as though they were about to pour down a
Plenty of Waters upon the thirsty Earth, Yet they pass Over, and a few Drops
only fall. Between the Time of my Instalment, and the late wonderful Day, I
received into full Communion about eighty Persons. The greater Part, of these,
were Such as first hoped they received a saving Change before my Instalment.
Others were such as hoped, since that Time, they passed from Death to Life.

In the Beginning of the Year 1764. There appeared some hopeful Tokens, that
the Lord was preparing his own Way, for a gracious Visitation. The absolute
Necessity and Importance of the Divine Influences, in order to the Revival of
Religion, become more frequently the Subject of Serious Conversation among the
Godly. Some of the Lord's People become wrestling Jacobs for the Divine
Influences. Our Assemblies for divine Worship grew larger, and their Attention
more engaged: And the Word Preached began now, by the divine Blessing, to
become powerful to quicken and comfort some of the Lord's People; and to
enlighten and awaken some Sinners. Thus the Lord seemed to be preparing his
Way, by gradually granting his returning Presence to his People, until the
memorable Sabbath March the 18th. Upon this Day, our Assembly was very large,
and more solemly attentive, than ever I knew it before. while the People heard
on one Part of the Day, what good News was brought them from Heaven, by the
Gospel; and on the other, what would be good News, to be carried from Earth to
Heaven, by attending Angels, they seemed in general upon the Point of
submitting to the prevailing Power of divine Truth. Prove. xxv. 25.
Upon this Day the Spirit of Prayer, for the Divine Influences, seemed to be
poured forth, as in a Kind of Celestial Torrent. Some awakend Sinners had their
Convictions increased, and some others were influenced to attend more
seriously, than ever before, to their eternal Concernments. This Day which God
has made to be had in Remembrance, marvelous as it was! I give the Place of a
preparatory Day to March, 19th. Upon this Day, the Lord began to carry on his
Work with astonishing Power and Glory! "According to this Time it shall be
said," (of East-Hampton) what has God wrought! Number. xxiii. 23.
"In the after Part of this Day, I discoursed with a young Person in Agony of
Distress for Sin, and an Interest in the Savior. Near the Evening I went to
see a young Man, that had concluded for a Time, not to go to Church upon the
Afternoon the Day before, fearing he should cry out in Public; so as to
interrupt the Hearing of others: His Convictions were so Powerful, that it
seemed to him impossible to avoid it. Before I came to the House, I met some
young Persons under Concern, on their Way to visit me: Upon Invitation, they,
and some others, soon came into the House after me. One following the Example
of another 'till there were about a hundred Persons assembled: With whom I
spent some Hours, in Prayer and Exhortation. The Lord was Pleased at this Time,
to bow the Heavens, and come down by an Effusion of the Blessed Spirit, in a
most plentiful and surprising Manner! The House seemed full of the Presence of
God: And almost all present appeared some how awed and influenced thereby. I
now heard many Sinners making the most mournful Declarations of their exceeding
Sinfulness before God, and of their infinite Danger of eternal Damnation! Some
uttered their Cries after the Manner of the Apostle Peter's Hearers, "What
shall we do"? The Entreaties of some, were like the poor Publican, "God be
merciful to me a Sinner"! Oh! "who among us shall dwell with devouring Fire?
Who among us, shall dwell with everlasting Burnings"? "If I go to Hell, I don't
want Company: If I must go, let me go alone, to those immortal Torments"! The
Wrath of God now appeared to sit heavy upon the guilty Consciences of Sinners,
and his infinite Displeasure against Sin, seemed to fill their Souls with
unutterable Anguish and Torment, as though their eternal Damnation was already
begun. It Is supposed that 30 or 40 Persons went Home from this Meeting under
most powerful Conviction of Sin and Misery, and anxious to the last Degree, to
know what they should do to be saved. When they came to the respective Houses
of their Abode, they entered them with Declarations that they were guilty
Sinners going to Hell. Their Agonies of Distress and moving Expressions had a
good Effect upon the Families, to which they bebelonged. This Evening and next
Morning, the Tidings of this wonderful Meeting, spread swiftly through the
Town, and gave a Shock like seven fold Thunder. The very Report thereof,
awakened Sinners to Soul-Concern, as it flew: And excited in the Lord's People,
solemn Joy, lively Hope, fervent Prayer, holy Admiration, and devout Praise
Early the next Morning, after this wonderful Meeting, my House was thronged
with distressed Law condemned, Gospel-condemned, Conscience-condemned Sinners.
Indeed, our Houses all over Town, now began to have Persons in them of this
Character. I had now Opportunity for particular Converse with many of the
awakened, and Occasion to observe, that although their Convictions were so very
powerful, yet they were rational and Scriptural, and as far as I could judge,
evidently the Effect of a Sight of Truth, by the Holy Spirit's Illumination and
Operation as a Convincer. At the Close of the Meeting the last Evening, I
notified a Lecture to be attended at 2 o'Clock in the House of God to Day. The
Report of the wonderful Effects of the Meeting last Evening, and of Lecture to
Day, was soon propogated in all Parts of the Town: So that People from the
Villages and remote Parts of Town met for divine Worship in the House of God,
even an Hour before the appointed Time, being swift to hear. They all appeared
serious, when I met them in God's House, as though they were looking into the
eternal World. While I preached to them, every Eye that was not overwhelmed in
Tears, appeared fixed upon the Speaker, and every Ear chained to the Things
spoken. Solemn profound Reverence appeared in every Countenance, and they heard
as Creatures made for Eternity, and bound over to a Judgment to come. After
Sermon I pronounced the Blessing as usual; but the People all kept their
Places, appearing unwilling to leave the House of God. Where upon, I prayed
again, and gave a Word of Exhortation: And suddenly there was a most marvelous
Effusion of the Holy Spirit, upon People in all Parts of the Church. People in
general continued in the House of God 'till 9 o'Clock in the Evening. Many
Sinners were brought under powerful Convictions; others had their Concern
increased; some who had been under Concern before, met with Light and Comfort;
many of the Lord's People appeared to have amazing Manifestations of divine
Glory, and answerable Fullness of divine Joy.

The Day following my House was early thronged by great Number, of weary heavy
laden Sinners. Soon after the Middle of the Day, People in great Numbers were
going up to the Temple, as supposing Publick-Worship, would probably be
attended as upon the Day before, although there was no previous Appointment of a
Lecture. About 2 o'Clock we all met in solemn Assembly, and Divine Service was
attended as on the preceding Day. After prononucing the Blessing People abode
in their Seats as upon the Day before. I then continued to pray and exhort them
for about an Hour. There was much Solemnity and Seriousness upon the Face of
the Assembly; yet the People seemed to be waiting for an increasing Sense of
divine Things, by more plentiful Measures of divine Influence. Where upon I
took Occasion to observe, that we were entirely dependent upon a sovereign GOD,
for such Effusions of the Holy Spirit, as were granted the Day before: That God
was now teaching of us thus much: That we must look beyond Means, and have our
Expectations upon God only. I repeatedly charged the People in the most solemn
Manner, and beseeched them again and again, to give God the Glory, all the
Glory, if He should now condescend to grant a marvelous Out-pouring of the
Spirit. Immediately thereupon as I proceeded to Speak, there appeared to be a
most surprising Effusion of the Holy Spirit, upon People in all Parts of the
House. An Almighty Energy seemed to accompany the same Words, so as that they
became powerful to a Multitude in one and the same solemn Moment of Time. The
Effects of this Outpouring of the Spirit seemed to be exactly parrallel to that
upon the preceding Day. This Dispensation was so timed, and so marvelous in
various Respects, that a Person of liberal Education, and judicious
Observation, occasionally present at this Time, has since observed to me, that
this Event was so wonderful and observable in it is Circumstances and Effects
that had an Atheist been present and heard and observed all that was said, and
beheld what followed, he must necessarily have acknowledged the Existence of a
God, and the Reality of Divine Influence.

The Following Day (Thursday March 22) was a Day appointed upon the preceding
Sabbath, to be observed as a Day of Fasting and Prayer, for the out Pouring of
the Holy Spirit; upon us in particular, and the Churches of Christ in general.
The Report of what God was doing among us, had now spread abroad, and many
People from neighboring Congregations came to join with us in the solemn
Services of this Day. So that we had now the largest Assembly I ever saw upon
this End of our Isle. There was such universal Solemnity and profound Attention
upon the Face of the Assembly as exceeded all I ever saw before. It was such a
Fast Day, for a powerful Sense of the infinite Evil of Sin, and Lamentation
therefore for a Spirit of Prayer, and for solemn Joy and Thanksgiving, with
great Numbers, as exceeded all of this Kind, I had before known. Toward the
Close of this Day, there were plentiful Measures of divine Influence given,
like as upon foregoing Days. The Lord now seemed to be verifying his Promise,
"And it shall come to pass, before they call, I will answer, and while they are
yet speaking, I will hear." Isa. lxv. 24. This Tent, my Rev. Brother Mr. James
Brown, improved, in the after Part of this memorable Day, as now exemplified.


People assembled for Public Worship upon Friday and Saturday, as before upon
Tuesday and Wednesday; although no Lecture was previously appointed: And Upon
each of these Days, there were wonderful Effusions of the Holy Spirit After
this Week, Lectures were ordinarily given out upon the Sabath, except upon the
unexpected coming of a Minister from a Distance. I suppose our attending
public Worship so often this Week, occasioned some Reports abroad, that People
here had wholly thrown by all Wordly Business, and betook themselves entirely
to religious Exercises. It Is true indeed, that People looked upon the World, as
it really is, in Point of Sufficiency, an empty Thing; and in some good
Measure, esteemed the Favor of God, as it will be looked upon at the Day of
eternal Judgment, even as the everlasting ALL! An extraordinary Day, will
doubtless justify that Conduct, that would not be prudent, at other Seasons I
Suppose St. Paul did not continue his Sermon 'till midnight every Evening He
preached, Yet he thought proper to do it upon a particular Occasion. My dear
People, now addressed each other in the Language of the Prophet, "Come ye, and
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob."
etc. They were glad to meet me daily in God's House, and I was equally rejoiced
to meet them there. I heartily wish every Minister of the Gospel, in City,
Town, and Country like Occasion of meeting there People in the Lord's House!
For I am persuaded that I, and many of my dear People, will have those Days, in
joyful and everlasting Remembrance.

Upon the fore mentioned solemn Days, when the Holy Ghost thus descended, in
the Application of Himself to his Work, He appeared to give his powerful
Presence and Illumination to great Numbers at the same Time: Whereby they had
amazingly increased upon them, Views of divine Things, seeing Truth and the
awful and glorious Realities of the eternal World, in a clear, Strong,
affecting and practical Light. From Day to Day, I now saw many Sinners of
various Ages, upon their Knees, with Hands extended toward Heaven, and in
flowing Tears, begging and crying for the Exercise of sovereign Mercy in the
Name of Jesus, with as much Earnestness and Importunity, to all Appearance, as
though the Lord Jesus Christ was then coming in flaming Fire to the final
Judgment. They seemed to be pressing into the Kingdom of God, as if they would
take it by Violence. I saw many others under powerful Convictions; Yet not in
such great Distress. Many appeared under the Abatement of Legal Terrors, as in
a most calm and serene Frame of Mind, as though resigning up their Souls to a
sovereign God through the glorious Mediator, in Hope of eternal Life by his
Mediation. I saw very many just beginning to hope they were favored with some
divine Manifestations and seemed wholly to be taken up and captivated with the
perfect Excellence and Glory, the alluring Fullness and Sufficiency of the Lord
Christ: Declaring his entire Suitableness and infinite Worthiness of the
Choice, Trust, Love and Praise of All. Admiring the adorable Riches of his free
and sovereign Grace made known to such infinitely Vale, unworthy Sinners as
they were: And uttering the Praises of the all-glorious, all-together Lovely
Lord Jesus, as though their whole Souls glowed with a Seraphic Love to him. The
House of God at these Seasons seemed to be full of his awful and glorious
Presence! And I used to visit the distressed in all Parts of it, and to
converse with and to drop a Word of Exhortation to great Numbers in a short
Space of Time, and the Lord gave the Blessing.

From Day to Day, we now saw both in the House of God, and in our own Houses
surprising Displays of the divine Power, Love and Grace of our IMMANUAL. The
awful and indearing Glories of the GODHEAD shined forth in this Work, as
sufficient to fill Heaven and Earth, Angels and Saints, with an Extacy of Joy!
With inexpressible Wonder, we beheld the Magnificent Triumphs of the victorious
Arms of Z ion's King, over the united Powers of Darkness, while stout hearted
Sinners bowed to the Scepter of his Grace, and became his willing People in the
Day of his all-conquering Power! The Lord's People in general, seemed to be
under the animating Power of Religion: And mighty in Prayer for divine
Influences, and the Salvation of precious Souls. Some of them especially
appeared like primitive Christans full of the Holy Ghost, rejoicing in the
Lord. While the Comforts of Some, and the Distress of Others, ran so high and
became so great, as set in Contrast and standing opposed, we had, as it were, a
Sort of Resemblance of the Day of final Judgment, and it appeared as if
Persons were now entering upon their eternal States of Heaven and Hell. It Is
indeed beyond me to give a full Description of this wonderful Scene. No Person
can form an adequate Idea of such a mavelous Dispensation of divine Power and
Grace, but as being a Spectator, and sharing largely in the divine Influences.

If any should ask why the Lord carried on his Work in such a visible Way? Why
was it attended with such unusual Symptoms? What valuable Ends could be
answered thereby? I would reply, I have not directed the Spirit of the Lord,
nor have I been his Counselor Who can search out the Almighty to Perfection?
However, some obvious and probable Reasons may be assigned: These extraordinary
Appearences, have answered many valuable Purposes.

With Respect to true Believers in Christ, their high and strong Exercises of
all Evangical Graces, by which they Glorify God. have been in full Proportion
to those extraordinary Measures of the divine Influences. Their anxieties for
the Formation of the Image of Christ in the perishing Souls of Sinners, and
their fervent incessant Prayers, and Activity, for that important Purpose, have
been in full Proportion to the copious Measures of divine Influence enjoyed:
And thereby they have answerably seen the Glory of the Lord's Work and have
been disposed and enabled to rejoice therein, and to give Him the entire Glory
thereof: Vehemently panting and ardently aspiring after absolute Perfection and
a glorious Immortality, at the same Time. While the Lord's People have drank so
largely of the New Wine of everlasting Consolation, filled like the Vessels of
the Sanctuary, as the Prophet Zacheriah has foretold, they have been "as the
Stones of a Crown lifted up, as an Ensign upon the Land:" Zech. ix. 15, 16.
And and as the Prophet Isaiah, "a Crown of Glory in the Hand of the Lord, and
a royal Diadem in the Hand of our God." Isai. lxii.
The Brightness and Luster of their Example and Excellence of their Seize
in Holiness and Joy, set up to the View of others, have been as an Ensign to
gather about, as a Prize to run for, and as a Crown and Glory to strive to
obtain: And thereby Saints of less Experience have been excited to ardent
Desires after such excellent Seize; some mere nominal Christians have
been convinced they had no Grace; and many poor distressed disconsolate
Sinners, have been ready to say, "thy People shall be my People, and thy God,
my God."

With Reference to Sinners, while the Lord has carried on his Work in this
Way, as by such powerful Illumination and pungent Conviction, ordinarily the
Work of Humiliation has made the swifter Progress. Many of them, seemed to see
and learn more of their exceeding Sinfulness, spiritual Impotency, unworthyness
of God's Mercy, and his Justice in their eternal Damnation, in one Day, than
some others, who have been under Conviction at other Seasons, have done in
Weeks or Months. The observable Distress and Soul Agony of some, by the
Blessing of God, has been the Means both of awakening, and increasing the
Concern of many others. While Sinners have been Spectators of their Fellow
Sinners under such Soul-agony of Distress, they have been ready to say, and
have said, "there, there, is one and another, yea many going to be taken, and I
am like to be left! These in such Distress about their Sins and Salvation, are
not greater Sinners than I am. They see their Sin and Danger, and are affected;
but I am dreadfully hardened, amazingly stupid, I shall be left! Oh! What shall
I do to be concerned for my Soul." It has been natural for Sinners, who have
beheld others so greatly concerned to argue thus, viz. "if the infinite
Displeasure of God against Sin, is so terrible in its Effects now, if one Spark
of his Wrath produces such Agony of Soul now, as if Hell Torments were begun,
oh, how dreadful an Evil is Sin? What, oh! What will it be to have full Vials
poured out upon the guilty damned! How insurportable, how intolerable, to go
down to Hell, where the Billows of the Wrath of Almighty God, roll over the
damned for one complete Eternity! oh, of what infinite Importance is it, that I
flee from the Wrath to come"! When any have met with Light and Comfort, who had
been the subjects of such great Distress of Soul, this has eminently been the
Means of promoting the Lord's Work among us. It has given a mighty Shock to
others, least they should be left, as Marshes and Miry Places, Ezekiel. xlvii. II.
without Life and Healing, by the flowing Waters of the Sanctuary. I have known
in many Instances a Work of Humiliation, powerfully carried on, while the
Subjects thereof have scarcely thought themselves under such a Work, and this
in Part owing to the greater apparent Concern of others. The visible and great
Distress of Sinners, has excited answerable Compassion in the Lord's People
for them, and more effectually engaged their Prayers. I may add, that while the
Lord has thus carried on his Work, he has given a Specimen of the Terrors of
that Day, when He will come in flaming Fire.

Moreover the Report of these Doings and mighty Acts of the wonder working
JEHOVAH has awakened and engaged the Attention of Multitudes in other Places.
The Accounts I have received, will justify me in asserting that I have Reason
to believe, thousands have been brought to think more seriously about the
Salvation of their Souls, and Things eternal, by Means of these mavelous
Dispensations of God. Many Godly Ministers, and pious People, have been excited
thereby to give Glory to God, and encouraged to pray more earnestly for such
Effusions of the Blessed Spirit. It seems as though God was pleased thus to carry
on his Work, that it might be taken the more Notice of in the World, and that
it might be regarded and spoken of, that so He might have the more Glory. The
Report of these extraordinary Operations, has induced many to come among us,
some of which, have hopefully thereby pertaken of the Dews of the heavenly
Influence, and given Glory to God. These, and such like, I humbly suppose, are
some of the obvious Reasons, and Purposes answered, with Reference to the
Lord's carrying on his Work, in such a powerful, visible and glorious Manner:
While many more may lie hid in the unfathomable Abys of divine Counsels: For,
how little a Portion is heard of Him! This Knowledge is too wonderful for us!

If any of my Readers judge I have dwelt too long upon the Effusion of the Holy
Spirit upon this Week, by Way of Apology, I would observe. That the precious
Influences of the divine Spirit are worthy of incomparably more Notice than I
have taken of them. That by these Dispensations, the Lord prepared the Way for
many future SALVATIONS. I have also dwelt the longer upon these mavelous
Effusions of the Holy Ghost, because I hope the Days are not very far off, when
such Outpouring of the Spirit will become more frequent and general among the
Lord's People: And in Process of Tune the World over. The present Narration of
such surprising Effusions of the Holy Spirit, together with the good Effects,
(if read by any) may serve for Confirmation of the Reality of the Lord's Work
in such Days. No doubt, the Days are coming when an immence Plenty of the
Lord's spiritual Waters, will be poured out upon thirsty Souls, and even Floods
upon the dry Ground: And it will seem as if the very Heavens were rent asunder,
and as it were dropped down from above, as at once. The coming of our Lord Christ
in his Kingdom, among Men, will be in a sudden, amazing and irresistible
Manner, and with clear Manifestation, like Lightening that cannot be hid, but
glares in every ones Eyes, and shines from one Side of Heaven to the other.
When at Evening Time it shall be Light, and so perpetual Day with Zion: For
then Jehovah will be unto her an everlasting Light, and her God her Glory. To
mention such a Day as not very far off, I am quite apprehensive, will be
thought by some, the same as to Prophesy. I am no Prophet, neither am I a
Prophet's Son; but I profess to believe the Prophecies. Although it (...) not be
for us to know the precise Time, and exact Periods, when the Pope in the West,
and Mahomet in the East, with their Powers will be utterly ruined, "so as no
Place shall be found for them;" yet it may, (I humbly conceive) be made evident
from the Prophecies themselves, and divine Dispensations, that the Lord's
People have now Ground to hope for some signal and plentiful Effusions of the
Holy Spirit. With all Humility and Modesty, I would take the Liberty to
suppose, that the western Empire Christian, and Antichristian, is the one Leg
and foot of the grand Image: And the eastern Empire, Christian, and Mehometan,
is the other Leg and Foot of the Image; according to the Prophet Daniel's
Description of the fourth Monarchy. Therefore the papistical antichristian
Power in the West, and the Meho-metan antichristian Power in the East, will be
smitten, by the Stone cut out of the Mountain, in order to it is filling the
whole Earth. From thence, may it not be inferred, that as the 5th Vial is
pouring out upon the antichristian Power in the West; the 6th. Vial will more
especially be poured out upon the Mehomitan antichristian Power in the East:
Which Power, will not fall gradually, like that in the West; but suddenly: "In
one Day her Plagues shall come upon her," as a Millstone thrown with Violence
into the Sea, sinks and never rises more. Whereupon, the Way will be prepared
for the Grand eastern Kingdoms, to become Christian; the great River Uphrates
being dried up, by the Pouring-out of the Sixth Vial.
No doubt it will be a Work of Time to bring on the Millenium or latter
DayGlory in its full Meridian, Splender and Brightness: But then if we view the
fulfillment of almost every Thing the Prophecies speak preceding, we shall find
Grounds to expect not only a Prelude to, but even the very Dawnings of that
glorious long expected, long wished for, and long prayed for Day. If I have
gained any Knowledge of this Kind, by a diligent Study of the Prophecies, for
many Years past, I freely profess I am in daily Expectation of approaching
terrible Things in Righteousness; amazing Changes hastening on the Earth;
mavelous Out-pourings of the Holy Spirit; and following Glories. But I must
not digress too far, upon the agreeable Subject.

After the forementioned ever memorable Week, there were no more such sudden
astonishing Effusions of the Holy Spirit, (like a mighty rushing Wind) except
for 2 or 3 Days a few Weeks afterward. However there were such plentiful
Measures of divine Influence continually granted, and such eminent Degrees of
God's gracious Presence accompanying divine Institutions, as that his Work made
glorious Progress. All Parts of the Town seemed to be full of God's Presence,
and the Power of his victorious Grace. Souls were now, to all Appearance,
flocking in Numbers to the Lord Jesus Christ from Day to Day. Soon after the
Work begun among us with such great Power, very many in a Day, day after Day,
hoped they received divine Light and Comfort. and for several Months, (as I
remember) not a Week past, but there were some that hoped (and still hope, with
others) that they were translated out of Darkness into mavelous Light. But
the time would fail to mention the apparent universal Concern of People, about
the great things of the eternal World: And the spiritual Exercises of
particular Persons: The Tokens we enjoyed of God's Presence, and how his
glorious Work made Progress from Week to Week: To do these things in their
Order and Series would require a Volume in Folio, in stead of a short Narritive.

I shall therefore proceed to give some Account of the Manner in which Persons
have been wrought upon, with Respect to the Work of Conviction and Humiliation.
And of divine Manifestations thereupon. And of the Subsequent Effects Exercises
and Fruits. Which the Subjects of this Work, profess to be experimentally
acquainted with: As I am well assured, by the Accounts they have given me, and
from what appears in Life and Conversation. As to their Spiritual Exercises and
Experiences, I have Occasion to observe, that in some Respects their is great
and wonderful Variety, in other Respects, (especially as to essential Points)
great and Surprising Harmony.

The Subjects of this Work, profess to have had clear and powerful Conviction
of the total Pollution of their Natures, and actual Defilements of their Lives.
Some when awakened were first of all convinced of actual Sin, and thereby were
led by the Streams back to the Fountain of Iniquity: Others, were suddenly
seized with Conviction of the exceeding Sinfulness of their Hearts, and thereby
were brought to the Knowledge of their Wickedness of Life. Some had gradual
Conviction, 'till their Concern became very great, and distressing: Others,
were soon taken hold of and seized with powerful Convictions, when first
awakened. Their Attention to the important Concernments of their Souls appears
to be brought on and increased upon them, by a View of themselves in their true
and proper Character, as given in the Word of God. They see the spirituallity
and Strictness of the Law of God: Thereby they have the Knowledge of their
exceeding Sinfulness before Him. When by the Law, applied with Power, by the
Spirit, they see their Sin, Guilt, and Danger of Damnation, this View gives
them the utmost Solicitude to know what they shall do to be saved. When they
are first awakened they don't see their absolute Inability to help themselves,
'till by Trial they find their Strength, Weakness. Their Awakenings put them
upon Confession, of Sinfulness both of Heart and Life; upon Cries for sovereign
Mercy, as though they would pierce the Heavens; upon greatness of Endeavors
after Salvation, as if they would take the Kingdom of Heaven by Violence. When
they are first awakened, commonly for a Time, they think they find in
themselves a Willingness to come to Christ for Salvation; but as a Work of
Conviction is carried on, they see they have imposed upon themselves, by taking
an Unwillingness to be forever miserable, to be a real Willingness to come to
Christ. I have known the poor Sinner upon more thorough Acquaintance with his
Heart, under distressing Conviction of the great Evil of ever supposing he had
such a Willingness, being now made to see, that all this Time he was virtually
casting the Fault upon Christ that he had not an Interest in Him, whereas all
the Fault, was justly chargeable upon the Sinner himself. The Spirit of God in
his legal Strivings with Sinners in this Day, has powerfully convinced and
taught them, that there is a Cannot and Willnot, justly chargeable upon them.
They see their Inability to believe, is an Unwillingness, a vile and wicked
Temper of Heart. That the Cause of their not coming to Christ for Salvation, is
not so much a can-not, although they can-not as a Willnot, a blameable Opposition
of Heart to the crowning of Christ with the Honor and Glory of their eternal
Salvation. Now they see themselves justly condemned both by Law and Gospel.
They sadly complain of the Enmity and Pride of their Hearts, of the Stubborness
and Obstinacy of their Wills, of the gross Blindness of their Minds: That they
cannot see their own Badness; nor the Justice of God in their eternal
Condemnation as they think others do, before they come to Christ. Sometimes
they think they are wholly stupid and senseless, that the Spirit of God has
done striving with them, and that they are given up to Hardness of Heart and
Blindness of Mind, which Thought greatly exercises their Fear. They often think
their Case somewhat singular, that their Convictions don't Work well, that they
are not such as the Elect have before Conversion. When they are brought to see
their own infinite Vileness, they greatly admire the Patience of God, That He
has kept them out of Hell, and wonder he don't send them immediately to
everlasting Burnings, and own it would be infinitely just if He should. They
strive and labor to get an Alteration of Heart for the better; but complain of
growing worse all the while. They think they had as good leave off striving for
Salvation, as to any Power of their own to obtain; and yet eternal Salvation
appears of such Importance that they persevere in striving. It Is very common to
have Scripture Truths, which they hear or read powerfully applied to their
Hearts for increasing their Convictions. As the Holy Spirit continues his
Illumination, and a Work of the Law is carried on, they see their exceeding
Sinfulness, and are brought to confess that God has made no Promises of Mercy
to them, that after all their persevering Endeavors for Salvation, He may
justly reject them forever. Being thus at Length, clearly and powerfully
convinced of the Strictness of God's Law, of their exceeding Sinfulness, of
their total Impotency, of the absolute Impossibility of being justified by any
manner of Virtue, Goodness or Righteousness of their own, and that it would be
infinitely just with God eternally to cast of and destroy them, they now see no
Hope of Salvation remaining, but by an absolute submiting themselves to God as
an Infinite Sovereign. Thus the Way has been prepared for giving the new
Heart, and for the Manifestation of divine Glory.

It may be proper here to observe, that Persons under the Work of the Law,
previous to Submission Light and Comfort, do not all see these Truths in an
equally clear Degree of Light; though all appear to have a powerful Sense of the
reality of them. The Distress of some when first awakened, is even to an Agony:
Which sometimes continues for an Hour or two and then seems to abate in a
Measure; but powerful Convictions still continue. Some have several such Turns
of great Distress and Soul Agony, before Light and Comfort. Some never have a
Return thereof after their first Awakenings, and the Work of Humiliation is
carried on powerfully 'till they meet with Comfort. Many have but little, and
some no Sleep the Night before divine Manifestations: Spending the Night in
Soul-Agonies and Cries for sovereign Mercy. Many were more gradually awakened,
and seemed to have increasing Convictions of Truth, and prevailing SoulConcern
'till they obtain Satisfaction of a Change. There has been great Variety as to
the Length of Time, that Persons have been kept under a Work of the Law.
Ordinarily the more Powerful Conviction, the sooner Persons have met with
Comfort; but it has not always been so. God in that Respect, as well as others,
has eminently displayed adorable Sovereignity. Many Persons that I have
coversed with in this Day, who appeared to me to have had a clear Work of the
Law, yet have been continually seeking Preparation for Christ, by legal Terrors
and Humiliations: When they have been told they were making a Righteousness
thereof, to recommend them to Christ, and that they must come to Christ upon
the Call and Warrant of the Gospel, renouncing all Preparation, self
Dependence, and even non-Dependence, being thus driven out of their false
Refuges and Subterfuges they have had not a Moments Rest, 'till brought to a
Dependence upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for Righteousness, Grace and eternal
Life: It Is Observable that Persons under a Work of Humiliation often don't
think themselves the Subjects thereof: "The blind are led in a Way they know
not." I have frequently known, as appeared to me, Persons the Subjects of real
Submission to God, while as yet, they knew not what to make of such a Frame of
Mind, as they then found. When the Sinner has retired again and again, and
repeatedly made the Attempt to pray, at least as the poor Publican, "God be
merciful to me; Sinner," Yet a Sense and clear Conviction of the Justice of God
in his eternal Damnation has entirely stopped his Mouth, though frequently making
the Attempt to utter such a Request Ordinarily Sinners have the clearest Views
of their own infinite Vileness, of God's Justice and sovereignity, just
preceding Submission and Comfort. Oftimes there is a Sort of Approbation of,
and Well-pleasedness with, God's Justice and Sovereignty, and a calm Frame of
Spirit, and to them a strange Composure of Mind a little before divine
Manifestations. This Calmness of Spirit sometimes continues but for a few
Minutes, sometimes for a quarter of an Hour, and sometimes for Hours, before
it is followed with any satisfying Views of an Interest in Christ, and the
Favor of God. When the Terrors of Wind, Earthquake and Fire have been useful
to prepare the Way, to usher in the designed Manifestations of the divine
Glory, the Lord gives a divine Calmness of Spirit, and comes as in a still
small Voice. I may here observe, as a summary Account, that a Law-Work, has
been substantially the same in all the different Subjects of it, though some
passed through much greater Degrees of Distress and Terror than others, and
this Distress lasted much longer with some than others.

The professed Subjects of this Work, give an Account of some divine
Manifestations in the Time of acting Faith and receiving Comfort there upon.
They see the Gospel of our Lord IMMANUEL to be divinely true, and prosess to
have a Spiritual Sight and divine Illumination of Mind, in the Knowledge of the
glorious Objects of Faith, in Order to believing with the Heart unto Salvation.
They appear to be clearly taught, as by Experience, that they, and they only,
who see the Son believe in Him: And that the Lord shines into the Heart, when
his Glory is beheld in the Face of Christ: And that it is a Time of Almighty
Power, when the Soul bows to the Scepter of the Lord Christ and Crowns Him with
the Honor of eternal Salvation. I know not the Person in this Day, that makes
any Pretense to a Hope that he is savingly wrought upon, that gives not some
Account of divine Manifestations, as by a special spiritual Illumination of
Mind. In the Time they suppose they first acted Faith, so as to have Comfort,
more generally they profess, to have had a Manifestation, either of God's
sovereign Mercy and Grace or of his glorius Attributes as they appear in the
Person and Mediation of Jesus Christ; or a View of the Divine and Mediatorial
Glory of our Lord IMMANUEL; and his alluring Fullness and All Sufficiency; or
of his entire Suitableness; or of the infinite Freeness of his Grace, and his
perfect Willingness to save Sinners; or they behold the infinite Excellence and
eternal Safety of the Way of Salvation by Him. When they thus come to know the
Lord Christ, they see Him to be Worthy of their Election, Trust, Love and
Praise, for what he is in Himself, and appear perfectly well pleased with the
Way of Salvation by Him: And these Views are followed with Rest, Peace and Joy
divine. By the Calls and Invitations of the Gospel, they appear to be led to
the Acceptance of Him: And oftimes their first Comfort is in and by the Letter
of the Scriptures; but not always.

There is great Variety as to Measures and Degrees of Light and comfort, when
Persons first have divine Manifestations. Some have at first only some small
Glimpse, of the Fullness and Glory of divine Objects; and these often soon
overclouded with Darkness: 'Till at Length divine Manifestations become more
clear, full and Satisfactory. Then they perceive they had something of the same
Kind before; but in a lower Degree. Some have a more sensible Deliverance from
a Spirit of Bondage, divine Light more suddenly and abundantly beams in upon
them, and they at once perceive themselves in a new World of Light and Comfort.
I cannot say that Persons who have had the most Terror and Distress under a Work
of the Law, have always had the fullest Measures of subsequent Light and
Comfort; Yet I think in general it has been so. Oftimes I have observed, that
the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garments of Praise for a Spirit of
Heaviness, have been in full Proportion to antecedent Distress: There is great
variety in these Respects.

When they first behold the Glory of divine Objects, they seem to be entirely
taken up in Acts of Choice, Faith, Love, Admiration and Praise: And in ardent
Desires after more clear Manifestations and fuller Measures of Enjoyment. Often
at this Season, Persons think little or nothing about Conversion, being wholly
captivated with the infinite Beauty and Glory of divine Objects: And Ordinarily
their Views of their own Vileness, are nor so clear at this Time, as under
divine Manifestations afterward. Now they see that those, and those only, who
are drawn by the Father come to the Son: And that they could not, and would not
come before, and that now they cannot but come. They now see there is a
Consistency between the Freedom of the Will and efficacious Grace in Acts of
Faith. Now they see the Grace of God to be infinitely free and sovereign: And
long to have others come and see, taste and know, that the Lord is gracious,
and to have every Body join with them in his Praise. Now they become assured
that the holy Scriptures are the Word of God: And have oftimes many Gospel
Promises flowing in upon their Minds, one after another, with Light and
Comfort: And it seems to them these Promises will always appear as they now do,
'till Time affords Conviction to the reverse. Their Joy and Comfort don't seem
to result from Thoughts that they are in a State of Safety, and are like to
escape Hell; but appears to be Joy and Rejoicing in the Lord. It begets a low
thought of worldly Joys, proves the Death of Joy in Sin, is as Oil to the
Wheels, to make them move on swiftly, in the Pathway of Duty, and is a very
solemn Joy, often expressed with a flow of Tears. They declare they never knew
what Joy and Pleasure were before, nor any Thing worthy of the Name. They loath
and abhor themselves for all their past Abominations, and have a different
Kind, of Sorrow for Sin, from what they had under a Work of the Law, mourning
for it now as against an infinitely holy and gracious God. They admire that
when the Lord came by his Spirit to awaken them, He did not come Sword in Hand
to destroy them. They are great Admirers of free and sovereign Grace, and
ascribe the sole Glory and Praise of their Salvation to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. There is an endless Variety of divine Truths, which Persons
have their Minds fixed upon and are delighted with. Words seem to fail, as to
expressing their Ideas and Views of the infinite Glory of divine Objects, and
the everlasting Importance of Things eternal. And while they behold them in
such a clear and strong Light, it often appears to them, as though others must,
as it were, be powerfully impressed and affected with them. Many see the
Justice of God in their eternal Damnation, and other Truths that they had some
Sight of under Convictions, in a more clear Point of View, after they have
Light and Comfort, than they did before. At the same Time, many express
themselves about the Things of Religion, in many Respects, as if they were new
to them, as though they never read, nor heard, nor sung before; yet as to the
Matter thereof were before acquainted with the same. That Sense they have of
the Weight and Importance of divine and eternal Things, influences them to
exercise a Jealousy over themselves, least they should sadly impose upon
themselves with a false Hope. It Is common for Persons after their first Light
and Comfort to be again plunged in Darkness and Distress, and to conclude their
Comfort was false and unscriptural. They are wont then to seek legal Terrors
again, and sometimes appear in as much Distress as before; yet it seems in some
Sort of another Kind, in that they appear secretly to mourn the Want of an
absent Good, before enjoyed. After these Exercises for a Time, they commonly
have some renewed divine Manifestations, and begin to think their Mountain
stands strong, and that henceforth they shall never be moved; yet sometimes
Darkness and Trouble again succeed. Thus Light and Darkness, Hopes and Fears
are interchanging, and they have great Variety of Exercises, Frames and
Feelings: And thereby make Progress in the experimental Knowledge of useful and
important Truths. Some that had not at first such clear Manifestations, by
renewed and more clear Discoveries, have now obtained comfortable or full
Assurance of the Love of God. Others are still exercised with Hopes and Fears,
finding such remains of Sin in their Hearts, as seems to them almost
inconsistent with the in Being of Grace. They in general appear to have
increasing Acquaintance with their own Hearts, and see more and more clearly
the Need of progressive Sanctification. They once saw their Hearts to be
exceeding bad, but now say, they see them ten Times worse than ever they
thought they were: They did not imagine there was so much Darkness and
unsubdued Sin in them as now they perceive, and groan under: And thereby learn
the Necessity of the constant Use of the Mediator Christ Jesus; and their Need
of the sanctifying Influences of the Holy Spirit. They appear to be engaged in
a Warfare with Sin, Satan, and the World, and to be learning Dependence upon
the Lord Christ, for Victory and eternal Triumph. they are pressing after
Holiness of Heart and Life, and thereby in general exhibit Evidence, they have
a Change of Nature. They all appear unwilling to rest in any present
Seize, and averse to a bad Temper of Heart, and resolved to follow on to
know more of God and Christ, and to become more rich in Experience of divine
Grace, They profess to give their Hearts to the Lord, and to devote their Lives
to Him as their reasonable Service. Their Hope purifies, and their Faith
produces Obedience and the Fruits of Holiness. They practically declare that
they look upon the Scripture Doctrine of Salvation by free and sovereign Grace,
to be a Doctrine according to Godliness. They acknowledge Christ to be both
Lord and Savior, and expect Salvation from Sin, as well as Wrath, by Him. In
general, they walk in the Fear of the Lord, and at Times in the Comforts of the
Holy Ghost. In fine, while they behold the Glory of God shining in the Gospel
Plan of Salvation, and are expecting Justification by the imputed Righteousness
of Christ, they have the clearest and strongest Conviction of the Obligation of
God's unchangeable Law upon them: And the deepest Sense of the Evil of Sin in
itself, and most awful Views of its Danger: and the highest Sense of the Purity
and Holiness of the divine Nature: And having a supreme Love to God, under a
spiritual Sight and Sense of his infinite Glory and Beauty: And Gratitude and
Thankfulness also inducing, they find themselves in the strongest Manner
possible, under Obligation to be entirely and for ever devoted to God, his
Service and Glory. And accordingly in some good Measure, are showing forth the
Virtues and Praises of Him, who has called them (as they hope) out of Darkness
into mavelous Light. Some other Fruits and Effects of divine Influence in
this Day, will be occasionally interspersed under some following Remarks and
Reflections.

I was not in have to have the professed Subjects of this Work admitted to the
Lord's Supper: Choosing rather there should be some Time of Trial, searching of
Heart, and serious Consideration, preparatory. Lord's Day July 15th. Ninety
eight Persons were added to the Church of Christ, at one Time: And since that
Time twenty four more. I yet expect large Accessions, many having conversed
with me relative thereto; and there being a large Number more, who hope they
have experienced a saving Change, in this Day; and there being none at present
belonging to our Communion under fifteen Years of Age. It Is an universal
Opinion and Principle embraced by my People that no Person ought to be a Guest
at the holy Supper, without the wedding Garment of imputed Righteousness and
inherent Holiness, derived from Christ our Lord Redeemer. Therefore our
Candidates for Communion, have ordinarily great Searchings of Heart, and
Exercises of Mind, previous to their offering themselves for Admission, least
they should come and eat and drink Judgment to themselves.

The Lord's People through the whole Summer, seemed to have a remarkable Spirit
of Prayer: And we had numerous Instances of Persons meeting with Light and
Comfort, so that the Lord's Work made a glorious and astonishing Progress among
us: And we were often refreshed, by heating of its prevailing Power and Glory
in many other Places. It was worthy of special Notice, that in the latter Part
of Summer, a considerable Number of Persons, who had for Years been laboring
under Hopes and Fears, and from the Beginning of the Work among us, been greatly
exercised about their spiritual State, now appeared favored with clear divine
Manifestations, and much Light and Comfort. In the Autumn and fore Part of
Winter it became Apparent, that the divine Influences were in a Measure
suspended, especially as to renewing Operations upon the Hearts of Sinners:
Though in other Respects we enjoyed special Tokens of God's gracious Presence
with us. In the latter Part of Winter and the Beginning of the Spring, the Lord
was pleased in a remarkable Manner to set his Seal, and give his own blessed
Testimony, to his own most glorious Work among us, by more plentiful Effusions
of his Spirit, than had been given for some Months before. The Concern of
Sinners was increased, some few hoped they received divine Light and Comfort:
And many of God's People had much divine Refreshment, and several of our young
Christians firm Establishment. One aged Man, even above 72 Years of Age, who
had long been under powerful Conviction, at this Time, met with Light and
Comfort, which increased upon him, for about six Weeks, when he departed this
Life, in the highest Triumphs of Faith. It may be worthy of a Remark; that the
few who have died among us, who hoped they received the Grace of God in this
Day, have given us just Occasion to conclude they left this World, in the
Triumphs of Faith with full Assurance of eternal Glory.

The Shower of divine Blessings in this Day, has been very extensive as to
Numbers, who hope they have been savingly wrought upon, and as to Persons of
various Ages. There are from Six or Seven Years of Age to above Seventy who
hope they have received the saving Grace of God in this Day. Yet I think the
Work has been principally among our young People. I am not able to inform what
Number of Persons entertain Hopes they have been savingly called, in this Day.
I have never pretended to number them, nor have I heard that any Person has
made the Attempt, unless by Way of General Conjecture. It Is not the Practice of
my People to pronounce one Another Converts: To say such a one is converted, is
a Term I have not used myself; nor have I heard it used by my People, to be
sure very rare, if ever, in this Day. The general Term has been such a one, by
Name, hopes he, or she, has received Light and Comfort. Although some may think
this is Tantamount or equivalent, to saying such a one is converted; I take the
Liberty to suppose the former is a Term that is more Suitable, since we know so
little of our own Hearts and much less of the Hearts of others. Some may
possibly imagine, that I am transported above Measure with the Lord's Work,
that, I take all for Gold that glistens, and every Pang of Devotions, for real
Religion, and am fond of Numbers; and exceeding charitable; whereas, I suppose
if such Persons, fully knew my Sentiments about a saving Change of Heart, and
what Holiness of Life, I expect thereupon, they would likely judge, I am a very
uncharitable Man. However, neither the one nor the other gives me Concern
personally considered. The Lord's Work is known, perfectly known, by Himself in
all its Glory; how muchsoever concealed from the Eye of Man. It has been a
Remark repeatedly made by Strangers, who have come to us from afar, and abode
with us for some Time, that People in remote Parts, in no due Measure at all,
formed a just Conception of the Power and Glory of the Lord's Work among us. I
am far from supposing that every one is new Born, that is the Subject of such a
Hope: There is a vast Variety of Cases, some more and some less hopeful. Upon
the whole; I am free to declare in the Face of the World, that so far as I am
capable by the Help of God's Word of judging of Things of this Nature, I have
Reason to entertain Hopes, that a very great Number of my dear People, have in
this Day of mavelous Grace, "passed from Death to Life:" I have all the
Evidence I can reasonably expect, and such as is sufficient to induce me to
give God the Glory, and to take the Comfort thereof, (which is quite enough for
me) while I pretend not to know the Heart. I flatter not myself, that there
will be no Instances of Hypocrisy and Apostasy at such a Season; Scripture and
past Observations lead us to expect somewhat of such a Kind. At the same Time,
that I have looked upon this Work much more free from corrupt Mixtures in
general, than ever I knew a Work of this Kind, so I have been hoping that
Instances of Apostasy would not be so numerous, as sometimes in such a Day; and
as yet I have ample Grounds to retain such a Hope. We have often been bid to
wait for Fruits, Fruits of Holiness have been justly expected, and blessed be
God! They now appear and give Confirmation of a mavelous Work of God's Grace
among us. I have the rather delayed the Publication of this Narrative, because
I knew what was expected by many, in order to their Faith concerning the Lord's
Work. It Is now above a Year and a half since the Work began among us so
powerfully, and if visible Fruits of Holiness, exhibit any Evidence of God's
Work of astonishing Grace among us, this Work must be allowed by ample Proof,
to be a mavelous Work of God's Grace. It Is Matter of Joyful Admiration and
Praise, that the Adversary as yet, has had so little Occasion to blaspheme. We
have indeed Occasion to lament, that we have no more of the Life and Power of
Religion among us. We are praying for divine Influences in more copious
Measures. We have several praying Societies, and Meetings every Week for
Prayer. In the after Part of the Day upon the first Wednesday of every Month,
our people meet for Prayer: When many Prayers are offered up to God, that he
would continue to pour out his Spirit upon us, and dwell with us, as his
People: And also that according to his Promise, "He would pour out his Spirit
upon all Flesh." We are still favored with some special Tokens of the divine
Presence, and have Occasion to be a very humble thankful People, abounding in
Fruits of Holiness. We have Reason to fear some have in a Measure lost their
Concern, others seem still determined not to have Rest and Comfort; but in the
Lord. We would fain hope the Harvest is not yet over, and hold on praying that
we may yet see greater Things: Mean While, we doubt not, but that the great
Jehovah has been, and is with us, of a Truth, to whom be all the Glory of his
own most blessed Work for ever and ever!

I have been desired, by a worthy Friend, greatly and justly renowned for
Learning, Piety, and extensive Usefulness in and to the Church of Christ, to
make some Remarks upon, and Reflections relative to this Work of God's
mavelous Grace among us. To which I now proceed.

In and by such a Work, as it is the effectual Application of Redemption, there
is the brightest Display of all the divine Perfections. The unsearchable
Wisdom, the boundless Goodness, the Almighty Power, the spotless Holiness, the
adorable Sovereignty, the inflexible Justice, and inviolable Truth of God,
shine in this great Work with united Splendour. All the Divine Attributes keep
their Place and Rank, and appear and beam out eternally, in all the Glory that
becomes the transcendent Majesty of God.

Such a Work serves to confirm the Divinity of the Gospel, and the Reality of
divine Influences in our Day. Every Soul brought from a State of Nature to a
State of Grace, and made fruitful in Holiness, may be reckoned a new Miracle in
Confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel, and of the divine Influences. All the
Force of mere moral Suasion could never effect such divine Productions, as we
here behold. Nothing short of the Influences of the Holy Spirit associated with
the divine Word, can produce such excellent and supernatural Effects. As to the
Subjects of this Work they are all assured that the Gospel is divinely true,
and the Words of eternal Life. No Person can be the Subject of this Work, and
imagine that the Influences of the Holy Spirit were confined and restricted to
the Apostolic Age, and are not now to be expected.

This Work appears glorious and worthy of special Notice with Respect to
Extent, and the Numbers hopefully wrought upon in this Day. It has not been
confined to one Place, or a few Places only; but the heavenly Shower has come
down upon a great many Congregations. This Work has been more or less
considerable in 12 or 14 Congreations upon this Island: And in some of them,
very powerful and glorious. There has been much of this blessed Work in
several Towns in the Jerseys. I saw much of the good Effects thereof, when in
those Parts the last Fall, upon a preaching Journey: And had very agreeable
Accounts given me of this Work in many Congregations, by a Number of my Rev.
Brethren in the Ministry, who appeared heartily and laborously engaged to
promote this glorious Work in those Parts. I should perhaps be inexcusable, not
to observe, that I have often received good Intelligence of the agreeable
Effects of divine Influence upon the Minds of many People in the City of
New York. I am informed that very many of the Inhabitants of that Metropolis
belonging to various Congregations, hopefully share largely in the special
Blessings of this Day, of the Out-pouring of the Holy Spirit. The Rev. Mr.
Charles-Jeffery Smith, who is abundant in Labors to promote the Redeemer's
Kingdom, and has been the Winter past in Maryland and Virginia, writes to one
of his Correspondents, "that he had lately been preaching among People, upon
whom the Dews of heavenly Influences were descending, as upon the People of
Long Island the last Summer." I have often received Information of the Power
and Progress of this Work in several Places in New England. But it cannot be
reasonably expected, that I should be particular in giving an Account of this
Work in other Places, as I am with Respect to it, among my own People: Yet I
have thought proper to hint thus much, it being one Branch of the Glory of the
Lord's Work at this Day, that it is so extensive. Since the above was written, I
have read the Copy of a Letter, sent from a Friend of Zion in Holland to a
Friend in New York, in which mention is made of a considerable revival of the
Lord's Work in several Places in Holland, within a few Months past. By Accounts
given in that Letter, the Work of Conviction and Conversion is going on in
several Places: "And some old pious People are obliged to acknowledge that
their Hearts are joyful in the Lord to the highest Pitch." The Letter is dated,
Amsterdam July 12. 1765.


The Lord's Work in this Day, has appeared some what singular and
extraordinary with respect to Degrees and Measures of divine Influence, Power
and Purity, Light and Comfort. In general, the Work of the Law has been very
powerful, clear, and distinct: And divine Manifestations thereupon equally so.
Many of the Lord's People have been so replenished with Light and Comfort, as
that their Cup has run over, and there has not been Room to receive the
Blessing some old Disciples among us, for now above a Year seem to have been
favored with the continual, unclouded Shines of Jehovah's precious Favor, and
almost uninterrupted, solemn, and delightful Communion with Him. They appear
continually delighting themselves in the great, I AM, as the Fountain of all
Good, and the Portion of their Souls for ever; and their devotedness to his
Glory is in full Proportion. The Prelibations of Heaven's Glory are now so
given, and New-Jerusalem so come down from above, with Respect to some Persons
among us in Months past, that with Regard to them, the latter Day Glory is
already come; unless we suppose (which I believe will be) that when that Day
fully comes, the Lord will enlarge the essential Powers, as well as spiritual
Principles of his People, so that they will be made strong to bear the Weight
of Joy and Glory, beyond all that has as yet been known upon Earth: In that
Day, -- The Feeble shall be as David, and the House of David shall be as God,
as the Angel of the Lord before them. Zech. xii. 8. Isai. Ix. 19.


This Work has been remarkable for a Spirit of Love and Benevolence; -- And
Freedom from Bitterness; -- And for carrying its own Evidence with it; -- And
for inconsiderable Opposition, where it has made Progress. For Brevity Sake, I
throw a Cluster of Remarks together. The Spirit of this Day eminently consists
in superlative Love to God, and the Savior; in a reigning Love to the Word,
Ordinances, and People of God; and a Disposition to universal Benevolence. I
never knew People converse with one another, more freely and plainly about the
State of each others Souls than in this Day; yet I never heard, nor heard of
one bitter harsh Expression, nor an Instance of rash censorious judging, by any
one of the Subjects of this Work, from the Day it begun among us, to this very
Day. All appeared to be spoken in Love, and with Benevolence, and was so
received: As if the God of Love, was come down to reign among us, by the Power
of Love divine. -- Thus this Work has carried its own Evidence with it: Also
in that the Subjects of it, whether distressed, or comforted, have in general
been capable of giving a rational scriptural Account of their Exercises of
Mind: And in that they appeared in Practice what they professed. By what I have
seen and heard, I have Reason to believe Hundreds, if not Thousands, have had
their Prejudices against experimental Religion removed from their Minds, by
this Work, which has carried such Evidence with it, that it is of God. -- Was
it not for an unhappy opposing few, this Work would almost want one Evidence of
being a Work of God. We here, have seldom ever heard the Word Opposer mentioned
in this Day: It seemed to be the general Concern of People to share in the
Work; and not to appear with a Spirit of Opposition. By what I have heard, it
has been much so in other Places, where this Work has made considerable
Progress. The Rev. Mr. Prime, in a Letter dated Huntington 8th. of May 1764,
writes thus, Although there are some among us, I hope but very few, that oppose
themselves, yet blessed be God, his glorious Work of Grace goes on here! The
greatest Part of our People seem to be solemnized and made thoughtful. Not a
few wounded deeply at Heart, and groaning under Burdens insupportable, some
under shuddering Horror, fearful Apprehensions of divine Wrath. The Rev. Mr.
Jones, of Morris Town, in a Letter dated July 13th. 1764. Thus informs, viz.
The Lord Jehovah has rent his Heavens and come down, and the Mountains are
fleeing at his Presence, I am surprised at the Progress and Success of this
Work; nor is their any considerable Opposition. There is some thing of this
blessed Work all around me. etc. There are such Marks and Signatures of a
divine Impress, attending this Work, as that it appears most unreasonably Vile,
and Wicked, to make Opposition.

This Work has been uncommonly free from mere imagination, and Satanical
Delusion. It Is not to be wondered at, if in such a Day, some Persons have
imaginary Notions; nor if Satan have a Hand in some woeful Delusions. The Devil
has sometimes, perhaps, too much atributed to him and sometimes not enough.
The due Consideration of human Nature under intense Exercises and Affections of
Mind, will sufficiently help us to account for a Train of strong and pleasing
Imaginations, and a Kind of delightful Visions. But utmost Care and Caution is
to be used, that Persons don't lay Stress upon such Things, as though they were
Visions, divine Revelations, and high Seize in Religion: For then the
Word of God, as the Rule of Faith and Practice, will be treated with Neglect;
and such Persons will likely be led a woeful Jaunt by the Devil. I have
conversed with but very few Persons in this Day that have made any Mention of
any thing that appeared to be merely Imaginary, and them mostly Servants, that
I suppose could not read. None among us make the least Pretense to Visions and
Revelations, as above mentioned. Intellectual and Spiritual Views of divine
Objects, as externally revealed in the Word, and Transformation of Soul, by the
Illumination of the Holy Spirit and the Comfort and Blessedness that
accompanies, are the Pursuit of the Subjects of this Work among us.

According to the Lord's Manner of Dispensation in this Work it is not his
Method of Operation to take Sinners out of a State of Security in Sin, Guilt
and Condemnation, immediately into a State of Justification, Sanctification,
Rest and Comfort; Greatness of Endeavor after Salvation, a Work of the Law,
and Humiliation preceed. Sinners are first brought to a Sight of themselves in
their true and proper Character, as given by the Law of God, in which Glass
they see their Sin, Guilt, and Danger of eternal Damnation: And when the Light
of Truth shines in the Conscience, it makes the stoutest Heart to tremble. Then
Sinners become anxious, use great Endeavors, utter Cries for Mercy, and strive
even to an Agony, for Salvation. The Spirit of God puts Sinners upon utmost
Endeavors after Salvation; but not upon resting in them. It seems to me, if
ever the Kingdom of Heaven was taken by Violence, it has been by Sinners among
us in this Day. At the same Time, they have seen their absolute Inability to
help themselves, approved of God's Law as just in their Condemnation, and found
that the Spirit of God is a Convincer, before he is a Comforter. It Is true
indeed, all have not in like Manner such dreadful Terrors of legal Wrath, nor
so deep a Sense of Hell and Damnation, nor have all in the same Method a clear
distinct Work of the Law: The Holy Spirit is a Sovereign Agent; enlightened
convinced Souls, are differently wrought upon herein. Proper Allowance is to be
made for Persons of little doctrinal Knowledge, and some others, that have not
had so clear a Work of the Law, if they are not able to give such a methodical
Account thereof, as would please the nice Taste of a learned metaphyfical
Divine, we must not always throw them a way, as Christless and Graceless:
Especially if they appear convinced of Sin, and to have their Hope in
themselves cut off, exalt Jesus Christ, as all in all, and appear heavenly in
their Temper, and holy in their Walk and Conversation. Nor is it safe for any
to conclude they have true Comfort, because it followed legal Terrors; this may
be and yet the Soul not converted to Jesus and the Holiness of the Gospel: The
grand Point we are to regard, as to our selves and others in our Judgment. Yet
it doubtless holds True, that until Sinners see the Sinfulness of Sin, their
lost State by Nature, the spirituality of the Law, their unworthyness of divine
Mercy, they will not come to Christ for Salvation; nor are they like to have a
Discovery of his Fullness and Glory. An Imperfect Work of the Law, and a
Misapplication of the Gospel, is no doubt, the Ruin of many Souls. Such as
imagine there is no Knowledge of Sin by the Law, and Spirit of God, given
before saving Faith, imagine, that which is Contrary to the Word of God, and
the Experience of his People in all Ages.

According to this Work of God, it appears evident by the Confessions of the
Subjects thereof, that in real Submission to a sovereign God, Sinners can plead
no Scripture Promises of Grace and Salvation, made to the doings of the
Unregenerate. They utterly discard such a legal Spirit, as the Result of Pride,
and vain Conceit of doing something to make God a Debtor to Works, and as
founded in Ignorance, both of ourselves, and the Word of God's rich Grace and
free Promises, all Yea and Amen in Christ, unto the Glory of God. Nor do they
come to Christ for Salvation, as first persuaded He died for them in
particular; but merely upon the Encouragement of Gospel Calls and Invitations.

Such a work as this effectually attaches the Hearts of its Subjects to the
whole System of Truths revealed in God's Word; and brings them in particular,
to acknowledge these Doctrines, which for Distinction sake, are called
Calvinistical: The lost and fallen State of Man by Nature; the absolute
Necessity of Salvation by Jesus Christ; -- the Pardon of Sin by the Riches of
Divine Grace, through the impured Righteousness of the Savior; --
Sanctification and Comfort by the Holy Ghost: -- These great Foundation
Doctrines, together with others, that have so extensive an Influence on the
whole of practical Religion, the Subjects of this Work embrace as true
Scripture Doctrine. Socinion, Pelagian, and Arminion Doctrines, and ^ll
Principles pernicious and destructive to the Souls of Men, however pleasing to
corrupt Nature, can have no Place nor Being, where such a Work prevails in its
Power. All the elaborate Performances and labored Arguments, of great and
sound Divines, are in no Measure comparable to such a Work of God, for the
utter Abolition of corrupt Principles.

In the View of this Work, it appears unCeasonable to lay Stress upon crying
out under Conviction, as though necessary to a Law Work, and equally absurd to
suppose Persons are deluded, because under a Law Work they could not refrain.
Many have and many have not gone the Length, to cry out under Soul Concern,
they respectively, as to the main Strokes give the same Account, as to a Work
of Conviction, and divine Manifestations and appear to walk with God, and to be
equally holy in Life and Conversation: Now is it possible for any thinking
Person, to conclude the Work has been deficient in the one, and delusive in
the other, merely on Account of that which at most, is but a Circumstance that
may, or may not attend Soul Concern and spiritual Exercises? No doubt, Persons
ought to refrain as much as they can from making ado, especially in Time of
Public Worship. This is an established Principle among my People; nor have I,
that I remember, been interrupted when Preaching so as to prevent my being
heard in general, for the Space of two Minutes; yet we have often seen some so
greatly distressed, and others so abundently comforted, as that it appeared
impossible for them to avoid undissembled Expressions of each. But these Things
are made no essential Part of Religion; nor do they give Offense when appearing
unavoidable. It Is abundently evident, that the great Distress of some, and the
divine Comfort with which others have been replenished, have been eminently
owned and blessed, as a Means to promote the Work of God among us. Therefore, I
take the Liberty to think, that 'till Minister and People are truly willing
the Lord should work in such a powerful Manner, his Way as yet, is not prepared
for doing many great and mighty Things among them. Not that I approve of the
Conduct of such Persons who give Vent to their Passions without Restraint, and
affect to be noisy, at Pleasure, making the same ado, at one Time as well as
another: They act a Part injurous to themselves, and prejudice many against all
extraordinary Appearances; especially when little or no Religion appears in
their Lives and Conversation. Such Conduct when not out of Necessity, is the
Way in Time to have all genuine Appearences lose all good Effect. But I think
it is too much for the Clay to dictate to the Potter: God gives not Account of
his Matters: Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? With whom took He
Counsel? -- It Is in vain to prescribe, after all, God will work like Himself,
and will carry on his Work in such a Manner as to show his own Glory, and exalt
his own Sovereignty, and pour Contempt on human Strength and Wisdom.

Although The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, like the Kingdoms of
earthly Kings, set up with outward Pomp, yet the Revival of Religion among a
People by a plentiful Effusion of the Spirit, occasions a great Stir, and
becomes publicly observable. When the Holy Spirit breathes upon the dry Bones
in the Valley of Vision, what a Noise and Stir is made, by the Resurrection of
a great Army to Life; and how observable the Effects?

Knowledge of, and Acquaintance with promissory and prophetic Parts of
Scripture may be of eminent use in such a Day: For Scripture Promises and
Prophecies, are fully expressive of such mavelous Effusions of the Holy
Spirit, and glorious Effects.

By such a Work, we learn that the Holy Spirit is an infinite Sovereign, in his
Opperations, and thereby produces affecting Seperations. He grants his
Influences when, where, upon whomsoever, and in what Measures and Degrees He
pleases: And a Separation is made between Persons of all Ranks, Ages, and
Relations, and even dearest Friends may seem parted, while one is taken and
another left.

By such a Work, Sinners are made to see, that Inability is no excuse for
Infidelity, it being moral Indisposition; and are brought, to approve of God's
Law, as being strictly just. And of the Gospel method of Salvation, as
infinitely glorious

It Is of no small Service to the Lord's Work, in such a Day, to have People
well indoctrinated, and to have a very considerable Number of solid judicious
old Disciples in Christ rich in Knowledge and Experience of divine Grace. They
befriend Sinners under Convictions; and young Christians in their first Love,
and afford them much Instruction amidst their new Experiences and various
Exercises. They happily often prevent wild Delusions.

The Subjects of such a Work highly esteem and inflexibly adhere to divine
Institutions and holy Ordinances. They cannot rest satisfied with empty Form
void of Life and Power; they watch against the Wiles of enthusiastical Error;
they pray much for the Aids and Assistance of the Blessed Spirit, in all holy
Duties: And especially to see Jehovah's stately Steppings in his Sanctuary; and
that there, and even continually, they may share largely in the powerful
purifying and consolatory Influences of the Holy Spirit upon their Hearts;
enabling and disposing of them to universal Holiness of Life. Although, to their
Lamentation, they find they come vastly short of their Aims, yet thus they seek
that Religion, which shines in the native Beauties of Holiness, and the
ravishing Glories of a divine Impress.

I have had Occasion to remark, that when Preachers have insisted upon those
Truths of Law and Gospel, that the Holy Spirit seemed to be making a powerful
Application of to the Minds of People at this Time, and in a very plain Manner
have exhibeted the blessed Jesus in all the Glories of his divine and
mediatorial Character, such Subjects and such a Method of Preaching, the
Blessing of the Lord in a signal Measure rested upon, for the promoting this
Work. Especially when the Preacher appeared to have a great and solemn Sense of
the Truths he delivered, and spoke, "as in Demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power": Frequently addressing the Consciences of Hearers in a pathetical and
pungent Manner, often in the pointed Form of the Second Person, that Saints and
Sinners might have their Portion of the Word well divided and give the more
Heed to an Address particularly directed. The Face of the Assembly in Time of
Hearing, ordinarily seemed to indicate a Blessing attending, such a Method and
Manner of Preaching, Accounts afterward received of the good Effects, gave
Confirmation. Which has often made me think, that the Goodness of preaching,
must be determined, like that of a Tree, not by its Blossoms, but its Fruits. I
can scarce forbear adding, that frequent Preaching, has been eminently blessed
for increasing and upholding Views of divine and eternal Things, in the Minds
of Saints and Sinners. Which has often made me long and pray for that
laborious Day, "when the Watchmen upon the Walls of Jerusalem, shall never hold
their Peace, Day nor Night," and the Gospel-Trumpet shall be blown by Zion's
Priests, with one long, perpetual and powerful Blast, so that the (...) of
Antichrist and Satan, like those of Jericho, shall fall down flat, and never
more be erected.

While I have heard so many in this Day, inquiring with Anxiety, what they
should do to be saved? It has been natural to reflect that the Condition of
many, must needs be lamentable, in Places of awful Security. There were
perhaps, as many hopefully truly pious Persons among us, before This Day, as in
almost any Place for the Number of People; Yet a great many among us, as well
the seemingly moral, as the awfully careless; and openly vicious, have seen
themselves in a condemned perishing Condition: Our Young People in general, now
know they were going in Companies to eternal Misery! Our Case is as yet, in a
Measure mournful; how lamentable then must be the Condition of many Persons, in
those Places, where the divine Influences have been awfully suspended for ten
or Twenty Years past! What Bowels of God-like Pity, and Christ-like Compassion,
should the pious few in such Places exercise toward the Multitudes around
them, going down -- down -- down to everlasting Burnings! How immensely
shocking it must needs be, to a faithful Minister of Christ, to pass round
about and behold, the breathless, lifeless, dry Bones, in such a Place! With
what a praying Frame of Soul with what an aching, sighing Heart, should and
will he enter his Pulpit to Minister, in sacred Things, to the many perishing
Immortals before Him!

It seems to be a Token for good, when the Lord gives his People a Spirit of
Prayer for the divine Influences, and brings Zion under laboring Pangs for the
Formation of Christ in the Souls of others: For this has eminently been the
Case among us as the Lord's Work began and made Progress, in this Day. However
strange it may seem to some, we have serious People among us, who had a
powerful Work of the Law, that declare they have undergone as much Distress for
the Salvation of the Souls of others, as they did for their own. In some
Instances I have known, I believe a Continuance would soon have separated
between Soul and Body. Thus have we had a faint Emblem of that amazing Day,
when it shall be asked, "Who has heard such a Thing? Who has seen such
Things? Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one Day? Shall a Nation be
born at once? For as soon as Zion traveled she brought forth her Children."

Suppressing numerous Remarks and Reflecions, I shall now only add, (with a
little Scope) that such a Work as has been narrated, may strengthen the Faith
and Hope, and encourage the Prayers of the Lord's People for plentiful
Effusions of the Holy Spirit. The same Measures of Light by the Holy Spirit
will produce the same Effects: There is in this Case an inseparable Connection
between Causes and Effects. That Sum of all Blessings, now of such infinite
Importance and Excellence, to be conferred upon us in all Places, without which
the unconverted must assuredly perish for an endless evermore, is the powerful
Illumination and sanctifying Operation of the Holy Spirit. The Omnipotent
Agency of the eternal Spirit, and a Sight of Truth, in its various needful
Branches, by his sacred Illumination, will, and nothing short thereof can,
produce those interesting Effects, and glorious Consequences, that God's People
are longing and praying for. If he suspends his powerful Influence, Sinners by
thousands around us, continue in their Security, in an habitual Alienation of
Heart from the Life and Power of true Religion, and every Moment will be
rushing on blindfold and unprepared into an amazing Eternity! It Is astonishing
to the last Degree! That no more is said, that no more is heard, concerning the
Holy Spirit's Operation, and that no more Honor is given Him, in the Affair of
Man's eternal Salvation. The Lord's People need all possible Encouragement to
pray for the infinitely important Blessing of the Out-pouring of the Holy
Spirit; and some Encouragement is given by his mavelous Descent upon an
unworthy sinful People. Encouraged by the gracious Benignity of the Holy
Spirit; by his Province in the Economy of Man's Salvation; by the Purchase and
Intercession of Christ by the Gospel's being the Ministration of the Spirit; by
numerous Prophecies and Promises of the Spirit's Mission and Influences; by all
past and present Operations; -- in the View of the present and future blessed
Effects and glorious Consequences of his sacred Influences, surely the Lord's
People can never faint, nor grow weary of praying: But use all their Interest
in Heaven, to the utmost, be resolute, Importinate, and unceasing, 'till the
Holy Spirit descends in Showers of Grace, upon the Church of Christ, and even
upon the whole World. The great I AM, our all-sufficient God, perfectly and
infinitely well knew, that He was equal to the Accomplishment of the Promises,
He made to his eternal Son our divine Mediator, and those He has given to his
Church and People in and through Him, when he made them: And he made them with
a Design to fulfill them, resolving their exact Accomplishment, and that the
Prayers of his People, should be a Means by which, He would execute his eternal
Purpose. O! that we firmly believed these Things, and lived upon them! That we
better knew who it is we pray to, and in whose Name, and what we pray for, when
we pray for the Effusions of the Holy Spirit upon the Church of Christ, and
upon all Flesh! Then should we become wrestling Jacobs, and even prevailing
Isreal's; giving our prayer hearing all-sufficient God and Father no Rest, 'till
He establish, and 'till He make Jerusalem a Praise in all the Earth.

Thus I have given some Account of the late wonderful Appearance of the Revival
of Religion among us: And made some Remarks thereupon knowing the Taste of the
present Age in general, I am quite sensible that some will possibly Judge, I
have been too Lengthy: But surely I have been very Brief, in the View of the
extraordinariness of the Work itself. Amidst a Throng of visits and abounding
Labors, as a hurried Man, I have taken hold on Time, to write the preceding
Narrative, for the Sake of those, who would read to improve for God's Glory,
and the Furtherance of their own Salvation. It may be expected, that numerous
and various Animadversions will be made, and very diverse Sentiments
entertained relative to what I have written. If any should read what I have
written, whose proper Charactor is, "that in Merriment, they are going on in
the Way to eternal Misery," they will doubtless, (if not awakened thereby)
disapprove and condemn; for such a Work, condemns to Death, their sinful
sensual Pleasures. If any should read, who have at Times some superficial
Thoughts about Religion, but never felt the Power of divine and eternal Things,
have rarely heard, or not yet believed, there is a Holy Ghost, and who scarce
know whether they give Sin and Death, a Judgment to come, Heaven and Hell a
Place in their Creed, such Persons no doubt will also disapprove; for such a
Work; condemns their awful Infidellity in an inglorious Nutrallity. If any
should read, who rest in the Form of Religion, and moderately acknowledge some
insensible Operations of the Holy Spirit, but are unacquainted with his sacred
Illuminations, and powerful Enlargements, who are apt to account Seriousness in
Religion, Mopishness and melancholy; Self-denial over Preciseness; holy
Singularity humourous Folly; serious speaking, mere canting; real Humility, a
Sort of Stupidity; exact Walking with God, a needless Scrupelosity; Faith of
Things future, a fond Credulity; Zeal in a good Cause, Fervor in Devotions and
earnest Conversing with God in humble Prayer, Enthusiasm; all such together
with others more strictly attached to a Form of Duty void of Life and Power,
will most probably disapprove of the work described in the preceding
Narrative: For such a Work makes null and void, all Pretenses to real Religion,
without serious Soul Exercises, and the Power of Godliness, by the divine
Influences. It Is probable that some will say, they approve of the Work in
general but they disapprove of laying so much Stress upon such sudden
mavelous Effusions of the Holy Spirit as seems to them is done in the
Narrative. It may be considered, that it was not the Design of the Narrator to
lay the Stress of the Work upon such Effusions; -- but to relate Facts: As
knowing that in order to such a Work's being judged of, there are but two
Things which need be known; viz. Facts and Rules to judge by: The Rules of the
Word of God, we have before us, and as to Facts there are but two Ways to
obtain them, so as to be in a Capacity to compare them with the Rules, The one
by our own Observation, the other by Information from others that had
Opportunity to observe. I would hope that the Facts narrated, are so well
attested, as in a Judgment of Charity, to demand Credibility. It Is true that
there were, when this Work first began with great Power among us, some sudden,
copious and astonishing Effusions of the Holy Spirit: Such as I have seldom
heard or read of since the primitive Times of Christianity. But before such
Effusions of the Holy Spirit are disapproved of, I would seek the Favor of my
Reader, to give an Answer to the following Questions, viz. First, Watchman,
what of the Night? or where is the Church of Christ now, according to Prophecy,
or in what Manner of Time does her present State seem to fall? Secondly, to
give a critical, full, and just Exposition of the Promises and Prophecies that
relate to the Manner of the Holy Spirit's being poured out in these last Days,
and as to Measures and Degrees, with the Effects, by Way of Conviction of Sin,
divine Manifestations, Transformation, divine Peace Love, Joy Assurance of the
divine Favor, and Fruits of universal Holiness. It Is beside my present Work,
or I would show that the Church of Christ, has now full Warrant to expect such
Effusions of the Holy Spirit; and prove from many typical Events, and express
Scripture Promises and prophecies, that the Dispensation of the Spirit is often
to be expected in such a sudden powerful Manner, and in yet vastly more
plentiful Measures, attended with answerable extraordinary Effects, and
glorious Consequences. Yet I don't suppose such Descents of the Spirit, as now
mentioned, essentially necessary to the Progress of the Lord's Work in some
good Degree, although the reality of his Influence and Operation is: I have often
seen the Work of God going on with Great Power and Glory, where such sudden
copious amazing Dispensations of the Spirit were not taking Place. Some that
read, will perhaps say they have nothing to object, only that some of the
Subjects of this Work appear to have been too much under the Power of legal
Terror, in too great Earnest for Salvation, and beyond all Reason affected with
Danger of perishing. It Is true, as has been related, that the Subjects of this
Work in general, have had a deep and distressing Sense of Guilt, Wretchedness
and Danger, and have seen the Law of God strictly just, in their eternal
Condemnation, before they submitted to sovereign Mercy, and had a View of the
infinite Safety and Excellence of the Gospel Plan of Salvation: And some in
particular had dreadful Terrors of legal Wrath, and were in Agonies of Distress
for a Savior, it may be remembered, that it is the Office of the Holy Spirit to
convince of Sin, by his powerful Agency; that our Lord Christ often tells us in
the plainest Terms, "That the Whole need not the Physician;" "That he came to
call Sinners to Repentence"; And that in particular He invites "the weary and
heavy laden to come to Him for Rest"; and commands us to strive even to an
Agony for Salvation; and justifies taking the Kingdom of God by Violence. And
as there is nothing unscriptural in great legal Terrors and distressing Soul
Concern, what is there unreasonable? When Sinners are brought by the divine Law
and Spirit, to view their Wickedness unutterably great, and to hear the
Thunders of offended Jehovah as immensly terrible, and realize Hell's Misery,
as infinitely dreadful, and to see themselves every Moment in Jeopardy of
flaming Ruin, just ready to be swallowed up in the bottomless Gulf of the
eternal Wrath of All-mighty God, can it possibly be thought unreasonable or
strange, that Sinners under such Views and Apprehensions, are greatly moved and
affected? I rather think it strange that they draw the Breath of Life. Eternity
is so yast, and spiritual, immortal Things of such infinite Concern, that to be
only moderately moved by and affected with them is in the Nature of Things, a
grand Absurdity. Some indeed have not so great Terrors, and so deep a Sense of
Hell and Damnation, as others, before they come to Jesus: But all come as
Guilty justly condemned Sinners, Some have great legal Terrors, and receive no
true Comfort; others, that have been under amazing legal Terrors, do and prove
excellent Christians. In this Case we are not so much to regard the Manner of
Operation by the Holy Spirit, as the Effect of his Operation, appearing by the
Fruits that follow -- some who read, may observe, that they think the Effect of
the Work in general to be good, in that the Subjects of it seem to be altered
for the better; but they talk so much about Light and the Spirit's Illumination
as seems to them to savior of an enthusiastical Turn of Mind. It Is true, there
is much said by the Subjects of this Work concerning the Excellence and
Importance of the Holy Spirit's Operation and Illumination. They perceive the
natural Man discerns not spiritual Things; -- That unenlightened Sinners are
Darkness in the Abstract; -- that none are born again, but by the Spirit; that
they who know the Lord's Name, trust in Him; -- that he that sees the Son
believes; -- that the Lord shines by his Spirit into the Heart, when his Glory
in the Face of Christ is beheld; and that by a Sight of this Glory they are
changed from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit; they find they cannot act their
own Graces, nor perform Duties evangelically, nor see the infinite Beauty of
moral Excellence; nor know the Things freely given them of God; nor enjoy the
Comfort of Religion, but by the Holy Spirit's Illumination, Aid and Assistance,
therefore they talk so much concerning his Operations and Illuminations, even
as all in all, in Point of Agency, in the Business of Religion. Some who read
this Narrative, may possibly allow, that Sinners indeed, may be justly affected
with Danger to the last Degree; but they cannot account for such great Joy and
Comfort as is narrated. We readily acknowledge, that this Coronation Day of
King Jesus, has been a Day of great and solemn Joy among us. Not only among
Prodigals returned (as they hope) to the Father of Mercies, and made to enjoy
the precious Shines of his Fovour, and the special Tokens of his Choice and
incomparable Love; but also among the Lord's People in general, as brought into
his Banqueting House with the Banner of divine Love displayed. Some old
Disciples, well acquainted with the Nature and Essence of Religion, who have
walked with God for above twenty Years, have now more Comfort in one Day
sensibly so, than in a Year before, and that for hundreds of Days together. I
can instance in a Person, that has sought the Lord with a Hope of being in his
Favor for fifty Years past, that has enjoyed more sensible Communion with God,
and Evidence of his Favor in one Day of late, than for fifty Years past: And
can give an Instance of another of ninety four Years of Age who for seventy
Years has been seeking God with a purifying Hope of an Interest in his Love,
enjoying (as I have Reason to believe) more of the sensible gracious Presence
of God and divine Comfort since this Day among us, than for seventy Years
before: So that Youth is renewed. The Lord's People did not know before that so
much of Heaven was to be enjoyed upon Earth. While divine Glories have been
opened to View, divine Comforts have run high. When true Believers in Christ
have enlightened Views of the joint Illustration of infinite Justice and Mercy,
and of the Harmony and Glory of all the divine Attributes in the Gospel Plan of
Salvation, and a Sight of the Glory and Sufficiency of the divine Jesus, and of
the moral Beauty and Excellence of the Things of God, what is there
unscriptural or unreasonable in their rejoicing with glorified Joy, even while
abased in the View of their own infinite unlikeness to spotless Rectitude and
Perfection? That Hypocrites and Stony-Ground Hearers have false Joys, arising
from the Thought that they please God, or that He is pleased with them, or from
some Impulses or imaginary Views and Notions, is an undoubted Truth. Now,
because there have been some, who seem, to have raised Affections and great
Joy, for a Time, that have fallen into Error, or their Affections and Joys have
come to nothing, great Numbers thereupon, appear disposed to reject and discard
all raised Affection in Religion, and even the sublime and heavenly Joys of the
Lord's People in Him; without Distinction they account all is Delusion. Which
is the Way to bring all Religion to a mere lifeless Formality and effectually
to shut out the Power of Godliness, and which directly tends to make ten Times
as many formal Hypocrites, as there are made by false Comforts. The Truth is,
there are false Affections and Joys, and there are true; and proper Distinction
is to be made between them; and the power of Godliness to be insisted upon and
urged at the same Time: For true Religion is ever more a powerful Thing. Although
there is no true Religion where there is nothing but Affection, there being
something else in it beside Affection, yet there is no true Religion without
the Affections. The Religion of Heaven very much consists in holy Love and Joy,
and so does true Religion upon Earth. If the Mind has answerable Light and
Knowledge of the moral Excellence and Beauty of divine Objects, and the Person
proportionable Humility, true mourning for Sin, and real dedevotedness to God,
no Matter how high holy Love and Joy arise, if even to celestial Flame and
Rapture, all the better. Who shall limmit our God, saying such a Degree of the
Earnest of heavenly Happiness shall be given upon Earth, and no more? It Is
evident from the Prophecies, that there is a glorious Day approaching, of such
Out-pourings of the Holy Spirit, as will introduce eminently holy and joyful
Times; and what if that Day already begins to dawn? Possibly some who read, may
approve of all that is narrated excepting only the great Distress of some
Persons for others, which is a Difficulty with them without a Solution. The
best Way in this Case, is to become seriously, deeply and joyfully impressed
with a Sense of the infinite Preciousness of Jehovah's Favor; and of the
beatitudes of the Sanctuary of Immortallity, by present solemn Delightful
Communion with the adorable Trinity; and to gain a sight of IMMANUEL'S Glory,
and a Sense of the Riches and freeness of his Grace and constraining Love;
thereby a true Apprehension of the immense Worth of Souls; and thereupon a
realizing View of the infinite Dreadfulness of eternal Seclusion from Heaven's
Joys and Glories; and of the Danger Sinners are in every Moment of sinking down
under the amazing Crush of the threatened, just, omnipotent Vengeance of the
ever living God, for an endless Eternity. Such, and such like Views, with a
good understanding of the many Scriptures that speak of Zion's laboring Pangs,
for the Newbirth of Souls, will best give a Solution of the present Difficulty.
All the Lord's People have not had equal Measures of Light, Distress, and
Comfort; but they know how to argue from the less to the greater: If such given
Measures of divine Influence and Light produce such Effects, no doubt higher
Measures will produce answerable Effects: Thus Experience does befriend us.

Some may acknowledge wonderful Effects produced, but then they resolve them
mostly into Pulpit-Gesture, striking Phraseology, Modulation of Voice, and
sound, or heated Imagination, something Constitutional, or mechanical
Operation. No doubt the Passions may be strongly touched, and the affections
greatly moved, and yet the Mind remain uninlighten'd, the Heart unrenewed, and
the Life unreformed. However, this proves nothing against the powerful Effects
of a preached Gospel, accompanied by the divine Influences. Although transient
Passions and superficial Emotions, may ebb and flow with the animal Spirits,
operating by a mechanical Force, as raised by the trivial Arts of puerile
Oratory; yet there is a pathetick Manner of Preaching; that has in it a Sort of
irresistible Authority: while the Preacher comes home to the great Concerns and
Feelings of Mankind, he seeks to interest Reason in his Cause, at the same
Time, enlightens, touches the Passions and warms: Which nevertheless passes
with many for enthusiastic Heat, and affected Singularity. When the Lord has
been with and assisted Ministers, in a Day of the Spirit's Out pouring, and
gave the Blessing, and People have been greatly affected with their eternal
Concernments, how common has it been for some to raise a Cry, that the
Preachers played artfully on the Peoples Passions, at the Expense of their
Reason. After all, we must attribute divine Productions to their proper Cause.
Let all serious People judge, whether such uniform Effects, and glorious
Productions, as I have narrated, can take Place, without an adequate Cause,
viz. a divine Agency: While in the present Case we Judge by Facts and Fruits,
as our Lord has directed. Thus I have thought proper, in a Measure to digress,
not merely for the Vindication of the Lord's Work; but if possible to remove
the prejudices of some, that they may receive the greater Benefit. "When they
heard these Things they held their Peace."

When there has been an Harvest, we expect a threshing and winnowing Time will
follow. The great Out-pouring of the Spirit in the Apostles Days, and the
History of the Church in various Ages, will teach us to expect Instances of
Apostasy following such a Day as this. Some who have gained the Charity of the
Lord's People, will likely fall away, and their fair Appearances come to
Nothing. The Lord's People, who know experimentally what true Religion is, will
not thereupon turn Scepticks; but as having increasing Acquaintance with Things
of this Kind, will doubtless be ready to adopt, the Sayings of that excellent
Casuist, and great Man in his Day, President Edwards, viz. I once did not
imagine the Heart of Man had been so unsearchable as I find it is. I am less
charitable and less uncharitable than once I was. The longer I live, the less I
wonder that God challenges it as his Perogative to try the Hearts of the
Children of Men. -- We have not such a Spirit of Discerning that we can
absolutely determine who are Godly, and who are not: For we can neither see nor
feel, the internal Exercises of Grace in others. How often have we seen
Persons, who seemed for a Time to have the same Exercises with real Converts,
yet after all their bright Appearances have fallen away, and become awful
Apostates; while others have persevered and shined in all the Beauties of
universal Holiness. Ordinarily in such a Day as this, there are some Persons,
who appear opposite to the power of Godliness. Other are only shocked by means
of the extraordinary Appearances of Things; and when their Surprise is over,
they return to Sin, and Folly as before. Some that were under powerful
Convictions of Sin and Misery, lose their Concern, and after the Restraint of
their Corruptions for a Time, they often break out with the greater Violence
and their "last State is worse than their first." Others that had legal
Terrors, having got false Comforts they at Length one after another Fall away,
and become Apostates. Satan is often permitted to play an after Game, and Error
and Delusion spring up, and become rampant. The divine Influences are in a
Measure suspended, and the Lord's People in general abate of the Vigor of a
Spiritual Life, and some die. Very soon rises up a Generation that knows not
God, and abounds in Wickedness. The Co-incedence of some, especially of all,
these Things, rightly considered, may be of Use to account for the Appearance
of the strange darkening and obscuring of the Glory of the Lord's Work, soon
after there has been a great Revival of Religion. Even the Lord's People, when
they do not make proper Allowence for these Things, withold from him, the due
Tribute of his Praise, for the Work of his mavelous Grace. When these Things
occur, they who truly fear God, are grieved, tried, and in the Issue
established. Many others stumble and fall, determine against experimental
Religion, and conclude to do as well as they can, and to rely upon unregenerate
Morality, as the best Way to Heaven, and discern not their proper Motto, "Mean
Tekal." Others speak reproachfully, and even blaspheme: With hardened Hearts
they cry, "Ah, so would we have it"! No doubt the Lord permits these Things,
for Trials to his People; and in awful Judgment to those who would not bow
before, nor acknowledge Him in the Work of his Grace. If People would carefully
attend to what the holy Scriptures teach us to expect, their Surprise,
Stumbling, and Reproach in all such Cases would cease. "For it must needs be
that Offenses must come: They who are approved must be made manifest. Though
there are many Counterfeits, there will still be sufficient Means to
distinguish in a Judgment of Charity, the Gold from the Dross. While the Faith
of some is tried, and the Infidelity of others confirmed, Aaron's Rod will be
swallowing up every other: Great is the Truth and it will at last prevail with
eternal Triumph: The Stone from the Mountain, shall smite the Image from Head
to Feet, and fill the whole Earth: As preparatory, "Many shall be purified, and
made white, and tried: But the Wicked shall do wickedly: And none of the wicked
shall understand; but the wise shall understand." The mournful Offenses just
now mentioned, take not Place as yet, among the professed Subjects of the
Lord's Work here. I cannot say there has been no Shadow of an Instance in any
Person's Conduct, that has given just Occasion of stumbling to others; nor do
I flatter myself there will be none strange if not Many; but at present,
Instances of moral Scandal we have not among us. God as yet has graciously
preserved the Subjects of this Work from giving Occasion of Scandal to the
World. I have still the Pleasure of proceeding in preaching the great and
glorious Truths of Law and Gospel without diverting to correct Errors that have
arisen in this Day. And indeed as Luther upon Occasion, said to Melancthon "the
best way to beat down Error, was to preach up Truth;" so I believe it is the
best Way to keep it out. We have here no Divisions and Contentions about
Religion, all is Harmony, all is Love. Some Christians are hoping, that Zion
shall no more be termed forsaken and desolate; but shall be called Hephzi-bah,
and our Land Beulah: And seem determined to pray that the Lord would continue
and increase the divine Influences 'till the latter Day Glory comes. Infinitely
unworthy as we are, if we may judge by Fruits, as well as Feelings, we have
most satisfactory, and Comfortable Evidence, that the great JEHOVAH has bowed
his Heavens and come down to us, here on this End of our Island: Manifests his
Glory to us, and dwells with us; and to Him be all the Glory and Praise for
ever.

While I have been seeking and laboring to promote this blessed Work, I have
been continually watchful, left Satan, (as has been common) should gain some
Advantage against it. I have looked for his Attempts, in his old beaten Paths,
and also to have him make some new Attack. After all Precautions and Endeavors
to have the Lord's Work preserved as free as possible, from Imaginary Notions,
corrupt Mixtures, awful Degeneracy, and satanical Delusion, "Except the Lord
keep the City, the Watchman waketh in vain." We the Ministers of Christ, who
have seen a Time, or Times, of the Out-pouring of the Holy Spirit heretofore,
and have observed past Scenes that have opened to View, and now see the Lord's
Work making Progress among our People, are reaping much Advantage by past
Times. But after all, we find our selves vastly insufficient for our Work in
this glorious Day: We see that we greatly need Heavenly Furniture, much Wisdom
and Prudence, divine Aid, Assistance and Zeal, to be denied from the immense
Fullness and unwasted Stores of our all-sufficient Immanuel, in order to
Fidelity, and full Proof of our Mininistry, in this mavelous Day of divine
Influence.

To conclude, I would bespeak the Praises, and request the Prayers of the
Lord's People, with Reference to his Work among us, and in behalf of Minister
and People in this Town. Let them praise the triune God, for astonishing
Manifestations of Almighty Power, and sovereign Grace among us! Let them pray
hard, for God's gracious Presence with us, that our Light may so shine, that
Himself may receive Glory We are far from being such a pure and holy People, as
we ought to be; we are indeed a very sinful and wicked People, greatly needing
a more thorough Reformation. It Is to be feared, that many are left as yet,
under the Curse, in the Day of Blessing; in Darkness, in this Day of Light; in
Slavery, in the Year of Jubilee; Famishing in the midst of a Plenty of the
Water of Life, and the heavenly Manna; Bleeding to Death, with many grievous
Wounds, while the great Physician is present with the Balm of Gilead, and
offers to heal and save, but they refuse as exposed to the most aggravated, as
well as an eternal Condemnation; surely their Case calls aloud for the
Compassion and Prayers of all God's People. As to those of us, that hope we
have received the Grace of God, after all that He has wrought for us, we co^^^
exceedingly short of being such a holy, heavenly, humble, self-denied,
fruitful, and thankful People, as we ought to be. We are not as yet half
awakened to a Sense of our Duties and Privileges as Christians. We have but
little Knowledge of the Glory and Beauty of the spotless Holiness, the perfect
Excellence, and infinite Amiableness of the divine Nature; and but little of
that entire Approbation of every Thing in God, his Law and Dispensations, as
perfectly right and absolutely Faultless: but little Knowledge of our own
infinite Vileness; and of the Divine Mediator's Glories, Worthyness, and
Fullness, compared with what we ought to have. We have but little supreme Love
to delight in, and devotedness, to an infinite holy God, and a blessed
Redeemer, to what we ought. We know but Little about the Operations of the Holy
Spirit, the Blessedness of Communion with the adorable Trinity, and the
infinite Excellence, and everlasting Importance of divine Things, compared with
what we ought: We beg the Prayers of God's People, that He would yet more
abundently Pour-out his Holy Spirit upon us. I would in particular, humbly
beseech the People of God, to help me Praise Him, for upholding and carrying of
me through a Series of suprising Labors in this Day: That in the distant
Prospect, would have been thought too mighty, for any Man to have gone through
and survived. I request the Prayers of the Lord's People, that I might give all
Glory to God; be upheld by his free Spirit, be fully brought into, kept truly
in, and under, the evangelical Spirit of this glorious Work. -- And may the
Lord's People, by Faith and every Grace, antecipate the Light, Purity, and
Felicity of that glorious Day, when the Light of the Moon, shall be as the
Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun seven fold! Mean while what I have
written, I leave as a grateful Public Testimony of the memorable Work of the
divine Power and Grace among us in my Day which my Eyes have seen, and my Ears
have heard with Pleasure that God, the Father, Son and Spirit, may have the
more exensive Praise, to whose Blessing I consign it; and that others thereby
may receive eternal Benefit.

P. S. The Author's great Distance from the Press has occasioned a Delay of
Printing the preceding Narrative or some Months; but nothing special has
occurred to darken and obscure the Glory of the Lord's Work among us.

Some late Accounts from the Rev. Mr. Wheelock, of Lebanon, together with the
prevailing and excellent Disposition of many Persons both in Europe and America
generously to contribute toward the Support of the collegiate School, more
immediately under his indefatigable Care, gives ground to hope for the
Propagation of the Gospel among the original Natives of America: Whereby the
Kingdom of our inthroned Savior will have the greater Extension, and the
brighter Resplendency on Earth. AMEN! Even so come LORD JESUS; Come quickly!

FINIS.

