THE VISION OF ISAAC CHILD'S, Which he saw in the Year 1757, CONCERNING
PENNSYLVANIA, The Land of his Nativity. ( Never published before this Year
1766.) To which is annexed, The EXPLANATION.

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men dream
dreams, and your young men see visions. Joel ii. 28.
IN the appearance, which is not of man, nor according to man, I looked, and
beheld a great mountain;

1 -- 2 And thereon stood candlesticks of gold, of silver, of brass and iron,
and in them were candles, some of them burning bright and clear, and some
appeared dull, and almost gone out, and some were gone out quite.

3 And others were covered with (...) to defend them from storms, for they were
all standing open to the firmament; and whilst I looked, behold, the light of
the sun disappeared for a short season, and clouds, and darkness, and storms,
and tempests, came and beat upon the mountain; then the candlesticks (which
were men) were left in thick darkness, for their candles were (...) out, and
some of them overthrown; and whilst I was looking off the walls of the
mountain, which was built of pure gold and precious stones,

4 There appeared a numerous company from another country, following ignus
fatus, and their leader rode a scarlet colored beast, and his name was
Oppression and Defense; and when they that sat in darkness upon the mountain,
saw the multitude which came forth, they went forth from the mountain, and
broke over the precious walls that were round it, and went to the leader of the
multitude, and honored him with great honor, and some joined with him in his
host, and followed ignus fatus, and they rejoiced, saying, We will do
valiently, for our God is with us, and we will tread down our enemies, and
every one that rises up to oppress us; and others gave him money and many
great gifts, saying, Go forth with thy army, and bear down those storms and
tempests.

5 So he went forth with his company, and fought against, but could not
prevail; and they which remained in darkness upon the mountain (a), made war
with the golden candlesticks, whose light appeared bright, and ceased not from
shining; but they were not able so much as to dim the light thereof neither
they nor the tempests that beat against them; For they (...) to a great (...),
which was in the midst of the mountain.

6 (...) they who were in darkness, were grievously perplexed and pricked in
their hearts, and gathered themselves together, (a) and considered one with
another, saying, Let us (...) ourselves places of refuge, whereunto we may flee
in time of trouble (b); and they took the holy name of the God of heaven in
vain, saying, He will be with us, and go forth with our armies; and they made
themselves preparations for war war (c).

7 And as I looked, one came forth in his glorious appearance, and cried,
saying, Cease ye to make unto yourselves martial preparations, and instruments
of war and of defense; for behold, there is in this mountain a safe biding
place (a); and the walls they are sure (b): But many believed not, for they
were in darkness, and hardness of heart overcame them, so that they gave no
heed unto him nor his messengers, which he sent unto many that remain
exercising themselves in martial manner: and there came forth a voice from on
high, saying to him to appeared, Remove the golden wall and bulwarks from (...)
this mountain, for they have exalted themselves in their own strength (c), and
have forgotten the might power, which is a place of refuge in the midst thereof
(d), who built the walls, and set the candlesticks, and light the candles that
are therein; and he said, Let the tower remain therein (e), and he that is able
to flee unto it, let him flee, and be safe, for I am determined what I will do
unto this place.

8 And suddenly the walls, which were of gold and precious stones, were taken
away from about the mountain, and the wild boar of the forest entered into the
borders thereof, and raged in his fury, for his chains were loosed (a), and he
was released out of his prison, and began to remove many candlesticks, and
assayed to destroy the whole mountain, and the cry of the widow and orphans
began to be heard in the land, and they were greatly distressed who trusted in
the holy name of JESUS, whose light still appeared; and they mourned and wept
for the candlesticks that were removed out of their places and for the golden
walls that were taken from about them (b).

9 And there appeared an angel of the Highest, having in the right hand golden
snuffers, and he passed through the (...) the mountain, and snuffed the candles
that were dim, and (...) of the golden oil, running through the golden pipes,
from the two golden olives that stand before the Lord on high, and he snake
comfortably unto them, and told them, that it was for the cursed sodomy (a),
and great forsaking the Lord their God, that they were thus judged; but he
said, Fear ye not, although the ancient walls are removed from about this
place, it is but that the wicked may have the reward of their works, and the
land be cleansed from the pollutions thereof, for there is an horrible
rebellion in the land, and turning aside from (...) of the righteous, provoking
the Holy One by sin and transmission, and breaking the holy covenant of the
most high God.

10. Thus says the Lord, I have turned my hand against this place for evil,
and I will give the people over to the furnace of (...), and he that comes
forth, shall be as pure (...) in treasure, more pure than the golden wedge of
(...) and (...) that comes not forth, is he who despises my holy covenant,
and I will forsake him, and give him over to the tormentor, and I will remove
his candlestick out of its place, and there shall be dreadful weeping and
gnashing of teeth, and there shall be a great overturning in the land, says
the Lord:

11 For behold, as I have threatened them with famine, and to let the sword in
upon them, and have scourged them in their borders for their wickedness, but
they have refused to humble themselves, and have lift up the heel against me,

12 And despised the meek appearance of the messengers of the holy covenant
(a), they have made the wicked world their (...), they worship it day and
night, and when they gather in their most solemn assembly, behold, it is in
their mind, cursing, swearing, drunkenness, whoring, theft, chambering and
wantonness, and all manner of abominations is in their borders; and yet, says
the Lord, they will afflict themselves with fasting, and put up their prayers,
saying, Lord, save us (b), whilst their hearts thirst after the blood of their
enemies, whom I have suffered to come upon them (c).

13 But thus says the Lord, I will accept of none of your prayers, your
fastings or afflictions of body; but I will suffer to come upon you the waters
of a mighty river, whose floods shall go over the banks of the land of Emanuel,
the streams thereof shall overspread the whole land, and there shall be great
affliction, which shall not cease till sin and transgression be entirely swept
away.

14 In this time many shall strive to flee to the strong tower, which is in the
midst of the mountain, but none shall be able ( a) except them whose candles
remain burning, and whose light shines in their borders; they shall strive, and
shall be able, and shall have the songs of salvation, and sing upon the banks
of deliverance; they shall say, Not by our might, nor by our power, but by the
Spirit of our God are we saved (b) from our enemies, whilst they who believed
not, having heard, suffer for their sins.

15 Then I looked, and behold, the wild boar of the forest continued to make
war in the mountain, and slew many in her (...), and took many captive, men,
women and children; then the candlesticks which were of silver, of brass and of
iron, and many dark candlesticks, rose up to resist him, and they fought
against him, and smote him in his hinder parts, and wounded him a little, but
they could not prevail against him; then they cried aloud against the golden
candlesticks, and (...) Our wives and children are taken captives, and our
(...) by the sword of them that are no people, and you will not arise for our
help; and power was given them to oppress the golden can candlesticks for a
time. Then the golden candlesticks were silent, and greatly distressed for a
season; then they arose, and some of them went forth, and joined with the
candlesticks of silver, brass and of iron, because of the oppression that was
upon them.

16 And they which remained, gathered themselves together upon the top of the
mountain, and sat silent (a) for a time, before the great tower that was in the
midst thereof, and many were pained in their hearts, and lifted up their voice
to the great Lord of Sabbath, because of the great distressing, and carrying
away captive in the land.

17 Nevertheless it pleased the Lord of Sabbath to continue his judgments for a
time, and a time. But as they continued crying and humbling themselves before
him, imploring help of his sacred Majesty for themselves and the people, it
pleased him in his infinite goodness (a) to command the boar of the forest to
return from their border, and he chained him with strong chains (b), and put a
hook in his jaw, and drew him back into the wilderness, and the mountain was at
rest for a short season; but the walls thereof was not since (c) built, neither
shall be for the days of many generations, says the Lord.

18 And about this time the candlesticks of sliver, of brass and of iron
exercised authority over the golden candlesticks, and would have overthrown
them, but they could not, by reason of the tower, which was in the mountain,
whereunto ability was given them to flee.

19 And behold, the wind of heaven arose, and blew upon the mountain, and the
waters of a great river came forth, and passed over the mountain, and there was
a great earthquake, and after that a great furnace, whose burning was as the
burning of lime, and the candlesticks of silver, of brass and of iron were cast
into the furnace, and the fire thereof burned in them, and all they which came
forth out of the furnace, were as pure gold; but they which came not out, were
no more, but as fuel of fire, and many golden candlesticks were refined
therein; and as I looked, there appeared candles in all of them which came out
of the furnace, which were all of pure gold (a) set round with precious stones.

20 And one of great power rent the heavens above, and came down, having in his
right hand a live coal, which he had taken from the holy altar of the most high
God, and he touched the candles therewith, and the light appeared; and I
looked, and the waters of the great river assuaged, and there was a calm (a),
and the golden candlesticks (which were ^^^fect men and women) went up to the
top of the mountain, rejoining; but the furnace remained in the mountain, that
at any time, if any rust appeared on any, they might be refined therein (...)
that came down from above, held golden snuffers in his (...) hand, that if any
candles appeared (...), he might clip them, that their light might renew its
strength; he also had power over the two golden olives and their two pipes, and
he commanded them, that they should pour forth of the golden oil into the
golden candlesticks. I also saw the peaceable streams of Shiloh, descending
upon the mountain, and they were as pure gold, clear as crystal (b); and he
that held the golden snuffers, whose appearance was like unto the Son of God,
calling unto them that stood upon the mountain, saying, Come and drink freely
of this new wine of the kingdom of God; and they came and drank thereof, and
sung praises unto him that lives for ever and ever, and honored and worshipped
him in the beauty of holiness (c); and he that called them, made a covenant
with them, that they should be his people, and he would be their God.

21 And said, There has been in this mountain wars and bloodsheds, and many of
my people have erred therein, and have strayed from the good Shepherd, who was
meek and low in heart, and gave his life for the sheep, who, when he was
reviled, reviled not again, but patiently suffered all things, that the will of
the Father might be done; and so ought my people to have done, that my will
might be done in them, and not have distrusted the power of the Highest, and
made flesh their arm; nor gone forth in martial, -- that is productive of sin,
misery and bloodshed, for it is contrary to my will and the glorious
dispensation of the gospel (a) to mankind; whereby many have shone as lights in
the world, which many in this land have rejected; not in this land only, but
upon the face of the whole earth (b).

22 But it shall not be so in time to come; for, says the Lord, I will
establish peace upon all the earth: And it shall come to pass, that he that
forms any instrument of war, shall be ashamed thereof, and I will judge him
at the last day. The roaring of cannon, and the beating of drums, shall not be
heard, the glittering sword and all the instruments of war, shall cease, and
the prophecy of my anointed shall come to pass; nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, nor learn war any more, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken
it, and it shall surely come to pass, notwithstanding many nations and great
kings (b) oppose its coming. Behold, says the Lord, they are but as
grasshoppers, and fade as the flower of the earth, and go to a dark house of
silence, and are seen of men no more. -- Therefore give ear, my people, unto my
words, and incline your hearts to wisdom, and learn understanding, that ye may
know the will of God, and do it, and you shall have peace from your enemies
round about; and I will build about you the walls and bulwarks of my salvation;
and you shall know the Lord your God have visited you for good, and have saved
you from your enemies. Also, you were not able to save yourselves in time of
trouble; and it shall be as long as you remain faithful and keep my
commandments, I will keep and preserve you and your generations; and you shall
be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed; but if at any time you or your sons
or daughters, refuse or rebel, and I threaten you with my judgments, to humble
you, if you lift up the head against me and my rebukes, as your fathers, I will
surely (...) you off from the earth, and you shall have a name among men no
more. (c)

23 And I will break down the walls which I have set about you, and they shall
be no more for ever: For behold, I brought your Fathers from a land, wherein
they were oppressed (a), and could not serve me freely, and I moved the heathen
back, for their sakes; not by the power of the sword, nor by the strength of
battle, but I myself rebuked them, saying, that they should not destroy mine
anointed, nor do my people any harm; and I fed your fathers in the wilderness
many days, and gave them strength to cultivate the land, and blessed their
labors with success, and gave them corn in abundance, and good things, and
they increased in the land, and their generations were in prosperity, and waxed
fat, and did not rightly esteem the rock of their salvation, but rebelled
against me, and in the time of correction they kicked; nevertheless I did not
impute their sins unto you, neither have I numbered them to their children,
neither will I, but every man shall suffer for his own sin; and he called unto
many, and taught them many excellent things, and commanded them to go forth,
and publish this doctrine to all people, whithersoever he should send them; yea
even the glad tidings of peace and salvation, to as many as believed on the
name of him that sent them, and received his law, and obeyed it, promising to
be with them henceforth and for ever.

24 And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have showed thee all these things,
that thou might make them known unto the people of this land; for I am
determined to do unto this land according to all that thou have seen; therefore
write all these things in a book, that if any will hear, and understand, and
repent, and be converted, that I may heal them, and save them from the hour of
temptation that is coming on all flesh.

The END.
Note, The Numbers and Signatures, in the course of the vision, refer to those
in the explanation.

THE EXPLANATION.
1 THIS mountain is the Quaker profession, or yearly meeting, in Pennsylvania.

2 Shows the members, under the term of candlesticks, and those who were born
sons. By candles, and those which shined bright, were such who bore a clear
testimony against the idol discipline: They had not only oil in their lamps,
but lighted also, and burning bright.

3 As those in this verse, being covered, shows some, who, in their private
opinion, were one with the bright ones; their lamps were also lighted, but kept
under cover, for fear of the yearly meeting authority, and select party: --
Whose committees, to deal with such who could not conform to discipline, were
the clouds that carried those storms which darkened the light of the Spirit of
God in almost all the members minds; and as some were overthrown, it shows that
some were overcome by those storms, and their faith sailed in the light of
Christ, in their own hearts; and they put their trust in, and depended upon the
wall for security, which was discipline; being built of, or composed of such
laws and rules as was truly the inward law of God's own Spirit; that is, where
men truly, by the dictates of God's own Spirit, made conscience of things, and
according as they walked, as to outward actions, by the leading of that Spirit;
-- this was collected into writing, and made into a law of discipline; thus was
this idol, or wall, in which they trusted, made of precious stones.

4 But this company, from another country, shows the natural man acting,
exactly in all outward appearance, to this law, while yet strangers to the work
of conversion; following the direction of this discipline and orders, sense,
judgments and appointments of the meetings of business, which is ignus fatus,
for every man and woman that ever acted in any service of a religious nature,
by virtue of their appointment from a meeting, so far as that appointment was
their warrant, or motive of inducement, so far they followed ignus fatus, whose
prime leader to all the inferior meetings, is the authority of the yearly
meeting. This authority is the scarlet colored beast; (...) scarlet is the
kingly color here in the kingdom of England; and it is to signify, that it has
a show of kingly or royal authority: And as in its very nature it oppresses,
which begets defense, so oppression and defense is its proper name. (That its
very nature is to oppress, will be shown at large in a work now preparing for
the press, wherein the mystery of Babylon will be fully shown and demonstrated
to be most complete in the Quakers.) The natural man, thus acting according to
the very exact copy of the living world, while yet entire strangers to it,
deceived those who had once known it, and were darkened again by this great
outward show; so that they went forth from the true living word of God, in
their own heart, which was going out of the very profession: Omitting justice
and judgment, is also breaking over the rule, because this is the end and
design; and breaking over the very wall, whole very first foundation was laid
by the first Quakers, not to stir or act but in God's power only; but instead
thereof, their eyes are turned to the leader of this multitude, namely, the
orders and authority of the yearly meeting; him they honor, and in that they
trust, and also rejoice; yea, also say, that we will do valiantly, for our God
is with us. It is high time to rise against the mighty, (has been a common
saying in meetings of business, by the select party) meaning such who call the
authority of the body of friends in question, and the authority of the yearly
meeting. Let the discipline be put in practice, and compare this with the
latter part of this verse; as also, the yearly collections to print epistles,
with private gifts to traveling friends, who are valiant for this cause;
observe also by the way, that though, as hinted in (3), those committees were
the very clouds, set to work by this authority, which carried or occasioned all
contention, tempests and storms, or strife; yet they themselves assigned the
cause to an opposite spirit. -- Having set the reader on the tract or true sent
of the meaning of this vision, shall now but just give a hint of matters in
short, in order to lessen the bulk of the book.

5 (a) Such who had known the truth, made war also (...) those whose light
shined to discover this false idol discipline but could not dim it. Witness
that nine years ago the authority of the yearly meeting was scarce questioned;
Quakers were startled, (as I remember J-n C-n said, I marveled at it) if any
dropped such an expression: And now it is become a fire side and table talk.
Those tempests here relate to the discouragements thrown in the way, as calling
us heathens, ranters, separatists; and the works (or use made of them) of
Barclay's Anarchy, Ellwood's works, and others, on or touching this point, who
had once known the truth. This proves a hard labor, even if it were possible
to deceive the very elect; yet a number has witnessed all this, not so much as
able to dim the light for they labored diligently, and found the pearl of
great price, that is, appealed only to the witness of truth in their own
hearts; this is the tower against the most plausible outward appearance.

6 (a) Meetings, conferences, etc. (b), let us make a new rule of discipline;
(now began the discipline to vary from being a true copy of the living word)
(c); discipline, with all its officers and amendments, said to be all done by
the voice of God and his wisdom, etc.

7 (a) This one was the voice of truth in the sons of God, or sons of the free
woman, that cried against this discipline, queries, memorials, etc. (b) The
wall of this tower, being sure, alludes to the other as not sure: (c) This;
shows, they trust to this discipline, as a things of their own strength; though
of pure gold, and precious stones. (d) Forgot to set truth and honesty, and the
spirit which trades it, above rule and order. (e) Let truth yet remain, under
the name of the society.

8 (a) This was quite obvious, for the serpent had twisted himself, and mixed
to such with the truth, that it was difficult for the sons of God, to strike at
this great order and authority, without giving encouragement to a libertine
spirit. So when peoples eyes began to be opened, the libertine and vain broke
loose, who were chained down by the remains of the power and function that went
with the order and authority of such who had acted truly in God's power; for
this power had in some measure remained till it was removed by a discovery of
the cheat. (b) This wild boar assayed, in its fury, to overrun the pure power
and word of life, as well as the false, which caused the widow and orphan to be
distressed; that is, those who were motherless and fatherless, or forsaken of
the yearly meeting, namely, the golden ones, who had cried against order and
discipline (a), or the sin of Onan.

9 (b) This covenant is made between God and every converted soul, where it
covenants in the secret of its soul, to follow the light and convictions of
God's Spirit in his own heart, on penalty of his eternal wrath, and willingly
covenants its being the day of God's power in the soul. And it is fitting to
observe here, that God tries the soul, upon the conditions of its covenant,
which sometimes will be to prohibit it from lawful things: And among Quakers,
we find of late, they are tried with a breach of discipline, may be to rise in
prayer, in public, before they are received in unity, by the paper god; as E
-- b A -- b, and others I could produce.

10 This verse foresheweth a peculiar day of grace and light at hand; for
though this day is to be desired, yet while the soul passes through the
furnace, it is not pleasant, at the present, and this grievously torment the
Pharisee spirit, (or select party) as our dictionaries explain the word. --
Gnashing of (...) there will be, when they behold God's power, working in
opposition to them, and their idol god: Then Jerusalem will be encompassed with
armies, and Quaker Pharisees will be in the Jewish condition, when Jerusalem
was taken, after Christ was put to death.

11 This is spoke of outward famine and sword, even the dry unnatural seasons
and Indian war; for as the kernel of a nut is enclosed with a rind, and then a
shell, the nearer to the kernel, the more resembling the substance; even so
this Indian war and outward society of Quakers, and contention and
controversies between them and other sects, is the rind or shell which enclosed
the kernel of the vision; and has so near a resemblance, that them who dwell in
the outward court, can form an imperfect explanation of it outwardly, also
points toward the truth or kernel.

12 (a) Those were not the select party, nor those who sat in the gallery
seats, with their certificates and authority of meetings, rich broadcloths and
line white beavers. These have been far from that low, meek appearance of
Jesus's true messengers, who ever yet have been rejected of men and the body of
the church. (b) All affliction of body is fasting, as abstinence from converge,
reading news papers, or other worldly matters (c); they thirst to kill the
character of such who keep to truth, whereby their wickedness is uncovered, and
honor and reputation of society stained.

13 This river is the same enemy, suffered to come; not the boar nor sword, but
is the voice of God, sent out in writing, as well as verbal testimonies, which
will come out so thick, as to overflow and sweep away all tradition, sense and
judgment of weighty friends (so called) out of men's minds, to serve the living
God, and not idols, composed of a body of men and women.

14 (a) Many who acted by discipline, shall strive to reconcile their past
conduct to the light, but none shall be able but such as bore an open testimony
against it; these shall now reap the fruit of their labor in this life,
saying, No discipline, order, or yearly meeting advices has been of the least
good service.

15 Wild nature show many by fornication, drunkenness, adultery and unusual
public wickedness abounding; and the select party rose up, and fought against
it with their discipline and preparations of war, and wounded it a little, and
cried out to such, who they perceived a slackness in of attending their
meetings of business, to come forward, and join in the Lord's work, etc. and
power was given them to set at naught such as did not attend meetings of
business, and join with the select party, but contended against the discipline,
queries, etc. those were set at naught, and contemned, as not concerned, to
arise to help, but enemies to the work of God; and by this oppression and
outside beauty of this order some who had known the truth, joined in this work
of discipline.

16 (a) Ceased opposing discipline, and cried for the abounding wickedness in
the society.

17 (a) Not by help of discipline; (b) secret conviction and restraining grace;
(c) this paragraph looks forward to the end, and concludes the vision with the
extirpation of yearly meeting bulwarks and discipline, as well as prophanity
and wickedness out of the profession, perhaps a new society by a fair
separation, or else conviction and reformation of the old.

18 At the last looked forward, and concluded, so this looks back, and comes
over the same a second time.

19 (a) Pure gold signifies, entirely free from being influenced by yearly
meetings orders for a rule of life, but from a fountain of their own.

20 (a) This shows, that when the soul receives light from God, the exercising,
refining workings of the mind, occasioned by the waters, or flowing testimonies
of truth, and burning of God's word within the soul, this exercise is assuaged;
that is, the effect of them in that soul, is accomplished, and not that they
shall cease to be any more in others, (b) a clear perfect fountain, rising up
in each soul free from tincture of education, tradition or filthy senses and
judgment of yearly meetings, or contentious priest craft; (c) not in the beauty
of order, and form appointed by church authority.

21 (a) Outward rules and order, contrary to gospel covenant, where the law
shall be in the heart, and not a paper book: (b) Not only Quakers have made
this outward discipline to govern the church, but all professions on the whole
earth.

22 (a) Any article of faith, order or rule, as a term of church communion: (b)
Societies, and founders of societies, and principal ruling active men in them;
the whole of this verse shows, that that the notion or chimera of spiritual
authority, shall be so clearly discovered, that any such pretenders, to invent
terms of church communion, or systems of divinity, will be laughed at or
ashamed; and this being the very seed and root of church contention, which
often set the magistracy or state on fire, nay mostly the cause: Therefore, the
seed and root being thus destroyed, the whole weed of course must decay away;
yet I am of the belief, that the sword will continue in the hand of the
magistrate, as long as man remains to be born in a state of nature, (c) This
signifies in case of such rebellion, the name Quaker shall become as odious to
all good men, as the name Jesuit, is now near come to that pass.

23 (a) From England, where they were persecuted.

FINIS.

