Mr. Appleton's SERMON Occasioned by the Repeal OF THE STAMP ACT.

A Thanksgiving SERMON ON THE TOTAL REPEAL OF THE STAMP ACT. PREACHED In
Cambridge, NEW ENGLAND, May 20th, in the Afternoon preceding the public
Rejoicings of the Evening upon that great Occasion.

By NATHANIEL APPLETON, M.A. Pastor of the First Church in said Town.

Published by the Desire of the Audience, and at the Expense of the Honorable
Brigadier General BRATTLE.

The Lord has done great Things for us, whereof we are glad.

The Snare is broken, and we are escaped: Our Help is in the Name of the Lord
who made Heaven and Earth.

King DAVID. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, 1766.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM PIT, ESQUIRE All the Friends of Virtue, AND
Patrons of Freedom, Lovers of GREAT BRITAIN, And her Colonies; Who have
gloriously appeared in the Cause of LIBERTY, And obtained a Total Repeal of the
STAMP ACT; The following DISCOURSE Is most humbly and gratefully inscribed by
The AUTHOR.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
PSALM. XXX. 11, 12. Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing: Thou have
put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness: To the end that my glory may
sing praise to thee, and not be silent; O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto
thee forever.
THIS is a psalm or song of praise to God, composed (as the title of the psalm
expresses it) by David at the dedication of his house: But the psalm is taken
up in the recounting the troubles and fears, difficulties and dangers he had
been in; and the merciful interposition of divine providence for his
deliverance out of them. And if we would have our hearts truly and thoro'ly
affected with divine goodness, and our lips opened wide in devout praises to
God, we must look back to the troubles, the fears, the dangers and distresses
we have been in, and from which God has delivered us: For the greatness of a
mercy is according to the degree of evil, misery or calamity we are delivered
from. -- This was the way by which the psalmist's soul was elevated in high
devotion, his heart enlarged in gratitude, and his lips opened wide in praise
to God. -- It should seem he had not only been under great difficulties and
hazards, by his enemies, and by the hand of Saul, who from envy and jealousy
sought his life; but that he had been brought low, and upon the borders of the
grave by sickness: But he cried unto the Lord, and he heard him, and kept him
alive that he should not go down into the pit; and he praises God, that his
anger endured for so little a while, but for a moment, and then visited with
his favor which is life: weeping endured for a night; but joy came in the
morning, 5th v. of the context. In the verses of our text he observes, how
wonderful the loving kindness of God had been to him in this respect; that he
had scattered the clouds, changed the dark and gloomy scenes that had been
before him, and had opened such new scenes of joy and gladness as called for
the most enlarged gratitude and exalted praises. -- Thou have turned for me my
mourning into dancing: He went mourning because of the enemy and the oppressor,
and was full of mourning because of his sickness, and the threatenings of death:
But now his mourning was turned into dancing, his spirits were relieved of the
heavy burden that lay upon them: and he felt such a lightness and cheerfulness
within upon his deliverance, as inclined him to dancing and such like tokens of
joy. Thou have put off my sackcloth: In times of trouble, and when under the
mighty hand of God, by some sore judgment or threatening evil, they were wont in
token of humility to put on sackcloth. Thus we find David and all the elders of
Israel, in the time of the Lord's anger, and when threatened with destruction,
clothed with sackcloth. 1 Chronicles. 21. 16.
But now God had put off his sackcloth, had redressed his grievances, and
removed his grounds of fear. And girded me with gladness, That is, so delivered
him, so relieved and revived his spirit, as not only gave him peace and
calmness of mind, but caused great joy and gladness of heart to him. He girded
him with gladness. He compassed him about with gladness as with a girdle on
every side. His soul was filled with joy: and gladness appeared all about him,
in his countenance, in his speech, and in his whole behavior. His troubles
were removed, his burdens were taken off, his fears all vanished, and so he
was all joy and gladness. To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and
not be silent. That is, that his tongue might speak and sing the praises of
God, and not suffer such mercies to pass in silence and without a due
acknowledgment of them. God delivered him from all his troubles, and from all
that was his fear, and girded him with gladness, with this view that David
might see the power and goodness of God herein and celebrate his praises. O
Lord my God I will give thanks unto thee forever. He had such a sense of the
divine goodness, while he was thus girded with gladness, that he was not only
for singing and speaking forth the praises of God for the present; but was for
maintaining an abiding sense hereof upon his heart, so as should be an
inexhaustible fund for everlasting praise. The psalmist had such a strong and
lively sense of the salvations and deliverances he had of late received, that
it seemed to him that he should never forget the same: But that the remembrance
hereof would be so fresh and strong upon his mind, that he should feel an
heart, and find a tongue to celebrate his praises forever, and ever.

The words thus largely opened afford us the following observations, which I
hope will appear seasonable for our present meditation on the great and
glorious occasion of our being this day together in the house of God. --

1 OBS. The great God has the absolute government of our affairs and
circumstances in the world, and opens the various scenes of life to us.

2 OBS. It is the will of God, and what he has in view, when he changes the
scene in favor of his people, that they should not be silent, but should awake
their glory to speak and sing his praise.

3 OBS. The true People of God desire to keep such a constant sense of the
divine goodness as to be disposed to praise his name forever.

1 OBS. The great God has the absolute government of our affairs and
circumstances in the world, and opens the various scenes of life to us.

This is what we are taught in the text, and which is acknowledged to his
glory. David passed through very various scenes of life, sometimes he was
mourning in sackcloth: and then he was girded with gladness; both which he
ascribes to God. Thou hidest thy face and I was troubled, 7th v. Thou have also
girded me with gladness, as in the text. And this is a glorious character which
God assumes to himself. I even I am He and there is no God with me; I kill, and
I make alive, I wound, and I heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of
my hand (...) 32 39
. I form the light and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil: I the
Lord do all these things Isaiah 45. 7.
. --

Here let me say,

1st. Whatever sorrowful, afflicted or threatening circumstances we are at any
time under, it is by the overruling providence of God.

Shall there be any evil in the city, that is evil of affliction, and the Lord
has not done it Amos. 3 0.
Sometimes we are afflicted with bodily pains and sickness. "He is chastned
with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain; his
soul draws near to the grave, and his life to the destroyers" Job 23. 19 22.
. And he is ready to say with Hezekiah when threatened with death by reason of
the disease that was upon him, "I said in the cutting off my days I shall go to
the gates of the grave: I shall not see the Lord in the land of the living: I
shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world: He will cut me off
with pining sickness" Isaiah 38. 10, 11, 12.
. Sometimes God reduces to straits, poverty and famine: Sometimes he deprives
of the dearest friends and relatives, and with them takes away the most
valuable enjoyments and the sweetest comforts of life, and gives them to
complain with the psalmist, 88 Psalm 18.
"Lover and friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into
darkness." Sometimes God hides the light of his countenance and they are
troubled: and while they suffer God's terrors they are even distracted.
Sometimes God so overrules or permits it to be, that a people's rights and
privileges are invaded, and infringed, they are greatly oppressed, and bro't
into slavery, or are under the fearful apprehension of it. How did God
overruled as to his people Israel, that they should be so many years in the
land of Egypt, and in the house of bondage! And how often did God afterward,
when settled in their own land, for their sinful departures from him, sell them
into the hands of their enemies, who cruelly oppressed them! Sometimes such a
severe hand was kept over them by those who had them in subjection, that they
were not allowed, so much as a blacksmith in all Israel, lest they should make
swords and spears, or any such weapons of defense, nor so much as their
husbandry tools 1 Samuel 13. 19.
. Or if a people are not actually brought into such a bondage as this; yet any
approaches toward, or threatening such infringements, may well cause grief and
fear, sorrow and mourning, in token of which they were wont in ancient time to
put on sackcloth. Thus Mordecai clothed himself with sackcloth when that cruel
edict of Ahasuerus came out against the Jews. Ephesians 4 2, 5.


And what a sorrowful, disturbed and tumultuous state have all the British
colonies of America been in, when by a late parliamentary act, many of the
privileges and liberties we had been in the quiet possession of, were cut
short: and should the act have continued, we should not have been the free
people that once we were, and should have been subject to such oppressions as
our fathers knew nothing of; and which neither we nor our children would have
been able to bear.

2dly. Whenever the dark scene is changed, and a more agreeable one opens to us;
it is God that does it for us.

Thou have turned for me, my mourning into dancing. Thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness. That is, the great God changes the
scene, and gives us occasion for joy and gladness, and leads us to all the
natural outward expressions thereof.

Joy and sorrow are human passions, and one or the other is excited, according
to the different scenes God in his providence opens to us. Afflictions and
fears, of themselves, beget sorrow and mourning: But the removal of real
afflictions, scattering our fears, and putting us into agreeable circumstances,
begets a joy and gladness of heart. And this joy is excited more or less
according or in proportion to the occasion. If it be a sore calamity, and a
very grievous burden we are delivered from, or if it be at such a critical
season when the danger is imminent and very threatening, and our fears run high;
removing such a calamity, and scattering such fears as are gathering into
distress and horror, creates so much the greater joy and gladness: And
sometimes the trouble, or the fear is so great and pressing upon the mind, that
the sudden removal of the same excites a joy and gladness beyond what we can
express: The salvation may be so great, and so sensibly affect the mind, that
men of strong passions, are sometimes thrown into rapturous extacies of joy. --
There is a joy unspeakable and full of glory.

And how is God now turning our mourning into dancing, putting off our
sackcloth and girding us with gladness, by the joyful and well attested news
from that far, but mother country, which assures us that the grievous and
bitter ACT which put us into mourning, covered us with sackcloth, and threw us
all into confusion, is now REPEALED, totally repealed, made null and void, by
the KING, LORDS, and COMMONS, in parliament assembled; so as to be as if it had
never been!

Oh! with what joy and gladness does it gird every true-born Englishman, every
friend to liberty, and every true lover of his country, his mother country or
these British colonies! what joy does now fill every breast, what gladness
appears in every face and feature! and how does every one feel himself ready to
burst forth in loud acclamations of joy!

But to exhilerate your spirits, and excite your joys in a rational manner, and
as becomes men of thought and judgment; who would always govern this very
passion of the soul by solid and substantial reason; I say, in order to this,
let us only consider the deplorable condition the nation and all these colonies
must have been in; if the government at home had established the ACT, and
proceeded to the inforcement of the same. If these had been the heavy tidings
from home, that the parliament insisted upon the rigorous execution of this act
in all the American plantations, and that in order to it fleets were forming,
forces raising, and a grand armament preparing, to enforce obedience to the
ACT. I say if these had been the doleful tidings, Oh what grief, what fear,
what consternation, and confusion, should we have been put into! what anger and
wrath, what resolution, what opposition, what force, what violence would this
irritated people have gone into! what desolation, what slaughter, and bloodshed
might have been expected! -- And what an unspeakable hurt must it have brought
upon us, and upon our mother country! what an alienation of affection, what an
interruption of mutual trade and commerce destructive to them as well as to us!

Moreover, How would they and we be exposed to our watchful and perfidious
enemies, who would suddenly and eagerly have caught at such a favorable
opportunity to make reprisals upon us! --

Surely when we consider the very extensive as well as pernicious influence of
this ACT, how deeply it would affect the nation as well as the colonies: and
what contention and ill blood, yea, what violence, and shedding of blood, what
destruction, and desolation is happily prevented by the repeal of this act:
Every one who loves his neighbor, who is concerned for the public peace and
safety, or that has any humanity, or bowels of compassion, must be glad and
rejoice at this merciful deliverance.

But then by the repeal of this oppressive act, there is a positive good
accruing, that may serve further to excite the joy, and increase the gladness
of our hearts. This serves to indear the KING (if possible) yet more and more
to us, and fill us with gratitude as well as loyalty to him, and to his royal
house, and will induce this people with all freedom to sacrifice their very
lives and fortunes for the support and defense of his crown and dignity.

This also will maintain within us a just honor for, and dutiful regard to the
British parliament, as the supreme legislative power of the nation, who heard
our cause and redressed our grievances.

This also will fix upon our hearts a most grateful remembrance of those wise
and worthy patriots, who heartily espoused and so strenuously pleaded our
cause, and set things in so clear and convincing a light, as to procure the
repeal of such a disagreable and destructive act. These great and good men, I
say, who have exerted themselves according to their superior abilities, and
their inviolable attachment to justice, truth and liberty in our behalf, will
be remembered with honor, love and gratitude, and their memory blessed we hope
in future generations.

Moreover, by reason of this happy repeal, love and affection between the
mother country and us, will return with its wonted ardor: Commerce and trade
will be carried on with the former freedom, to the mutual advantage of both
them and us. And we shall be ready upon every occasion to strengthen one
another's hands for mutual safety against the common enemy. And it gives the
most pleasing prospect of the growing greatness of the British empire. So that
all who love the peace and prosperity of the nation and all its dependencies;
and are pleased to see so sweet and pleasant a thing as brethren dwelling
together in unity and love; must needs rejoice and be exceeding glad at this
happy turn of times, as one of the most distinguishing and extensive blessings
of an outward nature that we ever received.

2 OBS. It is the will of God, and what he has in view, when he changes the
scene in favor of his people, that they should not be silent; but should awake
their glory to speak and sing his praise.

To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee and not be silent. The great
God will have us not only glad and joyful for any agreeable and happy turn of
affairs; but would have us also thankful. Many people are glad at the good
news, and agreeable change of affairs; but not thankful. They feel a pleasing
sensation within; but no due sense of God, or religious acknowledgment of him.
Whereas, this is what God expects and requires of us as men, and christians. He
girds me with gladness, to the end that my glory may sing praise to him, and
not be silent.

By the psalmist's glory some understand his soul, his rational and
intellective powers, which are indeed the glory of the man. But others
understand it rather of his tongue, as singing and not keeping silence
mentioned in the text are appropriate to the tongue.

Let us take them together; reason, religion and speech are the distinguishing
glory of man above every creature upon the footstool: and this glory taking it
collectively, is not to be silent when we receive any signal favors from God;
but to show forth his praise. Reason is to consider the greatness of benefits
received, with all the great and happy consequences thereof. Religion is to
view the great God as the author, and giver of every good thing, and to observe
the great and the undeserved goodness of God, in all the merciful and powerful
interpositions of his providence; and the tongue is to speak and sing, and
thereby to show forth the praises of God.

And who will suffer his glory to be silent? who can refrain from meditating
upon the great and wonderful things God has done for us, and from having his
heart enlarged in thankfulness, and his mouth filled with praises? Surely
reason, and religion, and the tongue, should all awake upon this great and
joyful occasion, and not be silent.

We should set our reason to work, and consider the greatness, extensiveness,
and vast importance of the affair for which we are at this time celebrating the
praises of God.

The Stamp Act was very extensive, not only as to the vast variety of articles
contained in it; but as to those who were subjected to it, and would be very
much affected by it. It extended to all the British subjects in America, from
Canada to Florida, comprehending all the British Islands. Moreover, our reason
and judgment tells us, that it greatly affected Great Britain itself in all its
merchandise and manufacture: and indeed that the whole British empire would
have felt the ill-influence of it: and consequently that the repeal of this act
has relieved a multitude of people, and filled many thousands and millions with
joy. For reason tells us this is the most effectual method of preventing any
grievous breach between the mother country, and these her colonies; and of
preserving the peace, love, and happy harmony that have so long subsisted
between us; and of establishing the power, wealth and prosperity of all. And so
in short reason tells us, that this is one of the greatest affairs, as to its
influence and consequences, that has been transacted in the nation for many
ages. I believe it will be readily yielded, that there has scarcely been one
thing of so great importance to the British nation and colonies, since the
happy revolution near fourscore years ago, by King William of glorious memory;
as the total repeal of the stamp act.

Now let religion speak, and let us set ourselves to consider that divine power
and influence by which this happy repeal has been effected. -- Religion teaches
us to view the hand of God in every thing. Religion teaches us that by the
divine permission that oppressive act was passed, by which God hid his face
from us, testified his anger, and let us see what our sins deserved: and that
it is of his undeserved mercy, and through his all governing influence, that it
is now repealed.

We may see, and we ought to observe, so far as we can, the natural means by
which things are brought about; but we must look above and beyond all human
means and natural causes, to him who sits upon the circle of the earth, and
who guides and governs in universal nature.

We may see, and we ought with gratitude to observe, the wisdom, the sagacity,
the faithfulness, the indefatigableness of our generous friends in espousing
and soliciting our cause; and we may see the various arguments made use of,
and the happy influence they had upon the King, and Parliament: But we must
look through all these to the great Governor of the world, who has the hearts of
Kings, and of all men in his own hands, to change and turn them even as the
rivers of water are turned: and so religion sees the hand of God in bringing
about this repeal. And the good christian will trace the footsteps of divine
providence, so far as is plain and obvious, and where it is beyond his
penetration, he will consider it as the work of the Lord, and regard it as the
operation of his hands. Thus the christian observes the hand of God in that
general commotion stirred up in the nation when the act was first passed, and
the time of its taking place appointed. The providence of God is also to be
seen in the universal uneasiness and clamor in all the colonies upon the first
tidings of it, all as one man rising up in opposition to it; such a union as
was never before seen in all the colonies.

Moreover, God is to be seen in the change of the ministry at such a critical
and important season, and calling such eminently worthy patriots into the
administration, who saw the dreadful consequences of enforcing the stamp act,
and were (as we understand) to a man for the repealing it. And how visible is
the hand of God in raising up such wise, able and faithful friends and
advocates to solicit the repeal, and in filling their mouths with such clear,
strong and cogent arguments, to convince and persuade of the absolute necessity
of a total repeal. Such as the Duke of Graston, Marquess of Rockingham, Lord
Dartmouth, Lord Camden, General Conway, the right Honorable William Dowdeswell,
Esquire Sir William Meredith, Sir George Saville, Col. Bar, great and worthy
patriots, whom God has raised up and honored as eminent instruments of our
deliverance. And how visible is the hand of God, more especially with respect
to the great, the good, and the excellent Mr. Pit, that grand (...) of true
virtue, and of English liberty, and whom God has once, and again raised up to
be the deliverer of these British colonies from captivity, and slavery. I say,
how remarkable was the kind hand of providence, that notwithstanding his
chronical grievous malady of body, his soul was inspired with such a sacred
ardor for his country's safety; that he surmounted all the difficulties of
bodily pain and weakness; and appeared in that august assembly with all his
flannels, and was enabled to utter himself with such clearness, closeness,
plainness and faithfulness as carried conviction with it, and had its desired
effect. Religion teaches us that the great God made so great a man; formed and
fitted him for such eminent services, and used and honored him as such a public
Savior to the British Israel.

Moreover, Religion teaches us to see the great God standing in the
congregation of the mighty, and judging among the Gods, presiding both in the
house of Commons, and in the house of Lords, exciting their attention to the
weighty reasonings, and causing them to feel such force and energy therein, as
to change their mind, and be inclined to repeal what they so lately enacted,
being convinced this was the best, if not the only way to save the nation and
its colonies from ruin. Now that majority of Parliament is to be highly
honored, for their regard to the public good, that they no sooner saw the
dangerous tendency of their late act, but they speedily made it null and void.
But as we would honor and respect every man, that has given his hand or voice
for the public safety; so we would see the hand of God in all this remarkable
event, from the beginning to the end. For religion will not allow us to
attribute any thing to mere chance, but points out the hand of God in the most
casual events. In what is there more chance than in votes, and lots? But what
says the wise man? Prove. 16. 33. The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole
determination is of the Lord.

Well now, when reason and religion teach us these things, what is the tongue,
that glory of men to do upon it? Why, be sure, not to be silent, but to awake
and talk of all his wondrous works, to sing unto him, and to give praise.

And who will, or who can suffer his glory to be silent, or refrain from
showing forth the praises of God for this remarkable glorious instance of his
goodness and mercy? O! how should our lips be opened in the most exalted
praises of God, and say he is our God and we will praise him, our father's God
and we will prepare him an habitation, who has remembered us in our low estate,
and in the critical hour gave the vote for us! What praises are due to almighty
God from this people? that he gave us favor in the eyes of the King and of his
Ministry, and of his Lords and of his Commons, who have redressed our
grievances, and taken away the heavy yoke, that neither we nor our children
would have been able to bear; whereby he has relieved our distressed minds,
removed the gloom that hung upon every face, turned our mourning into dancing,
put off our sackcloth, and girded us with gladness. Oh! how then should we
praise him with joyful lips, and show forth his praise from day to day? I will
bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall continually be in my mouth. My
soul shall make her boast in the Lord, the humble shall hear thereof, and shall
be glad. 0! magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together, and
say, bless the Lord O our souls, and forget not all his benefits: Our soul is
escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, and we
are escaped; our help is in the name of the Lord who made heaven and earth.

But then we must employ our tongue, our glory, not only to speak but to sing
his praises. This is the language of gratitude and true devotion, O come let us
sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.

Moreover we find in Ezra's day Ezekiel 3. 11.
, that the people in praising the Lord shouted with a great shout. Be glad then
in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are
upright in heart.

3 OBS. The true people of God desire to keep up such a constant sense of
divine goodness, as to be always disposed to praise his name, and to give
thanks to him forever.

O Lord my God! I will give thanks unto thee forever. A truly grateful people
will not content themselvcs with a few thankful acknowledgments, or in
attending the public worship of God in a way of praise and thanksgiving for an
hour or two, or in bonfires and illuminations the evening after; but will
labor to retain a grateful sense of divine favors all their life long, and to
transmit the memory of God's great goodness to future generations. This will be
the care of a godly and a grateful people, not to forget any of God's benefits;
especially such as are public, remarkable and very important; but to preserve
the memory of them from generation to generation. We will not hide them from
their children, showing to the generations to come the praises of the Lord, and
his strength and his wonderful works which he has done; that the generations
to come might know them, even the children which should be born, who should
arise and declare them to their children, that they might set their hope in
God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments Psalm. 78. 4. 6.
7.
.

Thus the grateful and the gracious soul will be for giving thanks to God
forever in this world, as he will endeavor that one generation shall praise
his works to another, and declare his mighty acts. But then the pious thankful
soul will praise this God forever and ever, in the other world, where all the
wonders of divine goodness, and all his seasonable appearances for his church
and people will so open themselves to the saints, as to fill them with new
matter of admiration and praise to all eternity.

How careful should we then be to perpetuate the memory of this late signal
deliverance: and endeavor that God may be praised forever and ever upon the
account hereof: and when we are sleeping in the dust of death which cannot
praise God, and in the grave which cannot celebrate him; our children may rise
up and praise him; and so from generation to generation. And we wish to God
there may be such lasting, happy and blessed effects of this repeal, as to our
religious as well as civil interests, as that we and our children may have
occasion for rendering everlasting praises to God in heaven. And if the repeal
of this act should be the means of continuing our religious as well as civil
liberties, and of transmitting pure and undefiled religion to future ages: Oh!
what a resource will it be of perpetual and everlasting praises!

But then, as we are to keep up a grateful perpetual remembrance of God's great
mercy to us, that so we might praise him forever and ever; so it becomes us to
keep up a continued grateful remembrance of those worthy honorable patriots
whom God has made eminent instruments of good unto us. Ingratitude to friends
and benefactors is to be abhorred: and if we would not be ungrateful we may not
be forgetful of such who have been distinguishingly kind, and good to us: But
must endeavor to perpetuate their names with honor: that they who rise up
after them, and us, may call them blessed. The memory of the just is blessed:
and the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. And it is highly
just and reasonable, that they who have received special benefits from the
great and the good, should do their part that the memory of such may be blessed.

And as God has in this late dark day, and critical juncture, raised up
powerful friends, and worthy benefactors to us, who by their wisdom and zeal,
their courage, constancy and close application in our behalf, have procured
this glorious deliverance for us; surely we can do no less than call them
blessed, by wishing blessings of every kind to them and theirs: and not only
so, but should endeavor that the memory of their good deeds may be handed down
with honor, not only in the annals of time and history of the present age; but
by some lasting monument or other.

And if it was in our power, how agreeable would it be to have the glorious Mr.
Pit, and others of the forementioned Worthies, who are avowed enemies of
corruption, tyranny and oppression, who are the fast friends of virtue, and
powerful advocates for liberty; at the same time lovers of their King, their
nation, and all the colonies: I say, how agreeable would it be to have brazen or
marble monuments erected, not only to perpetuate their memory; but to let the
future ages see the truly grateful sense we had of their patriotic goodness in
the time of it? I don't mean idolatrous images, to fall down and worship, which
was the superstition and folly of the ancient heathen, with respect to their
heroes; but to present to future ages the resemblances of such whom God formed,
raised up, and made such eminent instruments of saving the British Empire from
impending ruin.

All that I have further to add here is, that in our praises and thanksgivings
to God for this present merciful deliverance, we join our humble servent
prayers that this our tranquillity may be lengthened out to future generations;
and that; this people may never more be molested in such a manner: But that we
and ours may be continued in the quiet possession of all our constitutional
rights from age to age. And as the God of our fathers has so wonderfully
appeared for us at this time, we may confidently hope and trust he will for
time to come, if we walk in his ways, and serve him with a perfect heart and a
willing mind. And indeed considering, how fully this affair was debated in
parliament, and the judgment of some eminently learned in the law, of both
houses of parliament relative to constitutional right, It appears by the public
prints, that Lord Camden in the house of Lords. and Mr. Pit in the house of
Commons, declared the Stamp Act to be unconstitutional.
and taking many other things into consideration, we have no ground to fear any
thing of this sort, so long as we approve ourselves loyal subjects of king
George, and his successors in the British throne; and yield all due subjection
to the British Parliament.

And, as the Jews of old, when they were delivered from the cruel edict of the
king for their destruction, were filled with gladness and praise, and kept up
an anniversary solemnity in joyful remembrance of their deliverance, which was
a day of gladness and feasting, a good day, and of sending portions one to
another (...) 19.
. So now since this parliamentary edict which alarmed all our fears, and filled
us with distress, is absolutely and entirely repealed; let every one be girded
with gladness, and every tongue sing praise to God.

And as this religious exercise will be followed with public rejoicings, and
external tokens of joy; let me earnestly exhort you all, both old and young,
high and low, to conduct with all that decency and due decorum, which becomes
those who have been in the house of God this day, pouring out our devout
religious acknowledgments before him; and attending upon the counsels of his
word. Let me entreat you, and in the name and fear of God, let me charge you in
all your mirth to refrain from every thing that is profane; from every thing
that is rude or unseemly; from every thing that is intemperate and contrary to
the rules of sobriety; and from every thing that is mischievous or hurtful to
the persons or properties of others.

And let me further caution you against managing your rejoicing in a way of
triumph or insult upon any persons at home (for I know of none among ourselves)
who have appeared zealous promoters of the act which is now abolished. And that
you avoid every thing that is irrirating or provoking to men's spirits; or that
tends to beget ill will: For we know of no man, but whose help and good will we
may sometime or other have occasion for. Finally here let me advise you to
break up your diversions in good season, and return every one quietly to his
place of abode: And may every thing be conducted with so good order, and with
such innocence of behavior as becomes the disciples of Christ, who joy in the
Lord, and when they greatly rejoice, it is in the God of their salvation. And
if these external rejoicings flow from, or are accompanied with true gratitude
to the God of heaven, who has appeared for our help, it will be a token of
farther good.

Let me add one word more and have done; and that is, that we pay all due
respect to the civil magistrate, and a willing subjection to the government
over us, whether supreme or subordinate. Let us consider the true design of
government, which is the good of the community; and fixing this in our mind as
a firm principle, it will serve very much to direct, and regulate as to all
exertions of power, as well as to our obedience and submission thereunto. I
shall recommend to you the apostolic advice, 1 Pet. 2. 13 -- 17. Submit
yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, that is, to every
constitutional ordinance of man that is not repugnant to the superior law of
God and nature; whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto governors, as
unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well: For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: As free, and not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; but as the servants of God. Honor all
men, love the brotherhood; fear God and honor the King, PRAYING always for
Kings, and for all in authority, and that you yourselves may lead quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.

And now blessed be the Lord who has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad: Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous
things, and blessed be his glorious name forever; and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory. AMEN, and AMEN.


