SERMON, Preached at the Opening of St. PAUL's CHAPEL, IN THE City of NEW YORK,
On the Thirtieth Day of October, A. D. 1766.

By SAMUEL AUCHMUTY, D. D. Rector of Trinity-Church; and Chaplain to the Right
Hon. William, Earl of Stirling.

Quisquis ades, tu (...) pietate, parumper
Exue mortales Curas, and te quoque Dignum
Finge Deo.
Published at the Request of the Churchwardens and Vestry.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by H. GAIN, at his Book-Store, and
Printing-Office, at the Bible and Crown, in Hanover-Square.

To the HONORABLE Joseph Read, and Daniel Horsmanden, Esqrs, Churchwardens;
And the other Gentlemen of the Vestry.
Worthy Sirs,
IN Compliance with your Request, I now deliver you a Copy of my Sermon
preached at the Opening of ST. PAUL'S CHAPEL.

IF in any Shape it may tend to promote the Glory of GOD, the Good of Religion,
and a just Idea of the Sacredness of BUILDINGS dedicated to the immediate
Service of ALMIGHTY GOD, which I am confident can be your only Inducement for
desiring this Publication, I shall be most amply rewarded. But it will afford
me an additional Pleasure, if what is now offered to the Public, may have any
Influence in exciting others to follow so laudable an Example of Diligence,
Benevolence, and Disinterestedness, as you have exhibited to the World, In the
Undertaking, Conducting, and Completion of so beautiful and magnificent an
Edifice.

THAT it may answer these important and laudable Ends, is,

GENTLEMEN, The Sincere Prayer of, Your Faithful Pastor, And Much Obliged
Servant, S. A.
New York, Dec. ^^ 1766.
A SERMON, etc.
EXODUS, Chap. III. Verse 5. And he said, draw not nigh hither. Put off thy
Shoes from off thy Feet, for the Place whereon thou stand is holy Ground.


THE supreme KING of Heaven and Earth, being resolved to deliver his chosen
People the Jews then in Bondage, was pleased to employ his meek Servant Moses,
as a proper Instrument to procure their Enlargement: In Consequence of this
Determination, he condescended to appear before him, in a miraculous and august
Manner, ON THE Mountain OF GOD.

MOSES was alarmed at so astonishing an Appearance: And well he might, when he
beheld a Bush on fire, and yet not destroyed by that consuming Element, which
has no Respect of Persons, or Places, but with merciless Fury, too often
reduces the proudest Palaces to Ashes, and lays the Work of Ages, as it were,
in a Moment, level with the Ground.

WHEN the sovereign LORD beheld the Anxiety with which his chosen Servant was
seized, out of Compassion to him, he was pleased to say, Draw not nigh hither.
Consider before whom thou appearest, and preserve a proper and an awful
Distance. Put off thy Shoes from off thy Feet. The Majesty of Heaven is now the
Subject of thy Obedience and Reverence; therefore, revere him that covers thee
with the radiant Beams of his Glory; and in Token of Respect, Put off thy Shoes
from off thy Feet, for the Place whereon thou stand is holy Ground.

THE ALMIGHTY consecrated this Mountain by his especial Presence. The Ground
which before was no more holy than common, is now, from being visited by the
LORD OF LORDS, become holy Ground.

IT is very obvious to all present, that the Intention of our present Meeting
is, to dedicate this beautiful St. Paul's Chapel.
Edifice, to the Service of THE SUPREME BEING. It cannot therefore be deemed an
improper Undertaking to show;

1st, THAT ALMIGHTY GOD is eminently present in one Place, more than in
another; and therefore, that such Place, with great Propriety, may be called
holy.

2dly, THAT CHURCHES dedicated to the ALMIGHTY's Service, may be justly looked
upon as such Places.

FROM whence will appear,

3dly, THE Obligations which we are under, while in such a Situation, and in
the more immediate Presence of so holy a GOD, of behaving with Respect,
Reverence, and Devotion.

FIRST, then, I am to show you, That ALMIGHTY GOD is eminently present in one
Place, more than in another; and therefore that such Place, with great
Propriety, may be called HOLY.

TO Mankind, in their present lapsed Condition, the divine Presence is
invisible. We can form no adequate Idea of the Likeness of GOD. The most
soaring Imagination must fall infinitely short of SUPREME EXCELLENCE, should it
be vain enough to attempt to describe it. No Man, says the great Apostle to
the Gentiles, has seen, or can see GOD at any Time.

THE JEWS, his chosen People, though blessed with the SHEKINAH, or Glory of GOD,
never saw any Similitude The Shekinah was the most sensible Mark of the
Presence of GOD, which was to be observed amongst the Hebrews, and which rested
upon the Propitiatory, or over the golden Cherubims, which adhered to the
Propitiatory, or the Covering of the Ark: There the Shekinah abode in the Shape
of a Cloud. It was from thence that GOD gave forth his Oracles with an
articulate Voice, when he was consulted by the High Priest in Favor of the
People. Thence it is, that it is often said in Scripture, that GOD sits upon
the Cherubims, or between the Cherubims; that is to say; That he gives the most
evident Tokens of his Divine Presence, by answering from hence the Israelites
that consulted him. The Jewish Rabbis tells us, that the Shekinah first
resided in the Tabernacle prepared by Moses in the Wilderness, and that it
descended thereon on the Day of its Consecration, in the Figure of a Cloud. It
passed from thence into the Sanctuary of Solomon's Temple, on the Day of its
Dedication by that Prince, where it continued 'til the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and of the Temple, by the Chaldeans; and was not afterward to be
seen there. Calmet's Historical, etc. Dictionary of the Holy Bible. Vol. 3 d.
; nay, the divine Essence is undiscernable even to the holy Angels above. Those
blessed Spirits, though they inhabit celestial Abodes, possess a Space; their
Nature, therefore, must greatly differ from that immense BEING, the pure
Fountain from whence flows every Perfection, the GOD that pervadeth universal
nature.

THAT ALMIGHTY BEING, then, that reared the mighty Fabric of the Universe,
dwells not in Temples made with Hands: The Heaven of Heavens, the spacious
Concave above, is not able to contain Him, for he fills Heaven and Earth. His
Limits are not to be described.

BUT, though ALMIGHTY POWER is not to be fully ascertained, yet certainly it
may be exerted in a visible and extraordinary Manner, on particular Occasions.

TRANSCENDENT MAJESTY, arrayed in Glory, can certainly display himself in a
more conspicuous Manner in one Place, than in another. This is evident from
Facts.

IN our present imperfect State, much of our Knowledge is received by our
Senses. To investigate the most abstracted Ideas, we call to our Assistance the
most sensible Helps. The benevolent CREATOR of the human Race, intimately
acquainted with the fallen Nature of Man, has, upon particular Occasions,
condescended to exhibit to the World, a kind of visible Presence, of his
tremendous MAJESTY. His wise and gracious Intention in thus acting, is to (...)
Thoughts in our Minds, as may plant the Principles of our most holy Religion
deep and lasting in our Souls.

WE must be sensible, that a Being endued with omnipotent Power, can upon a
particular Occasion, actuate a Quantity of Matter, in such a Manner, as must
fill the Mind of Man, with great and astonishing Ideas of his Mejesty. His
Power being infinite; He is able to do among the Inhabitants of the Earth, as
well as in the Armies of Heaven, whatever he wills.

IN former Ages, the Almighty GOD, for wise and good Purposes, condescended to
exhibit astonishing Representations to particular Men, in particular Places.
These glorious and magnificent Signs were generally discovered by a remarkable
luminous Appearance, bursting forth from dark and thick Clouds.

THE first Appearance of the Glory of the Lord that we have recorded, was to
Adam, in Paradise. After our first Parent had stained his Soul with Guilt, his
justly offended GOD, appeared to him, arrayed with awful Majesty; and with a
commanding Voice, that pierced through his guilty Breast, he called the unhappy
and self-convicted Criminal.

THUS arraigned by his Sovereign Lord, he was seized with Fear and Dread. In
vain he attempted to hide himself from the Presence of injured MAJESYT.

AFTER the Flood, the SHEKINAH was often visible to the HOLY SEED; particularly
to the venerable Father of the Faithful; for it is said, that GOD went up from
Abraham.

WHEN JACOB returned from BEERSHEBA, toward HARAN, to mitigate incensed ESAU's
Resentment, he was blessed with the Divine Presence. He beheld the Angels of
God ascending, and descending, and viewed the Lord of Glory, who promised that
his wakeful Providence should watch over him for good.

WELL might the pious PATRIARCH break forth, and in a religious Rapture say,
surely the Lord is in this Place. How dreadful is this Place. This is no other
than the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven. And on his Return to his
Native Country, he (say the sacred Scriptures) wrestled with God and prevailed;
and in Honor of so signal an Event, called the Place where he obtained the
blessing, PENIEL; that is, the Face of God; because he was there favored with
the Divine Presence. After this the same august Being was pleased to display
his Glory to his faithful Servant MOSES; and God called unto him.

AND lest the Vain, the proud Skeptic, should say, that these particular Men
were deluded, and disturbed with Melancholy and Whim; the Spirit of Divine
Wisdom has also recorded the Almighty's appearing to Multitudes infamous for
the hardness of their Heart. Hear MOSES's solemn and awful Account of it,
dictated by the holy Spirit of God. On the third Day in the Morning there were
Thunders and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, and Moses brought
forth the People out of the Camp to meet with God; and Mount Sinai was
altogether in a Smoke, because the Lord descended upon it; and the Lord came
down upon Mount Sinai, on the Top of the Mount.

THUS it is very evident that Almighty God assisted the Imaginations of Men, by
his miraculous Presence; not that the Godhead was represented to them, for that
is invisible; but he condescended to exhibit to his chosen People, such
glorious, and amazing appearances, and such visible Signs, as convinced them of
his invisible Presence, and readiness to help and assist them.

BY illustrating the Manner in which Almighty God eminently appeared in one
Place, more than another, we shall be able to put the Truth now advanced in a
proper Point of Light. And,

FIRST, those Persons to whom the Glory of the Lord appeared, were themselves
fully persuaded of the Reality of the Divine Presence. If Men are endued with
such valuable Faculties as to know GOD, to serve Him, and to be directed by
Him; they then are also capable of knowing when infinite Wisdom condescends in
a particular Manner to reveal himself to them. The Fountain from whence all
Knowledge is derived, so enlightened their Understandings to whom the Shekinah
appeared, as convinced them by a Demonstration from the Spirit of GOD, that it
was no less than the Glory of the Lord that appeared. Nor is such a Divine
Illumination either inconsistent with the Perfections of Almighty GOD, or those
noble Faculties with which he has blessed the Sons of MEN.

ABRAHAM, the Father of the Faithful, was fully convinced that the GOD who had
often appeared to him, was the same BEING that commanded him to sacrifice his
only beloved Son ISAAC. We cannot suppose that so good and wise a Man, so fond
and indulgent a Parent, could be tempted to commit an Action, that had so much
the Appearance of being barbarous, unnatural and Irreligious, had he not
received the most ample Conviction, that it was the express Command of his GOD,
to whom he owed entire Obedience.

JACOB entertained not the least Suspicion but that it was GOD, that appeared
to him at BETHEL. The Divine Presence amply supplied those Cnveniencies which
he wanted, and rendered his Couch of Earth and Stones vastly preferable to the
Down and Tissue of Princes.

MOSES, that eminent Servant of GOD, would not have hid his Face, and been
seized with Fear, not daring to look up, if he had not been fully persuaded,
that the Divine Majesty appeared to him in Glory at that precise Time.

AND, to mention but one Instance more; the stiff-necked ISRAELITES, remarkable
for Infidelity and Perverseness, would never have moved, and stood afar off,
and condescended to request MOSES to speak unto them lest they should die;
would not have worshipped every Man at his Tent-Door, when they beheld the
cloudy Pillar standing at the Door of the Tabernacle, if they had not received
incontestable Evidence that the Divine Presence was in a special Manner there.

SECONDLY, The Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth always appeared with
astonishing Splendour, and amazing Glory, on particular Occasions.

AT those times, to make use of the sublime and grand Description, which the
sacred Oracles give us, There went up a Smoke out of his Nostrils; Fire came
out of his Mouth: He bowed the Heavens, and came down; Darkness was under his
Feet; He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly; He came flying upon the Wings of the
Wind. At the Brightness that was before him, thick Clouds passed away. The
Sight of the Glory of the Lord was like devouring Fire, in the Eyes of the
Children of Israel. And, it is recorded that, when GOD came up from Teman, and
the Holy One from Mount Paran, that his Glory covered the Heavens, and the
Earth was full of his Praise. His Brightness was as the Light. Nay, so
transcendently glorious was the Splendour of the Divine Majesty, that it even
dazzled the Eyes of Moses, though permitted to talk with his GOD, Face to Face.
Again;

THAT the Almighty might command the greatest Reverence, when he graciously
condescended to leave the beautiful Mansions of Glory, and to visit the Sons of
Men, (amazing Condescension indeed:) He was attended by a splendid Company of
active Angels. The Ancient of Days, says the Prophet Daniel, in a noble and
lofty Style, has Thousands to minister to him, and Ten Thousand Times Ten
Thousand standing before him. The Chariots of GOD are Twenty Thousand, even
Thousands of Angels, and the Lord is among them in his holy Place.

THUS the Patriarch Jacob, when blessed with the Divine Presence, saw the
Angels of GOD, attending on the Majesty of Heaven, ascending and descending:
And when the Almighty GOD appeared to his Servant Moses, the Angel was in the
Bush; and GOD upon Mount Sinai, was received by the Disposition of Angels.

LASTLY, The Place where the Shekinah, or Glory of the Lord appeared, was
esteemed holy. For if the Tabernacle, the Temple, nay, the meanest Utensil
appropriated for Divine Service, was esteemed as holy, surely the Place
honored with the especial Presence of Almighty GOD, was eminently so.

FOR this Reason Jacob, when he was fully convinced that GOD appeared to him in
Bethel, cried out, that the Place was dreadful, and that it was the House of
GOD: And GOD declares to his Servant Moses, that the Mount on which he
appeared to him in Glory, was holy Ground. And whenever the Glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle, the Israelites worshipped and did Obeisance. The
Speciality of the Divine Presence consecrating or making those Places holy, in
which Almighty GOD was pleased to appear.

THUS it is very evident that the Supreme Being is eminently present in one
Place more than another; therefore that such Place may, with great Propriety,
be styled holy.

I proceed, Secondly, to prove both from Scripture and Antiquity, that Churches
dedicated to GOD's Service, may be justly looked upon as such holy Places.

WE do not at this Day presume to assert, that the especial Divine Presence is
now visible in our Churches.

THE ancient Fathers justly suppose, that the Shekinah, or the Glory of the
LORD was effected by the Second Person in the sacred Trinity: It was therefore
highly reasonable that, when the Brightness of GOD's Glory, and the express
Image of his Person, became manifest in our Flesh; all those extraordinary
Appearances should cease; and accordingly they have long since been withdrawn.

BUT though the Glory of the Lord is not now visible, yet we may reasonably
conclude, that the Sovereign Inspector of Men, and their Actions, has a
peculiar Regard for those Places dedicated, and set apart, for his particular
Service, by his religious, and faithful Servants. And, though our Senses are
not struck with those radiant Beams of Light, which holy Men, before the
Appearance of the Lord of Light and Glory, were blessed with; yet the Great
GOD, though imperceptible to us, is more eminently present in Places dedicated
to his Name and Worship, than in common Buildings.

IN all Ages, and among all Nations, we find that particular Places have been
appropriated, and set apart for religious Rites and Ceremonies.

JACOB vowed a Vow, that the Place where GOD appeared to him, should be GOD's
House. And whenever this was done with Piety and Sincerity, the Supreme GOD, as
an Encouragement to his faithful Servants, was pleased to declare his
Approbation by manifest Signs.

THUS when Moses finished the Work of the Tabernacle, a Cloud covered the Tent
of the Congregation, and the Glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle: And when
the magnificent Temple of Solomon was finished, which for Grandeur, and
Refinement of Taste, exceeded every Thing of the Kind before or since, the
Cloud, as a Sign of Approbation, filled the House of the Lord.

THOUGH our Senses are not, in these Days of Degeneracy, struck with
extraordinary Appearances for the Reason already given; yet we may, with great
Truth, I am confident, presume, that Almighty GOD will equally delight in every
Place, or Church, which the Piety of his obedient Servants, with a View to his
Glory, and the present and eternal Welfare of the human Race, has dedicated to
Him under the Gospel, as He delighted in those dedicated to him under the Law;
He being the same Yesterday, Today, and for ever.

NOW indeed, neither Jerusalem, nor Mount Gerazim, are more holy to GOD than
other Places; but from the Rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, GOD
's Name shall be great in every Place. Incense shall be offered in his Name.

THE Goodness of GOD is not now confined to Palestine, neither is Jerusalem the
Place that his Holiness delighted to dwell in; but in every Country his
faithful Worshipers may erect Buildings, and dedicate them to the Service of
their GOD and Redeemer: And, when ever the Almighty is properly invoked in such
Places, or Churches, in Spirit and in Truth, we are assured that his Votaries
perform as acceptable a Service, as was anciently performed in those Places
called by GOD's sacred Name.

I would not be understood to say, that our Churches have any intrinsic
Holiness in them; but, by being solemnly dedicated to the sole Service of the
Almighty, they certainly have an immediate Relation to Him, and are
derivatively Holy.

BOTH the Laws of GOD and Man require, that the stated Times for the public
Worship of the GOD that made us, supports and protects us, be observed in a
different Manner from other Times. Why therefore, by a Parity of Reasoning,
should not hallowed Places, which are appropriated, and dedicated entirely to
the Service of Almighty GOD, be treated with greater Regard than ordinary
Houses?

THE superb Palace of a Monarch is approached and entered with Respect and
Deference; should not then noble and majestic Edifices erected for, and
dedicated to the Service of that Sovereign Being, the Lord of Lords, and the
King of Kings, be treated with the greatest Awe, and most profound Veneration?

IF outward Marks of Reverence be not paid to Things belonging unto GOD, in a
very short Time, (such is our Propensity to forget our Duty,) we may become so
lost to Decency, and our most reasonable Service, that we shall fail in that
inward Veneration we yet pretend to have for the Divine Majesty Himself.

IT is a just Observation of an eminent Prelate, (long since with his Maker)
that the inward Worship of the Heart is the great Service of GOD, and that no
Service can be acceptable without it: But, (he proceeds) the external Worship
of GOD in his Church is the great Witness to the World, that our Hearts stand
right in his Service.

THE Church or Temple (say our Homilies) is counted or called holy, yet not of
itself; but, because GOD's People resorting thereunto are holy, and exercise
themselves in holy and heavenly Things. Book Hom. Page 162.
But permit me to dwell a little longer on this Subject.

PERSONS and Things when set apart to the peculiar Service of Almighty GOD,
claim a Right to external, and relative Holiness; and this Right is founded on
their being thus appropriated.

THUS the Sabbath was called Holy, as it was the Day fixed for public Worship:
Thus the Oil under the Law was called holy, being appropriated to Divine Uses:
Thus the Jews were called an holy People, being separated from the idolatrous
Nations by Almighty GOD. And our Churches by solemn Dedication become the
Houses of GOD, and so are made holy.

I might now mention many Dedications under the Law, to elucidate what has been
said on this Subject, were it needful; but I rather proceed to observe, that
after the Ascension of the Lord our Righteousness, his disconsolate Spouse, the
Church, was, for some Time, clad in Mourning, weeping, and afflicted; and his
poor persecuted Servants were so watched by their cruel Enemies, that they were
obliged to make Use, not of the most decent, but most solitary and safe Places,
for their Religious Assemblies.

STATELY Fabrics, noble and magnificent Edifices, were not then erected. But
as mean and solitary as those Places were, which were set apart for Divine
Worship; yet they were treated by the Primitive Christians with the greatest
Respect; and the Profanation of them was universally detested and condemned.

SOME Ages after, the Rage of Persecution abated, the dark and dismal Cloud,
replete with Mischief and Vengeance, was, by the Interposition of Heaven,
dispersed and dissipated, and a radiant and glorious Light shone forth. Kings
gloried in being nursing Fathers to the true Church of GOD. The strong
Attachment, the sacred Veneration, which the first Christians had for the
Houses of their GOD, now openly appeared.

THE great and celebrated Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, immediately
set about finishing the Church at Jerusalem, built (as profane Historians
inform us) over our Savior's Sepulcher: And such was his Sense of the
Propriety and Decency of solemly dedicating it to the sole Service of Almighty
GOD, An. 335.
that he ordered the greatest Part of the Bishops of Christendom to assemble
themselves together for that Purpose. This they very readily complied with; and
some with Orations, others with Sermons, others with Prayers for the Peace of
the World, for the Safety of the Church, and for the Prosperity of the Emperor
and his Children, solemnized the Dedication to the best of their Power. This
pious Emperor also laid the Foundation of a famous Temple, called Sancta
Sophia, and Magna, which was finished, and dedicated Thirty-four Years after,
by his Son Constantius, Vid Bingham, Page 286.
who joined the Temple of Peace to it, including them both in one.

CONSTANTIUS was followed in his Piety by the succeeding Emperors, but
especially by Justinian, who, among other Works of this Nature, rebuilt the
Church of St. Sophia, which had been burnt down in the Time of Anastasius.

THIS Church was justly esteemed the Glory of the World, for its Greatness,
curious Architecture, Richness and Beauty; insomuch that Justinian himself
having finished it, was heard to say, I have outdone thee, Solomon.

SOCRATES SOCRAT. iii.8.
observes, that in like Manner the Council of Antioch An. 541.
was summoned on Purpose to dedicate the famous Church there, called Dominicum
Aureum, which was begun by Constantine, and finished by Constantius. Many
Examples of the same Nature are to be met with in profane History.

FROM these Instances therefore, of SOLOMON, under the Jewish, and Constantine,
and others, under the Christian Dispensation, it plainly appears in what Sense
the CHURCH is said to be HOLY.

AGAIN; it is called holy, from the sacred and solemn Offices that are
performed in it. The blessed JESUS himself, who always spoke the Words of
unerring Truth, assures us, that where two or three are gathered together in
his Name, HE will be in the midst of them; and we cannot doubt but that the
Father of all Mercies, will also be present with us in this House, now devoted
to his Service, by the Influence of his blessed SPIRIT; who is to renew us in
the inner Man, to incline us to will and to do what is acceptable to GOD.

WITHIN these sacred Walls, public Audience is to be given to the Ministers of
CHRIST, who preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of good Things;
-- to the Stewards of the Mysteries of Christ; -- to the Ambassadors of GOD;
who, with repeated Solicitations, beseech you in CHRIST 's Stead, to be
reconciled unto GOD.

IN this elegant House of GOD, the Laws of the great JEHOVAH will be promulged;
-- Obedience demanded; -- the Rewards that attend the Observance of them, and
the great Danger of a contrary Behavior, laid before you. Here, the benevolent
CREATOR offers to heal the broken Spirit, and the contrite Heart; -- to meet
with open Arms the poor, humble, dejected Penitent; -- to receive the sincere
Petitions of his obedient Servants, and to hearken to their earnest Prayers.
Here, at the sacred ALTAR, we are to commemorate the Death and Passion of that
immaculate Lamb, who was slain for the Sins of an ungrateful World. Here, we
shall feast upon the Banquet of redeeming Love; and receive the Elements of
Bread and Wine, to our great and endless Comfort. In a Word, Here, every
Ordinance of our religious Worship, for the Advancement of GOD's Glory, and the
Honor of his beloved Son; -- for the Edification of the People of GOD, and
promoting the eternal Interest of our immortal Souls, is required to be piously
discharged by the Congregation of the Faithful.

WE readily allow that the sacred Offices of our most holy Religion, may be
performed in private Houses; but it is evident from the Prayer at the
Dedication of Solomon's Temple, that religious Services performed in the House
of GOD are more effectual in removing Judgments, and procuring Mercies, than
those offered in private Places. The Goodness of the LORD never shines with a
greater Luster, than when the united Devotions of his faithful Servants,
wrestle as it were with the ALMIGHTY in his own House.

WE find that our blessed SAVIOR paid particular Respect to Places dedicated
to the Service of GOD. The sacred JESUS coming to Jerusalem, was filled with a
pious Indignation at seeing his Father's House vilely prostituted. When his
Person was treated in the most cruel and ungrateful Manner, he bore it with
wonderful Patience; but when the Temple of GOD was profaned, an holy Zeal
instantly kindled in his Breast. The meek Lamb of GOD, thus provoked, had
Recourse to holy Violence, and whipped the impious Merchants out of the Temple.
But,

LASTLY, If particular Edifices or Places are thus made holy, then many are the
Obligations that Christians are under of behaving, while in such a Situation,
and in the more immediate Presence of ALMIGHTY GOD, with the greatest Respect,
Reverence and Devotion.

WHETHER we reflect on the Divine Nature, or our Relation to GOD, our Judgments
must be fully convinced, that it is our reasonable Service, and our undoubted
Interest, to rejoice to enter into the House of the LORD, and there serve him
in the Beauty of Holiness. GOD's Service is now perfect Freedom; the Yoke of
CHRIST is easy, and his Burden light. It is not now required of us to come
before GOD with Calves of a Year old; to present Thousands of Rams, or Ten
Thousand Rivers of Oil; much less to give our first born for our
Transgressions, the Fruit of our Bodies, for the Sin af our Souls; but we are
required to sacrifice our Lusts and Passions, to serve the LORD our GOD, with
all our Hearts, and with all our Souls, etc. and to become new Creatures in
CHRIST JESUS. Can we possibly attain this blessed and desirable End by any
Means so likely, as a constant Attendance at the House of GOD; -- the Place
where his Honor dwells?

THE Royal Psalmist, with the most ardent Affection, longed to enter into the
Courts of the LORD, etc. He wisely esteemed them completely blessed, who dwelt
in the House of GOD. One Day in his Courts he esteemed better than a Thousand:
Therefore, the one Thing he desired was, that he might dwell in the Temple of
the LORD all the Days of his Life.

IF the Law, which made nothing perfect, thus strongly influenced that holy
Man, how inexcuseable then must Christians be, if they now neglect the
invaluable Means of Salvation offered them in the Gospel? Unpardonable must
they be, if they now refuse daily to walk with GOD, and reverence his Sanctuary.

BUT, barely to frequent the House of GOD, will not sanctify our Natures, and
render us amiable in the Sight of so pure a Being, unless we behave while in
his Courts, with the most intense Fervency and Devotion.

"BEFORE we enter the Church, says St. Chrysostom, we must divest ourselves of
the Care of this World. Let no Man (he goes on) enter with a troubled and
distracted Mind; let him lay all these down at the Doors, and so let him come.
For coming thither, we come to Heaven, not in respect of the Place indeed, but
of the Temper and Disposition of our Minds; for a Man while he lives on Earth,
may ascend to Heaven, and take a View of the Things that are there: Let no Man
therefore, in the Church, think of his domestic Affairs; but on the contrary,
while he is yet at Home, let him begin those Things he is to do in the Church."

THE like was observed among the very Heathens. They had their Nudipedalia
Sacra; and they put off their Shoes when they entered the Temple of Apollo. And
History informs us, that the Turks and Ethiopian Christians do not go into
their sacred Assemblies, but with their Feet naked. This was the ancient Way of
expressing Reverence and Respect, as uncovering the Head is, at present.

DOCTOR CAVE, in his primitive Christianity, says, "that the pious Christians
came into the Church as into the Palace of the GREAT KING, with Fear and
Trembling. Nay, the Emperors themselves, when they went into the House of GOD,
left their Guards behind them, and took off their Crowns, in Token of that high
Respect they paid to Houses dedicated to the Service of Almighty GOD."

LET modern Christians then follow these Examples. Let us worship the LORD our
GOD, fall down and kneel before him. When we reflect where we are, we must be
lost to all Sense of Goodness, if we neglect to serve our Creator with
Reverence and goldy Fear. Let us endeavor to form just Ideas of the awful
Majesty, of the Heavenly KING. Let us be properly impressed with a Sense of our
own Unworthiness, and then we shall be induced to approach the Sanctuary, with
Lowliness, Reverence and Devotion. Can we reflect that the Lord is certainly in
this Place, and be wanting in our Endeavors to order our Affections, and
regulate our Actions, in such a becoming Manner, as that no Thought of the
Mind, or Gesture of the Body, may render us unfit to appear before so great and
powerful an Inspector?

EXTERNAL Reverence greatly promotes the Interest of Religion, and must
convince all but the Abandoned and Obstinate, that our GOD is among us of a
Truth. GOD is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and to be had
in Reverence of all them that are round about him. Let us therefore keep our
Feet when we come into the House of GOD, and be more ready to hear, than to
give the sacrifice of Fools. Let our Hearts glow with Love to the best and
greatest of Beings, and then we shall worship him in the Beauty of Holiness.
But a formal Attendance on the House of GOD will be insufficient, unless,

LASTLY, by the Divine Blessing we order our whole Conversation suitable to all
those Means of Grace that we now enjoy. We may draw nigh to GOD with an outside
Piety, when at the same Time, it is possible, our Hearts may be far from Him.
If the Servant, for not improving the Talent committed to his Charge, was
deprived of it; -- if the Abuse of Knowledge will be attended with Punishment;
-- if a Neglect in the one Thing needful will be productive of everlasting
Misery; -- must not Christians dread that eternal Vengeance will be their
Portion, if through unpardonable Carlessness and Presumption, they render
abortive the most likely Means of making themselves holy and excellent, in all
Manner of Conversation and Godliness?

WE must be sensible that GOD hears not Sinners; that if our Hearts incline
to Wickedness, the LORD will not hear; for the Sacrifice of the Wicked is an
Abomination to Him: But if, during the whole Course of our Lives, we steadily
act upon religious Principles; -- if we bring our Wills to a strict Conformity
to the Divine Will; -- if we order our Conversation as becomes the Gospel of
CHRIST; -- if our Devotions are, as they ought to be, active, servent, and
lively; -- if we give unto the LORD the Glory due unto his Name; -- if we
worship Him in his Sanctuary with an holy Worship; if it be the principal
Business of our Lives to walk in the Courts of the LORD, -- we may then with
Comfort hope, that we shall hereafter be admitted, through the Merits of a
glorious Redeemer, into the Divine Presence, where there is Fullness of Joy;
and into those beatific Mansions, where there are PLEASURES FOR EVERMORE.

HAVING thus finished what I proposed to offer, from the Words of my Text, all
that now remains, is sincerely to congratulate you, Worthy Sirs, The
Churchwardens and Vestry who had the ordering and directing of the Building.
under whose wise Management, and prudent Direction, this beautiful and
convenient Edifice is now so far finished, as to be opened, and dedicated to
the Service of ALMIGHTY GOD.

YOU this Day have the unspeakable Pleasure, of seeing within these Walls, a
very respectable, numerous and devout Audience; -- And if we cast our Eyes
around us, and carefully view this elegant Building, which is an Honor to our
Church and City, we cannot help expressing our Admiration, at beholding it
nearly completed, with such great Judgment, and uncommon Dispatch.

A GLOWING Ardor for the Service of GOD, and a humane and benevolent Regard for
the present, and eternal Welfare of your Fellow-Citizens, are the only
Inducements (noble ones indeed they are!) that have influenced you, Sirs, of
the Corporation of the Church of England, in this City, as by Law Established,
to devote your Time and Service, to the Erection of this noble Edifice; which
will ever redound to your Honor, and be gratefully remembered by the latest
Posterity.

TO conclude; May that benevolent and most amiable Being, the great JEHOVAH,
who is a constant Observer of the Actions of Men, and who always delights in
those faithful and obedient Servants, that have exerted themselves in promoting
his Honor, pour the choicest of his Blessings upon you in this Life; and be
graciously pleased to crown you with immortal Happiness in the next. May he
permit this beautiful Building to be employed in his Service from Generation to
Generation. -- May all those that are here to assemble, and worship, be sincere
in their Devotions, and punctual in their Attendance, at this House of God. --
May they come with Hearts properly disposed to hear and receive the glad
Tidings of the glorious Gospel of Peace. -- May they be greatly edified, and
judiciously instructed by the Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, in that essential
Knowledge which alone is able to make them wise unto Salvation.

AND, finally, May the whole Assemby of the Faithful, after duly honoring, and
devoutly serving GOD in Houses made with Hands, be so completely blessed, as
for ever to praise, adore, and magnify, the benevolent Author of their Being,
and their Happiness, in you glorious and celestial Mansions, whose Builder and
Maker is the SUPREME GOD.

To whom, with his blessed Son CHRIST JESUS, and the HOLY SPIRIT, be ascribed,
as is most justly due, all Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Adoration, both
now, and evermore. AMEN.

