Mr. Barnard's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 28 th. 1766.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY FRANCIS BERNARD, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR and
Commander in Chief, THE HONORABLE His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, MAY 28th. 1766.

BEING the Anniversary for the ELECTION of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL for said
PROVINCE.

By EDWARD BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in HAVERHILL.

BOSTON: Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, Printer to the Governor and Council; and by
SAMUEL DRAPER, at their Printing-Office in Newbury-Street. MDCCLXVI.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, In COUNCIL, May 29. 1766.
ORDERED, That ISAAC ROYAL, JAMES RUSSELL, and NATHANIEL ROPES, Esqrs, be a
Committee to wait upon the Rev'd Mr. EDWARD BARNARD, and return him the Thanks
of the Board for his Sermon preached Yesterday, being the Day appointed by the
Royal Charter, for the Election of Counselors for the Province; and to desire
a Copy of the same for the Press.

Attest. A. OLIVER, Secr.

An ELECTION SERMON.
NEHEMIAH V. 19. THINK upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have
done for this people.
AN acquaintance with the history of past ages will lead us to observe, that a
common method of the exaltation of a people, has been by a succession of men
of eminent abilities and influence. A great genius appears at their head, and
forms a general scheme of institutions and laws. This being adopted, active
spirits follow, who carry it into execution, and the community swiftly ascends
to the height of prosperity.

EVEN Israel taken under the peculiar tutelage of Jehovah thus arose to a
flourishing state. Moses, by divine direction, gave them the rudiments of civil
and ecclesiastical polity. Joshua, by the same influence, led them over Jordan,
and fixed them in the destined inheritance.

IN a way somewhat similar may we well suppose a people emerging from the
depths of distress to regain their national character. Patriots, perhaps of
different qualities, exert themselves in turn, agreeable to their circumstances,
'till they make a respectable figure as in the former period of their existence.

An illustration of this we have in the case of Judah restored to Palestine and
the rights and privileges of their fathers, after their residence in a strange
land, and subjection to a foreign yoke, for seventy years.

DURING so long a term, when the public offices of religion could not be
regularly performed, when they were conversant with the superstitions of
Gentilism, and the manners of masters upon whom they were entirely dependant,
it is scarce possible but that the knowledge of divine truth must be greatly
lost, the ardor of devotion cooled with many, their spirits broken, and a
generous public temper well nigh extinguished.

LET us view these exiles going to a desolate country, and a capital in ruins,
with intention to possess and improve their ancient patrimony, rebuild their
city, set up the worship of God upon the Hebrew ritual, and settle the civil
administration to advantage; at the same time despised and hated by their
neighbors, and retarded as much as possible in every salutary projection.

THESE things considered, nothing can be clearer than the vast importance that
they should have wise men for pilots to direct them, men of goodness and
intrepidity, to animate them to every arduous undertaking.

ACCORDINGLY a gracious God not only favored them with his prophets to instruct
and support them, but rulers to lead and protect them, and forward the
enterprises to which they were called -- first Zerubbabel and Joshua, under
whom the temple was built, and altar for daily sacrifice; then Ezra a scribe
well instructed to the kingdom of heaven, who restored the scripture to its
primitive purity, and dissolved those interdicted alliances which weakened
their attachment to their religion and country.

BUT Jerusalem yet laid defenseless, enormities in part remained.

THE full accomplishment of the merciful intention of heaven toward that
afflicted people was reserved for Nehemiah.

THIS man held a lucrative post Pride. Connect. Vol. 2.
in a court the center of the wealth and glory of Asia, and had an intimate
access to the mightiest monarch then living. But surrounded with affluence and
honor, he mourned for Zion. His countenance betrayed a troubled soul to his
master, who understanding the cause, gave him liberty of absence for a term,
invested him with a public character in Judea, and sent mandatory letters to
his officers bordering thereupon to assist him.

His arrival to Jerusalem was like the light of the morning which dissipates
the incumbent gloom, and invigorates nature. Every heart was revived, every
hand employed. Present with them the walls went up, and the city filled with
inhabitants. By his incessant care and labors grievances were redressed, and
all things regulated in such a manner as to render them easy and happy.

THIS is the lover of his nation, whose words I have read. Think upon me, my
God, for good, according to all that I have done for this people.

LANGUAGE this consonant to the principles of reason and revelation. Natural
religion dictates that God is good, and a lover of righteousness. The
sacrifical services of the temple as instituted for particular cases, or
pointing to the promised Savior, while they implied guilt, gave assurance that
it was consistent with the rectoral holiness of God to have respect to
imperfect virtue. Nothing therefore is here expressed but what is agreeable to a
justness of though it, to a due humility of mind.

THIS passage as uttered by a ruler in Israel, suggests to us some things of
importance, suitable to the occasion of our present assembling.

I. WE may take notice of the ground of this request in the text to God. II.
THE request itself as connected with it.
WE are in the first place to take notice of the ground of this request to God.
-- According to all that I have done for this people.

THIS naturally leads us into some reflections upon civil government, it is
design, and the proper steps whereby it is pursued. But the subjects have been
handled with so much copiousness and accuracy in this desk, that they must be
but transiently touched upon.

IT has pleased the creator of all things to implant in mankind a desire of
happiness in the continuance of being, and accessions to their enjoyments. This
may be deemed a kind of instinct, which urges them without any rational
arguments to ward off an injury, or take hold of an offered advantage; and is
an engine of providence, whereby they are impelled to action, and the human
species is preserved. To this the Father of spirits has super-added reason, to
direct it in it is operations into a track consistent with the welfare of
others, and most adapted to a proper end.

IN the present state this principle gaining an undue ascendancy over the
intelligent powers is apt to excite men to the impetuous pursuit of personal
interest, to the oppression of the weaker. The proportion of an attainable good
is moreover as the means of arriving to it. Many can effect more than one.

CONSIDERING then the incapacity of individuals to defend themselves from the
rapacious, or to reach that degree of good they might in a collective view,
they are led to union. Union for these ends supposes rules framed in
subserviency to them. Occasions are continually rising for the amendment of
general rules, or additions to them, and particular cases occur which it is not
possible at once to provide for. So a standing legislature is erected. Laws
without execution are as none, therefore there must be an authority to see them
take effect. This seems the natural course of things.

THE exterior strength of a community, it is internal safety and advantage,
present necessity, or security for time to come, and a variety of adventitious
circumstances, have their weight in the model of government, and therefore it
differs according to the light in which either is viewed.

SURROUNDED by formidable adversaries, a people may choose to give to some one a
kind of dictatorial authority for their defense. Israel vexed with the frequent
irruptions of their neighbors desired a king to judge them, and fight their
battles. Property gives influence, and founds a sort of claim to rule, and a
large interest connected with that of the public seems to render the possessor
worthy of confidence. Therefore has the sole dominion been committed to a
certain number. Equality of property, a quiet situation, or perhaps painful
experience of the ill effects of unlimited sovereignty, have introduced a
popular jurisdiction, the society at large reserving to themselves the final
determination of matters which concern them.

HOWEVER each of these may answer good purposes for a term, yet singly they are
liable to exception. The supreme legislative and executive power lodged
entirely in the same hands uncontrouled, tends to tyranny. A government
altogether popular by reason of an infinite diversity of particular interests,
dissonant opinions, and formal consultations of the whole body, is slow,
uneven, and liable to convulsions, and subversion. Heineccius System of
Universal Law.


HAPPY are those whose political plan allows such prerogative as is sufficient
to the vigor, uniformity, and dispatch, of public measures, but at the same
time with such restrictions, as that the liberties of the subject are safe, and
by a wise mixture of the several powers which alone become pernicious, renders
them highly beneficial.

GOVERNMENT originating from the law of self preservation properly directed,
and being the basis of public happiness, we may easily collect the methods to
be prosecuted in consequence.

FROM hence it is evident that the constitution claims the first attention of
such as are in the legislative capacity.

THROUGH the weakness of human understanding, fundamental principles may
possibly be productive of ill consequences. Through a corrupt bias false
deductions may be made from maxims true and excellent, which practiced upon
will be highly detrimental. It should therefore be their care within their line
to correct mistakes of either kind; for if the foundations are out of course
what shall the righteous do?

AN equitable constitution on the other hand, the subserviency of which to
general utility experience demonstrates, is to be strenuously maintained. The
balance of power in a mixed government is no empty theory. The destruction of
it is terrible. The revolutions of Rome in former days we need not recur to in
proof of this. British records will inform us of the abolition of the ancient
system, the calamities thence ensuing, so severely felt as to induce a return
to it with as much zeal as it was rejected. It lays with rulers to preserve
this balance, (every inclination of which is in a double proportion) by a
scrupulous adherence to the duties of their department, and the seasonable
check to the violation of prescribed limits.

IT is likewise evident that the whole community should fall under the equal
eye of rulers -- that their concern should be exercised for all. Rivalship
there often may be between the several parts of society, and struggles for
immunities and privileges. Constituents may expect that those whom they elect
prove their advocates in prejudice to others. But such particular respect is a
perversion of the great intention of government, oftentimes rendering the
condition of some, of many, worse than if they had remained in a state of
nature, by tying them down under public sanction to what in that state they
might have prospect of relief from. Necessary burdens are to be adjusted to the
different capacities of bearing them, and advantages to be alike open to every
one properly qualified to improve them.

IT is equally evident that what concerns the welfare of the state is a proper
object of human laws. Provision therefore is to be made for the support of
those who serve the public agreeable to the places they sustain -- for defense
from, and opposition to, the unwarrantable encroachments of enemies -- for the
determination of contested rights, necessary to peace and order -- for the
encouragement of agriculture, manufactures and commerce, from whence are
derived wealth and plenty -- for the suppression of immorality, in its native
tendency as well as by the righteous providence of God pregnant with ruin --
for maintaining social worship, so friendly to that impressive sense of divine
things whereby the solemnity of an oath (the grand instrument of government) is
kept up, and adds to the force of civil authority that of conscience -- for
promoting the interests of learning, which softens a natural ferocity, assists
in the arts and business of common life, capacitates for great undertakings,
and with which (notwithstanding the exclamations of ignorance, enthusiasm, or a
narrow spirit,) religion and liberty are closely united.

To the efficacy of authoritative decrees to these purposes it is necessary that
they be dictated with as much precision as possible, so as to be easy of
application -- that the rewards and punishments annexed should be suited to the
circumstances and prevailing passions of those for whom they are framed, and a
freedom of access be ever preserved to the tribunals of justice.

HENCE finally the true use of executive power is readily perceived. It is the
energy and influence of the legislative -- the legislative put forth into act.
Those therefore who are vested with it are never at liberty to dispense with
laws -- are ever to make them their rule of conduct, and to their utmost,
endeavor a concurrence with the spirit and design of them.

WITH this general idea of civil government coincides the word of inspiration,
when it assures us that the ruler is the minister of God for good -- a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, attending continually upon this very
thing. With this coincide the common sentiments of antiquity. The kings of the
Gentiles (some of the successors of Alexander particularly) chose to be called
benefactors, when they reversed the character. Pagan deities were at first
earthly heroes -- good rulers who laid themselves out for the benefit of
mankind. Whether they had an apotheosis in gratitude for what they did here, or
as best qualified to superintend affairs below, or as an incentive with their
successors to an imitation, it shows the sense of mankind upon this head.

II. THE other thing which comes under consideration is the request to God.
Think upon me my God for good.

THIS in connection with the latter clause is worthy of distinct remark, as
containing seasonable and weighty hints, viewed in a diversity of lights.

1. WE may understand it as an implication of a ruler's governing aim at the
approbation of Heaven in his administration.

THE favorable regards of God cannot be conceived to be extended to any whose
habitual conversation in the world he dislikes, and therefore cannot fitly be
applied for by those who have not made it their main care to please him. Such a
sanctification of God in the heart by the influence of his spirit and truths as
shall give the supremacy to his approbation, is of vast consequence to rulers,
having a prodigious efficacy with them in the special business to which they
are called.

PERFECT wisdom has made nothing without design. The faculties of the minds of
men are for improvement, the talents given them for use in some particular
sphere. The disposal of circumstances, and adaptedness of talents thereto,
point out this sphere. Hereby industry is recommended in every station, and the
command proclaimed as with an audible voice from heaven, Occupy 'till I come.

WITHOUT subjection to the will of God the ruler cannot enjoy his smiles.
Seriously and deeply affected herewith, he gives all diligence (never content
merely with the honors and emoluments of a place) that his mind may be
furnished for exalted service. He will therefore carefully examine the best
policy of states, the causes of their grandeur and declension, attentively
survey his own country, it is situation, connexions, and manners, investigate
the foundation of laws, and their true sense, by intense thought, and the study
of the most judicious writers upon the subject, and converse with the remoter
branches of knowledge (according to opportunity) which throw light upon what he
is more nearly concerned with. He rises early, and sits up late, deliberating
upon the public safety. Contemplation and reading are for active duties, and
the treasures of wisdom laboriously acquired are freely expended for the good
of society. The senate complains not of his absence, or the seat of judgment.
He proposes, supports, objects, determines, and executes, and strains every
nerve in the fulfillment of his trust.

UNDER a firm persuasion that the righteous Lord loves righteousness, desires
truth in the inward parts, and that in his favor is life, he engages in every
momentous transaction with solemnity of spirit, is exceeding cautious that he
does not pervert judgment nor consent to any thing merely for it is plausible
appearance. Whatever comes before him passes under a severe scrutiny; assenting
hereupon to its rectitude it is received and prosecuted. He is not a wed into
compliances disagreable to the convictions of his mind by menaces from any
quarter. -- The fear of man brings a snare, but whosoever puts his trust in
the Lord, maintains due respect to him, shall be safe from the prevailing power
of such a temptation. Tenacious of a well formed purpose, secular arguments of
no sort are sufficient to warp him, he pursues it with an inflexible stability.
Constituted guardian of liberty, it is ever before him, and dear to him above
any earthly enjoyment. He is ready to all just means for it is preservation,
even to the laying down his life if called for in providence: But never will he
abuse the venerable name through precipitancy of passion, and for the
gratification of any personal sinister views.

INCOMPATIBLE with this persuasion is an habit of intrigue and dissimulation,
-- every subtle evasion of right, and those artifices which create confidence
and ruin dependants. It leads to fairness of expression and behavior -- to
account obligations sacred and a punctual conformity.

THE greatest may have some avenue whereby they are accessible to the crafty
and designing. A latent vanity not easily subdued renders adulation too
palatable. Sucking in the luscious draught, the ruler (as well as others) may
be intoxicated with the poison. Not so if he loves the praise of God more than
of man. This is an effectual antidote against it is baneful influence. -- This
closes the ear to the artful panegyricks of the fawning parasite.

IT must be confessed that other principles besides this we have been
considering may carry the ruler into a channel of duty in many instances
beneficial to a people. The enquiry is whether any short of this is sufficient
to carry him through the whole course of allotted duty.

NATURAL benevolence -- a disposition to serve mankind and to serve them
gracefully at once charms us, and we are ready to presage much good when this
is the characteristic of a ruler. But a little attention will convince us that
it is often accompanied with a certain indolence, averse to that close
application which forms the great, the vigilant, the active patriot, and
involves in it that desire to please which tends to an indiscriminate treatment
of all, and a flexibility which is sometimes prejudicial. Religion gives vigor
and compactedness to this amiable spirit; by this aided and exalted, it brings
forth fruit equal to the most sanguine prospects.

SENSE of honor has been much extolled, and is not without its advantages in
high life. But if all which is meant by it is a regard to decorum of behavior
as it comes under the observation and judgment of the world, it is too stinted,
too fluctuating always to be depended upon. This is consistent with private
vices, which by a kind of fatality draw on such as are more flagrant, and
widely mischievous. Ages differ in their taste, none are free from corruption,
and a compliment to that we live in may betray into a violation not of
received, but real propriety of conduct.

AFFECTATION of parade -- of shining in august assemblies, and being accounted
pillars of the state, prompts at times to exertions, the good effects of which
a community sensibly feels. But how will this operate in the day of trial, when
fame and duty come into competition, and a resignation of the former is plainly
incumbent? What but a principle of piety will produce the costly sacrifice?

APPREHENSIONS of the intrinsic excellency of virtue, nice ideas of moral
beauty, are worthy of the mind of man, and have their attractive influence. But
abstract notions only seem fitter for pure intelligences, than those who
dwelling in houses of clay have passions perpetually applied to by a thousand
sensible objects. To look in the critical hour to God whose favor and
friendship are of infinite importance, will be likely more to warm the heart,
and excite the springs of action, than the finest speculations of this kind.

ADMITTING then that in many instances these principles have been beneficial in
their consequence, still this must have the pre-eminence, as an incentive to
more extensive goodness, and the proper result of which is a consistent and
uniform character.

2. THIS clause connected with the latter may import the ruler's consciousness
of integrity in office, and his appeal to God on behalf of it.

MANKIND with understanding, judgment, and memory, are capable of recollecting
the past temper and conduct, and comparing them with some rule -- the divine
law. Conformity or disagreement herewith begets satisfaction or uneasiness in
review, especially as relative to the final determination of the character and
state by God the judge of all. What reverence is due to conscience, whose power
is alike exercised in absolving or condemning the great and the small? How much
should we prize his friendship, how fearful left we exasperate him?

THE ruler is not always exempt from the censure and resentment of the world.
Melancholy beyond description is his case if the reproaches of conscience are
joined with those of a people -- when deserted by man, he cannot look up to God
with comfort, for the voice of conscience is the voice of God. But censure and
resentment are not confined to those only that are culpable. Sometimes they
fall upon the upright; through misapprehensions, jealousies attendant upon a
warm passion for liberty, heavy burdens and disappointments fermenting the
spirit, or under some particular malevolent influence. Moses was faithful in
all God's house; but for an extraordinary divine interposal he would have
suffered from those for whom he so fervently pleaded. If Israel is deemed an
exception to the rest of mankind let us look elsewhere. The Athenians were the
most polite and sensible people on earth; quick in discerning merit, and ready
to embrace it. Yet those for whom they ordained public honors, by reason of
unfortunate events in which they had no share, felt the weight of their
displeasure. Even Aristides by the superior interest of a powerful adversary,
endured the severity of Ostracism, wishing as he relinquished his country that
it might never want him. Now when such a disastrous lot befalls a faithful
ruler, leading him to a solemn retrospect, vast indeed must be his happiness
with the testimony of conscience in his favor. He has that within which is
far more than a balance to what he feels from without, (though that must be
painful) he has a joy unspeakable, which no man can take from him.

BUT supposing such a day as this never to happen, yet mortality is the end of
all men. Rulers are styled gods as in an elevated station, but they must die
like men. Lying upon the bed of death that serious reflection is scarce
avoidable which a crowd of business and splendid scenes prevented in some. How
distressing must be that period, to one who for long time has lost fight of
his errand, and perverted the ends of his divine appointment, oppressed with
guilt peculiarly accumulated? On the contrary what transports are at this
season the portion of him, who has exercised a conscience void of offense,
whose applause reaches to the latest moments? Remember O Lord, as once a jewish
monarch, says he, (as supposed upon the verge of life) how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight, and smiles in the pangs of dissolving nature.

3. THIS clause may be understood as denoting a ruler's faith in and hope of
the gracious rewards of futurity agreeable to his services.

HOWEVER important the dispute may be concerning the intimation of future
happiness in the old testament, it is needless to enter upon it now. Suffice it
at present that the Jews in fact believed, and were actuated by it.

ETERNAL life is the free gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, but a gift
appropriated to those who possess a temper devoted to his service and glory,
and bestowed according to their assiduity in his work. Agreably our divine
prophet has represented mankind as servants, betrusted with pounds or talents
-- something improveable, and distinguished as they gained by trading.

WHAT restraint is the faith which is the substance of things hoped for, and
the evidence of things not seen from predominant worldly ambition and avarice,
prolific sources of venality and corruption! We judge of the value of things
very much by comparison, and the prospect of obtaining them. In nature and
duration the blessings above far surpass any thing below. While they are at a
distance the superiority does not appear in a striking light, but brought near
to the soul how is every enchanting object here diminished! Still does the
estimation increase when there is strong consolation through grace of an
heirship to them.

WITH this faith and hope who among the sons of the mighty can burn with
restless desires of mounting higher in the scale of human glory, indifferent to
any methods of advancement however base or unworthy? Incongruous herewith is an
insatiable greediness of wealth, an unbridled appetite to the wages of
unrighteousness. The crown which fades not away reserved in heaven, and a fair
reversionary inheritance in the kingdom which cannot be moved, being objects
upon which the mind is fixed, temptations from this world must lose their
strength.

THAT God is not unrighteous to forget the work, and labor of love showed
toward his name and people, being deeply imbibed in the heart, is a powerful
impulse with a ruler to unshaken perseverance in duty. By patient continuance
in well doing, -- with a zeal unabated by resentment, undismayed by
difficulties, he seeks for the sublime honor, the immense treasures of
immortality. If his work is attended with embarrassments very exercising,
discharging it with fidelity it is enough that this work is with the Lord and
his reward with his God; -- that God who with unerring rectitude weighs the
actions of his servants, with all the enhancing circumstances attending them,
and will award a fate accordingly, in that day when the kings of the earth, and
great men, shall in their united nature stand before the judgment seat of
Christ, to receive a decisive sentence for eternity.

SUCH are the sentiments which arise in contemplation upon this text of sacred
scripture, which should be wrote in deep and lasting characters upon the hearts
of every one that rules over men, and upon which the general temper and tenor
of action ought to be formed. Concurrence with the justness hereof our honored
fathers in an open manner declare, by coming into the temple this morning, that
the weighty affairs which are to be transacted may be introduced by the word of
God and prayer.

How great is the privilege by which civil rulers are distinguished by God,
while they have it in their hands above most others to do good to his people?
-- a privilege this with which the external badges of greatness, the tokens of
submission and respect justly belonging to them, or the most ample revenues
annexed to their office, are not worthy to be compared; -- a privilege
augmented according to the elevation of dignity.

THE chief magistrate of this province has eminent advantages to serve this
people. With pleasure we own his capacity, and rely upon his disposition to
improve it for this purpose. May his Excellency continued at the head of
administration be guided by divine counsel, assisted to the discharge of the
duties of his station, meet with the acceptance of those over whom he has
authority, the smiles of his master under whom he acts, and what is infinitely
more the commendation of his supreme judge.

THROUGH the tender mercy of our God upon us the day is returned wherein the
elective power vested in two branches of the legislature for our benefit is to
be improved. The subject upon which I have been treating points out their duty
in the choice of his Majesty's Council. So great a trust as is lodged in this
part of the General Assembly, most certainly ought to be reposed in such as
manifest an high opinion of the kind ends for which government is instituted,
and their value of a place in it for the exercise of a benevolent public
spirit, -- who in addition to political wisdom, discover a mind impressed with
a sense of religion, which will render them impregnable to any attacks upon
their virtue, inspire them with heroic fortitude in every exigency, and an
unshaken resolution to spend and be spent in the execution of the charge
devolved on them. In the choice of such the whole community is greatly
interested. Solicitude that these have a seat at the Council Board will
possess each one upon whom it depends, who is desirous of the answer of a good
conscience toward God, and of giving up his account with joy. Fully persuaded
of the critical inspection of the most High, and impartially consulting the
monitor within, we trust the heads of our tribes will so act this day, as that
they and we may rejoice together, -- they in remembrance of their uprightness,
we in the blessings derived from it.

MAY God be present with the Assembly of the mighty through the year,
instructing his servants in the things of our peace, and inclining them with
one heart and one soul to pursue them.

THE burdens of faithful magistrates are at all times heavy, but have been
greatly increased in the months which have passed over us. Serious persons
anxious for themselves and offspring, have not been unmindful of the perplexing
cares of their rulers, nor without desires that they might be directed and
sustained.

UNDER our sorrows and distresses, we have not been without consolatory
prospects, and those upon whose hearts the prosperity of Zion has laid, while
they have poured out tears unto God, have revolved in their minds such things
as have mightily supported them.

OUR fathers melted when they parted from their native country, -- as leaving a
parent, and taught their offspring to esteem it as a mother. Dismissed from her
bosom they and we have been afflicted in all her afflictions, and triumphed in
her prosperity. No event has happened to her which we have not sensibly felt.
Looking upon her always as our mother country, we have looked upon ourselves as
children, -- of the same family. Our connection therefore with her has led us
into dependence of seeing peace in her peace.

AT a distance from the throne, with duty to our Sovereign, we have confided in
him, to give us favorable audience, and extend his paternal concern to the
remotest parts of his dominions, -- a Sovereign who takes pleasure in the
happiness of his people.

THE wisdom of a British parliament, regard to equity -- to the welfare of the
nation throughout, must always incline to a review of every important affair as
more light is offered -- to allow due weight to the representations that are
made, to the arguments which are proposed.

WITH such considerations has the disquietude of our minds been much allayed,
our ultimate trust being still in the hope of Israel and the savior thereof in
the time of trouble.

WE have waited for thy salvation O God as they that watch for the morning.

THE mercy of the Lord has been upon us according as we have hoped in him. God
has spoken in his providence, saying, let there be light, and it is light; we
see it and are glad. May God be duly acknowledged, whose goodness is unfailing.
May our warmest affections flow to our King, and his government! May those who
have generously interested themselves in our behalf be had by us in everlasting
grateful remembrance!

WHILE every eye sparkles with joy, and every mouth is opened in mutual
congratulations, how natural is it in a fullness of spirit, to anticipate the
blessings concomitant with privileges freely enjoyed, -- to look forward to a
distant day? We behold the wilderness blossoming like a rose, under the
cultivation of the hand of industry. We behold our commercial interests
flourishing, -- the land of our original pouring in her ample stores upon us,
for convenience and delight, we making as ample returns, to the increase of her
strength and opulence. We behold a race of princes proceeding from the
illustrious House which now reigns, ruling over Great Britain and her American
colonies, 'till these colonies and Britain are no more.

BUT in the midst of our transports let us think soberly. Indulging high
expectations of seeing the good of God' s chosen, we ought to remember that
liberty, -- the best civil privileges which can be imagined, by no means
necessitate the happiness of the subjects. With these alone, with these
misimproved, we do but dream of becoming great and glorious.

IF when that is removed which so greatly oppressed our spirits, intestine
heats should prevail, and every thing be made matter of sharp dispute, if we
should crumble into parties, each one striving with vehemence for the mastery,
if crowned with prosperity we should grow proud in heart, and forget God, and
make proficiency in extravagance, luxury, and every vice dependant upon plenty,
how sad would be our condition? This (I was going to say) would be like
children, to throw away what we now seem so much pleased with; happy if no more
than children we were responsible for our conduct. But the expression is not
strong enough. This is more than merely to neglect the proper improvement of
the gifts of God, -- it is turning them against our supreme benefactor, and
perverting the means of happiness to our aggravated ruin. Rejecting the counsel
of God against ourselves, we cannot look for any thing but destruction to
advance like an irresistible whirlwind, and that when we call, God should
refuse to hear, -- that he should laugh at our calamity, and mock when terror
invades us.

BUT we hope better things, -- that our liberty will be used by all ranks and
orders, as the servants of God, that in love we shall assist and support one
another -- that henceforth we shall serve God in truth, and with a perfect
heart, considering what great things he has done for us.

THE truths which have been expatiated upon this morning as agreeable to my
text, are not unapplicable to a people. The design of civil administration
being the welfare of communities, it is clear that unlimited submission, --
submission in all cases, cannot be duty. It is as clear that when in the
general administration this design is kept in view, and prosecuted, respect and
subjection are due to those concerned in it. If rulers are to have habitual
regard to the approbation of heaven, the dictates of conscience, and future
blessedness, so should those in inferior stations. The civil distinctions which
subsist here among men, although necessary to the well-being of the world, are
yet but small, compared with that moral and probationary light, in which all
mankind are to be considered as standing upon a level.

IF these things are suitably digested we shall be led to that temper, and
conversation, which forming the general character, cannot fail to make us happy.

MAY God imprint them upon our hearts, and fulfill to us his ancient promises,
delivered in the noblest strains by the enlightened prophet, with which I close.

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold I will lay
thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. -- For
brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass,
and for stones iron: I will also make thine officers peace, and thine exactors
righteousness. -- Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit
the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may
be glorified.


