EXTRACTS FROM Diverse ancient TESTIMONIES of FRIENDS and others, corresponding
with the Doctrines of Christianity, recommended to the Consideration, First, Of
MINISTERS. Secondly, ELDERS. Thirdly, To every Member of the Church, who makes
a plain outward Appearance; as a Touchstone from the Spirit of Christ, through
his Servants, to try our Practice by; First, In the Education of our Children,
and Instruction of our Families in Religion. Secondly, In getting and spending
Riches; in Buildings, and furnishing them and our Tables. Thirdly, In
Marriages, and costly Entertainments at the same. Fourthly, In paying Tithes.
Fifthly, In Trades or Occupations, and Merchandise.

The INTRODUCTION.
Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters,
IT is in my Mind, by way of Introduction to the following EXTRACTS, to remind
us of one of the principal Ends of our peculiar Call by the Spirit of God, from
the Spirit of the World, to be a People separate from the many religious Names,
as well as their corrupt Nature; called of God, (to exhibit an Example of
Righteousness to the World) ^d above all the Family (...) Manifestation of the
W(...), Grace and Truth, which comes by Je(...) And for what End was this
larger Share (...)d Knowledge communicated to us? I choose us out of the World,
because (...)e holy than others, and therefore meri^^ial Regard? No verily: But
on the c(...)e were by depraved Nature Children well as others, and under the
same I (...)mnation for Sin, having run with then Excess of Riot in the Time of
our I(...)nd therefore were not in a Conditio (...)e Lord Christ for our
Portion; but it (...) as he said to his immediate Disciples, (...) ^hosen me,
but I have chosen you, and orda^ you should go and bring forth Fruit, and (...)
should remain. I have chosen you out of (...)d therefore it hates you; but you
know (...) before it hated you, because I tesiify of it, ti(...) thereof are
evil.

^S divine Wisdom, in all Ages, was plea^ use of Instruments to effect his holy
P(...) well as to be Witnesses to the power (...)s of his Hands, which caused
them to (...) Glory, Might, Majesty and Dominion, a ^orth his Praise in the
Beauty of his Holine Praise in the right ordering of their Conv^ For this very
Purpose did he choose (...)Y, in the Time of the Revival of div(...)ge, and
breaking forth of the true Li(...)s as a People, and ordained them to test the
World, its Corruption in Religi^ and Practice; chosen, as says the Apost^
peculiar People, a royal Priesthood, anoin(...)ified through the Truth; or
truly sanctifi(...)r and witness both of the Things which t(...) and those
Things in which the Lord sho^ or would appear to them; to open the Eyes of the
Blind, clos^ ^y the God of this World; to turn them from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan to God, that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins,
and an Inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Christ. Divine
Wisdom farther designed we should be as the Salt of the Earth, to season Men by
our savoury Conversation, and to be the Lights of the World, that others might
be directed thereby in the living Way to the Kingdom of God; a City set in an
eminent and conspicuous Situation, that could not be hid; in Dignity above all
others, uniform, compact and consistent; at Unity with its Self; governed by
Laws and Maxims founded in the Light and Truth, which instructs and requires
the Inhabitants of Zion, the holy Hill of the Lord, to glorify God in
whatsoever they put their Hands unto, that thereby others might be incited to
believe in the Light through their Word, or the powerful Influence of their
truly Christian Practice and Example, that at length these also might bring
forth much Fruit to the Praise and Glory of God.

Was this then one great Purpose of our high and holy Calling, as a Christian
Society in general, and the Ministry in particular? Most certainly yes. Then it
is evident, that our Concern for temporal, spiritual, and eternal Things, is
not to be limited to ourselves; no Man is born merely for himself, and no Man
lives or dies to himself; but his Life and Death has a Tendency to promote
Good or Evil. Our Views were intended, by divine Wisdom, to be directed in the
first Place, to the Honor of God; in the next, to our own Benefit, and the
Good of our Brethren and fellow Creatures; and therefore the Apostle enjoins
the Christian Converts, to do all Things to the Glory of God; and cautions them
against seeking only their own Things, but bids every Man look also on the
things of others; which he thus farther ^s, Let no Man seek his own,
(altogether) but (...) Man another's Wealth, Welfare, or Profit, in Temporals
as well as spiritual Things. Here then is the religious Justice due first to
God, and next, from one Member of the Christian Church to another, as well as
to Mankind in general. And how much greater is this Obligation on Ministers and
Elders, to whom the Care, Instruction, exampling, feeding and Oversight of the
Flock, Family or Church of Christ, is committed? In this Sense, every one is
obliged to be his Brother's Keeper: An awful and momentous Charge indeed! How
great then must be the Guilt we lie under, if we discharge not this sacred
Trust committed to us by God himself? How cautiously then ought Ministers and
Elders, etc, to walk in all godly Fear and Circumspection, as Ensamples to the
Flock, not only in Word and Doctrine, but in that which speaks the most
effectually and convincing, in Life and Conversation, or Practice, giving no
just Occasion of Offense to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of Christ, to
speak Evil of Dignities, or the Dignity of our holy Profession? I say, it
highly behooves Ministers and Elders to be blameless in all Things, walking
conformably and consistent with the Doctrines of Christ and his Apostles,
adorning the Gospel in all Things; otherwise they are not properly qualified to
example, exhort, counsel, caution, reprove and rebuke, with all Authority, the
Backsliders, Gainsayers and Unfaithful in the Church; for whom it has long
been the earnest Travil of my Soul, Night and Day, that they might come to
witness Redemption from the Spirit of the World, by which they have been so
long held in Bondage: And in a particular and especial Manner has my Spirit in
great Fervency been engaged, that the Ministry might be blameless; that those
who have a Dispensation of the Gospel committed to them, might be preserved
faithful in every Branch of our Christian Testimony, kept by the Direction and
Leading of the Spirit of Truth in the holy Way of Truth, and out of all Error;
that they might act consistent with the Dignity of their high and holy
Vocation, forbearing to do any Thing against the Truth, but every Thing for its
Promotion and Honor, whether in eating, drinking, clothing, buying, selling,
marrying, or given in Marriage, building Houses, and furnishing the same; that
all and every Action of our Lives might glorify God, or at least, in all these
Things that we be careful not to dishonor him. In such a Case, I am persuaded
the Gospel Power would run and be glorified; Men would say, God is with us of a
Truth; and the Uncircumcised in Heart and Ear would hear, if Practice and
Example spoke more generally in those who think themselves more reformed than
others; There would be now, as formerly, many taking hold of the Skirt of the
true Jew, saying, Now we believe; not because we have heard the Doctrines of
the Gospel preached by you, but the powerful Influence of your truly Christian
Practice we cannot resist; we are now sensible you believe the Truths of the
Gospel, for the Work's Sake which accompanies your Faith. In such a Case, the
People would not retort as now they do, Such a one, say they, preached to
himself this Day. -- Another we hear crying, aye! So say, so do. -- A Third,
look at the Pride in their Families. -- A Fourth, observe such and such.
Grandeur. -- A Fifth, look at their Love of the World, and earnest Pursuit of
Riches. -- With many more such like Retortions, which proceed from the Mouths
of many of the Members of our own Society.

And here let us give a little Attention, and hear the World speak; for neither
will they believe our Report: Says one, Now you Quakers have convinced us your
Principles are right, you are leaving them yourselves: Where Is your Contempt of
the World? How can you speak against the earnest Pursuit of Riches; for who
more earnest to accumulate Wealth than your People? Where Is the Self-denial you
pretend to? Don't you gratify the Lust of the Eye, and Pride of Life, though
plain, yet in rich and costly Silks, and the finest of Linen? Do you call this
Self-denial? And then, what Time do you take to dress yourselves in your plain
Nicety and Exactness? We are not half so long putting on our Finery. Again, one
asked, How we could pray that the Vanities and Glories of the World, might be
stained in the Eyes of the People, which she heard prayed for in a Meeting, and
when she came out made this Remark; You both make and sell these Vanities.
Another said, We have no Scruple about those Things; but how you that have, and
yet make and sell them, is a Wonder to us. Another, purchasing some vain
Things, looked with Admiration on the plain Friend that could sell such Things.
With many more such Observations on our Inconsistencies in other Things, too
numerous to relate.

Observe, Dear Friends, how we are reproached now, not for reforming, but
conforming to the World in many Respects; and though there has been so much
Labor bestowed to convince the World of our Christian Principles, and what
great Self-denial they lead to, we cannot deny that they have abundant Reason to
say as they do of many; They are contradicting them themselves. And now, dear
Friends, permit me to say, while by Practice any of us thus do, whatever our
Station be in the Church, whether public or private, both Profession and
Preaching will be vain; the People it is to be feared, will remain in Unbelief.
And I farther add, I do not communicate these Things to you with any other
View, than that of a long wished for Reformation in our poor declining Society;
that those by whom Offenses come, might no longer offend against the Light, the
sacred Rule we profess to walk by, which you know is no less than the Direction
and Leading of the Spirit of God. And allow me further to say, which I do with
Regret, that there should be any Cause for it, Many see and say, that this
wished for Reformation must begin in MINISTERS, ELDERS, RULERS, and all such as
appear outwardly in Plainness: The Sons of Levi, and others mentioned, must be
purified: I mean, such of these who have contracted too much of the Dust of the
Earth, and Spots of the World; for, in this Sense, the Head is partially sick,
which is the Cause the Heart of the Faithful faints; and they are greatly
straightened till the fiery Baptism is thoroughly accomplished in such who are but
partially washed, or at least have been again defiled by turning to, and loving
this present World: And on this Occasion the faithful Ministers are weeping as
between the Porch and the Altar, saying, Spare the People, O Lord, who were
called by thy Name; and are offering daily the Sacrifice for themselves as well
as for the People, fervently petitioning the God of Knowledge to try and search
them thoroughly, and if any Iniquity remain, by his, cleansing Power he would do
it away: And that every one who profess the blessed pure Truth, may have not
only their Feet, but their Head and Hands thoroughly purified, that they may
walk in, Integrity and Equity before the People, as was said of the House of
Levi, My Covenant, says the Lord, was with him of Life and Peace, Iniquity was
not found in his Lips, he walked with me in Peace and Equity, and did turn many
away from Iniquity: But when he departed out of the Way, be caused many to,
stumble at the Law, which he had been, partial in, and so corrupted the
Covenant.

And again, that we might be of upright Minds land sound Judgments, always
remembering that we are to judge for God, and not for Man: that we may shut our
Eyes from seeing of Evil, which, it is to be feared, some pass by with too
gentle, if any, Reproof of it; that we may stop our Ears from hearing of Blood,
listening to, or by any Means giving Way to the corrupt Reasoning and carnal
Arguments of libertine Spirits, who, though they are called of the People of
Israel, were as of old, gathered together and combining with the Spirit of
Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles, against the holy Child Jesus, crying
out in Effect and Practice, Slay this Witness that rises up against us and our
Deeds. I say, don't let us countenance this Disposition in any who are
crucifying the Lord afresh, though never so near and dear to us; nor encourage
those Things which put him to open Shame. And that we may also make our Hands
from holding of Bribes, ever refusing to be bribed against the Truth, either
from our own Hearts Lusts, or from Wives, Children, Friends or Relations,
remembering, in the Case of Idolatry under the Law, a Man was not to know his
nearest of Kin, when acting for God's Honor: Then the Idolater was not spared;
but under the more linient Dispensation of the Gospel, the Idol only is to be
destroyed. And again, let us ever be on our Guard, that we are not bribed with
the flattering Affections of the People; remembering it is not our own Honor,
but the Honor of God we are concerned for: And lastly, let us take Care, and
keep a double Guard, that we are not bribed by Worldly Interests and Connexions
in Trade; thus reasoning, If I use plain Dealing with such or such, I shall
lose their Custom. And again, If I sell not such Merchandise as please the
People, I shall have no Trade.

O dearly Beloved, my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God is, that he would
enlighten, more and more, every Eye that may be blinded with the Love of the
World, that they may see these Bribes, and refuse this Gain of Oppression,
which ever did, and ever will oppress and choke the Seed of the Kingdom; but
that all may walk righteously, and speak uprightly, saying, under any of these
Temptations, How can I do this Thing (or suffer it in any in my Charge) which
the Light and Truth condemns, and sin against my God, whose holy Spirit I
profess to be guided by!

And now, dear Friends, let me here say, that what I have written, and the
Collection I have made from Friends Writings, will not I am certain hurt the
Faithful, and may be of Service to the Unfaithful, to whom I offer them in that
Love which has no other View but the Glory of God, and the Edification of all
in the Love of God; and not for the Discouragement, much less the Destruction
of any; but in that Charity which will never fail, is my earnest Petition put
up to him who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, that the dispersed in Judah,
and the scattered of Israel, may be by the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls
brought home to the Fold of Eternal Rest and Safety. But I would ever discern
and make a Difference between the Precious and the Vile; between that among us
that brings Glory to God, and that which manifestly dishonours him, and our own
Pretensions. And though I am led to recom^ the Perusal of these Papers to those
in the Si^on above mentioned, yet I know of a Certainty; that there are a few
Names left among us, who have retained their first Love, a faithful Remnant
both of Ministers, Elders, and others, scattered up and down among the Tribes,
with whom my Soul is nearly united in the Bond of true Affection and Sympathy,
who are frequently mourning the Declension of the Church, and in the Words of a
faithful Minister, Their Burden is my Burden, I weep with these that weep, am
sorrowful with the Sorrowful; and as the Spirit of Christ is one in all, that
which is a ^f to the Spirit of God in any, I am burdened with them, and do bear
a Part of their Grief: And these are sometimes discouraged, seeing the Rubbish
is so mountainous, and the faithful Laborers so few, they are crying to the
Lord, that he would be pleased to qualify and send forth more Laborers, to
remove the Rubbish, in order to rebuild the Walls of our Jerusalem, and once
again set up her Gates on the old Foundation, Christ, his Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus himself being the chief Cornerstone; which Foundation only
stands sure and immovable; That if possible the latter House may excel in
Beauty and Comeliness the former; for though there can be no other Foundation
for the Church of Christ to build on, yet as People keep a single Eye to God's
Glory, a greater Degree of Light, in which new Things would be discovered,
would shine forth in a greater Degree of Self-abasement, and more perfect
Self-denial, and so would our Zion yet become the Example, and then the Praise
of the whole Earth, and remain an eternal Excellence to the Praise and Glory of
God, who has called us to Virtue, which as we come up in the Practice thereof,
we shall be made Inheritors of that Peace and Glory which fades not away. That
this may be the happy State of us all, yea of the whole World, is the unfeigned
Desire o^our truly affectionate Friend,

SOPHIAH HUME.

EXTRACTS Concerning EDUCATION.
PENN's Works, Vol. I. Address to Protestants. What this Author observes to the
Civil Government of this Nation, may be applicable or useful to us as a,
religious Society, viz. We are a sort of Trustees for the Youth of our Society,
who, though now Minors, yet will have the Government when we are gone: Therefore
depress Vice and cherish Virtue, that through good Education they may become
good and happy in this World, and a good Way to fit them for that which is to
come; They will then own more to your Memories for their Education than for
their Estates. First then, says that Author, let Care be taken to breed up
Youth in Morality: Virtue prepares the Mind, helps the Understanding, and gives
Industry ^o compass what is desired. -- I would have no Books used in Schools,
in which. there may be the least Indecency. There were, and not without Reason,
ancient Canons against the Reading such Heathen Authors; and not a few learned
and sober Men have rebuked that Practice among us. It is an Affront to
Christianity, yea to our Natures, to fetch our Wit and Manners from them. It
were well if some Tracts of moral Virtues and Invectives against Vice, were
written in those Languages we would have Youth to learn; for in such Discourses
they might obtain good Manners with the Languages; whereas by preferring in
Schools Heathen Authors, our Youth have learned base Obscenities and a corrupt
Conversation. This Author proceeds to recommend what he thinks suitable for
Youth to be instructed in, which see in page 740.

Abstract of an Epistle from the Quarterly Meeting at York, 1690. That Friends
be watchful the Enemy darken not their Minds, and bring them back into Folly
and Vanity, wherein their Minds are alienated from God, their Understanding
veiled; and turn again into the Practice of those Things which they were
sensible the Lord by his Spirit testified against, and reproved them for; and
it is possible they may indulge such Things not only in themselves, but among
their Children and Families, which in Time of their first Convincement they
durst not allow of; nor are they to be allowed in our Christian Society. First
then, be diligent to assemble to worship God, 2d. Ministers Conversations
answer their Testimonies. 3d. Parents (and let me add Tutors) indulge not
their. Children in speaking to one in the plural Number, nor allow the Liberty
of Sports and Plays, which have a Tendency, to viciate their Minds and Manners;
but train them in the Fear of God, restraining them from Evil, Folly and
Vanity, and cause them to read the holy Scriptures, and such Books as are
profitable; bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; that none
go into the vain and gaudy Habits, Dress, nor foolish antic Modes and
Fashions, either in Apparel, Furniture, or other Superfluities whatsoever; nor
join in keeping up Feasts and Fastdays; Banquets and vain Customs of the World;
and where, any Fault appear, let such Persons be duly warned and admonished by
faithful Friends.

And here may not inaptly come in, John Burnyeat's Exercise on Occasion of some
differing Judgments about Fast-days. See his Works, page, 107, viz. There was a
Fast at Barbados, that the Judgments of God might be removed, and there was
among Friends different Minds about owning or not owning of it; but after a
Time of deep Exercise, the Lord God by his eternal Word raised my Zeal, and I
did in his Power smite against all such Mockeries; and then in the heavenly
Revelation showed me, that it was to be witnessed against by all that stood in
the Testimony of God; and that those who would weaken the Spirits of any, in
their Testimony, it was showed me plainly from the Lord, they would draw a Vail
over themselves; and in a cowerdly underly Spirit, by the corrupted fallen
Wisdom, would put the Candle, which God had lighted, under a Bushel, until at
last it would be put out: So that we, like other Professors, at last would be
led to yield to any Thing rather than suffer; and so then the Offense of the
Cross might cease.

George Fox says, That which brings to the true Fast, seperates from them who
bow down the Head for a Day, and would be seen of Men to fast.

Dell's Works, page 186., Reformation of Learning, In teaching Youth the
Tongues, to wit, the Greek and Latin, such Heathenish Authors be most carefully
avoided, be their Language never so good, whose Writings are full of the
Fables, Vanities, Filthiness, Laciviousness, Idolatry and Wickedness of the
Heathens; seeing usually, whilst Youth do learn the Languages of the Heathen,
they also learn their Wickedness in that Language: Whereas it were far better
for them to want their Language, than be possed of their Wickedness. And what
should Christian Youth have to do with Heathenish Poets, who were for the most
part the Devil's Prophets, and delivered forth their Writings in his Spirit;
and who, through the Smoothness, Quaintness and Sweetness of their Language, do
insensibly instill the Poison of Lust and Wickedness in the Hearts of Youth,
whereby their Education, which ought to correct their natural Corruptions, does
exceedingly increase and inflame it. Wherefore my Counsel is, that they learn
the Tongues especially from Christians, without the Lies, Fables, Follies,
Vanities, Whoredoms, Lusts, Pride, Revenge, etc. of the Heathens; especially
seeing, neither their Words nor Phrases are meet for Christians to take into
their Mouths. And most necessary it is, that Christians should forget the Names
of their Gods and Muses, and all their fabulous Inventions, and let them go to
Satan from whence they came.

Light shining out of Darkness. The Christians in the primitive Times lived
excluded from all Honors and Magistry, and did neglect those Studies necessary
for civil Trusts and Employments; and because Sophisters and Philosophers were
the principal Enemies of Christianity, they were disgusted at all Philosophy,
and severely censured all manner of florid and polite Learning: They condemned
Tragedies and Comedies, and other poetical Writings, being the main Part of
human Learning, and thinking they did not conduce to solid Knowledge, being
full of Wantonness and Obscenity, as also Promptuaries of fabulous Idolatries.
Hence it was, Tertullian thinks, Schoolmasters, and other Professors of
Learning, to be guilty of a manifold Idolatry, whose Business it was to explain
the Names, Genealogies, fabulous Acts and Elogies of the Heathen Gods.
Generally the Believers in those Days harbored a very bad esteem for worldly
Learning: Whence it is clear, secular Learning was endangered in those Times of
the ancient Christians, who was so much the more provoked thereunto, because
the Gentiles did continually upbraid them, That they were a Sort of Idiots and
illiterate Persons; that their Teachers were rude and ignorant Combers of Wool,
Cobblers and Fullers. The Christians replied, That the Learning in which they
did so pride themselves, was an useless Thing, no Ways advantageous to
Salvation; nay, that it did estrange the wise Men of this World from the Ways
of God, and was a great Occasion of their Ruin. Hence it was that Celsus
upbraided them as a Communion of Fools and Slaves. The Gentiles also objected
unto the Christians their rude Style, harsh Language, calling them Rusticks and
Clowns. Clemens enjoined Christians to abstain from all Books of the Gentiles;
for what have you to do with strange Discourses, or Laws, or false Prophets,
who seduce weak Men from the Truth? Bishops were also forbid to read Heathen
Authors; out of the Bucolicks they sing Love Verses, they peruse Virgil, etc.
and what is a Sin of enforced Necessity in Children, becomes their Delight. If
you say, there is not now any Danger of reading heathenish Books, you give but
the same Reason Bellermin does, which is refuted by Lawrentius, since the
Errors of the Heathen are not more manifest now than of old, nor Men more fixed
and constant. Machivel says, the first Promoters and Founders of Christianity
were so assiduous and deligent in extirpating the Superstitions of the
Gentiles, that they commanded all Poets and Historians, which contained any
Thing of that Nature, to be burned: They did not spare Plautus, Martial and
Terence, and for the same Reason as they burned some of the Latin Authors, did
they destroy the Greek, because they were lascivious. Bellonius, a great
Traveller, says, when he came to Mount Athos, which is the greatest of any of
the Greek Church, he did not find there among religious Persons (no nor in all
Greece) one Man that was learned. In their Libraries they had several
Manuscripts of Divinity, but no Poets, Historians or Philosophers. Yet thou art
to understand, Reader, that the Greek Church is owned as a true Christian
Church, and highly magnified by Protestants; yet neither they, nor the Picards,
or Waldenses, did value Learning: So far were they from esteeming it as a Prop
of true Religion.

Lawson's Works. Many Since the Apostles Days have borne Testimony against
teaching Heathen Authors in Christian Schools; nay, a Heathen, Plato, blames
the first Education of Youth as destructive, in Reading the feigned, Comical
and tragical Inventions of Poets. -- A. Sympson says, There is much precious
Time spent in profane Stories and lascivious Poems. -- The. Romans brought in
Heathen Poets and Comedies into Schools; which to the Shame and corrupting this
Nation are yet continued: Though in the Days of Queen This Queen enjoined, that
all Schoolmasters should accustom their Scholars reverently to learn such
Sentences of Scripture, as should be most expedient to induce them to Godliness.
Elizabeth, the Lords of her privy Council sent Letters to her Commissioners in
Causes Ecclesiastical, requiring them to write Letters to all the Bishops of
this Realm, and require them to give Commandment, that in all Grammar and!
Free-schools, Christopher Ocland's Book should be taught in Place of some
Heathen Poets; saying, The Youth of this Realm receive rather Infection in
Manners, than Advancement in Virtue from the Heathen Poets taught in Schools.
-- Bishop Wilkins says, Men have neglected sound, savory and useful Matter, the
Quintessence of Learning, and have devoted themselves to an Excess of fine
Speaking. Augustine accounts Terence unworthy to be read, and blames Grammarians
for teaching of it."

In a Synod for the Estate of Guernsey and Jersey, 1576, it was provided in
Behalf of Schoolmasters, "That they should instruct their Scholars in the most
pure Authors, both for Learning and Language, left Children by reading immodest
Writings should be infected with their Venom.

"Far be it, says Jerome, (in the Year of Christ 384) that Jupiter, Macastor,
and other Monsters rather than Gods, should be heard out of the Mouth of a
Christian. But, says one, scarce any other Thing rings in Schools now.

"Socrates Scholasticus says, That for Christians to imbibe the Learning of
the Heathen, can no ways advantage their Religion, for it is not without
Danger, because it teaches Plurality of Gods.

"Abstain from all Heathen Books, says Clemens; for what is wanting in the Law
of God, that thou should apply thy Mind to Heathen Fables? Clement adds, The
Ancients denied these Things; but now through a Pretense of instructing Youth,
the Knowledge of these Things is so incorporated in tender and simple Minds, as
that the same can scarce by any Ways or Means be rid out of them.

"Martin Luther says, It is a serious and Weighty Thing, that Youth be
instructed in a Godly and Christian Manner.

"Objection to T. Lawson. Did not thou teach all usual School Authors? It Is
true I taught these Things, but I found no Peace, but entering into my Chamber
communing with the Lord, I found the Mouth of Heaven opened against them, and
in secret Retirement the Enchantment aforesaid was more and more discovered;
and I have put off that Coat, never more to put it on. It is not Schools, but
the Abuses, that this Testimony is against,"

And now let us hear George Fox's Sentiments concerning Heathen Authors, which
see in his, Battledoor. "The Children of Israel was to be taught the Law of
God, and Statutes of the Lord: They were to destroy the Heathen Inventions, to
break down what they invented, and not to teach their Children them, but they
were to be rooted out of their Memories. But you, called Christians, must befa
in to have Heathen Books to teach your Children in your Schools, whereby the
Children must learn the Heathen Words. What Christians! what Gospel-Professors!
are not you to teach your Children the Gospel, as the Jews were to teach their
Children the Law? and train them up in that, and break down all the Heathen
Books? Must the Heathen help you? must you be Borrowers of the Heathens? The
Jews were not to be Borrowers, and are you Borrowers of the Heathen Books? Did
not the Christians burn Abundance of Books when they were converted? And are
you gathering up Heathen Books since the Days of the Apostles, (in the
Apostasy) as Virgil, Ovid, Horace, Terence, Plautes, Cicero, and others, which
you extol in your Schools? If you will teach your Children other Tongues,
translate the Scriptures into other Tongues to teach their Children, and make
an End of all Heathenish Books which corrupt the Earth, and do not teach your
Children the Way of the Heathen by teaching their Books: And, continues George
Fox, we have drawn some few Examples forth of the School Books, to show the
Reader whether such Words are fit to be taught in Schools." See the latter End
of the Battledoor.

Rutty's Introduction, Liberty of the Spirit, page "'It Is not in the Power of a
Parent to convey Faith to his Children; but this should not hinder him from
conveying to them what he can. A Parents who has happily experienced the
Advantages of a Life and Conversation conducted in the Ways of Truth and
Simplicity, Temperance, Sobriety and Frugality, and of an Education exempting
him from many Snares and Temptations to Vice, to which many others are exposed:
Shall a Parent thus situated abandon his Offspring during a State of Minority,
Ignorance and Weakness, to Nature or to corrupt Company?"

Amborse Rigg 's Life, page 28, "We educated our Children in (the Way of)
Truth, and watched over them in Love. Many Days and Years have I, with bended
Knees, prayed to God before the Throne of his Grace, to guard my Children by
his Power from the Evils of this World, and to direct their Steps in
Righteousness, which hitherto I have in great measure enjoyed; blessed be the
Lord for ever."

Yearly Meeting Epistle, 1753. "Various Branches of our Christian Testimony
neglected: We cannot omit fresh Advice to Parents, to be careful in the
Education of their Children, to train them up in a godly Conversation, reading
the holy Scriptures and Friends Books; in Plainness of Speech and Habit while
young, that a gradual Advancement from Minority may tend to a firm
Establishment in the Truth; and that they walk before them in ^ll Godliness,
remembering the Day of Account to ^e rendered of their Stewardships."

Epistle from the Women's Meeting at York. "And ^ou that are Mothers of Children
and Rulers in ^amilies, be good Examples to your Children and ^ervants;
discourage the Evil, and encourage the ^ood, and in the Love of God and
Authority of truth rule over them: For if Children rule over ^arents, it is a
Dishonor to Truth."

Fox 's Epistles, page 547. "If you will have com^rt in your Children, train
them up in the Fear (...) God, and in his Covenant of Light; and if Children
and young People must be left, and let alone to themselves, and not to be
admonished, exhorted and restrained from the Evil and Vanities of the World,
then why did Moses and the Prophets, and Apostles, which were sent of God,
exhort the People to train up their Children in the Fear of the Lord, and to
teach them his Law while they were young, that they might not depart from it
when they were old? And if they did, the Lord would judge them. -- And if that
they must be left to themselves, and not restrained from Evil, how came it to
pass, old Eli lost his Life and his Priesthood, and the Ark of God, for not
restraining his Children? God commanded Abraham to circumcise himself, his
Children and Servants; and Genesis xvii. here you may see Abraham was to teach and
instruct his Family and Servants; he was not to keep one uncircumcised in his
Family. Now you that profess the new Covenant, are not your Children and
Servants to be circumcised with the Spirit? And do not they who have not the
Body or Death and Sin cut off by Circumcision, go down into the Pit, and not
into the Kingdom of God? Therefore, may not such uncircumcised by the Spirit,
hurt the Families of true Christians in the Light?"

An Epistle from an ancient Friend, Anne Galloway. "Dear Sisters, it lies upon
me to entreat you to whom God has given Children, that ye bring them up as
becomes the Truth, and do not dress them, not yourselves, to imitate the
World's Fashions, though it be it Plainness; for if you do, it is with me in the
Love of God to forewarn you of it, for it will grieve the Lord, who in measure
has redeemed you out of the Fashions of the World: And if you do look back
again and take Liberties, we shall suffer Loss, which one Day will be greater
than if we were stripped of all that can be enjoyed in this Life."

Fox 's Epistles, page 289 and 309. "Train up your Children in the Fear of God,
instruct and keep them employed in some lawful Calling, serving the Lord in the
Things that are good. -- They that are to govern, are first to be governed and
ordered themselves by the Spirit of God, to his Glory, and Examples in their
Families. -- Begin while Children are young to restrain them from Evil. --
Every one, in the Life and Power of Truth, keep your Authority, and lose not
the Understanding given you by Christ, nor true Reason, which gives to
distinguish Good from Bad. -- In all Things keep your Authority in God, and you
will bring up and govern your Sons and Daughters, Servants and Apprentices, and
cause them to keep their Places."

Yearly Meeting Epistle, 1690. "Our earnest Advice and Counsel to all Friends
concerned, so far as in them lies, to provide Schoolmasters and Mistresses who
are faithful Friends, to teach and instruct their Children; and not send them
to such Schools where they are taught corrupt Ways, Manners, Fashions and
Language of the World, and of the Heathens in their Authors, and Names of
Heathenish Gods and Goddesses, tending greatly to corrupt and alienate the
Minds of Children into an Aversion or Opposition against the Truth and the
Simplicity of it; but take Care to train up your Children in the good Nurture,
Admonition and Fear of the Lord, and in that Plainness and Language which
becomes Truth."

Extract of an Epistle from R. Jordan to Friends. "'It Is manifest there is a
great Declension in true Love and Tenderness among us, toward the Lord and one
another, and in too many Elders, both in respect to their own Conditions and
the Tuition of their Children, for that in many of the Youth appears little
Sense of Truth; but as some has already taken their Flight, more seems to be
upon the Wing; which in a Word, seems to lie much at the Doors of such Elders
who have not kept their first Love. Oh! is not Blindness in part already
happened to our Israel, through the subtle Workings and Aboundings of the
Mystery of Iniquity, and the Prevalence of the God of this World! Let us, as
many as have the Cause of Truth at Heart, offer our Supplications, with
Singleness to the Lord, as Jacob did, when the Enemy was coming in like a Flood
to destroy the Heritage and Seed of Promise; that he will be graciously pleased
to turn the Captivity of his People, by renewing his powerful Visitation, to
the searching the deceitful, hard and ungrateful Heart, etc. Yet there is a
precious Seed both in Elders and Young, whom the Lord will preserve; but the
Stumbling Blocks shall be discovered, and the Weak comforted."

Extract from an Epistle of A. Rigge. "Friends, Stand as Witnesses for God
against all wordly Lusts, both among yourselves and the World; be watchful over
yourselves and your Children, indulge them not in any thing that is evil, but
timely restrain it, left it become your Sin; and command them to observe the
Law of the Lord in their Hearts. -- If you love the Truth, you will train up
your Children in it when they are young. -- Keep them to sound Language, which
Truth required in the Beginning. -- Keep them in plain and modest Apparel and
Behavior, in due Subjection to the Truth in all Things, in ^n holy
Conversation. -- It Is your Duty, the Lord requires it of you, as you must give
an Account to God while they are under your Wing -- Eli's not restraining his
Sons became his Sin, and brought a Curse upon his House for ever; beware then
of neglecting or winking at your Childrens Sins. -- Train them up in the
Nurture of the Lord left they bring a Shame upon your Houses, and so made a
Scorn to Fools, and a Derision to them that are round about us, and have opened
the Mouths of evil Men to blaspheme the Name of the Lord."

And here let me add a Remark of the foregoing Author, for the Admonition or
Instruction of the Youth of our Society. -- His Wife's Parents were convinced
of Truth before she was; yet she had that reverend Respect for them, that she
would not willingly appear before them in any Dress they did not like; and in a
little Time she and her Sisters were convinced.

Yearly Meeting Epistle 1709. "Dear Friends, who are Heads of Families,
especially Elders in the Church, watch over the young Generation, that
Sobriety, Plainness and Virtue may be promoted and exemplarily recommended by
you to them. -- Let the Aged remember, and the Youth know, that when any
apparent Signs of the Plague of Leprosy appeared on the Walls of the Houses of
Israel, it was the Care of the Priests under the Law, to have the Houses
cleansed and the Lepers also: And surely Christ's Priesthood should not fall
short of their Care, to endeavor to stop and remove the manifest Tokens of the
great Sin of Pride, and all Superfluity of Naughtiness: And therefore let all
concerned, be earnestly stirred up to sincere Obedience to the Light of Christ,
our great high Priest, that he may cleanse the Hearts and Houses of that
growing Plague, which tends to the Ruin of Families, and Posterity. -- And
further, let all be concerned not only to watch over their Children for Good,
but rule over them in the Fear of the Lord, that none in Fondness of Affection
lose their Authority, wherein the Lord has set them for their Childrens
Preservation; and let all be Examples in Wisdom, Moderation, Plainness in
Language and Habit; and not Examples only, but also to restrain them from
Things hurtful either inwardly or outwardly, neither providing for them costly
Attire unbecoming Godliness, nor letting them have Money to gratify themselves
therein. -- And it is a Duty incumbent on Friends, to cause them to be frequent
in reading the holy Scriptures, observing to them the Examples of such Children
as have early learned the Fear of the Lord; instructing them in the Fear and
Dread of the Lord; planting Impressions upon their Spirits of Reverence toward
God, from whom they have their daily Support; showing they ought not to offend
him, but love, serve and honor him: And as their Hearts are seasoned with
Truth, good Fruits agreeable to Truth will appear, to the Honor of God and
Comfort of Parents."

Fox 's Acts and Monuments, page 23. where Bishop Ridley speaks after this
Manner; "Conscience does move me to fear, left the Lightness of my Family shall
be laid to my Charge, for lack of more earnest and diligent Instruction which
should have been done. -- I bless God that he has given me to see this Fault,
and to lament it from the Bottom of my Heart. -- I would that I esteem nothing
available for me, which will not further the Glory of God; for whosoever
wittingly neglects to clear his Conscience, cannot have Peace with God. --
Conscious of this, that we Pastors, many of us, are too cold, and bare too much
with the wicked World so on every Side, and of every Sort, we provoke God's
Anger."

Yearly Meeting Epistle 1751. "And you Parents, Guardians, Masters, and all
under whose Care and Tuition our Youth are placed, we tenderly caution, and in
Love entreat you, that you faithfully discharge the Trust in you reposed, and
that you would neither encourage nor permit the Youth, under your immediate
Direction and Care, to take undue Liberties in Speech, Behavior and Apparel;
but that you earnestly advise, and as much as in you lies, keep them from
conforming to the Fashions of the World. -- By such a timely Care, Parents and
Guardians may keep themselves from any just Imputation of Blame, arising from
the Misconduct of those committed to their Care, from being accessory to their
Ruin, which unwary Youth too often incur through such Means."

Ambrose Rigg 's Life, page 348. "Let young Women have a Care how they look out
at the Glory of the World, where the Lust of the Eye and Pride of Life is,
which is not of God, left they be ensnared, as the young Men of the Hebrews
with the Daughters of Moab; which brought a Plague upon Israel. And you Elders,
Fathers and Mothers of Families, walk in him your heavenly Head as Examples of
Gravity, and Temperance, and Modesty; be watchful over your Children in their
young Years; beware of letting them alone without due and loving Reproof for
the least Appearance of Evil in Word or Deed. -- This is the Will of God
concerning you, to whom he has given Power in their younger Years to restrain
from every Appearance of Evil. -- They are of your Loins, and you must be
accountable for their Evils, till they know and be made sensible of the Spirit
of Truth in themselves, and when they turn from it, the Miscarriage will lie at
their own Door."

And it may not be amiss here to add, That it is a Duty incumbent on Parents,
Tutors, Schoolmasters and Mistresses, carefully to watch the Passions and
Dispositions of Youth, [and to provide some sober Person to attend them in
their vacant Hours, to prevent any Sports which may have the evil Tendency
before mentioned] and as much as possible to correct or amend the evil
Inclinations which may appear in any, by Methods suiting the Tempers of the
Children; and as ceasing to do evil, is but one Part of the Injunction
delivered by the Prophet in the Name of the Lord, it is indispensibly necessary
they should be taught to do well: That they be carefully instructed in a Manner
suitable to their Age and Capacities, in the Principles of our Christian
Profession, as well as reading such Parts of the holy Scriptures and Friends
Writings, as their Understandings might take in, when a little explained by the
Instructor. And as proper Habits, as well as suitable Nurture, may have some
good Influence on their future Life and Practice, it is but agreeable to our
Profession, as well as to the repeated Advices of our Friends, to recommend to
Parents, Schoolmasters and Mistresses, that they spare a little Time in some
seasonable Part of each Day, to sit with their Families in a religious Silence;
if it were only to think on the Name of the Lord, it would be comely and of
good Report; for it don't seem to, be so, when many are behind the formal
Worshippers of this World in Family Acknowledgements of God, who is to be
enquired of for Help and Asistance, not only once a Week, but, as the Jews
outward, so the Jew inward, is to offer the daily Sacrifice. Well, I say, if
this be done by us in Integrity and Uprightness of Heart, the Result of the
Love of God, the Advantages arising from such a Practice will not only be
certain but great, as the Prophet assures us; and when done in Simplicity,
while we may be thus musing the Fire may kindle, and the warming Beams of God's
Love may shed its, enlivening Influence on Elders and Youth; to whom our
Memorials of God's Mercies might be produced. I am sensible, if we more
generally lived in a due Sense of our Dependency on the Lord, and of his
Benefits to our Souls and Bodies, past and present, an humble Gratitude must
arise and fill our Hearts with high Praises, and we shall sensibly worship
before him, who is worthy of Dominion and Glory.

Ury, 29th of the 6th Month, 1693.
CHRISTIAN BARCLAY'S Epistle.
My dear Friends, in and about London,
IN the Feeling of that Love that has visited our Hearts, do I desire to
salute you: Since I had the Occasion to see some of your Faces, you have been
often before me in that which desires the Prosperity of the good and holy Work
of Truth, that our God in his Mercy has begun in and amongst us, and honored
us to be as a first Fruits unto himself: Therein I feel this Concern
increases, so that I could not safely forbear, but in Obedience to that which
raised this Concern in my Heart, do I write unto you as follows:

Since the Lord our God has been pleased to take from among us many of our
ancient Brethren and Sisters in the Truth, who had a great Concern on them for
the going on of this Work in the Purity of ^t, let us that are behind be carful
of the Work of God in us, and amongst us; that we may stand up ^n Faithfulness
of Heart in their Rooms, in this our Day of God's Love to us. O you Elders in
the Truth, and Parents of Children, my Call is unto you; stand up in the
Authority that God gives you, in the Meekness and Wisdom of God, and in your
Places acquit yourselves as becomes you, in Obedience to God, and therein
answer your Duty toward your Youth. We know that God's Power (...) near, that
gives to know, and enableth us to answer our Duty in all Things, as we keep in
Subjection our Minds to it; so let us all be careful in our Places to keep to
the Power, that therein we may be good Examples to one another, laying aside,
and keeping out of all [ Superfluity or] Superfluous Things; for we know that
in Mercy we were brought in at the right Door: And there was no less called for
at our Hands, in our first Visitation of God's Love and Light, than to come out
of all Superfluity. So in the same pure Way must we hold on, and have weighty
Care to train up our Youth therein, to go on with us in it, that we and ours
may be given up to the Lord, (who has visited us in his Love) for we and ours
are the Offering due to our God, and he requires it of us. O my dear Friends,
let no less be our Offering to him than our All. This is the present Breathing
of my Heart before him. For what is or can be our Children to us, but as they
are in the Truth, that brings forth a sober and serious Conversation in it?
Therein only can they be a Comfort to the upright in Heart. So let this Concern
be more and more weighty on us Parents, Schoolmasters and School-mistresses. I
feel it in my Heart in that which desires I may be kept in the Concern myself,
and in Obedience to that Power that raises this good and weighty Concern, my
Call is unto you all who have the Occasion to be concerned in this weighty Work
of bringing up Youth; have a special Care that you answer your Duty in it, in
the first Place to God, and next to the Youth you are concerned with. I feel
there is a great Matter of this Work lies in your Hands, Parents,
Schoolmasters and School-mistresses: O you have Need to know and keep your
Watch continually, in the pure Spring of Life and Wisdom, that you may know,
and make a thorough Difference between the needful and the needless and
superfluous Things, either in Meats, Drinks and Apparel; and in that which ye
teach them for the Employment of their Hands.

I charge you in the Sight of that Power that searches the Depths of our
Hearts, that you neither teach, allow nor suffer the superfluous or vain Thing
amongst you: For your Families ought to be as young Nurseries to the Lord, and
then your Endeavors with them shall be known for Good, in the Families they
fall to be in.

And O you Youth! how shall I ease my Mind concerning you! for your Sakes, and
on your Behalf, am I often as one who has her Hands upon her Loins, and as in
Pain for your Sakes, that you may more and more come forth out of that which
hinders you from serving God in your Generation in a sincere Heart; for a
Profession alone will not do, or serve. Therefore arise in Uprightness of
Heart, and shake yourselves from that which hinders and disorders the Mind as
to its following God in Obedience: And, as wise Virgins in a chaste Mind to
God, let us both Old and Young wait more and more to feel in his Virtue and
Power our Light increased, and we, as Lamps, filled with the Oil of the Gospel;
that therein we may know a putting on of the Wedding Garment of true Holiness,
which will make us acceptable in the Sight of our God. And as the Mind comes
weightily to be concerned that it may be so with us, it will make it easy to us
to part with all the superfluous Part, either in Food or Raiment, and in every
step of our Conversation or Converse: Yea the superfluous Words also must be
laid aside; for in the Resignation that is known in the silence of Mind before
the Searcher of Hearts, is our Preservation witnessed. O that those of us, both
Old and Young, that in Mercy are made sensible that it is so, may be in a
weighty Care to hold on in the daily Practice and inward Enjoyment of it, and
that therein we may bring forth the Godly Conversation, in which we may be
serviceable to one another, and may recommend the good Way of Truth to the
Beholders of our Conversation in it, is the earnest Breathing of my Heart, who
desires the Prosperity and going on of this blessed Work, both in the
Particular and in the General, in which I desire to remain your Friend and
Sister in the Truth,

CHRISTIAN BARCLAY.

Let this Salutation of my Love (in Obedience) be read in the Men's and Women's
Meetings, and in their Schools, as Friends see it meet.
TESTIMONIES of FRIENDS against superfluous Needle Work, of various Colors and
Figures, called Tent-work and Cut-works, laced Seams, etc.
ANNE Whitehead, Wife of George Whitehead, one of the first convinced Women
Friends at London, and, if I mistake not, the first Woman that appeared in
public Testimony for Truth; she no sooner had a sight of the Pearl of great
Price, and found she must sell all for the Purchase of it, but she put away all
that was delightful to her; and though her own Works, and highly prized by
others, yet, lest there should be an Idol in them, they were all thrown into
the Fire by her; yea, all that she thought would stop or hinder her walking in
the narrow Way. She prayed earnestly for Friends Children, that they might fear
the Lord, and be preserved from the Spirit of Pride; which was the Substance of
the last Testimony before her Death, on seeing some Friends Children come into
Meeting dressed in the Mode of the Times.

Joseph Featherstone, on his Deathbed, desired his Wife to bring up his
Children in the Nurture and Fear of the Lord, and educate them in the plain
decent Parts that belong to a Woman: but upon a needless Seam, or any Thing
superfluous, no not to lift her Hand to do it; For that, said he, will bring
Dishonor to the blessed Truth, and burden the single hearted, and draw the
Minds of Youth after Vanity.

Elizabeth Ashbridge, of Pennsylvania, kept a School, and would not teach nor
suffer Superfluity, as Cutworks, laced Seams in Childbed Linen, only Marking
and Plain-work; neither would she let Friends Children dress in the Fashions of
the World.

Anne Gerrard, a public Friend at London, her Testimony against Superfluity: I
adorned, says she, the Clothes of my first Child with Superfluity and fine
Works; and showing them to my Mother, she was grieved, and said, Anne, this is
the Finery, but not the Plainness of Friends. These Words of my Mother made
such an Impression on my Mind, that I never had any more Superfluity on my
Childbed Linen.

A Friend on her Dying-bed, which was in Childbirth, called to have the
Childbed Basket removed: Take it away, said she, for there is Abundance of
Superfluity and needless Work in it, and though I did not do it, I caused it to
be done, and now it is a Burden to my Mind.

Friend H -- 's Grandmother, a School-mistress, could not teach Works of diverse
Colors, etc. but Plain work.

Lucy Bradley's Mother, on her Deathbed left a Charge, her Daughter should not
learn fine Works, but Plain-work and Marking.

Sarah Morris. Her Mother would not suffer her Children to learn fine
Needle-works of various Colors, Lace-work nor Cut-works.

A certain Friend said, She once did a pretty deal of fine Needle-works of many
Colors; but when Truth prevailed in her Mind, she gave them away; and since
said, She wished she had not; for if she had them again, she believed she
should burn them.

I visited Edmondsbury Boarding-school, and testified against the Works taught
in it, such as Tentstitch, Cut-works, etc.

Esther Morris, in early Time of Friends, had a Concern to educate Children,
and proposed to Friends to teach their Daughters, because of the Danger of
mixing with the Worlds Children in Schools: She succeeded, and taught only
Plain-works, Marking, Knitting and Reading.

Simeon Warner would not suffer his Granddaughter to learn fine Needdle-works,
as she told me.

George Fox tells us, he had a Concern to advise setting up a Girls School;
Children to be taught, says he, civil Things: That is, as some Minutes of
Friends explain the Word (plain Things) and Things useful in the Creation;
Journal, Vol. 2. page 105. The same Author warns against Pride in these Words;
do not nourish the Lust of the Eye in your Families, for if you do, you nourish
that which is not of God. Doctrinals, page 828.

William Penn, speaking of Apparel and other external Things, says, A few
plain, decent or comely Things, serve a Christian Life; it is Lust, Pride and
Covetousness, thrust People on such Follies. No Cross etc. -- The same Author,
speaking of modern Education, says, The Minds of Youth are allured to visible
Things that perish, and instead of remembering their Creator, are taken up with
Toys and Fopperies. -- If thou art clean and warm, it is sufficient; more-does
but rob the Poor, and please the Wanton. Maxims, page 26. Again the same Author
tells his Wife, in his Advice to her and his Children, I had rather, says he,
have my Children homely than finely bred; be plain in Clothes, Furniture and
Food. -- Be clean, and then the Coarser the better; the rest is but Folly and a
Snare. -- Spare not Cost for my Children's Learning, but let it be useful
Learning, such as is consistent with Truth and Godliness. Let my Children be
Husbandmen and Housewives. It Is industrious, healthy and honest, and a good
Example, like Abraham and the holy Ancients that pleased God, and obtained a
good Report, and diverts from being taken up with the vain Arts and Inventions
of a luxurious World. -- Rather keep a Person in the House than send them to
Schools, unless they are very well regulated, which is I fear hard to find. --
Above all, take Care to preserve their native Innocence and Modesty, which in
public Schools, for a little they get is mostly lost, for in such Places the
first evil Impressions are received.

Charles Marshall's Epistle to Friends, page 12, 13. of his Works. Friends, it
is upon me to leave this as the Counsel of the Lord upon all that have the
Tuition of Children or Youth; that always in their Families they wait to feel
the daily arising of God's Power, and in that to labor and keep down all Sin
and Iniquity in your Families, and feel the Ability to reach the Witness of God
in Children and Servants, etc. that all may be kept sweet and clean in God's
Fear, Dread and Awe, out of all needless Discourse, vain Words and foolish
jesting. Let your Words be few, ministering Grace to the Hearers. -- And,
Friends, it is likewise upon me to warn all to be careful, that neither you nor
your Families run into Superfluities in Meat, Drink and Apparel, or into the
proud offensive Garbs of the World; but in all Things let us keep our first
Fear, Dread and Awe, that in none of these Things we may make Provision for the
Flesh to fulfill the sinful Lusts thereof.

Christian Barclay, Wife of Robert Barclay, the Aplogist, whose Epistle is
before annexed to these Testimonies: I had a Concern, says she, to speak to a
School-mistress, a Friend, of the Inconsistency of teaching these Works, I have
mentioned, in Friends Schools; and she signified, on her first teaching them,
she was very uneasy in her Mind; but taking Counsel of one she preferred in
Judgment, she was advised to continue to teach them. I don't at all know the
Friend or Friends who thus counseled her, but it appears to me to be a Case
parallel with that we read of, where the old Prophet turned the Younger out of
the Way, and caused him to disobey the Lord.

I visited another Boarding-school, and spoke to the School-mistress on the
same Subject; she allowed it was not agreeable to Truth to teach these Things
in Friends Schools; but alleged, their Parents would have them so taught. But
ought not faithful Friends to make a stand against them, and thus query, How
can I assist in making Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the sinful Lusts
thereof? This faithful Testimony would have a Tendency to open the Eye which
the God of this World has blinded in Parents, etc. I am informed, the Schools
of some, called Friends, make for Sale Childbed Linen with laced Seams, etc. to
the Value of five, six or seven Guineas a Suit. O that all would consider and
see they are helping on the Excesses and Luxury of Babylon; consider, I say,
and dread and fear her miserable Doom, left any Professor of the Truth of God
partake with her in her Plagues; for the more delicately, costly and vainly she
lives, the more will she be punished.

Francis Howgill's Advice to his Daughter. In thy Youth learn to read, and
write a little, and few, and knit, and other Points of good Labor that belongs
to a Maid; flee Idleness and Sloth, that nourishes Sin. -- And as thou grows
up, labor in the Affairs of the Country, and beware of Pride, and Riotousness,
and Curiosity, but be content with such Apparel as thy Mother will permit thee,
that thou may be a good Example to others. -- And let nothing separate thy
Love from God and his People. -- Those are his People who keep his Law, and
lead a holy Life; they were ever hated and evil spoken of.

The Testimony, on her Deathbed, of a Woman Friend, who apparel'd herself in
Plainness, and did not follow Fashions of the World; but loved nice, though
plain Things. In this solemn Season, stripped of all false Reasoning, she
declared, That those Things, termed little or indifferent, were now become
great Burdens to her, which she was unable to bear. She was favored with
Repentance, and I hope, Acceptance with God.

A young Woman, on her Deathbed, blessed the Lord, that she had so faithful a
Parent who restrained her from youthful Follies and the Vanities of Life.

A young Man, in the same Situation, laments to his Parents as follows; O
Father and Mother, if you had done your Duty to me, I had not been so far from
the Kingdom as I am.

On getting and spending Riches.
PENN's Maxims, page 77, 78. "Seek not to be rich but happy; one lies in Bags,
the other in Content. We are apt to call Things by wrong Names; Prosperity we
will have to be Happiness, Adversity to be Misery, though that is the School of
Wisdom, and often the Way to eternal Happiness. -- The Generality are the worse
for their Plenty; the Voluptuous consume it, the Miser hides it, the good Man
uses it, and to good Purposes; but such are hardly found among the Prosperous."

Penn 's No Cross, no Crown, page 68. "People are apt to call Providence by
wrong Names; Afflictions they style Judgments, and Trails, more precious than
Gold, they call Misery; the Preferments of the World, Honor and its Wealth,
Happiness; when for once they are so, it is much to be feared they are sent of
God an Hundred Times for Judgments, at least Trials upon their Possessors."

Penn 's Maxims. page 93. "Men seek Wealth rather than a Subsistence; and the
End of Clothes is the least Reason of their Use. -- The satisfying the
Appetite, not so much the End of eating as pleasing the Palate: -- This
introduces the What we shall eat, etc. The like may be said of Building,
Furniture, etc. where the Man rules not the Beast."

William Bailey 's Works, page 365. "Work is not rightly done for God without
Christ's Guidance therein, who is the Wisdom and Power of God, in which the
Heart is made wise to discern both Time and Judgment. -- Take heed that you do
not bear rule by your Means, because you have more of this World's Goods (which
is of the Earth, and returns to the Earth) for that is the Leaven of the false
Prophets, against which the Woe is pronounced, because it is an Oppressor and
Persecutor of the Seed; and God will abase that Spirit, for it secretly
accepts Persons, despising the Poor, and admiring the Rich in this World. For
what art thou, or what have thou more than another, either inward or outward,
which thou have not received, or have by Permission to try thee, from the
righteous God? to whom thou must give Account, who will change Times, Seasons,
and the State of Things, People and Nations, as he pleases; therefore be low
and fear before him, for he will smite all the Proud and Covetous. -- But
blessed is the Man or Woman that dwells in the Sense of God's Mercies and their
own Nothingness, Inability and Weakness. -- Here you will not hurt the Trender,
nor strengthen the Wild, Stubborn and Froward in their Ways, but your Life will
reprove them, though you speak not a Word; in which dwelling, and being good
Examples, ye will teach more in one Hour than a Thousand Words every Day
without it."

Character of a primitive Quaker, by John Whitehead in 1661. "He is righteous
and equal in all his Ways, in Dealings just, Behavior good, in Conversation
honest, in Life blameless; their Yea Yea, and Nay Nay; do unto all Men as they
would that they should do to them, is the Rule of their Walking; Covetousness
they deny as Idolatry, they are sensible they are Stewards of the Portion the
Lord has given them; they do not use Things superfluous, destructive to the
Creation, and hurtful to their Neighbors; in Apparel modest, in Meats and
Drinks temperate, that they may have wherewith to give a Portion to the
Afflicted, feed the Hungry, and cover the Naked. -- Nor dare they pay Tithes to
that Priesthood, which have Hearts exercised with covetous Practices, and
unduly claim them of Christians that know Christ is come, and has changed the
Priesthood that took Tithes."

Extract of an Epistle from the Second-day's Morning-meeting, the Eleventh
Month, 1690, to Monthly and Quarterly-meetings. "A few Days before George Fox
died, he had a great Concern on his Mind, concerning some the Lord was
qualifying for the Ministry, who through their intangling themselves in the
Things of this World, did make themselves unready to answer the Calls and
Leadings of the Power of God, but hurt the Gift, and did not regard their
Service and Ministry as they ought: He expressed his Grief concerning such as
preferred their own Business before the Lord's, and sought the Advancing
worldly Concerns, before the Concerns of Truth; that such would commit the Care
of their outward Concerns to the Lord, who would care for them, and give a
Blessing to them." Signed by Twenty-one Members.

William Penn 's No Cross, no Crown, page 104. "'It Is as much the Business of
the Cross of Christ, to crucify the Love of Riches, as any other Sin
whatsoever. -- It Is a great Aggravation of the Uncharitableness of the Rich,
that they spend upon their Fancies and Follies that which would supply the
Necessitous, and rejoice the Hearts of many a worthy Person in Distress: I am
sure those offend the Lord, who thus fulfill their wandering never satisfied
Eye." -- Rich People are sometimes querying, what they should do with their
Time and Money? This Author informs them, Chap. 15. Sect. 5, 9 and 10, viz.
"Women should sew, spin, knit, weave, garden, preserve, and the like Housewife
and honest Employments; the Practice of the greatest and noblest Matrons and
Youth among the very Heathens. -- They may help others, who for Want are unable
to keep Servants to ease them in their necessary Affairs. -- They should be
often in private Retirement from all worldly Objects, to enjoy the Lord in
secret and steady Meditation. -- Charity to the Poor, Help to the Needy, Visits
to the Sick, Care of the Widow and Fatherless, and Peace among Neighbors, and
other temporal good Offices would be a noble Employment, and much more worth
your Expense and Pains. -- Their Affections should be raised to sublime and
spiritual Conversation." And he elsewhere adds, "We should visit our sober
Neighbors to be edified by them, wicked Ones to reform them." And farther, "We
should use this World in its most innocent Enjoyments as if we used it not; and
if we take Pleasure in any Thing below, it should be in such good Offices as
before mentioned, that Benefit may redound in some Respect to others."

Extract from A. Rigg 's Life. "Charge all Parents of Children, that they keep
they Children low and plain in Meat, Drink and Apparel, and in due Subjection
to all just Commands, and let them not appear above the real Estates of their
Parents; not get into Pride and high Things, though they have plentiful
Estates, for that is of dangerous Consequence to their future Happiness. -- Let
them not get into any superfluous Thing, as needless rich Hangings, costly
Furniture, fine Tables, great Treats, curious Beds, Vessels of Silver or Gold;
-- The very Possession creates Envy, says an ancient Christian, Clement."

Origin, speaking of those Words, Silver and Gold I have none; said, "Behold
the Riches of those who are Priests of Christ; but let us quickly apply these
Things to ourselves, who are prohibited by the Law or Christ, (if we have any
Regard thereto) to have Possessions in the Country, and Houses in the City; no,
not to multiply Coats nor Money; but if we have Food and Raiment let us be
therewith content." Dissertation on Tithes.

Ambrose Rigg 's Life, page 236. "That Estate that is got, either with the
rending, or Hazard of rending another's, is neither honestly got, nor can be
blessed. -- It Is when the Enemy gets in, and works in his Mind, and he begins
to think of a higher Trade, and finer House, and to live more at Ease and
Pleasure in the World, and then contrives how he may borrow of this and the
other; and when accomplished according to his Desire, then he begins to
undertake great Things, and get into a fine House, and gather rich Furniture
and Goods together, launching presently into the strong Torrent of a great
Trade, and then make a great Show beyond what really he is, which is
Dishonesty; and if he accomplish his intended Purpose to raise himself in the
World, it is with the Hazard (at least) of other Men's Ruin, and if he falls
short, he brings a great Reproach upon the blessed Truth he professes, which
is worst of all."

Epistle from the General-meeting in Dublin, 1671. "As there was rather a going
back by many into the dark Customs and never-settled Fashions, into the Liberty
and Spirit of the World, both in Apparel and superfluous adorning of Houses
with those Things which at best do but feed the Lust of the Eye, and therefore
must needs minister unto Vanity, and not adorn the Gospel of Christ; the Lord
has put it into our Hearts to write these Lines."

In an Epistle to the Men and Women's Meetings throughout Ireland in 1684, I
find Elders concerned to restore the Youth, and others among Friends, who had
gone into a false Liberty dishonorable to Truth; and among other Things
complained of, I find this lamented;" -- Also, that several who have Hair
enough on their Heads, cut it off and get ruffling Wigs, and others who may
have some Necessity, do get such Wigs as are superfluous, in Length and
otherwise."

Yearly Meeting 1718. "A Testimony against an undue Liberty which too many
under the Profession of Truth run into, to the Grief of the Faithful, and the
Reproach of our holy Profession, by Men amongst us putting on extravagant Wigs,
etc."

Ambrose Rigg 's Epistle to Friends. "Whereas the great and wise God having
made Man according to his good Pleasure, and has bestowed a Quantity of Hair
to keep them warm, some of one Color and some of another, such a Color as
will satisfy an humble Mind; and if any has not a sufficient Quantity, or
through Sickness or Casualty loses his Hair, a suitable and modest Supply may
be suitable, and no Offense to God and good Men; this Supply of Hair being used
till natural Hair grow again, and then be well laid aside. -- But if Pride, or
without any just Occasion, do cut it off, because it is not fashionable or
modish, or that it don't curl enough, or is not of such a Color as they like;
this is not right in the Sight of God, and an evident Token that divine Wisdom
is slighted and undervalued, by those who are not contented with such Sort and
Color of Hair as he has seen sit to bestow, as if they would alter the Work
of Providence, and mend what God has made. -- I felt a Concern on my Spirit
from the Lord to give a short Testimony against this Excess, seeing, to my
Sorrow, many both old and young run into unnecessary Wigs, and have found that
it has given Occasion of Offense in diverse Places."

And I here add, That Truth is one in all, and it calls to Humility and
Self-denial in all, as appears by diverse Testimonies formerly given forth
against Pride, by several Members of the Church of England. And I find in the
Articles of Visitation, when the Bishops visited their Diocesses, they were to
enquire among other Things, Whether the Ministers were sober, and examplary in
their Hair? And one (called a dignified one) amongst them, writes thus: "There
have been Books written about ^he Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Men's wearing
long Hair, the Substance of which were too much to transcribe here. -- That
which seems commended to us as the Will of God in this Matter is, That Men and
Women should so order their Hair, as to preserve the Distinction of Sexes, (as
well as in their Clothes) that they should not wear it curled or tricked up
about their Heads, as the Women; which speaks too much of an unmanly esseminate
Temper; and much more, it was what became not Christians. And if this be
forbidden Men, as to the Use of their own Hair, they stand concerned to
consider, whether it be lawful thus to adorn themselves with the Hair of other
Men and Women."

And here let the Prophet and Apostles have place; and I would, Brethren, it
might have place in your Hearts also. -- And first, the Women's well-set Hair
is produced by the Prophet as a Mark of their Pride; and among their Implements
serving the Purposes of Pride, is enumerated the Crispinpins; which an old
Translation says, were Pins to curl their Hair, or to keep it in that Form. And
next, let us give Attention to the Apostle's Advice, which plainly amounts to a
Prohibition; that Christian Women ought not to plait or broider their Hair;
which the Bishop's Bible calls curling the Hair: Forbid, I say, as it was not
becoming the Humility, Solidity and Gravity of Women professing Godliness, no
more than wearing Gold and costly Array: And here we may observe Religion
concerned in these Things, though many deny it. -- I might here enlarge on this
Subject, but for Brevity's Sake I shall only recommend to you, Brethren, to
consider and judge of this Matter yourselves; judge ye then: Does all this
well-set and curled Hair you adorn yourselves with, become Men professing
Godliness, yea, the highest Degree thereof, Perfection? Again, does the Hair of
a Youth of seventeen Years answer the Appearance we should see in Seventy? And
if Necessity is pleaded, why must Men have borrowed Hair so different from
their natural Covering? which not only may differ in Color, but in its lank,
mean and unpleasant Form. -- Well, is the Time come, or approaching, wherein
the Children is to teach the Fathers? Instead of the Fathers, must we look to
the Children, to be made Princes in all the Earth, to give Laws and Example to
Mankind? O beloved Brethren, if any are out of your Places in this Matter,
resume your Dignity, be Princes in your own Hearts, by the Power of him by whom
Kings reign: Search out the Law and the Testimony, which too many have
violated, let us be governed strictly by it ourselves; then shall we every one
of all Stations be qualified to execute the Laws of God in our Families, in
Equity, Truth and Righteousness.

Preface to William Crouch 's Works. page 12. "As to the Things of this World,
he esteemed them, as they are in themselves, perishing Enjoyments, and
therefore placed not his Affections on them; he looked not on himself as a
Proprietor, but a Steward of them; so he was a Benefactor to some of all
Opinions, counting that Person his Neighbor that stood in Need of his Bounty,
declaring the Love of Money the Root of all Evil, saying, Covetousness is a
Sin, which wise Men in all Ages condemn, yet most Men have been more or less in
Love with it. That Covetousness is a Sin, yea, a grievous Sin, who is there
that denies it? But then the Distinctions about it, the Apologies and Excuse
made for it are so many, and so subtly contrived, that though no Sin is so
general and apparent, yet there are very few among the vast Number of
Delinquents, that will acknowledge themselves guilty. -- He made such a
Detection of it, that notwithstanding all the Cunning of its Advocates and
Abettors, and the various fair Colors they put upon it, it is still whatever it
was, an odious Monster in the Sight of God and good Men, a complicated Evil,
that carries in its Bowels the Seeds of all Iniquity." See his Treatise on the
enormous Sin of Covetousness detected. -- "We read not of any good Man, says
he, in all the History of Scripture, or of the primitive Times, that was
covetous, and it is a Shame that any that do now pretend to the Christian
Religion should degenerate. He was clear himself in this Matter, as credible
Persons, who knew him, unanimously agree, that his Treasure was in Heaven; the
Treasures of the World he put no Value on them any further than to be his
Servants for necessary Uses, and for charitable Acts toward others, for even
Strangers in Distress went not empty handed from his Gate; he visited the
Fatherless and Widow, and kept himself unspotted from the World; he did Justice
toward all Men; it is one of the first Lessons Truth teaches her Disciples. Now
as doing justly or righteously is a certain Proof of being born of God, so it is
in vain for any Man to conceit he is so born, in whom the Fruits of Equity or
Righteousness are not conspicuous; and whosoever Acts as a new Creature, and
feels a Necessity upon him to keep his Word, perform his lawful Contracts, pay
his just Debts, and do to all Men as they would have them do to him. -- This
was the Rule this Friend walked by, and was blessed in his Deeds."

Rutty 's History of Friends in Ireland, page 199. "When the Fear of God
prevailed in our Hearts, and we hated Pride and Covetousness, then were we
ready to answer Christ Jesus our Captain, that called us to follow him in a
spiritual Warfare, under the discipline of the daily Cross and Self-denial;
then the Things of this World were of small Value to us, so that we might win
Christ; and the goodliest Things of this World were of small Value, and were
not near us, so that we might be near the Lord; and the Lord's Truth
outballanced all the World, even the most glorious Part of it. -- Then great
Trading was a Burden, great Concerns a great Trouble; all needless Things, fine
Houses, rich Furniture, and gaudy Apparel was an Eyesore; our Eye being single
to the Lord, and the Inshining of his Light in our Hearts, which gave us the
Sight of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, which so affected our Minds, that
it stained the Glory of all earthly Things, and they bore no Mastery with us,
either in Dwelling, Eating, Drinking, Buying, Selling, Marrying, or giving in
Marriage; the Lord was the Object of our Eye, and we were all humble and low
before him, and Self of small Reputation; Ministers and Elders all in such
Cases walking as good Examples, that the Flock might follow their Footsteps, as
they followed Christ in the daily Cross; and this answered the Lord's Witness
in all Consciences, and gave us great Credit among Men, till there came a
Spirit among us, that began to look back into the World, and traded with the
Credit which was not of their own purchasing; striving to be great in the
Riches and Possessions of the World: And then great fair Buildings in City and
Country, fine and fashionable Furniture, and Apparel equivalent, with dainty
and voluptuous Provisions, rich Matches in Marriages, excessive customary
uncomely smoking Tobacco, under Color of lawful and serviceable, far wide
from the Footsteps of the Ministers and Elders the Lord raised up and sent
forth in his Work and Service at the Beginning, and far short of the Example
our Lord and Master Jesus Christ left us, when he was tempted in the Wilderness
with the Offer of all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, and he
despised them; and Moses, that refused to be called the Son of Pharoah's
Daughter, but rather chose Affliction with the Lord's People, having a Regard
to the Recompense of Reward. And the holy Apostle writes to the Church of
Christ, both Fathers, young Men and Children, and advises against the Love of
the World, and the Fashions thereof: And it is working, as the old Leaven, at
this very Time, to corrupt the Heritage of God, and to fill it with Briars,
Thorns, Thistles and Tares, and the Grapes of the Earth, to make the Lord
reject it, and lay it waste. But the Lord of our Mercies is lifting up the
Standard of his Spirit against the Enemy in the Hearts of many, to stand in the
Gap which this floating, high, worldly, libertine Spirit has made, that is
gone from the Footsteps of them that followed Christ as at first, and knew him
to keep them within his Bounds; and not their own Will and Time to lay hold on
Presentations and Opportunities that may offer to get Riches, which many have
had and refused for Truth's Sake, and the Lord has accepted it as an Offering,
and rewarded to their great Comfort, and the Praise of his great Name."

On the foregoing Page we may observe, that with the Declension so much
lamented, came in a Desire of rich Matches in Marriages, which occasioned many
Advices from Yearly and other Meetings, to Parents who have Children to dispose
of in Marriage, not to make their first Care to obtain large Portions for their
Children, and Settlements of Marriage; but rather careful that their Children
be joined in Marriage with Persons of religious Inclinations, suitable
Dispositions, Temper, Sobriety of Manners, and Diligence. -- And is not this
Advice necessary at this very Day to Ministers and Elders, etc. some of whom,
it is to be feared, make their first Motive of their Change of Life, the
Worldly Possession of the Party they address; though in many other Respects, as
above mentioned, instead of being equally yoaked and Help-meets for their
Furtherance in Religion, they become Snares, and perhaps cause them also to
worship their strange Gods, as did the Wives of one of old, once greatly
favored of the Lord.

Rutty 's History of Friends, etc. "After the Troubles in Ireland, succeeded a
Time of great Plenty; and as the Time of great Losses had been experienced,
before the Time of great Riches came on, and many eagerly pursued them, which
proved very injurious upon several Accounts, especially to Friends Children,
who perceiving their Parents Fullness, relied on them, and grew conceited and
finical, many giving way to Idleness, and many Parents indulging them, and
gratifying the vain Mind that goes after the Fashions of the World; and for
want of timely Care, some grew so hardy, that their Parents could not deal with
them; and these Things added great Exercise to the Sincere, and great
Endeavors were used to put a Stop to this eager Pursuit after the Things of
this World. -- And from many Men and Women's Meetings, Admonitions, Exhortations
and Warnings, were sent forth to the Body of Friends, to keep to the Limits of
Truth. And further, continues the History, "This Concern of the Elders is no
less a standing Evidence of their true Wisdom and Forecast, with Regard to the
Preservation of succeeding Generations, which seems to be expressed in those
Terms, Laying God's Heritage waste; and indeed, that great Desolation in
respect to the Posterity of Friends, has been the natural Tendency of this
inordinate Pursuit of Riches and Grandeur in Parents, as has been amply
verified by the Observations of succeeding Times. -- Not all the Persecutions,
said a certain eminent Elder, not all the Apostates, nor all the open or
private Enemies we have ever had, have done us, as a Christian Society, the
Damage that Riches have done. -- In Fact, we see scarce any Thing more frequent
than this, that when the laborious and frugal Father has amassed a great
Estate, and left it to his Children, they grow too high to stoop to those
Singularities, and Instances of Self-denial, wherein they have been educated;
the Quakers Religion becomes a Burden, and perhaps thrown off for that which is
most in Fashion. -- The Importance of this Affair was such, that in the Year
School, a Province Meeting was held, consisting both of Men and ancient concerned
Women, in order to wait on the Lord for Counsel, concerning the proper Bounds
of getting and right using the lawful Things of this World; and they testified
that the Glory of the Lord covered their Assembly, and their Hearts were melted
in his Presence; and under this Influence, the Persons that constituted that
Meeting did by unanimous Consent, one by one, offer themselves to be subject to
the Province Meeting, or any Elders appointed by that Meeting, with Regard to
their outward Callings, Holdings, Trading or Dealing among Men, If any Thing
should be judged to exceed the Bounds of Moderation."

This Evil of Covetousness is so dangerous, that our Lord redoubles his Caution
against it; Take heed, and beware of Covetousness; an Evil, though frequently
disguised under the Cloaks of Temperance, Industry and Frugality, yet engrosses
the Affections as much as the Lust of the Flesh, or other more infamous Sins,
and as effectually excludes from the Kingdom of God. -- And as this Sin of
Covetousness is so frequently, justly, and ardently condemned and testified
against, as it is the Root of all Evil; and among many unlawful Means it puts
People on to gain this End, is that of buying and selling uncustom'd Goods. --
And among many Advices from Yearly-meetings, etc. let us hear and take this of
1719. "Dear Friends, as our Testimony has ever been and still is against
defrauding the King of any of his Customs, Duties or Excise, buying Goods
reasonably suspected to be run, exporting Wool or other Goods prohibited by
Law, or doing any other Thing whatsoever to the Injury of the King's Revenues,
or of the common Good, or to the Hurt of the fair Trader; if any of our
Profession shall be known to be guilty of these or other such Crimes, we do
earnestly advise the respective Monthly-meetings, to which such Offenders
belong, severely to reprehend and testify against them, and their
unwarrantable, clandestine and unlawful Actions, and admonish them to make
Restitution for the Wrong done the Government and the holy Truth professed by
us."

Another Evil which springs from this bitter Root of Covetousness, is trading
upon other Men's Foundations. -- For a full Detection of this enormous Sin, see
Ambrose Rigge 's brief and serious Warning to such as are concerned in Commerce
and Trading, in his Works, page 233.

The same Author says, page 348, "Be not lifted up if the World's Riches
increase, for it is not always a Sign of the Favor of God; and be not cast down
when they are taken away, for it is not a Sign of his Displeasure."

Dr. Rutty 's Hist. of Friends in Ireland, page 57. The Love of God and the
Brethren, (though supplanted by the Love of this World, in a human, carnal and
apostatized Ministry, who have made a Trade of the Gospel, and followed Jesus
for the Loaves) is all the Support the true Ministry wants: And as Love begets
Love, whatever outward Support may be needful will be freely administered,
according to the primitive Pattern. -- And though such a Ministry may not enjoy
great Riches and Revenues, yet as these are Provocatives to Luxury, and many
other Evils, this will be no Loss to them as spiritual Men; but on the
contrary, less Temptation administered in respect to the Cares and Pleasures of
this Life; and they will be enabled to apply themselves to the Concerns of the
other with less Distraction, and shine as living Examples of Piety among the
People."

To corroborate this Observation, let us take that Of the Apostle Paul's to
Timothy, -- Having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content. But they that
will be rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in ^erdition and Destruction. For the Love of
Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred
from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. But thou, O
Man of God, flee these Things, and follow after Righteousness, Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience and Meekness.

And as this Root of all Evil (the Love of Money) too much prevailed among us
as a Society, I find concerned Friends in Ireland advising against Tradesmen,
etc. being concerned in Trading in the Time of the Half-year's Meeting,
alleging, That it was a Cumber to the Minds of Friends, when they should be
concerned about the Lord's Business, and gives Occasion to judge Friends are
covetous-minded. And may it not be observed with Sorrow now, as formerly, when
too many are embarrassing themselves in Trade, and breaking in upon the
Solemnity of these Times, which as I conceive were originally appointed for the
Service of Truth only: And though I decry superstitious Forms, appointed Times,
and Observation of Days, after the Inventions of the carnal Mind, (in which I
long had my Conversation, but now deny) yet, as a certain ancient Worthy
observes, There are some Forms among us, as Time and Place to meet together,
etc. necessary to the very Being, and Well-being of a religious Society. The
Apostles were in a Form, when they assembled at Jerusalem, where with one
Accord they were assembled in one Place, waiting for the Promise of the Holy
Ghost, which we find descended in a wonderful Manner upon them; and by the
powerful Preaching of the Apostles, the People were so baptized, that the same
Day there was added to the Church three Thousand Souls; and we may see, that
the holy Spirit not only descended on them, but remained on them; for they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and in Fellowship; and they were
daily with one Accord in the Temple, and breaking of Bread from House to House,
not with double Views, but in Singleness of Heart, minding one Business only;
not trading from House to House, but praising God in their Visits for this
Addition to the Church, not to their Estates: And by this pious Example they
were brought into Favor with Men also, and probably was a Means that so many
were adding daily to the Church of such as should be saved; and not without
Reason we may believe, diverse of these were sent by the Almighty, with his
Offers of Salvation, to others which should believe through their Word.

Rutty 's History of Friends in Ireland, page 477. "I cannot banish from my
Mind, that a Degree of that general Lukewarmness and Indolence which have
overspread the Churches, may have also affected some of the Ministry; for if
Truth be as amiable now as ever, as undoubtedly it is, but these less zealous
in propagating it, it may be feared that some other Beloved has interposed and
seized some of them, viz. the World, and the Cares thereof; and if with regard
to every private Christian they are as Thorns that choke the good Seed, it must
prove still more eminently so in public Stations, who are concerned to
minister spiritual Things to others; who in an especial Manner ought to shun
the Entanglements of the Affairs of this Life. Had there been no Danger of this
Sort incident to the Ministry, that Query would have been unnecessary, viz. Do
none of these overcharge themselves with Business, to hinder their Service? And
had there been no Possibility of Indolence and Negligence in the Ministry,
those Advices of the Apostle Paul had been needless, viz. Give Attendance to
Exhortation, to Doctrine, to Reading; neglect not the Gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on the Hands of the
Presbytery; meditat^ on these Things; give thyself wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all. Now as Ministers and Elders may be considered as
the two principal outward Pillars of the Church, the Stability and Integrity of
these will undoubtedly have no small Influence on the Prosperity thereof; and
so on the contrary. I heard a solemn and awful Truth uttered in a Meeting of
Ministers and Elders by an eminent Minister; Corruption never did overspread
the Church, unless Ministers and Elders gave way. And no doubt it nearly
concerns all in these Stations, to exercise a holy Jealousy over themselves,
lest they should not be found standing in the Gap in these perilous Times, when
Desolation seems to threaten us."

Extract from the Lives of the primitive Christians from William Caton's
Abridgement. "The Members of this Christian common Wealth looked mean and
contemptible: Nothing about them was pompous, either in Clothes, Diet, or
Habitation, or Household Stuff. -- Such as were noble or learned, or of a
genteel Extract, laid aside all their Pride, and all their swelling Titles, and
forgot that they had been better born or educated than others; and became like
their Brethren. -- Plaiting, or curling of Hair, was a Thing both their Men and
Women proscribed from their Care; they thought that Labor lost, which was
employed about such Superfluities: They were jealous of their serious Frame of
Mind and Spirit, and therefore all such Dresses as served to infuse Vanity into
their Minds, or damp their Zeal to Religion, they shunned, as they did Houses
infected by the Plague. -- They minded no such Thing as Modes and Fashions, nor
did any new Habit or Ornament, that came up, entice them to Imitation. --
Decency was their Rule, and Modesty the Standard of their Habit and
Conversation. -- They wore nothing about them that was costly or curious. --
Their Study and Contrivance was, how to make them sit for the Marriage of the
Lamb. -- Their Garments was either Linen, Woolen, Furr or Sheepskins, and their
Furniture mean and homely. -- They were despised for their Meanness. and were
looked upon as unsociable, People of pitiful Spirits, Strangers to the Art of
Conversation, melancholy Wretches, Brethren of Worms, ^y (...) they mattered
not the World's Censures, and tr^umphed more in a good Conscience, than the
others could do in all the Vanities and Glories of this present World. -- The
World's Contempt was their Glory; they did not mind being undervalued by the
vulgar Crowd, that they might with greater Earnestness long after a better
Inheritance. -- If any wanted Business, and had no Need to work for their
Living, they worked for the Poor. Idleness they had an Aversion to. The great
Men and Women would do something, that the Needy might be the better for. She
that had been the greatest Lady, did not disdain to spin, sew and knit for her
distressed Neighbors. -- Like Bees, they were ever employed for the common
Good. -- The Love of the World was Death to these Christians; they thought it a
certain Sign that they had no Portion in Christ, if they attempted to serve God
and Mammon. -- To be in the World, and not of the World, was their Motto. --
They seemed to be profane, because they did not worship the Heathen Gods; but
were more devout to the true God. -- Not a few left their great Dignities, high
Places, and swelling Titles, to become Christians, and chose to be low and
contemptible in the World, that they might have no Impediment in their Way to
Heaven.

The ancient Christians mainly insisted upon this, That the Arts of curious and
costly Dresses were injurious to God, and a Disparagement to his Workmanship.
-- Says Tertullian, we are not to seek after Neatness and Finery beyond what is
simple and sufficient, and what pleases God; against whom they offend, who are
not satisfied with his Workmanship. -- Chrysostom commends Olympias, a Woman of
great Birth and Estate, for the incredible Modesty and Meanness of her Attire.
-- The Christians were so far from the Affectation of Bravery in rich and
costly Things, that they thought they never could seem mean enough. -- Clemens
of Alexandria says, The Garments we should wear ought to be mean and frugal,
and that is the best which is farthest from Art and Curiosity. -- The Ancients
censured Intemperance, but, says Clemens, not to be compared with a nice,
curious Study of Finess. -- They cried out not only against the Costliness of
their Clothes, but the Arts to add greater Handsomness than God had bestowed
upon them. -- But some of these Times pleaded Riches; to which Cyprian answers,
They are truly rich who are rich toward God, and the World ought to be
despised with its Pomps and Delights, which we renounced when we happily turned
to God; and Riches are to be governed by just Measures. For the Apostle
commands all Women, how rich soever, to adorn themselves in modest Apparel, not
with costly Array; and shows a more excellent way to bestow their Estates, to
relieve the Hungry and feed the Poor. -- This was the best Art of improving
Riches."

Rutty's Hishory of Friends in Ireland. "The foregoing Page informs us, not
only how the primitive Christians clothed themselves, but how they furnished
their Houses, agreeable to the Simplicity and Moderation of our elder Brethren,
with Regard to the Furniture of their Houses; concerning which I am sorry to
have Occasion to observe, that not a few of the present Generation have
deviated a much greater Length from the primitive Precept and Example, than
they have in Respect to the Ornaments of their Persons, whose Conduct in
Relation to these two Particulars is so little uniform, that it would seem to
imply, than provided they would retrench a little of the modish Superfluities
in clothing their Bodies, they had received an Indulgence to run into an
unbounded Profusion and Extravagance in the Furniture of their Houses." And
with the same Parity of Reason may it be here added, that provided they denied
themselves of gay and gaudy Clothing, they might indulge an extravagant
Disposition in that that is plain and grave, as if the Pride lay in the Color
only, and not in the Quality of the Garment; neglecting the Apostle's
Prohibition of costly Array, as well as Gold and superfluous Ornaments: And
also forgetting the many Changes of Raiment, or changeable Suits of Apparel,
the sine Linen, the Glasses, and curious Things which we find in the Catalogue
of the Jewish Women's Pride and Daintiness. This minding of high Things,
pursuing great Riches, and purchasing costly Things, don't seem at all
consistent with the Lip Acknowledgment of many, and the great Expressions of
Humility, debasing ourselves below the most abject of all Beings, as weak,
short-sighted, imperfect, unworthy Creatures; Worms and not Men; Vanity, and
less than nothing. And to see the Costliness of Apparel, and Furniture in
Houses, etc. and the impious Nicety and Curiosity, as William Penn justly
styles it, among some of the plainer Sort in the Society, is most astonishing,
and would almost induce one to think, that provided they considered themselves
in this humble Situation in the Sight of God, the supreme Being, they might be
indulged in their imagined Superiority and Distinctions which their Riches have
made between them and their fellow Creatures.

George Fox's Warning to keep out of Fashions of the World, which leads below
the serious Life. "Mind that which is sober and modest, and keep your Fashions
therein, that you may judge the World, whose Minds and Eyes are in this, what
they shall ea^ and put on; and, Friends that see the World so often after
Fashions and follow them, they cannot judge the World, but the World will judge
them; Keep all in Plainness and Simplicity, and be circumspect, for they that
follow these Things the World's Spirit invents, they cannot be solid; and many
Fashions might be instanced, both of Hats and Clothes of Men and Women, that
daily are invented, which they that run into them, are near unto the World's
Spirit, that run into the Lust of the Eye, and Pride of Life; and let the Time
past suffice, and the rest of your Time live to the Will of God, taking no
Thought what ye shall eat or put on."

Women's Meeting Epistle from the Bull and Mouth, 1685. "The World says, the
Quakers are now like us, they want only Lace and Ribbands. Our End is not to
upbraid, but to remind you how our religious Profession is upbraided; for with
the Light you will see there is Superfluity in Habit, though no Lace and
Ribbands." -- But to our Sorrow let us observe a farther Degeneracy since that
Time, and not only Ribbands adorn the Heads of plain Friends both Youth and
Elders, but Laces adorn the Seams of their Infants Linen; which Inconsistency
occasioned one, whom we term of the World, to query with me, Where the
Difference lay between Lace made with Bobbins, and Lace made with Needles?
because, says she, your People use Lace made with Needles, and refuse that made
with Bobbins.

Gerard Croese's Account of Friends. "Their Moderation and Temperance was such
as became their Character; they were distinguished in the Managment of Trade
and Commerce with the World; they were meek, mild and moderate; their
Countenance severe, and Speech slow; they were mean in their Clothing, and
their Houses not richly furnished, though there were Men among them of large
Substance."

Francis Howgill's Works, page 123. "There are Differences of Administrations,
but by the same Spirit of the Lord; now the Spirit of Truth, which is Life in
its Self, puts forth its own pure Act, not only to detect and convince him
that transgresses his Appearance, and manifests Evil that has been committed,
but being turned unto, shows Men the Motions whence Temptations to Evil
arises, and as he singly keeps his Mind to it, gives Power to vanquish those
Evils."

Yearly Meeting Epistle 1688. "Advice against meddling with outward Heats,
Controversies and Distractions of this World, about the Kingdoms thereof; but
pray for the Good of all, and leave all to the divine Power and Wisdom, which
rules in the Kingdoms of Men. -- The Lord's hidden ones are always quiet in the
Land."

Fox's Epistles, page 205. "And now, dear Friends, whatever Bustlings, Tumults,
Outrages, Quarrels and Strife should rise in the World, keep out of them all,
and concern not yourselves with them, neither talk of them; but keep in the
Lord's Power and peaceable Truth, that is over all such Things."

Ibid. page 209. "And all light Words and Jesting avoid, and Fables and foolish
Talk."

Penn's Epistle. "Let us beware of Lightness, Jesting, or a careless Mind,
which grieves the Spirit."

On Feasting at Marriages, etc.
PENN's Maxims. "Neither make, nor go to Feasts, but let the laborious Poor
bless thee at Home."

Fox's Epistles, page 556. "Such among Friends who marry, and provide great
Dinners, that instead thereof it would be of good Savor on such Occasions,
that they give something to the Poor, that be Widows and Fatherless, and such
like, to make them a Feast to refresh them. -- To feast the Poor that cannot
feast you again, would be a good Practice and Example; I know this Practice
has been used by some twenty Years ago, not only to give the Poor a little
Victuals which you cannot eat yourselves, but give them a little Money. -- These
Things I do recommend (though it may look strange) to weigh and consider the
Thing; it will be of good Report, and manifest a Self-denial and Openness of
Heart, and of the general Love of God."

Rutty's History of Friends in Ireland. "I find in early Records Instances of
particular Persons guilty of Drunkenness, who were dealt with, and if not
reclaimed, expelled the Community. -- And to the same Purpose any Thing that
had a Tendency to promote this Evil, such as the unnecessary frequenting
Alehouses and Taverns, is not only cautioned against, but a Return in diverse
Places is made to euch Quarterly Meeting, of the Observance or Non-observance
of this Caution. And whereas a great deal of Luxury, worldly Pomp and
Ostentation of Births, Marriages and Burials, of those who call themselves
Christians, they esteemed themselves called to bear a Testimony against these
Things, and accordingly it is an established Query, Whether Friends avoid
superfluous Provisions at Births, Marriages and Burials, and on other
Occasions? and such as transgress are liable to Admonition."

Yearly Meeting Epistle 1712. "Let Friends concerned about Marriages, keep
within the Bounds of Truth, Sobriety and Temperance, that whether ye eat or
drink, it may be to the Glory of God."

Yearly Meeting Advices 1710. "In case of Marriage, Parents are tenderly
exhorted to seek the Lord in this weighty Affair, and wait for Counsel and
Direction from his holy Spirit, and that the Youth do the same; and that none
make the Earth or the World the Ground of their Choice, for that will not
procure a Blessing, but the contrary, and grieve the Lord, may spoil Families,
and bring an Exercise on the Church of Christ."

Yearly Meeting Advices 1718. "A Testimony against running into excessive,
sumptuous and costly Entertainments at Marriage Dinners, a great Part of which
may be better employed in relieving the Necessities of the Poor."

And would it be amiss here to advise Friends, to spare a Part of what is laid
out in costly Apparel and fine Linen on such Occasions? Would not the Excess
which appears in too many, though plain, be better bestowed to clothe the
Naked? If so, I believe we should have a better Account to give of the Lord's
Wool, Flax, etc. than pleasing our Fancies with costly Things. And as Excesses
have been complained of on rather a more solemn Occasion, viz. at Burials, "The
National-meeting in Ireland being informed of it, testified against this Excess
and Custom of having Wine, Brandy, or strong Waters, and Cakes; Pipes and
Tobacco, which is (...) unbecoming the Occasion of their ^ng together; it is
therefore recommended, that Friends put a Stop to that unsuitable Practice, as
well as adorning Coffins." And may I add, taking such laborious Pains to make
them shine, and appear beautiful to the Eye; when (alas!) if we cast our Eye
within, behold perhaps an Object already beginning to corrupt: Which brings to
mind the Observation of a worthy Ancient, William Penn, speaking of costly
Apparel, and may be applicable to the present Purpose. "Miserable State indeed,
to be so blinded by the Lust of the Eye, as to call Show, Decency, to be
curious and expensive about that which should be our Humiliation." -- And I am
sorry to find this Note in Penn's Rise and Progress, viz. "Since the Time of
this Account was first published, some of the Posterity of this People have put
on outward Mourning Habits for the Deceased." Friends, I beseech you discourage
it in your Families.

Half-year's Meeting in Ireland. "Advice to keep out of all Excess in
Provisions, and Feasting in Marriages, and out of all airy and unsavory
Discourse and Deportment; -- and to avoid outward decking and dressing
themselves more than at other Times; -- and that every particular Meeting
appoint two weighty sensible Friends to see this Service performed."

Quarterly Meeting in London, 1750-1. "That in solemnizing Marriages, Friends
advised to proceed with Decency and good ^der becoming our Christian
Profession. -- To be careful neither to endeavor after too much Privacy, nor
too popular Invitations to the Solemnity; but that suitable Notice be given of
the intended Marriage, and that they keep to the Hour appointed. -- That as
much as possible they would avoid all Superfluity in Apparel, and unnecessary
Show and Expense on account of Marriage Dinners and public Entertainments,
these Things being altogether inconsistent with the Simplicity and Moderation
we profess, injurious to the Circumstances of some, and even in such as can
afford it, but an ill Example to those of less Ability. -- And the said
Monthly-meetings are desired to give this Advice to each Couple who shall lay
their Intentions of Marriage before them."

TESTIMONIES against paying Tithes.
HISTORY of Friends in Ireland, page 416. "Behold the Sentiments of this People
with Regard to a truly Gospel Ministry, and that which is merely of Man's
Appointment, and the Tithes established for its Support, which they have always
deemed a Jewish and antichristian Yoke of Oppression, against which they were
called to bear a Testimony; and accordingly if any of this Profession were
found to be concerned in paying or receiving Tithes, they were deemed
unfaithful, and proper Subjects for Admonition, unworthy to set in Meetings for
Church Discipline, and liable to further Censure if they persist in their
Opposition. -- Tertullian openly declares, that when Men depart from the
Discipline of the Gospel, they so far cease among us to be accounted
Christians. Hist. of Friends, page 7."

The dying Testimony and Exercise of William Fisher, 1708-9. "I William Fisher
of Ross in Hereford, being weak in Body, but of a right Understanding, have
been sorely afflicted in my Mind and Conscience since my late and present
Weakness, in consenting to my Son's paying Tithes for me; which has been such a
Terror to me, and has wounded my Conscience, so that the Lord's Judgments has
followed me, that I could not take my natural Rest, which has caused me to put
forth this Paper as an Acknowledgment of my Condemnation for so doing. And I
desire all others who profess the Lord's everlasting Truth, may take Warning by
me, and bear their Testimonies more faithfully for the Lord, against the grand
Oppression of Tithes, that they may be more easy and composed in Mind upon a
dying Bed than I have been. For the Terrors of the Lord have followed me in
giving way to that Delusion, which were it to do again, I would not pay it for
all the World. I have often supplicated the Lord to forgive me this my great
Transgression in paying Tithes, and I desire the Prayers of all my true and
honest hearted Friends, that God would be pleased in Mercy to pass by and
forgive me for this my Sin, so that I may obtain Peace with him. And now having
Satisfaction in publishing this, I subscribe my Name, the 1st Month, 1708-9.

WILLIAM FISHER."

The Words of a dying Man, which may be a Warning to Old and Young to prize the
Day of Visitation. "I went to visit John Start of Hedingham in Essex, being
under the afflicting Hand of the Lord: I said, I hoped he had labored to make
his Peace with God; he answered in some Measure and not all, is hard; what is
wanting is not on the Lord's Part but ours. I left him and went to his Wife,
who told me her Husband had refused to pay Tithes, and the Priest troubled him
for it, and she and her Neighbors prevailed on him to go to the Priest and
carry the Money, and that her Husband was in great Distress of Spirit for so
doing, and said to her, Had I not been better without Dish or Spoon, than to be
in this Condition? I thought I had been an honest Man, but new I see I am
weighed in the Balance and am found too light; and so will many more that
profess themselves, Quakers, if they have not a great care to prize the Day of
Visitation. -- Here the Wife wept, and expressed great Sorrow for her being
instrumental in paying the Priest. -- This is the Substance of what I heard
them say,

ABRAHAM GOYMER."

Behold and fear, Brethren! here is one Instance of Disobedience to God, and
Bribery from a Wife; take heed and be not unequally yoked; and also take heed
of supporting a Ministry God is determined to bring down, by directly or
indirectly, and in a clandestine Manner paying their Demands, for be assured,
that as all Sinners in Zion shall be afraid, so Fearfulness will one Day
surprise these Hypocrites.

On Trades and Merchandise.
I Beheld the Worlds and so! there was Peril, because of the Devices which were
come into it, 2 Esdras, ix. 20. for though God made Man upright, he has found
out many Inventions, not only in Religion (which respects the Soul, but in
outward Things which relate to the Body) to make that an easy agreeable Duty,
suitable to the carnal Mind that is content with the Form thereof, so they may
be excused from coming under the Influence of its Power, and thereby be left
more at Liberty to search out and make Things to indulge the same carnal Mind
in the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes and Pride of Life; and so these
Craftsmen must consequently have Retailers of their Inventions, from whence
it is probable this Complaint against Israel was taken up, Thou have defiled thy
Sanctuaries by the Multitude of thine Iniquities, and by the Iniquity of thy
Traffic, Ezck. xxviii. 18. The general Pretense of Mankind for encouraging
Superfluities of all Kinds, is, that these Crafts helps the Poor to a
Subsistence; which, by the way, is far from being the Motive of these Promoters
of Lust and Vanity, at least but of a very few; and the greatest Charity will
not allow us to judge otherwise, as it is evident in Instances where some
Invention is become unfashionable, the Craftsmen have been reduced to a State
of Poverty for want of Employment.

Penn's no Cross, no Crown, page 213. "But if the Inventors of evil Things want
a Livelihood, feeding them that way nurses the Cause instead of starving of it.
-- Let the Poor be helped by Charity to better Callings, and the rich
Vanity-huxters retreat, and spend it more honestly than they got it."

Some People allege, That it is Necessity obliges them to sell such
Superfluities as gratify the vain Mind; Let these remember, that we are not to
do the least Evil that the greatest Good may ensue; and also, that there is one
Necessity greater than all others, and that is, the Necessity of not offending
the Lord and grieving his holy Spirit.

Again, says the above mentioned Author, "The Kingdom of God, say some, stands
not in Meats, Drinks, nor Apparel, etc. I answer, right. -- But it stands out
of them. True honest Religion don't send People out of the World, but it
preserves them from Evil. But some would endeavor to make God serve with their
Sins, and would rather charge the Almighty with the Creation and Invention of
their dirty Vanities, than want a Plea to justify their Pretense and Practice.
But to such miserable Souls I answer, What God has made for Man's Use is good,
and what the blessed Jesus allowed, enjoined, or gave in an heavenly Example,
is to be believed, observed and practiced; but in the whole Catalogue the
Scriptures give of both, I never found the Attires and Way of living of the
Generality of the Christians of these Times."

Penn's no Cross, no Crown, page 93. Giving an Account of the Day of the Lord's
Visitation, and our Call from the Spirit of the World, he says, "Now there was
a grand Inquest came upon our whole Life; the Root examined, and Tendency
considered of every Thought. The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and
the Pride of Life opened to our View, and the Mystery of Iniquity in us; and
knowing the evil Leaven, and its diverse evil Effects in ourselves, how it had
wrought, and what it had done, we came to a Sense and Knowledge of the State of
others, and what we could not, nay dare not let live and continue in ourselves,
as being manifested to proceed from an evil Principle in the Time of Man's
Degeneracy, we could not comply with in others."

Christopher Story's Journal, page 59. He gives an Account of Aaron Atkinson,
and his Master William Armstrong, convinced and lived together, and honored
Truth in their Trading, being at a Word. "They saw they were not to trade in
prohibited Goods, neither to sell striped and gaudy Cloth, such as was not
seemly for Friends to wear: Honest Friends, of what Employment soever, were
concerned to be Testimony Bearers in the Way of their Trade and Business, and
though it looked for a Time as if it would have hurt their Trades, yet as they
were faithful, they prospered,"

Shield of Truth. A Tract by James Parnel, 1655. "Pride is the Fruit of the
corrupt Tree. -- Are Points and Ribbands of any Use but to satisfy the proud
Mind? Also following the new Fashions and Inventions of the World, to make the
Creature seem something in its own Eyes, and in the Eyes of others; are not
these the outward Signs of Pride which lodges in the Heart? Covetousness is
another Root of the corrupt Tree, which excites People to pursue Wealth by
unlawful Means, by gratifying the Lust of the Eye and Pride of Life; has not
the Lord pronounced a Woe against the Crown of Pride? and is he not determined
to destroy it Root and Branch? and shall any professing as we do, by any Act of
ours spare, nourish and keep it alive in any one? God forbid! whoever then has
thus done, let the Time past suffice, wherein they have been making Provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the sinful Lusts thereof."

Penn's Just Measure. "The Society we are of, has nothing to do with what House
I live in, what Food I eat, what Clothes I wear, nor what Trade I follow,
provided there be no Excess nor Uncomliness in all these." -- Agreeable to what
the Apostle writes, Whatsoever is comely and of good Report, etc. that follow.
-- Now judge ye, is it comely and of good Report for the Members of a Society,
professing to deny all the fantastic Modes and Fashions, and all the
Superfluities in Use among what we term the World's People, and in Words
zealous against them in the Youth of our own Society, and desiring that all
Mankind might be so enlightened by divine Grace, to see the Evil and Folly of
these external Things, and are at times calling to them to forsake them, seeing
the great Danger in these Luxuries, of hurting their eternal Interest? and what
is astonishing, at another Time exposing to Sale rich plain and gaudy Silks,
fashionable Ribbands, with a Train of other Vanities too numerous to add here.
Judge yourselves, Brethren, in these Things by the Spirit of Truth, and then no
Man will judge you.

Penn. -- "Visible Objects have a great Influence on the People, and therefore
Satan is represented tempting Eve with fair Fruit, pleasant to the Senses, the
Palate, the Eye, etc. And are not they who fell vain and superfluous Things,
exposing them at Door and Windows, Tempters of the People to the Lust of the
Eye and Pride of Life?

Barclay's Apology, page 532. "'It Is not lawful for Christians to use
superfluous Things, in Clothes, etc." And then certainly not lawful to sell
them, to feed these Lusts.

Fox's Doctrinals, page 828. "Do not nourish the Lust of the Eye in your
Families; if you do, you nourish that which is not of God. -- Page 881.
Whatever you gain by your Covetousness from the Lusts of others, will not this
bring Destruction upon you and your unrighteous Gain, which you have got by
feeding their Lusts; for that Spirit which feeds the destroying Lust is the
Destroyer, and the Profit of that will not be Gain to you in the End."

Fox's Epistles, page 2. "The Children of this World do mostly mind external
Things, their Love is in them; but they who follow Christ in his Cross, they
are Strangers to the World, Wonders to the World, condemned by it: But while
the Nature of the World does rise in Man, O the deaf Ear, the blind Eye, the
Understanding shut up, in which they judge! -- Page 8. We see Men despise us
when we go from our Principles, Page 262. Friends keep to Truth's Principles."

John Fothergill's Journal, page 10. "God is desirous that his Camp should be
cleansed, for it seems to me, that there are Abundance of People, not of our
Society, will confess, to the Truth in Words, that have their Eyes very
strictly upon us, to see if our Actions agree with our Principles, and our
Conduct answers the Profession we make."

Lawson's Mite, page 38. "As Nations come to be rectified and seasoned with the
Salt of the Kingdom, all Arts not savouring of God, but tending to deprave the
People, and lead them into an airy uncertain State, will be witnessed against."

Penn's Epistle to the Churches, 1677. "A Warning to all that make mention of
the Name of the Lord, that they take care how they let out their Minds in any
wise to please the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and Pride of Life,
which are not of the Father, but of the World; left any be exalted into a
Liberty that makes the Cross of Christ of none effect, and the Offense to
cease. -- These will become as the Salt which has lost its Savor, and at last
will be trod under the Feet of God and Man."

The same Author to the young Convinced, 1669. "We are as well to be a Cross in
our Garbs, Gate, Salutations and Dealings, as to the Worships of this vain and
adulterated World. -- Epistle 1696. My Friends, blessed are they that see their
Captain go before them, counselling and leading them in all their outward and
lawful Concerns, that they offend not:"

Stephen Crisp's Works, page 364. Beware of the Wiles of those who are crafty,
and would lead from the Simplicity of the Gospel, but keep your Testimony alive
in all Things. -- Page 381. Have a Care that nothing be done or permitted which
hurts your Testimony for God, his Name and Example to others, in a Restoration
(from the sinful Life) of the whole World. -- Page 368. What is not right, Love
constrains to deal uprightly with. -- That which God calls unclean, let no Man
presume to call clean, or join with it. -- Page. 169. There are many reasoning
with the Flesh, May I not do this that my Heart desires, and keep in the Way
of Truth? Thus the Serpent begets a Question of obeying the Truth, and his
Answer is always with a Liberty to disobey. -- This brings Oppression on the
pure Seed, and that withdraws, and so Night comes. Page 366. Let your Lives
shine that sober Enquirers may be reached, without which all Testimony is to no
Purpose but to condemn us; keep then a single Eye, for ye cannot serve two
Masters."

Penn's Maxims, page 169. "Fear and Gain are the great Perverters of Mankind,
when either prevails the Judgment is violated." If we contribute to Pride, we
make ourselves accessory to the Consequences arising therefrom, and justly
charged with keeping the World in Ignorance.

Ireland, 1688. At a Meeting of Merchants, Clothiers and Tailors. "We being met
together according to the Appointment of the Half-year's Meeting, to consider
whether it be convenient for Friends to make draught, figured and stripped Work,
or to sell such, or make them up into Clothes; and upon the whole Debate and
Resolves, we believe it is comely and according to Truth, and Truthlike, for
Friends to wear plain Apparel, and to make plain Stuffs, and to sell plain
Things, and for Tailors to make Clothes plain; and that it will be commendable
that all Friends, who have the Truth chiefly in their Eye in all the said
Clothes and Goods, in their dealing, making and wearing; and that if any Friend
do, for Truth's Sake, lay aside and deny themselves of the Profit of what they
might expect to get, by figured and stripped Things, we believe they will not
lose their Reward. And Friends would do well to encourage Friends of that Trade
that cannot answer the World's Fashions."

Half-year's Meeting, 1693. "The Yearly Meeting of Women apply to this Meeting
for Advice, about Friends having printed or painted Hangings, Shining-tables,
Chests of Drawers, and Dressing-boxes, large Looking-glasses, painted Rooms,
etc. The Sense of this Meeting is, That Friends ought not to run into, but lay
aside all printed and painted Hangings, and to avoid any Hangings of Rooms as
much as possible; if they have real Necessity for plain Hangings, that they may
take Advice before they do it. -- And that they deny themselves of such Finery
of Tables, Drawers, etc. which gratify an high Mind, and use plain ones for
Service; that none keep large Looking-glasses, (and if Partitions colored, to
be of one plain Color.") And may I add, it is advisable to reduce the Number
of small Looking-glasses.

Advices of Half-year's Meeting continued. "'It Is desired, all Friends that are
Joiners, Ship-carpenters, Founders, that are present, to meet apart and
consider what is convenient for them to make, and give their Judgment to the
Meeting to spread abroad for Truth's Service; which was as follows: That Chests
of Drawers ought to be plain, all of one Color, without any swelling Works:
That Tables and Chairs ought to be plain without carving, keeping out of all
new Fashions; and all Mouldings one above another about Beds, Clock-cases, etc.
ought to be avoided, only what is according to Truth, so that all Furniture
should be plain. -- That Ship-carpenters leave off carving and making Images,
and putting them up in Ships. -- That Founders take care to keep out of casting
Images, or superfluous Things. -- That Saddlers make plain Saddles for Men and
Women."

Fox's Doctrinals, page III. The Fashions of the World made manifest. "Is not
all your Fashions to please the Lust of the Eyes? You are carried away with the
Vanities of your Minds, and the Inventions of your wicked Hearts: Do you not
believe that God will spew you out for thus polluting the Earth and staining of
it, who are given up to the Inventions of Fashions? Craftsmen given up to
Inventions of Fashions. -- The newest Fashions pleases the People best. -- You
serve your Inventions more than God, though you call on him with your Lips. --
You say the Quakers Religion stands in this, to cry against the Fashion of the
World; nay, not altogether; yet it. does stand to cry against them. -- The
Quakers Religion is pure, and keeps from the Spots of the World and the
Fashions of it. -- It is Time to cry against all your Fashions, for the Devil
has carried you to such a Height, who are in the Wisdom of the Earth, which is
sensual, that it is Time to cry against them upon the Wall."

No Cross no Crown, page 15. "The true Disciples of our Lord must be crucified
to Objects and Employments that attract downwards."

Fox's Epistles, page 209. "Friends, keep your Hands, Tongues, Feet, Bodies and
Hearts clean, out of all Pollutions; keep out of all the vain Fashions of the
World, and over that unchaste Spirit that invents new Fashions daily in Apparel
and Diet? keep chaste, that your Lives and Conversations may judge them, in
such Things."

Gilbert Latey, convinced by Edward Buroughs in 1654, was a Man fearing God,
and hating Iniquity, fervent and zealous against Deceit; which Testimony he
bore faithfully according to his Ability. Having received a Gift in the
Ministry, he honored them greatly who were Elders in the Lord, as they kept to
that Power that first broke forth in their Hearts; he would often say, they
were as Marrow to his Bones. -- He took up the Cross, and despised the Shame,
and it pleased the Lord to bring a Trial upon him, like cutting off a right
Hand, viz. He being a Tailor, was employed by Persons of Note, who would have
their Apparel set off with much Cost and Superfluity of Lace and Ribbands, and
he came under a conscientious Concern not to meddle therewith, nor suffer his
Servants to put it on; so he was forced to part with his Servants, not knowing
but he must be a Servant himself; yet he chose to leave all rather than lose
his Peace with the Lord, who never forsakes those who trust in him: Thus was he
resigned to God's Will. -- He wrote an Epistle to all Tradesmen whatsoever,
telling them, The Lord was appearing to search out the Works and Deeds of
Darkness; and exhorts all, of what Trade, Office or Calling soever, to leave
off all the Evil in them, for the Lord was weary of it, and grieved with the
Evil used in their Employments which they were daily exercised in, and led to
by the Enemy of Souls; for which they must all come to Judgment for the Pride
that they have been Leaders into, and Preparers of the Way for Pride and
Vanity, which grieves the Lord Day by Day.

John Hall, Father of David Hall of Skipton, lately deceased, born in 1637, a
Tailor by Trade, was often employed in the Families of great Men and
Circumstances, had in great Esteem amongst them, being willing, capable and
ready to gratify them in the Modes, Cuts and Superfluities of the Times, being
himself at that Time a Youth gay and modish in Apparel, sprightly and jovial in
Spirit, swimming toward the Profits and Pleasures of this fading World; yet
preserved from gross Enormities, was awakened by one Gervase Beson: Some Time
after, in a silent Meeting, convinced of the blessed Truth, and continued in it
to his dying Day. Now the Light of the just Man's Path, which shines more and
more to the perfect Day, made further Discoveries unto him; for whereas
aforetime he had gratified the vain Minds of Men and Women in the Fashions and
Superfluities then in vogue, now he found a Restriction laid upon him, and a
conscientious Scruple in doing such like Things: Howbeit, for some Time,
through Reasoning, etc. permitted his Servant or Servants that wrought with him
to have some hand in the doing of it. He did not at the first renounce all
those Superfluities, and the Profits that might seem to arise therefrom, but
the Light shone brighter and brighter, and discovered Things further and
further; and as he sat in a Meeting on a certain Day ( the Power of the Lord
seized him) he was so remarkably affected, that his Hands were drawn together,
the Use of his Limbs taken from him, and he fell down on the Floor, where he
laid for some Time, to the Admiration of the Spectators. After this Visitation,
which he took to be a Dispensation of the righteous Judgments of the Lord, for
his being instrumental in setting on of Lace on Women's Apparel, and other
Superfluities of the Times, which frequently occurred in his Business, he was
sweetly favored with an immediate Succession pf refreshing Consolation, so
that he could sing of Judgment and Mercy. From that Time he never durst set on
any Lace, or other superfluous Ornaments, or gratify the proud Minds of Men and
Women in the vain Fashions and changeable Modes of the Times, neither with his
own Hands, nor the Hands of his Servants, what Disadvantage soever it might be
unto him: But the Lord prospered what he put his Hand to; he was with his
Servant, and is with all the Faithful that follow his Leadings and Drawings of
the Light and Truth, even to the giving an hundred Fold in this World, and in
the World to come Life everlasting.

Soon after this, he was sent for by a great Man to make some very fine
Clothes; when he saw the Work was to be wrought with many Superfluities, which
for Conscience Sake he durst not undertake, upon his Refusal they told him, he
might let his Man do them; but he said he durst neither permit his Man to do
them, nor assist him; then they said they must employ another. He was willing
to lose all rather than his Peace with the Lord: He freely turned his Back of
all that worldly Interest: And Providence so favored his conscientious Care,
that he got plan Work enough, and his Wages increased; as he was faithful in a
little, the Lord made greater Things manifest unto him, for in the Families in
which he had been light, airy and wanton, he was now made to reprove Vanity,
and bear a living Testimony to the everlasting God in Word, Doctrine, Life and
Conversation; and it pleased the Lord to dispense to him a Gift or Talent in
the free living Ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ, which through his Blessing
he improved to God's Honor and the Comfort of Souls. He recruited in the World
and lived reputably among his Neighbors; but the Officers were very rigorous
in the Execution of the Law upon him, and in the Year 1683 was several Times in
Prison, but the Lord made way for him and all that faithfully follow him, let
their Difficulties be what they may. He was zealous in Discipline to keep up
that Hedge, and strict and conscientious in the Nurture and Education of his
Children.

Extract from a Treatise wrote by Henry Lombe of Norwich, Weaver; printed 1684,
reprinted 1693. "I do declare, that the Work which has been wrought in me is
the Lord's Work, and Praises be given to him alone. And I do also further
declare that the Lord, in this Day of great Love to my Soul, has been pleased
to discover to me diverse Things, wherein I disobeyed his holy Law in my Heart,
and which he did require me to forsake and part withal; but that which in
particular I find a Concern to live upon my Spirit, to give forth as a public
Testimony unto others, is, That the Lord has manifested to me his Displeasure
against my being concerned in making any figured and gaudy Stuffs, whose End
and Service was chiefly to satisfy the vain and proud Minds of Men and Women,
that live in Disobedience to God; and that those Things have their Rise and
Beginning, and are invented by Man, whose Heart and Mind is gone astray from
the Counsel of the Lord, and therefore by such as come to yield up unto him,
and take Counsel of his holy Spirit, they are to be denied and turned from; and
we are not to reason with Flesh and Blood about these Things, saying, If I
leave this Way, I know not how I shall get such a Maintenance for my Family as
I now can; and if the Lord would make, out a Way for me in other Things, I
could willingly part with this. And so are prefering their present Prosperity
in this short and transitory Life, before their Peace and eternal Comfort and
Felicity with the Lord for ever: O, my Friends, it is better to have inward
Peace with the Lord, and the Seal and Testimony of Faithfulness born Witness
unto us, and in us, though we do suffer in the outward, than to enjoy outward
Comfort for a little Season, and want inward Peace. -- My Friends, it is the
Lord has given unto me, that those that are obedient unto him, and bear a
faithful Testimony for his Truth, against that Spirit of Pride and Wickedness,
that so much abounds in this our Age, they shall not want that which is
necessary for their Support in the outward; and on the contrary, they that
refuse to obey the Lord and answer his Requirings, and think by continuing in
that which grieves his holy Spirit, to gather together and increase in Riches,
the Lord is able to blast all their Increase when he pleases; therefore let all
be persuaded to be faithful to the Lord, and turn their Hearts and Minds to
seek him above all other Things, and all Things good for us shall be added."

Collection of Tracts written by several Friends: William Billing, in the third
Page of his Epistle to Friends, says, "Let nothing be bought or sold that is
superfluous, or destructive to God's Creation, -- Let none, I say, return to
any Part of the old Vomit,"

Deuteronomy. xxiii. 18. The Price of a Dog shall thou not bring into God's House. --
The marginal Note says, forbidding Gain got by evil Things to be applied to the
Service of God.

Ambrose Rigg's Life. Epistle to Friends, page 348. "Wait upon the Lord in
Faith, and he will give you what is needful in his own Time, and with a
Blessing added; but I have learned this by long and good Experience, to
recommend to you in Brotherly Caution, not to seek lawful Things by unlawful
Means, for that is not good in the Sight of God; but let the Lamp of
Righteousness go before you in all your outward Undertakings, by which all
Snares which may be laid in the Way may be avoided, in the Dominion which
subdueth. all Things which are not of God."

London, the 2d of the Eleventh Month 1682.
A Paper to Friends and others, against the Pomps of the World used by many
Tradesmen in their Vocations, contrary to many of their Sureties, Promises and
Vows; by George Fox. Doctrinals. page 834.
"Friends,
STAND in the eternal Power of God, Witnesses for the eternal God against the
Devil and his Works, and the World, and the Lusts and Pomps and Vanities
thereof; which World the Devil is God of. Now there is a Saying by the
Godfathers, so called, that they do promise and vow, etc. to forsake the Devil
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of the wicked World, and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and vow for Children that they will not follow nor
be led by them, but forsake them all. And do we not see many run into them all,
or many of the Lusts and Pomps and Vanities of the World? And are not such
offended at such Tradesmen that cannot trim their Clothes and Apparel according
to the Pomps, Lusts and Fashions of the World, which pass away? But such
Tradesmen as stand Witnesses in the Power and Truth of God, and connot fulfill
Peoples Minds in the Lusts and Vanities of the World, I say, they are offended
at them.

"But did God make Man and Woman with these Pomps and Vanities, and Lusts, or
how came they into them? No, God did not make them with these Lusts and
Vanities; but when Man and Woman forsook the living God, and disobeyed him, and
followed the Serpent Satan, the Devil, then he filled them with the Pomps,
Lusts and Vanities of a Wicked World, which he is God of: So they fell from the
Righteousness, Holiness and Image of God, and transgressing the Command of God,
and following the Serpent, he has filled them with Pride, Malice and Hatred,
and with the Lusts and Vanities of the World. -- And some are grieved and vexed
if they cannot have such Vanities as others have, and think much at such who
are in Pomp and Pride above them, and the Lust the Devil begets in them, in Man
and Woman in the Fall. -- So it had a Beginning in Man and Woman, and must
there have an End, if ever they come to God. -- So they that stand faithful
Witnesses for God against the Pride, Pomps and Vanities of the World, they
cannot please nor satisfy them, though it bring them much Gain. For the Apostle
faith, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and Pride of Life, is not of
the Father; [mark, not of the Father] not of God the Father, the Creator of
all, that takes Care of all, who is Lord of all. -- If these Lusts be not of
the Father, who are they of then, but of the Devil, the God of this World? So
these Tradesmen that are God's Witnesses, cannot fulfill these Lusts of the Eye,
etc. which are of the Devil, whom Christ destroys and his Works; and are sealed
and certain Witnesses in God's eternal Power, against all which is not of the
Father, but of the Devil. And they are also Witnesses for that which is of God
the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and for his Glory, and for his Honor and
Praise.

"But they that are in the Pomps and Vanities of a wicked World, and Followers
of the God of this World, and his Works, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, and Pride of Life, they hate and persecute them that stand Witnesses
against such Things, and will hardly employ such who stand Witnesses against
their Pride. So these Tradesmen can hardly get any Trading while they witness
for God, the Father's Power and Truth, against those who are in the Pomps and
Vanities which is not of the Father. But in so doing they know they keep clean
Consciences to God, and know and are assured that his Blessing rest upon them,
who will bless them with Blessings from above and beneath, as they are
Witnesses for God, who has his upper and nether Springs to refresh them, which
enables them to stand faithful Witnesses for the living God their Father, to
whom be Glory for ever, whose Glory is over all the Works of his Hands, who is
worthy to be served, worshipped and honored for evermore, Amen.

"And therefore it is good for all to wait patiently upon the Lord, for some of
you do know, that when Truth first broke out in London, many Tradesmen could
not take so much Money in their Shops as would buy them Bread, because they
withstood the World's Ways, Words, Fashions and Customs; yet by their patient
waiting on the Lord, in their good Life and Conversation, they came to answer
the Truth in Peoples Consciences; so there arose a Belief in People, that
Friends would not wrong them in any Thing; so at last the Lord did increase his
Blessings both inwardly and outwardly upon his People: Therefore let none
murmur nor complain, but wait in Patience and Faithfulness upon the Lord, who
is both. God of Heaven and Earth; all is the Lord's, who can fill you both with
his spiritual and temporal Blessings; therefore all walk worthy of them in
Truth and Righteousness, and that whatever ye do in Word or Deed, it may be
done to the Praise and Glory of God.

GEORGE FOX."

George Fox's Epistles, page 288. "Help such who have left a Calling which they
for Conscience sake cannot follow; do the best you can to help them, and
further them to Employments, that they may labor in the Thing that is good,
and be a Blessing in the Creation."

Extract from a Treatise of Discipline, by Dr. Rutty, page 441. History of
Friends in Ireland. "There remains yet worthy of Notice, certain particular
Instances of their tender Regard to Justice, and their condemning the
Acquisition of Riches by Means either unlawful, or such as interfered with the
Dictates of their Conscience, viz. I find it to have been the Concern of a
National Meeting, held in Dublin 1677, to recommend to Friends, that they
should forbear selling needless Things, and such as had a Tendency to uphold
Pride and Vanity: Such they deemed to be the Merchandise of Gold and Silver
Lace, gaudy Ribbands, Silks, etc. all which Kind of Traffic, several Persons
who had been concerned in, when they came to be of this Judgment, did lay down
for Conscience Sake."

Extracts from the Half-year's Meeting in Ireland, 1676. "Whereas there have
been several Testimonies from our former Half-year's Meetings, against the vain
and never settled Fashions in Apparel, and against Superfluity in Household
Stuff and otherwise, and against making and selling such Things which Truth
will not allow of; and to the End such Things may not creep in again, and that
the Expectation of all faithful Friends may be answered herein, and the said
Testimonies kept up, Friends at the said Meeting do signify their continued and
constant Unity with the said former Testimonies, Copies whereof being sent
herewith, desiring the Men's and Women's Meetings every where in this Nation, to
look into these Matters, and to use all Ways and Means in Truth to get them
swept away, where such Things appear, and are found; that so the House may be
kept clean: And that all Friends in Cities, Towns and Country, do keep up their
Testimony against Observation of Days, called holy Days; also the Women's
Meetings every where to be encouraged and helped, according to a Paper of our
dear Friend John Banks, recommended to the Men and Women's Meetings, to
accomplish its Service."

Ibid, in 1677. "Friends of the several Provinces are desired to take Care,
that the Testimonies formerly given forth against the World's Fashions in
Apparel, and Superfluity in Household Stuff, or otherwise, and against Tithes,
directly or indirectly, and against making and selling such Things as Truth
will not allow of, that these Things be enquired into in every respective
Meeting by faithful Friends, and that Returns be made to the Provincial
Meetings, how such Things are found in each particular Meeting."

"Dear Friends,
"IT being by us known, that the Ancient of Days is come, to bring Things into
Ancient Order; that the Searcher of all Hearts is come to search thoroughly;
that the Rock of Ages is appeared for People to build thereon; that the
Comeliness and Beauty of him is now seen, whose Face has been more marred than
the Face of any Man, whose glorious Brightness has enlightened our
Understandings; by which Candle of the Lord we see the State of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, and how the Enemy of Mankind goes about seeking whom he may
devour, and entangle again with the Glory and Beauty of this World, setting
before Men and Women the Comeliness and Decency of the several Fashions of the
World, and also the Delight and Pleasure which may be had therein; by which we
see many are ensnared by looking out at those Things, and not keeping upon
their Watch Tower, whereby they might see all the Baits and Snares the Enemy of
their Souls lays in the broad Way and crooked Bye-paths, for their Hurt and
Destruction. And therefore the Lord has put it into our Hearts, to beseech all
to be willing to come out of, and lay aside all those dead Things, which does
not become the Sons and Daughters, the Servants and Handmaids, of the living
God, after that he has so gloriously in Life and Power appeared unto them.

"And we desire that in all Men and Women's Meetings, faithful Men and Women be
chosen, as have not entered into any of these Things, but are come out, and
keeps out of them all, since they were convinced of the living Truth of God,
or such as now with a willing and ready Mind, in the Dread and Fear of the Lord
God Almighty, will come out of them all, to the Intent that they without Delay,
in the meek and melting Spirit of the Lord with much Tenderness, may visit all
those that have entered into, or keep in the World's Fashions in their Apparel,
Household Stuff or otherwise; or in selling those Things which the faithful
People of God cannot lawfully use for wear; and to exhort them to come out of
them all. And if any are not willing, and do not come out of those Things,
after they have been twice or thrice exhorted, then those that exhorted them,
to acquaint the Men's and Women's Meeting with it, to whom they do belong, to the
End they may be had before the Meeting to answer for their so doing, that the
Glory and Honor of God may be over all, and in us all, to our Comfort and
Consolation."

"Friends, keep to the ancient Principles of Truth, 1st. At a Word in all your
Callings and Dealings without Oppression. 2d To sound Language, Thou to every
one. 3d. In your Testimony against the World's Fashions. 4th. To your Testimony
against the Priests, their Tithes and Maintenance, 5th. Against Mass Houses,
and repairing them. 6th. Against the World's joining in Marriage, and the
Priests, and stand up for God's joining. 7th. Against Swearing, and the World's
Manners and Fashions. 8th. Against all Looseness and Pleasures, and Profaneness
whatsoever, and against all the World's Ways and Worships, and Religions; and
stand up for God; see that every one that has done wrong, that they do
restore. 9th. That all Difference be speedily made up. 10th. That all bad
Things be judged speedily, that they do not fly abroad to corrupt Peoples
Minds; that all Reports be stopped the defaming any one.

London, 13th of the Fifth Month 1671. GEORGE FOX."

A Hammer to break down all invented Images. George Fox's Doctrinals, page 312.
"Man (says he) transgressed by touching that which was forbidden. -- And the
Law was added because of Transgression. -- But the Law made nothing perfect,
not taking away the Root, only taking hold upon the Actions. -- But Christ,
which, or who destroyed Death with his Works, takes away the Root of Sin, and
destroys the Beginning of it, to wit, the Original the Devil, who abode not in
the Truth himself, (...) led Men and Women out of the Truth, and so to be like
him in his Image, and not like God in his Image; and therefore Christ, who
destroyed the Devil, renews Man again into the Image of God.

And now all Men that be in the Image of the Devil, out of Truth, out of the
Image of God, they are them that are making Images, Likenesses and
Representations of Things in Heaven, in the Earth, in the Waters above and
below; so these would be Imitators of the Creator and Maker of all Things in
Heaven, in the Earth, etc. though they do not worship them; and this is
forbidden, both to worship and to make them.

And therefore all Friends, and People, pluck. down your Images, your Likeness,
your Pictures, and your Representations of Things in Heaven, etc. I say, pluck
them out of your Houses, Walls and Signs, or other Places, that none of you be
found Imitators of his Creator, whom you should serve and worship; and not
observe the idle, lazy Mind, that would go, invent and make Things like a
Creator and Maker; any Thing, I say, that is in Heaven, etc. for mind, while
Man was in the Image of God, and his Likeness, and the Woman, they did not make
any Likenesses: but when Man lost the Image of God, then they did begin to make
such Things as the Stock of Nimrod, in Ninos his Time; then they began to make
Images of their Children, and indulge them that would worship them: At last
they worshipped four-footed Beasts, as in Rom, i. 23. so in the Restoration of
Jesus Christ there is no Image, nor Likeness, etc. therefore down and away with
all your Images, etc you Imitators of God your Maker and Creator, you who have
made Likenesses of Things in Heaven, etc. I say, down with them out of your
Houses, and off your Sign-posts, with the Power of God; for as that arises in
your Hearts, the Nature that does appertain to them, or adore or worship them,
and the Makers of them, by the Power of God are thrown down, it and them both."

Edward Haistwell, who was once said to be Servant to George Fox, married a
rich Merchant's Daughter, and was afterward esteemed very rich; but running
into Grandeur, he among other Things had Pictures hung up in his House, at the
Sight of which William Edmundson was so wounded, that he weightily said
thereon, Surely the Lord will visit for these Things. Some Time after a Hand
turned against this rich Man, so that instead of his own saying, he would leave
off Trade when he had arrived to four Hundred Thousand Pounds, his Bills were
retun'd upon him, and he fell short with his Creditors, ending his Days in that
State.

George Fox's Doctrinals, page 73. "A Cry so, Repentance to London chiefly, and
to those whose Fruits do shame their Profession, that they may come to yea and
nay in their Communications and Dealings, that their Life may judge the World."
George Fox concludes this warning thus. "And all you Makers of Images, Baubles
and Toys, to please the Lusts and Vanity of the People, repent, repent, left
God consume you with the Vanity. And you that delight in fine Houses, and
Apparel, and the Eyes are fixed in those Things, repent, left God destroy you
with them, "He calls next to Astrologers, Fortune Tellers, etc. "God's Arm is
turned, with which he will gather his People to himself; the Furnace is
prepared, the Oven is provided, and all high buildings shall be laid low, and
the Cities waste and without Inhabitants: The Lord God is bringing his People
to his City, and many are in their Way wandering to it, and many are entered
into their Rest. -- Therefore to you repenting Ones is this, and to you
unrepenting Ones, that you may come to see the Way hither out of the Earth,
into the righteous Way and Path of Life, which leads to God the Father of Life;
and to you this is the Word of the Lord God, from him that dwells in that which
comprehends the World, and answering this shall be with that of God in every
one of you. -- Have not Ribbands, Jewels, Images and Baubles carried away the
Eyes and Hearts of People, which brings them to lose Sincerity? O! repent ye
whose Hearts and Eyes are given to Vanity, left the Lord come upon you like
Mortar and Clay, and tread you to. Pieces like Potsherds."

FINIS.
Printed, and Sold by James Adams, in Wilmington, the Printer hereof,

DEIS: The Life of David, King of (...): A sacred Poem. -- By T. ELLWOOD.

^NVERSATION with GOD: Exemplified in ^ly life of Armelle Nicolas, a poor
Country in France.

^ICIENCY of the SPIRIT's Teaching without human Learning. --,By S. HOW.

Looking-glass for the Times: or, A Re^brancer for Pennsylvania. -- By G. C.

And, ^NTATION over SION, on the Declension of the CHURCH.


