Dr. Chauncy's DISCOURSE On a Day of Thanksgiving For the REPEAL of the
STAMP ACT.

A DISCOURSE On "the good News from a far Country." Delivered July 24 th. A Day
of Thanksgiving to Almighty GOD, throughout the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, on Occasion of the REPEAL of the STAMP ACT;
appointed by his Excellency, the GOVERNOR of said Province, at the Desire of
it is House of REPRESENTATIVES, with the Advice of his MAJESTY'S COUNCIL.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D.D. A Pastor of the first Church in Boston.

BOSTON: N.E. Printed by KNEELAND and ADAMS, in Milk-street, for THOMAS
LEVERETT, in Cornhill. MDCCLXVI.

A Thanksgiving SERMON.
PROVERBS 25. 25. "As cold Waters to a thirsty Soul; so is good News from a far
Country."
WE are so formed by the God of nature, doubtless for wise and good ends, that
the uneasy sensation to which we give the name of thirst, is an inseparable
attendant on the want of some proper liquid. And as this want is increased,
such proportionably will be the increase of uneasiness; and the uneasiness may
gradually heighten, till it throws one into a state that is truly tormenting.
The application of cooling drink is fitted, by an established law of heaven,
not only to remove away this uneasiness, but to give pleasure in the doing of
it, by its manner of acting upon the organs of taste. There is scarce a keener
perception of pleasure, than that which is felt by one that is athirst upon
being satisfied with agreeable drink. Hence the desire of spiritual good things,
in those who have had excited in them a serious sense of God and religion, is
represented, in the sacred books, by the "cravings of a thirsty man after
drink." Hence the devout David, when he would express the longing of his soul
to "appear before God in his sanctuary," resembles it to the "panting of an
heart after the waterbrooks." In like manner, "cold water to a thirsty soul" is
the image under which the wise man would signify, in my text, the gratefulness
of "good news." It Is refreshing to the soul, as cold waters to the tongue when
parched with thirst: Especially is good news adapted to affect the heart with
pleasure, when it comes "from a far country," and is big with important
blessings, not to a few individuals only, but to communities, and numbers of
them scattered over a largely extended continent.

SUCH is the "good news" lately brought us from the other side the great
waters. No news handed to us from Great Britain, ever gave us a quicker sense,
or higher degree, of pleasure. It rapidly spread through the Colonies, and, as
it passed along, opened in all hearts the springs of joy. The emotion of a soul
just famished with thirst, upon taking down a full draught of cold water, is
but a faint emblem of the superior gladness with which we were universally
filled upon this great occasion. That was the language of our mouths,
signifying the pleasurable state of our minds, "as cold waters to a thirsty
soul; so is this good news from a far country."

WHAT I have in view is, to take occasion from these words to call your
attention to some of the important articles contained in the good news we have
heard, which so powerfully fit it to excite a pungent sense of pleasure in the
breasts of all that inhabit these American lands. The way will then be prepared
to point out to you the wisest and best use we can make of these glad-tidings
"from a far country."

THE first article in this "good news," obviously presenting itself to
consideration, is the kind and righteous regard the supreme authority in
England, to which we inviolably owe submission, has paid to the "commercial
good" of the Nation at home, and its dependant Provinces and Islands. One of
the expressly assigned reasons for the REPEAL of the Stamp Act, is declared in
these words, "Whereas the continuance of said act -- may be productive of
consequences greatly detrimental to the commercial interests of these Kingdoms,
may it therefore please" --. The English Colonies and Islands are certainly
included in the words, "these Kingdoms;" for they are as truly parts of them as
either Scotland, Ireland, or even England itself. It was therefore with a
professed view to the commercial good, not only of the Nation at home, but of
the Plantations also abroad, that the authority of the British King and
Parliament interposed to render null and void that act, which, had it been
continued in force, might, in its consequences, have tended to the hurt of this
grand interest, inseperably connected with the welfare of both. From what more
noble source could a REPEAL of this act have proceeded? Not merely the repeal,
but that benevolent righteous regard to the public good which gave it birth, is
an important ingredient in the news that has made us glad. And wherein could
this "good news" have been better adapted to soften our hearts, sooth our
passions, and excite in us the sensations of unmingled joy? What that is
conducive to our real happiness, may we not expect from a King and Parliament,
whose regard to "the commercial interest" of the British Kingdoms has
overpowered all opposition from resentment, the display of sovereign pleasure,
or whatever other cause, and influenced them to give up, even a CROWN-REVENUE
for the sake of a greater national good? With what confidence may we rely upon
such a supreme legislature for the redress of all grievances, especially in the
article of trade, and the devising every wise and fit method to put and keep it
in a flourishing state? Should any thing, in time to come, unhappily be brought
into event, detrimental in its operation to the commerce between the
Mother Country, and these Colonies, through mis-representations from "lovers of
themselves more than lovers" of their King and Country, may we not encourage
ourselves to hope, that the like generous public spirit that has relieved us
now, will again interpose itself on our behalf? Happy are we in being under the
government of a King and Parliament, who can REPEAL, as well as enact a law,
upon a view of it as tending to the public happiness! How preferable is our
condition to their's, who have nothing to expect but from the arbitrary will of
those, to whom they are slaves, rather than subjects?

ANOTHER thing, giving us singular pleasure, contained in this "good news" is,
the total removal of a grievous burden we must have sunk under, had it been
continued. Had the real state of the Colonies been as well known at home as it
is here, it is not easily supposeable, any there would have thought the tax,
imposed on us by the STAMP ACT, was sutably adjusted to our circumstances and
abilities. There is scarce a man in any of the Colonies, certainly there is not
in the New England ones, that would be deemed worthy of the name of a rich man
in Great Britain. There may be here and there a rare instance of one that may
have acquired twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty thousand pounds sterling; and
this is the most that can be made of what they may be thought worth: But for
the rest, they are, generally speaking, in a low condition, or, at best, not
greatly rising above it; though in different degrees, variously placing them in
the enjoyment of the necessaries and comforts of life. And such it might
naturally be expected would be the true state of the Colonists; as the lands
they possess in this NEW COUNTRY could not have been subdued and fitted for
profitable use, but by labor too expensive to allow of their being, at present,
much increased in wealth. This labor indeed may properly be considered as a
natural tax, which, though it has made way for an astonishing increase of
subjects to the British Empire, greatly adding to its dignity and strength, has
yet been the occasion of keeping us poor and low. -- It ought also to be
remembered, the occasions, in a NEW COUNTRY, for the grant or purchase of
property, with the obligations arising therefrom, and in instances of
comparatively small value, are unavoidably more numerous than in those that
have been long settled. The occasions also for recourse to the law are, in like
manner, vastly multiplied: For which reason, the same tax by stamped-paper
would take vastly more in proportion from the people here, than in England. And
what would have rendered this duty the more hard and severe is, that it must
have been paid in addition to the Government-tax here, which was, I have good
reason to think, more heavy on us in the late war, and is so still on account
of the great debt then contracted, at least in this province, in proportion to
our numbers and abilities, than that which, in every way, was laid on the
people either of Scotland, Ireland, or England. I have been assured by a
Gentleman of reputation and fortune, in this Town, that, in the late time of
war, he sent one of his rate-bills to a correspondent of note in London, for
his judgment upon it; and had this answer in return from his friend, "that he
did not believe there was a man in all England, who paid so much, in
proportion, toward the support of the Government." It will render the above
account the more easily credible, if I inform the reader, that I have lately
and purposely conversed with one of the ASSESSORS of this Town, who has been
annually chosen by them into this office for a great number of years, for which
reason he may be thought a person of integrity, and one that may be depended
on; and he declares to me, that the assessment upon this Town, particularly in
one of the years when the tax on account of the war was great, was as follows:
On personal estate, thirteen shillings and four pence on the pound, that is to
say, if a man's income from money at interest, or in any other way, was sixty
pounds per annum, he was assessed sixty times thirteen shillings and four
pence, and in this proportion whether the sum was more or less: On real estate,
the assessment was at the rate of six years income, that is to say, if a man's
house or land was valued at two hundred pounds per annum income, this two
hundred pounds was multiplied by six, amounting to twelve hundred pounds, and
the interest of this twelve hundred pounds, that is, seventy two pounds was the
sum he was obliged to pay. Besides this, the rate upon every man's pole, and
the poles of all the males in his house upwards of sixteen years of age, was
about nineteen shillings lawful money, which is only one quarter part short of
sterling. Over and above all this, they paid their part of an excise that was
laid upon Tea, Coffee, Rum and Wine, amounting to a very considerable sum.

How it was in the other Provinces, or in the other Towns of this, I know not;
but it may be relied on as fact, that this was the tax levied upon the Town of
Boston. And it has been great ever since, though not so enormously so as at that
time. Every one may now judge, whether we had not abundant reason for mournful
complaint, when, in addition to the vast sums (considering our numbers and
abilities) we were obliged to pay, we were loaded with the STAMP-DUTY; which
would, in a few years, have taken away all our money, and rendered us
absolutely incapable, either of supporting the Government here, or of carrying
on any sort of commerce, unless by an exchange of commodities


This if mentioned cursorily, was never, that I remember enlarged upon, and set
in a striking light, in any of the papers wrote in the late times, as it might
easily have been done, and to good purpose -- Besides all which, it is
undoubtedly true, that the circulating money in all the Colonies would not have
been sufficient to have paid the Stamp-duty only for two years; and an
effectual bar was put in the way of the introduction of more, by the restraints
that were laid upon our trade in those instances wherein it might, in some
measure, have been procured.

IT was this grievance that occasioned the bitter complaint all over these
lands, "we are denied straw, and yet the full tale of bricks is required of
us!" Or, as it was otherwise uttered, We must soon be obliged "to borrow money
for the King's tribute, and that upon our lands. Yet now our flesh is as the
flesh of our brethren, our children as their children: And lo! We must bring
into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants." We should have been
stupid, had not a spirit been excited in us to apply, in all reasonable ways,
for the removal of so insupportable a burden. And such an union in spirit was
never before seen in the Colonies: Nor was there ever such universal joy as
upon the news of our deliverance from that which might have proved a yoke, the
most grievous that was ever laid upon our necks. It affected in all hearts the
lively perceptions of pleasure, filling our mouths with laughter. No man
appeared without a smile in his countenance. No one met his friend, but he bid
him joy. That was our united song of praise, "Thou have turned for us our
mourning into dancing; thou have put off our sackcloth, and girded us with
gladness. -- Our glory [our tongue] shall sing praise to thee, and not be
silent: O Lord our God! we will give thanks to thee forever."

ANOTHER thing, in this "news," making it "good," is the hopeful prospect it
gives us of being continued in the enjoyment of certain liberties and
privileges, valued by us next to life itself. Such are those of being "tried by
our equals," and of "making grants for the support of government of that which
is our own, either in person, or by representatives we have chosen for the
purpose." Whether the Colonists were invested with a RIGHT to these liberties
and privileges that ought not be wrested from them, or whether they were not,
it is the truth of fact, that they really thought they were: All of them as
natural heirs to it, by being born subjects to the British Crown; and some of
them, by additional charter-grants, the legality of which, instead of being
contested, have all along, from the days of our fathers, been assented to, and
allowed of, by the supreme authority at home. And they imagined, whether
justly, or not. I dispute not, that their RIGHT to the free and full enjoyment
of these privileges was their righteous due in consequence of what they, and
their forefathers, had done and suffered in subduing and defending these
American lands, not only for their own support, but to add extent, strength and
glory to the British-Crown. And as it had been early and deeply impressed on
their minds, that their Charter-privileges were RIGHTS that had been dearly
paid for by a vast expense of blood, treasure and labor, without which this
continent must have still remained in a wilderness-state, and the property of
savages only; it could not but strongly put in motion their passion of grief,
when they were laid under a Parliamentary restraint as to the exercise of that
liberty, they esteemed their greatest glory. It was eminently this that filled
their minds with jealousy, and at length a settled fear, lest they should
gradually be brought into a state of the most abject slavery. This it was that
gave rise to the cry, which became general thoughout the Colonies, "we shall be
made to serve as bond-servants. -- Our lives will be bitter with hard bondage."
Nor were the Jews more pleased with the royal provision in their day, which,
under God, delivered them from their bondage in Egypt, than were the Colonists
with the REPEAL of that act which had so greatly alarmed their fears, and
troubled their hearts. It was to them as "life from the dead." They "rejoiced
and were glad." And it gave strength and vigor to their joy, while they looked
upon this REPEAL, not merely as taking off the grievous restraint that had been
laid upon their liberties and privileges, but as containing in it an intention
of continued indulgence in the free exercise of them. It Is in this view of it,
that they exult as those who are "glad in heart;" esteeming themselves happy
beyond almost any people now living on the face of the earth. May they ever be
this happy people! And ever have "God for their Lord!"

THIS news is yet further welcome to us, as it has made way for the return of
our love, in all its genuine exercises, toward those on the other side of the
atlantic, who, in common with ourselves, profess subjection to the same most
gracious Sovereign. The affectionate regard of the American inhabitants for
their Mother Country, was never exceeded by any Colonists, in any part, or age
of the world. We esteemed ourselves parts of one whole, members of the same
collective body. What affected the people of England, affected us. We partook
of their joys and sorrows; "rejoicing when they rejoiced, and weeping when they
wept." Adverse things in the conduct of providence toward them alarmed our
fears, and gave us pain; while prosperous events dilated our hearts, and in
proportion to their number and greatness. This tender sympathy with our
brethren at home, it is acknowledged, began to languish from the commencement
of a late Parliamentary act. There arose hereupon a general suspicion, whether
they esteemed us brethren, and treated us with that kindness we might justly
expect from them. This jealousy, working in our breasts, cooled the fervor of
our love; and had that act been continued in force, it might have gradually
brought on an alienation of heart, that would have been greatly detrimental to
them, as it would also have been to ourselves. -- But the REPEAL, of which we
have had authentic accounts, has opened the channels for a full flow of our
former affection toward our brethren in Great Britain. Unhappy jealousies,
uncomfortable surmisings and heart-burnings are now removed; and we perceive
the motion of an affection for the Country from whence our forefathers came,
which would influence us to the most vigorous exertions, as we might be called,
to promote their welfare, looking upon it, in a sense, our own. We again feel
with them, and for them; and are happy or unhappy, as they are either in
prosperous or adverse circumstances. We can, and do, with all sincerity, "pray
for the peace of Great Britain, and that they may prosper that love her,"
adopting those words of the devout Psalmist, "Peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces. For our brethren's sake we will say, peace be
within thee."

IN fine, this news is refreshing to us "as cold waters to a thirsty soul," as
it has effected an alteration in the state of things among us unspeakably to
our advantage. There is no way in which we can so strikingly be made sensible
of this, as by contrasting the state we were lately in, and the much worse one
we should soon have been in had the Stamp Act been enforced, with that happy
one we are put into by its repeal.

UPON its being made certain to the Colonies, that the Stamp Act had passed
both houses of Parliament, and received the King's fiat, a general spirit of
uneasiness at once took place, which, gradually increasing, soon discovered
itself, by the wiser sons of liberty, in laudable endeavors to obtain relief;
though, by others, in murmurings and complaints, in anger and clamor, in
bitterness, wrath and strife; and by some evil-minded persons, taking occasion
herefor from the general ferment of men's minds, in those violent outrages
upon the property of others, which, by being represented in an undue light, may
have reflected dishonor upon a country which has an abhorrence of such
injurious conduct. The Colonies were never before in a state of such
discontent, anxiety and perplexing solicitude: Some despairing of a redress,
some hoping for it, and all fearing what would be the event. And had it been
the determination of the King and Parliament to have carried the STAMP ACT into
effect by ships of war, and an embarkation of troops, their condition, however
unhappy before, would have been inconceivably more so. They must either have
submited to what they thought an insupportable burden, and have parted with
their property without any will of their own, or have stood upon their defense;
in either of which cases, their situation must have been deplorably sad. So far
as I am able to judge from that firmness of mind and resolution of spirit,
which appeared among all sorts of persons, as grounded upon this principle
deeply rooted in their minds, that they had a CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT The
Colonists may reasonably be excused for their mistake (if it was one) in
thinking, that they were vested with this CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT, as it was the
opinion of Lord CAMDEN, declared in the house of Lords, and of Mr. PIT,
signified in the house of Commons, that the STAMP ACT WAS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
This is said upon the authority of the public prints.
to grant their own moneys, and to be tried by their peers, it is more probable,
they would not have submited, unless they had been obliged to it by superior
power. Not that they had a thought in their hearts, as may have been
represented, of being an independent people. They esteemed it both their
happiness and their glory to be, in common with the inhabitants of England,
Scotland and Ireland, the subjects of King GEORGE the third, whom they heartily
love and honor, and in defense of whose Person and Crown they would cheerfully
expend their treasure, and lose even their blood. But it was a sentiment they
had imbibed, that they should be wanting neither in loyalty to their King, or a
due regard to the British-Parliament, if they should defend those rights which
they imagined were unalienable, upon the foot of justice, by any power on
earth. The great Mr. PIT would not have said, in a certain august Assembly,
speaking of the Americans, "I rejoice that they have resisted," if, in his
judgment, they might not, in consistency with their duty to government, have
made a stand against the STAMP ACT. It Is certainly true, there may be such
exercise of power, and in instances of such a nature, as to render
non-submission warrantable upon the foot of reason and righteousness: Otherwise
it will be difficult, if possible, to justify the REVOLUTION, and that
ESTABLISHMENT in consequence of it, upon which his present Majesty sits upon
the British throne. That non-submission would have been justifiable, had it
been determined that the STAMP ACT should be enforced, I presume not to say:
Though none, I believe, who are the friends of liberty, will deny, that it
would have been justifiable, should it be first supposed, that THIS ACT
essentially broke in upon our CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS as Englishmen. Whether it
did, or not, is a question it would be impertinent in me to meddle with. It is
the truth of fact, that the Colonists generally and really thought it did; and
that it might be opposed without their incurring the guilt of disloyalty or
rebellion; and they were led into this way of thinking upon what they imagined
were the principles which, in their operation, gave KING WILLIAM, and QUEEN
MARY, of blessed memory, the Crown of England.
And had they, upon this principle, whether ill or well founded, stood upon
their defense, what must have been the effect? There would have been opened, on
this American continent, a most doleful scene of outrage, violence, desolation,
slaughter, and, in a word, all those terrible evils that may be expected as the
attendants on a state of civil war. No language can describe the distresses, in
all their various kinds and degrees, which would have made us miserable. God
only knows how long they might have continued, and whether they would have
ended in any thing short of our total ruin. Nor would the Mother Country,
whatever some might imagine, have been untouched with what was doing in the
Colonies. Those millions that were due from this continent to Great Britain,
could not have been paid; -- a stop, a total stop, would have been put to the
importation of those manufactures which are the support of thousands at home,
often repeated. And would the British merchants, and manufacturers, have set
easy in such a state of things? There would, it may be, have been as much
clamor, wrath and strife in the very bowels of the nation, as in these distant
lands: Nor could our destruction have been unconnected with consequences at
home infinitely to be dreaded. --.

But the longed for REPEAL has scattered our fears, removed our difficulties,
enlivened our hearts, and laid the foundation for future prosperity, equal to
the adverse state we should have been in, had the Act been continued and
enforced.

WE may now be easy in our minds, contented with our condition. We may be at
peace and quiet among ourselves, every one minding his own business. All ground
of complaint, that we are "sold for bondmen and bond-women," is removed away;
and instead of being slaves to those who treat us with rigor, we are indulged
the full exercise of those liberties which have been transmitted to us, as the
richest inheritance, from our forefathers. We have now greater reason than ever
to love, honor and obey our gracious King, and pay all becoming reverence and
respect to his two houses of Parliament; and may with entire confidence, rely
on their wisdom, lenity, kindness, and power, to promote our welfare. We have
now, in a word, nothing to "make us afraid," but may "sit every man under his
vine, and under his fig tree," in the full enjoyment of the many good things we
are favored with in the providence of God.

UPON such a change in the state of our circumstances, we should be lost to all
sense of duty and gratitude, and act as though we had no understanding, if our
hearts did not expand with joy. And, in truth, the danger is, lest we should
exceed in the expressions of it. It may be said of these Colonies, as of the
Jewish people, upon the repeal of the decree of Ahasuerus, which devoted them
to destruction, they "had light and gladness, joy and honor; and in every
province, and in every city, whithersoever the King's commandment and his
decree came, they had joy and gladness, a feast day, and a good day;" saying
within themselves, "the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad." May the remembrance of this MEMORABLE REPEAL be preserved, and handed
down to all future generations, in every province, in every city, and in every
family, so as never to be forgotten!

WE now proceed, the way being thus prepared for it, to point out the proper
use we should make of this "good news from a far country," which is grateful to
us "as cold waters to a thirsty soul."

WE have already had our rejoicings, in the civil sense, upon the
"glad-tidings" from our Mother Country; and it is to our honor, that they were
carried on so universally within the bounds of a decent warrantable regularity.
There was never, among us, such a collection of all sorts of people upon any
public occasion: Nor were the methods in which they signified their joy ever so
beautifully varied and multiplied, and yet, none had reason to complain of
disorderly conduct. The show was seasonably ended, and we had afterward a
perfectly quiet night. There has indeed been no public disturbance since the
outrage at Lieut. Governor HUTCHINSON'S house. That was so detested by Town and
Country, and such a spirit at once so generally stirred up, particularly among
THE PEOPLE, to oppose such villainous conduct, as has preserved us ever since
in a state of as great freedom from mobish actions, as has been known in the
Country. Our friends at home, it should seem, have entertained fears, lest,
upon the lenity and condescension of the King and Parliament, we should prove
ourselves a factious turbulent people; and our enemies hope we shall. But it is
not easy to conceive on what the fears of the one, or the hopes of the other,
should be grounded, unless they have received injurious representations of the
spirit that lately prevailed in this, as well as the other Colonies; which was
not a spirit to raise needless disturbances, or to commit outrages upon the
persons or property of any; though some of those sons of wickedness, which are
to be found in all places, It has been said, and in the public prints, that
there have been mobish riotous doings in London, and other parts of England, at
one time and another; and that great men, at such times, men far superior to
any among us in dignity and power, suffered in their persons, by insulting
threatening words and actions; and in their property. by the injurious violence
that destroyed their substance. Would it be just to characterise London, much
more England itself, from the conduct of these disturbers of it is peace? it
would as reasonably, as certainly, be esteemed a vile reproach, should they, on
this account, be represented as, in general, a turbulent seditious people,
disposed to throw off their subjection to government, and bring things into a
state of anarchy and confusion. If this has been the representation that has
been made of the Colonists, on account of what any may have suffered in their
persons, or effects, by the ungoverned disorderly behavior of some mobishly
disposed persons, it is really nothing better than a base slander; and no more
applicable to them, than to the people of England. The Colonists in general,
the inhabitants of this Province in particular, are as great enemies to all
irregular turbulent procedings, and as good friends to Government, and as
peaceable loyal Subjects, as any that call King GEORGE the IIId, their rightful
and lawful Sovereign.
might take occasion from the stand that was made for liberty to commit
violence with an high hand. There has not been, since the REPEAL the appearance
of a spirit tending to public disorder; nor is there any danger such a spirit
should be encouraged, or discovered, unless the people should be needlessly and
unreasonably irritated by those, who, to serve themselves, might be willing we
should gratify such as are our enemies, and make those so who have been our
good friends. -- But to leave this digression,

THOUGH our civil joy has been expressed in a decent orderly way, it would be
but a poor pitiful thing, should we rest here, and not make our religious
grateful acknowledgments to the supreme Ruler of the world, to whose super
intending providence it is principally to be ascribed, that we have had "given
us so great deliverance." Whatever were the means or instruments in order to
this, that glorious being, whose throne is in the heavens, and whose kingdom
rules over all, had the chief hand herein. He sat at the helm, and so governed
all things relative to it, as to bring it to this happy issue. It was under his
alwise overruling influence, that a SPIRIT was raised in all the Colonies
nobly to assert their freedom as men, and English-born subjects; a spirit,
which, in the course of it is operation, was highly serviceable, not by any
irregularities it might be the occasion of, [in this imperfect state, they will
more or less mix themselves with every thing great and good] but by it is manly
efforts, setting forth the reasons they had for complaint in a fair, just, and
strongly convincing light; hereby awakening the attention of Great Britain,
opening the eyes of the merchants and manufacturers there, and engaging them,
for their own interest as well as that of America to exert themselves in all
reasonable ways to help us: It was under the same all governing influence, that
the late ministry, full of projections tending to the hurt of these Colonies,
was so seasonably changed into the present patriotic one, which is happily
disposed, in all the methods of wisdom, to promote our welfare:

It was under the same influence still, that so many friends of eminent
character were raised up, and spirited to appear advocates on our behalf, and
plead our cause with irresistible force: It was under this same influence also,
that the heart of our King, and the British Parliament, were so turned in favor
to us as to reverse that decree, which, had it been established, would have
thrown this whole continent, if not the nation itself, into a state of the
utmost confusion: In short, it was ultimately owing to this influence of the
God of heaven, that the thoughts, the views, the purposes, the speeches, the
writings, and the whole conduct of all who were engaged in this great affair,
were so overruled to bring into effect the desired happy event.

AND shall we not make all due acknowledgments to the great Sovereign of the
world on this joyful occasion? Let us, my brethren, take care that our hearts
be sutably touched with a sense of the bonds we are under to the Lord of the
universe; and let us express the joy and gratitude of our hearts by greatly
praising him for the greatness of his goodness, in thus scattering our fears,
removing away our burdens, and continuing us in the enjoyment of our most
highly valued liberties and privileges. And let us not only praise him with our
lips, rendering thanks to his holy name; but let us honor him by a well ordered
conversation. "Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice." And "to love the Lord
our God with all our heart, and mind and strength, and to love our neighbor as
ourselves, is better than whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices." Actions speak
much louder than words. In vain shall we pretend, that we are joyful in God, or
thankful to him, if it is not our endeavor, as we have been taught by the grace
of God, which has appeared to us by Jesus Christ, to "deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in the world." doing
all things whatsoever it has pleased God to command us.

AND as he has particularly enjoined it on us to be "subject to the higher
powers, ordained by him to be his ministers for good," we cannot, upon this
occasion, more properly express our gratitude to him, than by approving
ourselves dutiful and loyal to the gracious King, whom he has placed over us.
Not that we can be justly taxed with the want of love or subjection to the
British Throne. We may have been abused by false and injurious representations
upon this head: But King GEORGE the IIId has no subjects, not within the realm
of England itself, that are more strongly attached to his person and family,
that bear a more sincere and ardent affection toward him, or that would exert
themselves with more life and spirit in defense of his crown and dignity. --
But it may notwithstanding. at this time, be seasonable to stir up your minds,
by putting you in remembrance of your duty to "pray for Kings, and all that are
in subordinate authority under them," and to "honor and obey them in the Lord."
And, if we should take occasion from the great lenity and condescending
goodness of those, who are supreme in authority over us not to "despise
government." not to "speak evil of dignities," not to go into any method of
unseemly disorderly conduct; but to "lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty," every man moving in his own proper sphere, and taking
due care to "render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar and to God the
things that are God's;" -- we should honor our selves, answer the expectations
of those who have dealt thus favorably with us; and, what is more, we should
express a becoming regard to the governing-pleasure of almighty God.

It would also be a suitable return of gratitude to God, if we entertained in
our minds, and were ready to express in all proper ways, a just sense of the
obligations we are under to those Patrons of liberty and righteousness, who
were the instruments employed by him and whose wise and powerful endeavors,
under his blessing, were effectual to promote at once the interest of the
nation at home, and of these distant Colonies. Their names will, I hope, be
ever dear to us, and handed down as such to the latest posterity. That
illustrious name, in special, PIT, will, I trust, be never mentioned but with
honor, as the SAVIOR, under God, and the two Kings who made him their prime
minister, both of the nation and these Colonies, not only from the power of
France, but, from that which is much worse, a state of slavery under the
appellation of Englishmen. May his memory be blessed! May his great services
for his King, the nation, and these Colonies, be had in everlasting remembrance!

To conclude, Let us be ambitious to make it evident, by the manner of our
conduct, that we are good subjects and good christians: So shall we, in the
best way, express the grateful sense we have of our obligations to that
glorious being, to the wisdom and goodness of whose presidency over all human
affairs it is principally owing, that the great object of our fear, and anxious
concern, has been so happily removed. And may it ever be our care, to behave
toward him, so as that he may appear on our behalf in every time of danger and
difficulty, guard us against evil, and continue to us all our enjoyments both
civil and religious! And may they be transmited from us to our children, and to
children's children, as long as the sun and the moon shall endure.

AMEN.

