AN INQUIRY INTO THE RIGHTS of the BRITISH Colonies, Intended as an Answer to
The Regulations lately made concerning the Colonies, and the Taxes imposed upon
them considered. In a Letter addressed to the Author of that Pamphlet.

By RICHARD BLAND, of VIRGINIA.

Dedit omnibus Deus pro virili portione sapientiam, ut et inaudita investigare
possent et audita perpendere. LACTANTIUS. WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by ALEXANDER
PURDIE, and Co. MDCCLXVI.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE RIGHTS of the BRITISH Colonies.
SIR,
I TAKE the Liberty to address you, as the Author of The Regulations lately
made concerning the Colonies, and the Taxes imposed upon them considered. It is
not to the Man, whoever you are, that I address myself; but it is to the Author
of a Pamphlet which, according to the Light I view it in, endeavors to fix
Shackles upon the American Colonies: Shackles which, however nicely polished,
can by no Means sit easy upon Men who have just Sentiments of their own Rights
and Liberties.

You have indeed brought this Trouble upon yourself, for you say that many
Steps have been lately taken by the Ministry to cement and perfect the
necessary Connection between the Colonies and the Mother Kingdom, which every
Man who is sincerely interested in what is interesting to his Country will
anxiously consider the Propriety of, will inquire into the Information, and
canvas the Principles upon which they have been adopted; and will be ready to
applaud what has been well done, condemn what has been done amiss, and suggest
any Emendations, Improvements, or Additions, which may be within his Knowledge,
and occur to his Reflection.

Encouraged therefore by so candid an Invitation, I have undertaken to examine,
with an honest Plainness and Freedom, whether the Ministry, by imposing Taxes
upon the Colonies by Authority of Parliament, have pursued a wise and salutary
Plan of Government, or whether they have exerted pernicious and destructive
Acts of Power.

I pretend not to concern myself with the Regulations lately made to encourage
Population in the new Acquisitions: Time can only determine whether the Reasons
upon which they have been founded are agreeable to the Maxims of Trade and
sound Policy, or not. However, I will venture to observe that if the most
powerful Inducement toward peopling those Acquisitions is to arise from the
Expectation of a Constitution to be established in them similar to the other
Royal Governments in America, it must be a strong Circumstance, in my Opinion,
against their being settled by Englishmen, or even by Foreigners, who do not
live under the most despotick Government; since, upon your Principles of Colony
Government, such a Constitution will not be worth their Acceptance.

The Question is whether the Colonies are represented in the British Parliament
or not? You affirm it to be an indubitable Fact that they are represented, and
from thence you infer a Right in the Parliament to impose Taxes of every Kind
upon them. You do not insist upon the Power, but upon the Right of Parliament
to impose Taxes upon the Colonies. This is certainly a very proper Distinction,
as Right and Power have very different Meanings, and convey very different
Ideas: For had you told us that the Parliament of Great Britain have Power, by
the Fleets and Armies of the Kingdom, to impose Taxes and to raise
Contributions upon the Colonies, I should not have presumed to dispute the
Point with you; but as you insist upon the Right only, I must beg Leave to
differ from you in Opinion, and shall give my Reasons for it.

But I must first recapitulate your Arguments in Support of this Right in the
Parliament. You say the Inhabitants of the Colonies do not indeed choose
Members of Parliament, neither are nine Tenths of the People of Britain
Electors; for the Right of Election is annexed to certain Species of Property,
to peculiar Franchises, and to Inhabitancy in some particular Places. But these
Descriptions comprehend only a very small Part of the Lands, the Property and
People of Britain; all Copyhold, all Lease-Hold Estates under the Crown, under
the Church, or under private Persons, though for Terms ever so long; all landed
Property in short that is not Freehold, and all monied Property whatsoever, are
excluded. The Possessors of these have no Votes in the Election of Members of
Parliament; Women and Persons under Age, be their Property ever so large, and
all of it Freehold, have none: The Merchants of London, a numerous and
respectable Body of Men, whose Opulence exceeds all that America can collect;
the Proprietors of that vast Accumulation of Wealth, the Public Funds; the
Inhabitants of Leeds, of Halifax, of Birmingham, and of Manchester, Towns that
are each of them larger than the largest in the Plantations; many of lesser
Note, that are incorporated; and that great Corporation the East India Company,
whose Rights over the Countries they possess fall very little short of
Sovereignty, and whose Trade and whose Fleets are sufficient to constitute them
a maritime Power, are all in the same Circumstances: And yet are they not
represented in Parliament? Is their vast Property subject to Taxation without
their Consent? Are they all arbitrarily bound by Laws to which they have not
agreed? The Colonies are exactly in the same Situation; all British Subjects
are really in the same, none are actually, all are virtually, represented in
Parliament: For every Member of Parliament sits in the House not as a
Representative of his own Constituents, but as one of that august Assembly by
which all the Commons of Great Britain are represented.

This is the Sum of what you advance, in all the Pomp of Parliamentary
Declamation, to prove that the Colonies are represented in Parliament, and
therefore subject to their Taxation; but notwithstanding this Way of reasoning,
I cannot comprehend how Men who are excluded from voting at the Election of
Members of Parliament can be represented in that Assembly, or how those who are
elected do not sit in the House as Representatives of their Constituents. These
Assertions appear to me not only paradoxical, but contrary to the fundamental
Principles of the English Constitution.

To illustrate this important Disquisition, I conceive we must recur to the
civil Constitution of England, and from thence deduce and ascertain the Rights
and Privileges of the People at the first Establishment of the Government, and
discover the Alterations that have been made in them from Time to Time; and it
is from the Laws of the Kingdom, founded upon the Principles of the Law of
Nature, that we are to show the Obligation every Member of the State is under
to pay Obedience to its Institutions. From these Principles I shall endeavor
to prove that the Inhabitants of Britain, who have no Vote in the Election of
Members of Parliament, are not represented in that Assembly, and yet that they
owe Obedience to the Laws of Parliament; which, as to them, are constitutional,
and not arbitrary. As to the Colonies, I shall consider them afterward.

Now it is a Fact, as certain as History can make it, that the present civil
Constitution of England derives its Original from those Saxons who, coming over
to the Assistance of the Britons in the Time of their King Vortigern, made
themselves Masters of the Kingdom, and established a Form of Government in it
similar to that they had been accustomed to live under in their native Country
Petyt's Rights of the Com. Brady's Comp. Hist. Rapin. Squire's Inquiry.
; as similar, at least, as the Difference of their Situation and Circumstances
would permit. This Government, like that from whence they came, was founded
upon Principles of the most perfect Liberty: The conquered Lands were divided
among the Individuals in Proportion to the Rank they held in the Nation Caesar
de Bell. Gall. Tacitus de Germ. C. 28. Temple's Misc.
; and every Freeman, that is, every Freeholder, was a Member of their
Wittinagemot, or Parliament Tacitus de Germ. C. 11.
. The other Part of the Nation, or the Non-Proprietors of Land, were of little
Estimation Ibid. C. 25.
. They, as in Germany, were either Slaves, mere Hewers of Wood and Drawers of
Water, or Freedmen; who, being of foreign Extraction, had been manumitted by
their Masters, and were excluded from the high Privilege of having a Share in
the Administration of the Commonwealth, unless they became Proprietors of Land
(which they might obtain by Purchase or Donation) and in that Case they had a
Right to sit with the Freemen, in the Parliament or sovereign Legislature of
the State.

How long this Right of being personally present in the Parliament continued,
or when the Custom of sending Representatives to this great Council of the
Nation, was first introduced, cannot be determined with Precision; but let the
Custom of Representation be introduced when it will, it is certain that every
Freeman, or, which was the same Thing in the Eye of the Constitution, every
Freeholder 2 Inst. 27. 4 Inst. 2.
, had a Right to vote at the Election of Members of Parliament, and therefore
might be said, with great Propriety, to be present in that Assembly, either in
his own Person or by Representation. This Right of Election in the Freeholders
is evident from the Statute 1st Hen. 5. Chapter 1st, which limits the Right of
Election to those Freeholders only who are resident in the Counties the Day of
the Date of the Writ of Election; but yet every resident Freeholder
indiscriminately, let his Freehold be ever so small, had a Right to vote at the
Election of Knights for his County, so that they were actually represented: And
this Right of Election continued until it was taken away by the Statute 8th
Hen. 6. Chapter 7. from those Freeholders who had not a clear Freehold Estate of
forty Shillings by the Year at the least.

Now this Statute was deprivative of the Right of those Freeholders who came
within the Description of it; but of what did it deprive them, if they were
represented notwithstanding their Right of Election was taken from them? The
mere Act of voting was nothing, of no Value, if they were represented as
constitutionally without it as with it: But when by the fundamental Principles
of the Constitution they were to be considered as Members of the Legislature,
and as such had a Right to be present in Person, or to send their Procurators
or Attorneys, and by them to give their Suffrage in the supreme Council of the
Nation, this Statute deprived them of an essential Right; a Right without
which, by the ancient Constitution of the State, all other Liberties were but a
Species of Bondage.

As these Freeholders then were deprived of their Rights to substitute
Delegates to Parliament, they could not be represented, but were placed in the
same Condition with the Non-Proprietors of Land, who were excluded by the
original Constitution from having any Share in the Legislature, but who,
notwithstanding such Exclusion, are bound to pay Obedience to the Laws of
Parliament, even if they should consist of nine Tenths of the People of
Britain; but then the Obligation of these Laws does not arise from their being
virtually represented in Parliament, but from a quite different Reason.

Men in a State of Nature are absolutely free and independent of one another as
to sovereign Jurisdiction Vattel's Law of Nature. Lock on Civil Govern.
Wollaston's Rel. of Not.
, but when they enter into a Society, and by their own Consent become Members
of it, they must submit to the Laws of the Society according to which they
agree to be governed; for it is evident, by the very Act of Association, that
each Member subjects himself to the Authority of that Body in whom, by common
Consent, the legislative Power of the State is placed: But though they must
submit to the Laws, so long as they remain Members of the Society, yet they
retain so much of their natural Freedom as to have a Right to retire from the
Society, to renounce the Benefits of it, to enter into another Society, and to
settle in another Country; for their Engagements to the Society, and their
Submission to the public Authority of the State, do not oblige them to
continue in it longer than they find it will conduce to their Happiness, which
they have a natural Right to promote. This natural Right remains with every
Man, and he cannot justly be deprived of it by any civil Authority. Every
Person therefore who is denied his Share in the Legislature of the State to
which he had an original Right, and every Person who from his particular
Circumstances is excluded from this great Privilege, and refuses to exercise
his natural Right of quitting the Country, but remains in it, and continues to
exercise the Rights of a Citizen in all other Respects, must be subject to the
Laws which by these Acts he implicitly, or to use your own Phrase, virtually
consents to: For Men may subject themselves to Laws, by consenting to them
implicitly; that is, by conforming to them, by adhering to the Society, and
accepting the Benefits of its Constitution, as well, as explicitly and
directly, in their own Persons, or by their Representatives substituted in
their Room Wollaston's Rel. of Not.
. Thus, if a Man whose Property does not entitle him to be an Elector of
Members of Parliament, and therefore cannot be represented, or have any Share
in the Legislature, inherits or takes any Thing by the Laws of the Country to
which he has no indubitable Right in Nature, or which, if he has a Right to it,
he cannot tell how to get or keep without the Aid of the Laws and the Advantage
of Society, then, when he takes this Inheritance, or whatever it is, with it he
takes and owns the Laws that gave it him. And since the Security he has from
the Laws of the Country, in Respect of his Person and Rights, is the Equivalent
for his Submission to them, he cannot accept that Security without being
obliged, in Equity, to pay this Submission: Nay his very continuing in the
Country shows that he either likes the Constitution, or likes it better,
notwithstanding the Alteration made in it to his Disadvantage, than any other;
or at least thinks it better, in his Circumstances, to conform to it, than to
seek any other; that is, he is content to be comprehended in it.

From hence it is evident that the Obligation of the Laws of Parliament upon
the People of Britain who have no Right to be Electors does not arise from
their being virtually represented, but from a quite different Principle; a
Principle of the Law of Nature, true, certain, and universal, applicable to
every Sort of Government, and not contrary to the common Understandings of
Mankind.

If what you say is a real Fact, that nine Tenths of the People of Britain are
deprived of the high Privilege of being Electors, it shows a great Defect in
the present Constitution, which has departed so much from its original Purity;
but never can prove that those People are even virtually represented in
Parliament* And here give me Leave to observe that it would be a Work worthy of
the best patriotick Spirits in the Nation to effectuate an Alteration in this
putrid Part of the Constitution; and, by restoring it to its pristine
Perfection, prevent any Order or Rank of the Subjects from imposing upon or
binding the rest without their Consent. But, I fear, the Gangrene has taken ^oo
deep Hold to be eradicated in these Days of Venality.

But if those People of Britain who are excluded from being Electors are not
represented in Parliament, the Conclusion is much stronger against the People
of the Colonies being represented; who are considered by the British Government
itself, in every Instance of Parliamentary Legislation, as a distinct People.
It has been determined by the Lords of the Privy Council that Acts of
Parliament made in England without naming the foreign Plantations will not bind
them 2 Pur. Williams.
. Now what can be the Reason of this Determination, but that the Lords of the
Privy Council are of Opinion the Colonies are a distinct People from the
Inhabitants of Britain, and are not represented in Parliament. If, as you
contend, the Colonies are exactly in the same Situation with the Subjects in
Britain, the Laws will in every Instance be equally binding upon them, as upon
those Subjects, unless you can discover two Species of virtual Representation;
the one to respect the Subjects in Britain, and always existing in Time of
Parliament; the other to respect the Colonies, a mere Nonentity, if I may be
allowed the Term, and never existing but when the Parliament thinks proper to
produce it into Being by any particular Act in which the Colonies happen to be
named. But I must examine the Case of the Colonies more distinctly.

It is in vain to search into the civil Constitution of England for Directions
in fixing the proper Connection between the Colonies and the Mother Kingdom; I
mean what their reciprocal Duties to each other are, and what Obedience is due
from the Children to the general Parent. The planting Colonies from Britain is
but of recent Date, and nothing relative to such Plantation can be collected
from the ancient Laws of the Kingdom; neither can we receive any better
Information by extending our Inquiry into the History of the Colonies
established by the several Nations in the more early Ages of the World. All the
Colonies (except those of Georgia and Nova Scotia) formed from the English
Nation, in North America, were planted in a Manner, and under a Dependence, of
which there is not an Instance in all the Colonies of the Ancients; and
therefore, I conceive, it must afford a good Degree of Surprise to find an
English Civilian Strahan in his Preface to Domat.
giving it as his Sentiment that the English Colonies ought to be governed by
the Roman Laws, and for no better Reason than because the Spanish Colonies, as
he says, are governed by those Laws. The Romans established their Colonies in
the Midst of vanquished Nations, upon Principles which best secured their
Conquests; the Privileges granted to them were not always the same; their
Policy in the Government of their Colonies and the conquered Nations being
always directed by arbitrary Principles to the End they aimed at, the
subjecting the whole Earth to their Empire. But the Colonies in North America,
except those planted within the present Century, were founded by Englishmen;
who, becoming private Adventurers, established themselves, without any Expense
to the Nation, in this uncultivated and almost ^ninhabited Country; so that
their Case is plainly distinguishable from that of the Roman, or any other
Colonies of the ancient World.

As then we can receive no Light from the Laws of the Kingdom, or from ancient
History, to direct us in our Inquiry, we must have Recourse to the Law of
Nature, and those Rights of Mankind which flow from it.

I have observed before that when Subjects are deprived of their civil Rights,
or are dissatisfied with the Place they hold in the Community, they have a
natural Right to quit the Society of which they are Members, and to retire into
another Country. Now when Men exercise this Right, and withdraw themselves from
their Country, they recover their natural Freedom and Independence: The
Jurisdiction and Sovereignty of the State they have quitted ceases; and if they
unite, and by common Consent take Possession of a new Country, and form
themselves into a political Society, they become a sovereign State, independent
of the State from which they separated. If then the Subjects of England have a
natural Right to relinquish their Country, and by retiring from it, and
associating together, to form a new political Society and independent State,
they must have a Right, by Compact with the Sovereign of the Nation, to remove
into a new Country, and to form a civil Establishment upon the Terms of the
Compact. In such a Case, the Terms of the Compact must be obligatory and
binding upon the Parties; they must be the Magna Charta, the fundamental
Principles of Government, to this new Society; and every Infringement of them
must be wrong, and may be opposed. It will be necessary then to examine whether
any such Compact was entered into between the Sovereign and those English
Subjects who established themselves in America.

You have told us that before the first and great Act of Navigation the
Inhabitants of North America were but a few unhappy Fugitives, who had wandered
thither to enjoy their civil and religious Liberties, which they were deprived
of at Home. If this was true, it is evident, from what has been said upon the
Law of Nature, that they have a Right to a civil independent Establishment of
their own, and that Great Britain has no Right to interfere in it. But you have
been guilty of a gross Anachronism in your Chronology, and a great Error in
your Account of the first Settlement of the Colonies in North America; for it
is a notorious Fact that they were not settled by Fugitives from their native
Country, but by Men who came over voluntarily, at their own Expense, and under
Charters from the Crown, obtained for that Purpose, long before the first and
great Act of Navigation.

The first of these Charters was granted to Sir Walter Raleigh by Queen
Elizabeth under her great Seal, and was confirmed by the Parliament of England
in the Year 1684 This Charter is printed at large in Hakluyt's Voyages, P. 725,
Folio Edition, Anno 1589; and the Substance of it is in the 3d Vol. of Salmon's
Mod. Hist. P. 424.
. By this Charter the whole Country to be possessed by Sir Walter Raleigh was
granted to him, his Heirs and Assigns, in perpetual Sovereignty, in as
extensive a Manner as the Crown could grant, or had ever granted before to any
Person or Persons, with full Power of Legislation, and to establish a civil
Government in it as near as conveniently might be agreeable to the Form of the
English Government and Policy thereof. The Country was to be united to the
Realm of England in perfect LEAGUE AND AMITY, was to be within the Allegiance
of the Crown of England, and to be held by Homage, and the Payment of one Fifth
of all Gold and Silver Ore, which was reserved for all Services, Duties, and
Deman^^.

Sir Walter Raleigh, under this Charter, took Possession of North America, upon
that Part of the Continent which gave him a Right to the Tract of Country which
lies between the twenty fifth Degree of Latitude and the Gulf of St. Laurence;
but a Variety of Accidents happening in the Course of his Exertions to
establish a Colony, and perhaps being overborn by the Expense of so great a
Work, he made an Assignment to diverse Gentlemen and Merchants of London, in the
31st Year of the Queen's Reign, for continuing his Plantation in America. These
Assignees were not more successful in their Attempts than the Proprietor
himself had been; but being animated with the Expectation of mighty Advantages
from the Accomplishment of their Undertaking, they, with others, who associated
with them, obtained new Charters from King James the First, in whom all Sir
Walter Raleigh's Rights became vested upon his Attainder; containing the same
extensive Jurisdictions, Royalties, Privileges, Franchises, and Pre-eminences,
and the same Powers to establish a civil Government in the Colony, as had been
granted to Sir W. Raleigh, with an express Clause of Exemption for ever from
all Taxes or Impositions upon their Import and Export Trade.

Under these Charters the Proprietors effectually prosecuted, and happily
succeeded, in planting a Colony upon that Part of the Continent which is now
called Virginia. This Colony, after struggling through immense Difficulties,
without receiving the least Assistance from the English Government, attained to
such a Degree of Perfection that in the Year 1621 a General Assembly, or
legislative Authority, was established in the Governor, Council, and House of
Burgesses, who were elected by the Freeholders as their Representatives; and
they have continued from that Time to exercise the Power of Legislation over
the Colony.

But upon the 15th of July, 1624, King James dissolved the Company by
Proclamation, and took the Colony under his immediate Dependence; which
occasioned much Confusion, and created mighty Apprehensions in the Colony lest
they should be deprived of the Rights and Privileges granted them by the
Company, according to the Powers contained in their Charters.

To put an End to this Confusion, and to conciliate the Colony to the new
System of Government the Crown intended to establish among them, K. Charles the
First, upon the Demise of his Father, by Proclamation the 13th of May, 1625,
declared that Virginia should be immediately dependent upon the Crown; that the
Affairs of the Colony should be vested in a Council, consisting of a few
Persons of Understanding and Quality, to be subordinate and attendant to the
Privy Council in England; that he was resolved to establish another Council in
Virginia, to be subordinate to the Council in England for the Colony; and that
he would maintain the necessary Officers, Ministers, Forces, Ammunition, and
Fortifications thereof, at his own Charge. But this Proclamation had an Effect
quite different from what was intended; instead of allaying, it increased the
Confusion of the Colony; they now thought their regular Constitution was to be
destroyed, and a Prerogative Government established over them; or, as they
express themselves in their Remonstrance, that their Rights and Privileges were
to be assaulted. This general Disquietude and Dissatisfaction continued until
they received a Letter from the Lords of the Privy Council, dated July the 22d,
1634, containing the Royal Assurance and Confirmation that all their Estates,
Trade, Freedom, and Privileges, should be enjoyed by them in as extensive a
Manner as they enjoyed them before the recalling the Company's Patent;
whereupon they became reconciled, and began again to exert themselves in the
Improvement of the Colony.

Being now in full Possession of the Rights and Privileges of Englishmen, which
they esteemed more than their Lives, their Affection for the Royal Government
grew almost to Enthusiasm; for upon an Attempt to restore the Company's Charter
by Authority of Parliament, the General Assembly, upon the 1st of April, 1642,
drew up a Declaration or Protestation, in the Form of an Act, by which they
declared they never would submit to the Government of any Company or
Proprietor, or to so unnatural a Distance as a Company or other Person to
interpose between the Crown and the Subjects; that they were born under
Monarchy, and would never degenerate from the Condition of their Births by
being subject to any other Government; and every Person who should attempt to
reduce them under any other Government was declared an Enemy to the Country,
and his Estate was to be forfeited. This Act, being presented to the King at
his Court at York, July 5th, 1644, drew from him a most gracious Answer, under
his Royal Signet, in which he gave them the fullest Assurances that they should
be always immediately dependent upon the Crown, and that the Form of Government
should never be changed. But after the King's Death they gave a more eminent
Instance of their Attachment to Royal Government, in their Opposition to the
Parliament, and forcing the Parliament Commissioners, who were sent over with a
Squadron of Ships of War to take Possession of the Country, into Articles of
Surrender, before they would submit to their Obedience. As these Articles
reflect no small Honor upon this Infant Colony, and as they are not commonly
known, I will give an Abstract of such of them as relate to the present Subject.

1. The Plantation of Virginia, and all the Inhabitants thereof, shall be and
remain in due Subjection to the Commonwealth of England, not as a conquered
Country, but as a Country submitting by their own voluntary Act, and shall
enjoy such Freedoms and Privileges as belong to the free People of England. 2.
The General Assembly as formerly shall convene, and transact the Affairs of the
Colony. 3. The People of Virginia shall have a free Trade, as the People of
England, to all Places, and with all Nations. 4. Virginia shall be free from
all Taxes, Customs, and Impositions whatsoever; and none shall be imposed on
them without Consent of the General Assembly; and that neither Forts nor
Castles be erected, or Garrisons maintained, without their Consent.
Upon this Surrender of the Colony to the Parliament, Sir W. Berkley, the Royal
Governor, was removed, and three other Governors were successively elected by
the House of Burgesses; but in January 1659 Sir William Berkeley was replaced
at the Head of the Government by the People, who unanimously renounced their
Obedience to the Parliament, and restored the Royal Authority by proclaiming
Charles the 2d King of England, Scotland, France, Ireland, and Virginia; so
that he was King in Virginia some Time before he had any certain Assurance of
being restored to his Throne in England.

From this Detail of the Charters, and other Acts of the Crown, under which the
first Colony in North America was established, it is evident that the Colonists
were not a few unhappy Fugitives who had wandered into a distant Part of the
World to enjoy their civil and religious Liberties, which they were deprived of
at home, but had a regular Government long before the first Act of Navigation,
and were respected as a distinct State, independent, as to their internal
Government, of the original Kingdom, but united with her, as to their external
Polity, in the closest and most intimate LEAGUE AND AMITY, under the same
Allegiance, and enjoying the Benefits of a reciprocal Intercourse.

But allow me to make a Reflection or two upon the preceding Account of the
first Settlement of an English Colony in North America.

America was no Part of the Kingdom of England; it was possessed by a savage
People, scattered through the Country, who were not subject to the English
Dominion, nor owed Obedience to its Laws. This independent Country was settled
by Englishmen at their own Expense, under particular Stipulations with the
Crown: These Stipulations then must be the sacred Band of Union between England
and her Colonies, and cannot be infringed without Injustice. But you Object
that no Power can abridge the Authority of Parliament, which has never exempted
any from the Submission they owe to it; and no other Power can grant such an
Exemption.

I will not dispute the Authority of the Parliament, which is without Doubt
supreme within the Body of the Kingdom, and cannot be abridged by any other
Power; but may not the King have Prerogatives which he has a Right to exercise
without the Consent of Parliament? If he has, perhaps that of granting License
to his Subjects to remove into a new Country, and to settle therein upon
particular Conditions, may be one. If he has no such Prerogative, I cannot
discover how the Royal Engagements can be made good, that the Freedom and other
Benefits of the British Constitution shall be secured to those People who shall
settle in a new Country under such Engagements; the Freedom, and other Benefits
of the British Constitution, cannot be secured to a People without they are
exempted from being taxed by any Authority but that of their Representatives,
chosen by themselves. This is an essential Part of British Freedom; but if the
King cannot grant such an Exemption, in Right of his Prerogative, the Royal
Promises cannot be fulfilled; and all Charters which have been granted by our
former Kings, for this Purpose, must be Deceptions upon the Subjects who
accepted them, which to say would be a high Reflection upon the Honor of the
Crown. But there was a Time when some Parts of England itself were exempt from
the Laws of Parliament: The Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester were
not subject to such Laws Petyt's Rights of the Commons. Kings Vale Royal of
England.
ab antiquo, because they did not send Representatives to Parliament, but had
their own Commune Concilium; by whose Authority, with the Consent of their
Earl, their Laws were made. If this Exemption was not derived originally from
the Crown, it must have arisen from that great Principle in the British
Constitution by which the Freemen in the Nation are not subject to any Laws but
such as are made by Representatives elected by themselves to Parliament; so
that, in either Case, it is an Instance extremely applicable to the Colonies,
who contend for no other Right but that of directing their internal Government
by Laws made with their own Consent, which has been preserved to them by
repeated Acts and Declarations of the Crown.

The Constitution of the Colonies, being established upon the Principles of
British Liberty, has never been infringed by the immediate Act of the Crown;
but the Powers of Government, agreeably to this Constitution, have been
constantly declared in the King's Commissions to their Governors, which, as
often as they pass the Great Seal, are new Declarations and Confirmations of
the Rights of the Colonies. Even in the Reign of Charles the Second, a Time by
no Means favorable to Liberty, these Rights of the Colonies were maintained
inviolate; for when it was thought necessary to establish a permanent Revenue
for the Support of Government in Virginia, the King did not apply to the
English Parliament, but to the General Assembly, and sent over an Act, under
the Great Seal of England, by which it was enacted by the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Consent of the General Assembly, that two Shillings
per Hogshead upon all Tobacco exported, one Shilling and Threepence per Tun
upon Shipping, and Sixpence per Poll for every Person imported, not being
actually a Mariner in Pay, were to be paid for ever as a Revenue for the
Support of the Government in the Colony.

I have taken Notice of this Act, not only because it shows the proper Fountain
from whence all Supplies to be raised in the Colinies ought to flow, but also
as it affords an Instance that Royalty itself did not disdain formerly to be
named as a Part of the Legislature of the Colony; though now, to serve a
Purpose destructive of their Rights, and to introduce Principles of Despotism
unknown to a free Constitution, the Legislature of the Colonies are degraded
even below the Corporation of a petty Borough in England.

It must be admitted that after the Restoration the Colonies lost that Liberty
of Commerce with foreign Nations they had enjoyed before that Time.

As it became a fundamental Law of the other States of Europe to prohibit all
foreign Trade with their Colonies, England demanded such an exclusive Trade
with her Colonies. This was effected by the Act of 25th Charles 2d, and some
other subsequent Acts; which not only circumscribed the Trade of the Colonies
with foreign Nations within very narrow Limits, but imposed Duties upon several
Articles of their own Manufactory exported from one Colony to another. These
Acts, which imposed severer Restrictions upon the Trade of the Colonies than
were imposed upon the Trade of England, deprived the Colonies, so far as these
Restrictions extended, of the Privileges of English Subjects, and constituted
an unnatural Difference between Men under the same Allegiance, born equally
free, and entitled to the same civil Rights. In this Light did the People of
Virginia view the Act of 25th Charles 2d, when they sent Agents to the English
Court to represent against Taxes and Impositions being laid on the Colony by
any Authority but that of their General Assembly. The Right of imposing
internal Duties upon their Trade by Authority of Parliament was then disputed,
though you say it was never called into Question; and the Agents sent from
Virginia upon this Occasion obtained a Declaration from Charles 2d the 19th of
April 1676, under his Privy Seal, that Impositions or Taxes ought not to be
laid upon the Inhabitants and Proprietors of the Colony but by the common
Consent of the General Assembly, except such Impositions as the Parliament
should lay on the Commodities imported into England from the Colony: And he
ordered a Charter to be made out, and to pass the Great Seal, for securing this
Right, among others, to the Colony.

But whether the Act of 25th Charles 2d, or any of the other Acts, have been
complained of as Infringements of the Rights of the Colonies or not, is
immaterial; for if a Man of superior Strength takes my Coat from me, that
cannot give him a Right to my Cloak, nor am I obliged to submit to be deprived
of all my Estate because I may have given up some Part of it without Complaint.
Besides, I have proved irrefragably that the Colonies are not represented in
Parliament, and consequently, upon your own Position, that no new Law can bind
them that is made without the Concurrence of their Representatives; and if so,
then every Act of Parliament that imposes internal Taxes upon the Colonies is
an Act of Power, and not of Right. I must speak freely, I am considering a
Question which affects the Rights of above two Millions of as loyal Subjects as
belong to the British Crown, and must use Terms adequate to the Importance of
it; I say that Power abstracted from Right cannot give a just Title to
Dominion. If a Man invades my Property, he becomes an Aggressor, and puts
himself into a State of War with me: I have a Right to oppose this Invader; If
I have not Strength to repel him, I must submit, but he acquires no Right to my
Estate which he has usurped. Whenever I recover Strength I may renew my Claim,
and attempt to regain my Possession; if I am never strong enough, my Son, or
his Son, may, when able, recover the natural Right of his Ancestor which has
been unjustly taken from him.

I hope I shall not be charged with Insolence, in delivering the Sentiments of
an honest Mind with Freedom: I am speaking of the Rights of a People; Rights
imply Equality in the Instances to which they belong, and must be treated
without Respect to the Dignity of the Persons concerned in them. If the British
Empire in Europe and in America is the same Power, if the Subjects in both are
the same People, and all equally participate in the Adversity and Prosperity of
the Whole, what Distinctions can the Difference of their Situations make, and
why is this Distinction made between them? Why is the Trade of the Colonies
more circumscribed than the Trade of Britain? And why are Impositions laid upon
the one which are not laid upon the other? If the Parliament have a Right to
impose Taxes of every Kind upon the Colonies, they ought in Justice, as the
same People, to have the same Sources to raise them from: Their Commerce ought
to be equally free with the Commerce of Britain, otherwise it will be loading
them with Burdens at the same Time that they are deprived of Strength to
sustain them; it will be forcing them to make Bricks without Straw. I
acknowledge the Parliament is the sovereign legislative Power of the British
Nation, and that by a full Exertion of their Power they can deprive the
Colonists of the Freedom and other Benefits of the British Constitution which
have been secured to them by our Kings; they can abrogate all their civil
Rights and Liberties; but by what Right is it that the Parliament can exercise
such a Power over the Colonists, who have as natural a Right to the Liberties
and Privileges of Englishmen as if they were actually resident within the
Kingdom? The Colonies are subordinate to the Authority of Parliament;
subordinate I mean in Degree, but not absolutely so: For if by a Vote of the
British Senate the Colonists were to be delivered up to the Rule of a French or
Turkish Tyranny, they may refuse Obedience to such a Vote, and may oppose the
Execution of it by Force. Great is the Power of Parliament, but, great as it
is, it cannot, constitutionally, deprive the People of their natural Rights;
nor, in Virtue of the same Principle, can it deprive them of their civil
Rights, which are founded in Compact, without their own Consent. There is, I
confess, a considerable Difference between these two Cases as to the Right of
Resistance: In the first, if the Colonists should be dismembered from the
Nation by Act of Parliament, and abandoned to another Power, they have a
natural Right to defend their Liberties by open Force, and may lawfully resist;
and, if they are able, repel the Power to whose Authority they are abandoned.
But in the other, if they are deprived of their civil Rights, if great and
manifest Oppressions are imposed upon them by the State on which they are
dependent, their Remedy is to lay their Complaints at the Foot of the Throne,
and to suffer patiently rather than disturb the public Peace, which nothing
but a Denial of Justice can excuse them in breaking. But if this Justice should
be denied, if the most humble and dutiful Representations should be rejected,
nay not even deigned to be received, what is to be done? To such a Question
Thucydides would make the Corinthians reply, that if a decent and condescending
Behavior is shown on the Part of the Colonies, it would be base in the Mother
State to press too far on such Moderation: And he would make the Corcyreans
answer, that every Colony, whilst used in a proper Manner, ought to pay Honor
and Regard to its Mother State; but, when treated with Injury and Violence, is
become an Alien. They were not sent out to be the Slaves, but to be the Equals
of those that remain behind.

But, according to your Scheme, the Colonies are to be prohibited from uniting
in a Representation of their general Grievances to the common Sovereign. This
Moment the British Empire in Europe and in America is the same Power; its
Subjects in both are the same People; each is equally important to the other,
and mutual Benefits, mutual Necessities, cement their Connection. The next
Moment the Colonies are unconnected with each other, different in their
Manners, opposite in their Principles, and clash in their Interests and in
their Views, from Rivalry in Trade, and the Jealousy of Neighborhood. This
happy Division, which was effected by Accident, is to be continued throughout
by Design; and all Bond of Union between them is excluded from your vast
System. Divide et impera is your Maxim in Colony Administration, lest an
Alliance should be formed dangerous to the Mother Country. Ungenerous
Insinuation! detestable Thought! abhorrent to every Native of the Colonies!
who, by an Uniformity of Conduct, have ever demonstrated the deepest Loyalty to
their King, as the Father of his People, and an unshaken Attachment to the
Interest of Great Britain. But you must entertain a most despicable Opinion of
the Understandings of the Colonists to imagine that they will allow Divisions
to be fomented between them about inconsiderable Things, when the closest Union
becomes necessary to maintain in a constitutional Way their dearest Interests.

Another Writer The Administration of the Colonies by Governor Pownall.
, fond of his new System of placing Great Britain as the Center of Attraction
to the Colonies, says that they must be guarded against having or forming any
Principle of Coherence with each other above that whereby they cohere in the
Center; having no other Principle of Intercommunication between each other than
that by which they are in joint Communication with Great Britain, as the common
Center of all. At the same Time that they are each, in their respective Parts
and Subordinations, so framed as to be acted by this first Mover, they should
always remain incapable of any Coherence, or of so conspiring amongst
themselves as to create any other equal Force which might recoil back on this
first Mover; nor is it more necessary to preserve the several Governments
subordinate within their respective Orbs than it is essential to the
Preservation of the Empire to keep them disconnected and independent of each
other. But how is this Principle of Coherence, as this elegant Writer calls it,
between the Colonies, to be prevented? The Colonies upon the Continent of North
America lie united to each other in one Tract of Country, and are equally
concerned to maintain their common Liberty. If he will attend then to the Laws
of Attraction in natural as well as political Philosophy, he will find that
Bodies in Contact, and cemented by mutual Interests, cohere more strongly than
those which are at a Distance, and have no common Interests to preserve. But
this natural Law is to be destroyed; and the Colonies, whose real Interests are
the same, and therefore ought to be united in the closest Communication, are to
be disjoined, and all Intercommunication between them prevented. But how is
this System of Administration to be established? Is it to be done by a military
Force, quartered upon private Families? Is it to be done by extending that
Jurisdiction of Courts of Admiralty, and thereby depriving the Colonists of
legal Trials in the Courts of common Law? Or is it to be done by harassing the
Colonists, and giving overbearing Taxgatherers an Opportunity of ruining Men,
perhaps better Subjects than themselves, by dragging them from one Colony to
another, before Prerogative Judges, exercising a despotick Sway in
Inquisitorial Courts? Oppression has produced very great and unexpected Events:
The Helvetick Confederacy, the States of the United Netherlands, are Instances
in the Annals of Europe of the glorious Actions a petty People, in Comparison,
can perform when united in the Cause of Liberty. May the Colonies ever remain
under a constitutional Subordination to Great Britain! It is their Interest to
live under such a Subordination; and it is their Duty, by an Exertion of all
their Strength and Abilities, when called upon by their common Sovereign, to
advance the Grandem and the Glory of the Nation. May the Interests of Great
Britain and her Colonies be ever united, so as that whilst they are retained in
a legal and just Dependence no unnatural or unlimited Rule may be exercised
over them; but that they may enjoy the Freedom, and other Benefits of the
British Constitution, to the latest Page in History!

I flatter myself, by what has been said, your Position of a virtual
Representation is sufficiently refuted; and that there is really no such
Representation known in the British Constitution, and consequently that the
Colonies are not subject to an internal Taxation by Authority of Parliament.

I could extend this Inquiry to a much greater Length, by examining into the
Policy of the late Acts of Parliament, which impose heavy and severe Taxes,
Duties, and Prohibitions, upon the Colonies; I could point out some very
disagreeable Consequences, respecting the Trade and Manufactures of Britain,
which must necessarily result from these Acts; I could prove that the Revenues
arising from the Trade of the Colonies, and the Advantage of their Exports to
Great Britain in the Balance of her Trade with foreign Nations, exceed
infinitely all the Expense she has been at, all the Expense she can be at, in
their Protection; and perhaps I could show that the Bounties given upon some
Articles exported from the Colonies were not intended, primarily, as Instances
of Attention to their Interest, but arose as well from the Consideration of the
disadvantageous Dependence of Great Britain upon other Nations for the
principal Articles of her naval Stores, as from her losing Trade for those
Articles; I could demonstrate that these Bounties are by no Means adequate to
her Savings in such foreign Trade, if the Articles upon which they are given
can be procured from the Colonies in Quantities sufficient to answer her
Consumption; and that the Excess of these Savings is so much clear Profit to
the Nation, upon the Supposition that these Bounties are drawn from it; but, as
they will remain in it, and be laid out in its Manufactures and Exports, that
the whole Sum which used to be paid to Foreigners for the Purchase of these
Articles will be saved to the Nation. I say I could extend my Inquiry, by
examining these several Matters; but as the Subject is delicate, and would
carry me to a great Length, I shall leave them to the Reader's own Reflection.


