CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE RIGHTS of the COLONISTS TO THE PRIVILEGES OF British
SUBJECTS, Introduced by a brief Review of the Rise and Progress of English
Liberty, and concluded with some REMARKS upon our present ALARMING SITUATION.

-- Eripe turpi
Colla Jugo; Liber-liber sum dic age!
NEW YORK: Printed and sold by JOHN HOLT, at the Exchange, 1766.

To T -- H --, Esquire
MY Leisure unfortunately concurring with the present Itch for Scribbling,
which so universally prevails, has produced the following political Essay; and,
as I have great Reason to believe that I caught this Cacoethes scribendi in
your City, I shall make no Scruple of throwing upon your Hands it is first
troublesome Production. You will find very few Arguments or Facts, that have
the Gloss of Novelty to recommend Them. In a Subject so hackney'd They could
not reasonably be expected. All that I have aimed at has been to give a regular
Form, and more decent Dress to those Sentiments which are every Day sported by
our Coffee-House Politicians. It can do a good Cause no Harm to state the same
Facts in a different Light, and dress the same Sentiments in different
Language. From this necessary Variety, Information may be more easily and
readily communicated.

However inconsiderable the Merit of this Performance may appear, as it cost me
three or four Days Labor, it shall, at least, have the Honor of your Perusal,
and then undergo that Fate to which you may think proper to devote it.

When first I took up my Pen, I meant no more then to commit to Paper, my
loose, undigested Thoughts upon the present State of our political Affairs for
my own private Satisfaction; but in the Course of a few Pages my Imagination
became so heated, and my Heart so deeply interested in the important Subject,
that, seized with a Rage of Patriotism, my unruly Pen, submitting to no Check,
served me as Teague's Legs served their passive Master -- fairly ran away with
me.

At the End of my Race, I found something like-Considerations upon the Rights
of the Colonists to the Privileges of British Subjects, introduced by a brief
Review of the Rise and Progress of English Liberty, and concluded with some
Remarks upon our present alarming Situation. Such as They are I submit Them to
your Examination, but, at the same Time, for my own Security, claim that
Partiality which your Friendship has ever shown to, etc.

December, 16, 1765.
CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
THE English Constitution, in its present State, may be considered as a nice
Piece of Machinery, which has undergone many Changes and Alterations. To Malgre
tous les Travaux des plus sages Legislateurs, L'Etat politic demeura toujours
imparfait, parcequ'il etoit presque L'Ouvrage du Hazard; et que mal commence,
le Tems, en decouvrant les Defauts, et suggerant des Remedes, ne put jamais
reparer les Vices de la Constitution.

Rousseau. Nothing appears more exquisitely combined, to an unexperienced
Examination, than the English Government, where the executive and legislative
Powers control each other so perfectly; where the Prerogative of the Crown,
and the Rights of the People, are so nicely adjusted and counterpoiz'd. It is
indeed a fine Machine in Idea, yet the Fabric is too delicately wrought to go
well long, and Subtilty of Workmanship wants Strength of Par^^ to sustain it.

Angleloni's Letters.
make it applicable to every possible Contingency which might affect any Part
of that Society for which it was calculated, many finer Movements have, from
Time to Time been added, which may indeed have answered some present Occasion,
but which have left it more exposed to Injury from the slightest Obstruction.
What State of Perfection it may, at this Period, have obtained, I leave to be
determined by those, who have Talents better adapted, and Opportunities more
favorable for such Kind of Speculation. I only mean to take Notice of a few
Particulars which may serve to regulate my Sentiments upon the present
important Dispute between Great Britain and it is Colonies.

The Spirit of the English Nation, depressed and broken by the Norman Conquest,
for many Years quietly gave Way to the Rage of Despotism; and peaceably
submitted to the most abject Vassallage. I do not mean to insinuate that before
that Period, They ever enjoyed a State of Liberty. The frequent Irruptions of
the Danes and Saxons kept Them in a State of constant Confusion. Each little,
temporary Kingdom governed by a particular Policy of it is own, had it is
Attention too much engaged by it is encroaching Neighbors, to refine much upon
the simplest Principles of Government. But, when the Norman, at one Stroke,
subdued all South-Britain, the Weight of his Sword induced a general
Acquiescence to the most arbitrary Measures. Disjointed as the Kingdom had
been, by the Intrusion of foreign Powers, and indeed peopled by different
Nations; a very considerable Time was required to produce a perfect Coalition.
No sooner was this natural Effect produced, and the Nation become one family
united Body, connected by the same Ties and engaged in the same Interest, but
the superior and more sensible Part, showed it is Aversion to the Tyranny of the
Norman Princes, by the boldest Opposition; and laid the Foundation of our
present Liberty.

In the first Stages of feudal Government, the common People were reduced to
such a State of abject Slavery, that the Voice of Liberty could not easily
reach their Ears. The Batons first felt the Weight of Oppression, and, by a
spirited Opposition, endeavored to reduce within reasonable Bounds, the almost
unlimitted Authority of the Crown. At this happy Period, We may fix the
Foundation of English Liberty. The common People, employed by their Lords, to
effect their glorious Purposes, grew every Day more intelligent. As They became
acquainted with and interested in Facts, They naturally acquired such a Habit
of reasoning upon Them, as soon served to show Them that nothing but Resolution
was required to obtain a reasonable Share of Freedom. Once acquainted with
their own Importance, They never stopped 'till They had secured the most
valuable of those Privileges which are now said to be the Birthright of
Englishmen. They obtained the amplest Charter as a Security against the
Encroachments of the Crown, and established for themselves an equitable
Interest in the Power of Legislation. The Prerogative of the King became
limited by the same Law, which secured the Liberty and Property of the
Subject; and the more effectually to maintain their invaluable Acquisitions,
every County, City and Borough was to choose a certain Number of its Members to
sit in a general Assembly for the propounding and enacting, in Conjunction with
the Barons, such Laws as future Occasions might demand. The Kingdom thus
divided into the three Estates of the King, Lords and Commons; the Policy of
it is Government became every Day more refined and delicate. The People thus
raised to such a Degree of Importance, and jealous of their new acquired
Rights, have, from Day to Day, for Ages past, successfully disputed, with the
Ministers of the Crown, every Point which might serve to confirm this happy
Establishment. While the Nation knew no Law but the Sovereign's Will, continual
Dissatisfaction and violent Opposition kept alive the Spirit of Discord: But,
when the Law of the Land was confirmed by the Voice of every Freeman properly
represented, it is Execution was enforced by the united Power of the whole;
since no Man could be deprived of Life, Liberty or Property, but by those
Statutes which He himself had framed.

In this Situation of almost perfect Security, the new World was discovered,
and the Inhabitants of Great Britain, tempted by extraordinary Concessions from
the Crown, and a Hope of future Advantage to Themselves and their Posterity,
left their native Country, to settle and cultivate a Desert. They were not
banished to America as a Punishment for any Crimes which They had committed,
and by which They might possibly have forfeited the Privileges of Society. Far
from it! -- They left England as free Adventurers; and, bringing with Them the
Obligation of Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, brought with Them all the
Rights of Englishmen. As They could not by any Act of their's dispense with the
One, so could They not relinquish the Other to the Prejudice of their
Posterity. The first Settlements were made under the Direction of the Ministers
of the Crown, and to some were given particular Among the several Colonies
whose Form of Government is settled by particular Charters, I am led to take
Notice of that happy Constitution established in the Province of Pennsylvania,
from some very extraordinary Measures lately set on Foot to effect a Change of
Government. The Form which at present prevails, was granted by the Proprietor
in the Charter of 1701 to the Petition of it is Inhabitants cancelling the
original Charter, which had obtained the Approbation of the greatest
Politicians, merely to gratify their capricious Wishes. Enriched with such
immense Possessions, and vested with such extensive Powers as almost put Him
upon a Footing with a Prince of the Empire, Mr. Penn, in every Transaction, not
only evidenced the greatest Extent of Genius, but the most obliging
Condescension to the fluctuating Humors of his first Adventurers. From this
new Grant They received such extraordinary Privileges, as secured Them the
Enjoyment of more than English Liberty. Their Assembly of Representatives,
annually chosen by Ballot, have the peculiar Privilege of setting upon their
own Adjournment, and an absolute Power to dispose of the public Moneys in what
manner They please. Unmindful of all these singular Advantages, and blind to
their own Interests, They have suffered an ill founded Resentment against their
Proprietor, encouraged by the artful Management of one designing Man, to hurry
Them into such a Measure, as They may hereafter have Leisure to repent. To
acquire a Power of throwing upon their Proprietary what They conceive to be his
exact Proportion of the public Burden. -- to extort from the Man who is the
Object of their implacable Hatred, perhaps an Addition of L500 per. Annum to
the public Funds, They would willingly resign to the Ministers of the Crown the
absolute Disposal of the whole; and to effect the malicious Purposes of a few
splenetic Individuals, They would sacrifice the Interests and Happiness of the
whole Community. History cannot furnish Us with a more amazing Instance of
blind Infatuation; nor could any Man, with less Abilities than Mr. F -- n
possesses, have led a whole Province blindfold to Destruction.


Charters of Privileges. The highest Encouragement which They received,
scarcely under their Situation tolerable; or but poorly recompensed the
Inconveniences which They suffered.

In the Infancy of their Settlement, before any critical Occasion, required
more particular Regulations, They had the Common and Statute Law of England for
their Guide: But, when their Labors had raised Them to considerable
Importance, and the Emergency of Circumstances required it, They were allowed
to form different Assemblies of select Men, as Representatives of the Freemen
of the different Settlements. The Crown had it is Deputy at the Head of each
Colony, with a considerable Number of it is chosen Servants to form a Third
Estate, vested with the Powers and Privileges of the Lords. Thus were the
Interests of the Crown most effectually secured by this double Representation
in the two superior Branches of the Legislature.

As the first Settlement of the Colonies was not a Matter of national Concern;
the whole fell under the Direction of the Ministers of the Crown; and in their
Infant State, all their little Disputes, too crude and undigested to come
regularly before any of the superior Courts of Judicature, were brought before
the Privy Council for a final Determination. The Convenience of this Method of
Proceeding, rendered it agreeable to the Colonists; who did not conceive all
the Evils which it might possibly produce: And thus did the Privy Council usurp
a Jurisdiction altogether unconstitutional. The laborious Inhabitants of these
Settlements, had their Attention too much employed by their necessary
Avocations, to examine much into the Minutiae of Government. A Form, in any
Degree resembling that of their Mother Country, satisfied their moderate
Wishes; and, while They were encouraged in their Pursuit of present Gain, They
suffered Themselves to be altogether directed by the Ministers of the Crown. To
preserve an Appearance of Liberty, each little Society was allowed to choose a
reasonable Number of it is Members, to meet in a general Assembly, for the
propounding such Laws as the State of the Colony might require; but, before any
such Act as might be proposed by the representative Body of Freemen, could
obtain the Force of Laws, They must receive the Approbation both of the
Governor and Council; and even after all this, be laid before the Privy Council
for a final Confirmation or Repeal. Disadvantageous as this Form must appear to
every unprejudiced Person, to highly were the Colonists affected with a Sense
of Duty for their Sovereign, that They never attempted to dispute the Legality
of that Constitution which had been settled by his Ministers. They patiently
submitted to many Inconveniences, rather than disturb the public Peace by a
Remonstrance of Grievances. Their Trade not yet oppressed by unreasonable
Restrictions, They cheerfully exerted their utmost Industry to promote the
Interest of Great Britain. The Produce of each different Colony was exported to
foreign Markets, to enable the Exporters to pay punctually for the immense
Quantity of British Manufactures which They yearly consumed. In the Course of a
successful Commerce They even submitted, without Murmuring, to Regulations
framed by the British Parliment; and suffered the Expediency of the Measure, to
prevent their examining into it is Legality. Indeed all such general Regulations
as could not be effected by the single Powers of any one Colony, were willingly
received from the Legislature of Great Britain; from a Consideration of those
Advantages which They brought to the whole united Body: But, when that same
Legislature, unmindful of those very Principles from which They first derived
their Power, have attempted to bind the Colonies by the most injurious
oppressive Act, They have met with an Opposition which They never could have
expected; and that too from a Spirit, which Nothing but the Justice of the
Cause could have excited. Warmed with a Sense of Resentment for the present
Attempt, They naturally extend their Enquiries to what is, or ought to be the
Constitution of the Colonies, agreeable to the Plan established by their
Forefathers. No Man will deny that the provincial Americans have an inherent,
unalienable Right to all the Privileges of British Subjects. This Position
taken for granted, let Us now see how careful our Kind Parent has been to
preserve from Violation those sacred Privileges. Let Us take a Review of that
Form which generally prevails where the Constitution has not been settled by
particular Charters; and, by comparing this with the Form, which, at this happy
Period, is established in Great Britain, We shall easily determine whether the
Colonies enjoy the Rights and Privileges of their Mother Country. The Freemen
of each Province are duly represented in an Assembly formed upon the same
Principles as the House of Commons; but then the Crown is doubly represented,
by nominating both the Governor and Council. The Council, generally chosen from
the most considerable Persons of of the Province, become the middle Branch of
the Legislature, and are vested with the Powers and Privileges of the Lords.
Proud of the Dignity annexed to their Office, and fond of maintaining such a
flattering Superiority. They naturally become Tools The honorable Members of
the Council, for the Province of New York, in a late very interesting Debate,
have proved that this general Maxim, though supported both by Reason and
Observation, is not unexceptionable.
of that Ministry, upon whose Favor their very Existence depends; since, the
same Power which raised Them to this exalted Rank, can, for a single Act of
Disobedience, sink Them into their original Obscurity. The Creation of so
powerful a Part of the Constitution, depending altogether upon the royal
Mandate, is not the only Grievance. The Counselors are generally taken from
among the most wealthy and important, and the Society thus loses the Weight and
Influence of it is most valuable Members. The Lords indeed are of the same
Creation; but, once created, cannot be dispossessed of their Rank; and
naturally form a Body so respectable and independent, that They are with great
Propriety and Safety trusted with the Liberty and Property of the Nation. Far
different is the Nature and Constitution of a Provincial Council! As a Branch
of the Legislature, They can only be considered as Creatures of the Crown; and,
when sitting as a Court of Judicature, no more than Judges during Pleasure.
With Officers so totally under the Influence of the Crown, how can the Subject
confide the most valuable Blessings of Life? or how can They weakly think their
Liberty and Property sufficiently secure, when We must reasonably suppose that
the Judge who is to determine upon both, dare not give a Determination,
inconsistent with that royal Pleasure by which He holds his Commission. The
Prerogative of the Crown thus carefully guarded, in a Manner inconsistent with
the Liberty of the Subject, and unwarranted by the Principles of the English
Constitution; the Ministers of the Crown are still determined to effect one
favorite Purpose, which They may hereafter make Use of for the Introduction
and Support of the most arbitrary and tyrannical Measures.

By one single Stroke of political Legerdemain, They have unhinged the whole
Constitution. It was not sufficient to have our Judges molded by the Hand of
Power. The darling Privilege, of Juries, still remained as a formidable Support
of Liberty. At once to depretiate these Jewels of English Freedom, and reduce
Us to a State of abject Dependence, the privy Council have erected themselves
into a Court of final Appeal. -- of Appeal upon the Merits of the Cause. A
Measure so fraught with pernicious Consequences, and so incompatible with the
Spirit of Freedom, that it could owe it is Birth to Nothing but the horrid
Design of reducing the Colonies to an abject State of Vassallage. No Minister
of the Crown, though ever so warm in the Pursuit of this detestable Purpose, dare
think of effecting it so precipitately, without the Assistance of that Power
which ought to be the Guardian of English Liberty. How this has been obtained
one cannot easily imagine, unless it has been by the grossest
Misrepresentations of our Conduct, and by exciting such a ridiculous Jealousy,
as must, upon the slightest Examination, appear to be as unnatural as it is ill
founded. That the Enemies to America have drawn upon Us all the Weight of
Parliamentary Power, was clearly evidenced by the severe Restrictions upon
Trade, before the present infamous Act for collecting a Stamp Duty gave the
Alarm to the Sons of Freedom. What may be the Consequence of the spirited
Opposition which has been given to this daring Act of Oppression, Time only can
determine: But, whether we may obtain the invaluable Birthright for which We
now dispute, or whether We may fall a Sacrifice to superior Power, We shall
have the Satisfaction of thinking that We have discharged our Duty to Ourselves
and Posterity; and every Heart dead to the Sense of Freedom must feel the
Justice of our Cause.

The most justifiable Resentment may hurry Men of warm Tempers, into the
greatest Extravagancies; and such may have been committed on the present
alarming Occasion: But He, who would, at this interesting Crisis, assume the
Character of Stoicism, and preach up Moderation to his Countrymen, may
reasonably be considered as no Friend to his Country.

We need no Reasoning to prove, since the Records of our own History evidently
show, that every particular Branch in a mixed Form of Government is continually
laboring to extend it is own Power and Influence.

We need not be told that there has been a Time, when the whole representative
Body of the Nation, have been intimidated into the most servile Complaisance by
the Frowns of their Sovereign; nor, is any Thing more notorious, than that the
last Century furnished Us with a House of Commons so bold and enterprising,
that by extending the Signification of the Word, Privilege, they gave it Power
sufficient to destroy the Prerogative of the Crown and Liberty of the Subject.
That the Ministers of the Crown have, even in the Infaney of our Setlements,
meditated for us a Form of Government, essentially different from that of
England, and only calculated to answer their infamous purposes, must evidently
appear from the following very extraordinary Speech made by Mr. Commissioner
Atwood upon the Trial of Colonel Bayard in New York for high Treason. I do not
say petitioning the King is a Crume; but, it may be to petition the House of
Commons in the Plantations where the King govern, by Prerogative. State Trials,
Vol. V.
If this be, as it indubitably is, the grasping Nature of Power, We cannot be
surprised that the Ministers of the Crown have endeavored to increase, in the
Wilds of America, the Force of that Prerogative which is so strictly limited
at Home; nor, that the Parliament of Great Britain should strive to extend it is
Power to such an unreasonable Length, as to aim at Nothing less than the
bringing within their absolute Disposal, the Lives, the Liberties and the
Property of Millions to whom They owe no Duty, and from whom They have received
no Trust. Immoderate, and unreasonable as this Attempt may appear, it now no
longer assumes a doubtful Face. -- It Is Meaning is expressed in every Line of
the late Act for collecting a Stamp Duty. Some little Efforts have indeed been
made before this; but, as They came masked with the Appearance of public
Utility, They were received without any great Reluctance.

An Acquiescence, founded upon Principles of Moderation, was mistaken for the
Effect of a tame, passive Disposition, such as would qualify Us for the Slavery
to which They intended to reduce Us. But to the Honor of my Countrymen, let it
be eternally remembered, that the Spirit of Liberty is as warm and active in
the Wilds of America, as in the more cultivated Fields of Britain.

Before We have Recourse to such Measures for the Defense of our violated
Rights as the Necesity of our Situation may require, let Us first endeavor to
prove that We have an equitable Title to those Privileges for which We contend.

Though born and bred in the Wilds of America, and separated from our more
polished European Brethren by an immense Extent of Ocean, yet do the
Inhabitants of the Provincial Settlements claim an unalienable Right to all the
Privileges of Englishmen. -- As Freemen, Subjects of the same Prince, They
consider Themselves upon an equal Footing with the Freemen of Great Britain. To
suppose any Subordination would be destroying the very Spirit of the English
Government. As Freemen, Members of an extensive Society, They conceive
Themselves vested with the Power of delegating a select Number of their own
Community, with sufficient Authority to frame such Statutes, as may be deemed
conducive to the public Good; first of all obtaining the Approbation of the
Crown or it is Deputy before They acquire the Force of Laws. To these Delegates,
properly chosen, They willingly commit the absolute Disposal of their Liberty
and Property; as They are Members of the same Community, influenced by the same
Interests, and constantly bear a Part of those Burdens which They may think
proper to impose. They very reasonably imagine Themselves entitled to the
Benefits, and obnoxious to the Penalties both of the common and Statute Law, as
it was established at the Time when their Ancestors quitted their native
Country; since the Colonists of the prosent Age claim, by Right of Inheritance,
as great an Interest in the Settlement of those Laws; as the present
Inhabitants of Great Britain: But who will venture, upon the common Principles
of Reason, to assert, that the Freemen of Great Britain can vest their
Representatives with the Power, arbitrarily to dispose of the Property of their
American Brethren?

We are told that the Colonists have no more Reason to complain of being bound
by Laws to which They have not subscribed by their Representatives, than those
flourishing Towns in England, which send no Members to Parliament. The
Advocates for the Extent of Parliamentary Power, must be not a little perplexed
when They would draw an Argument from an evident Defect in the Constitution; --
a Defect which may be attended with the most fatal Consequences, although it was
the natural Result of that Fluctuation which marks the Progress of Time. If
there be any Meaning at all in the Doctrine of Representation, We cannot
suppose it to be absurdly partial -- calculated to procure the most invaluable
Blessings of Life for one particular Part of Society, and, at the same Time
leave the other at the Mercy of unlimitted Power.

When this important Privilege was granted to the Freemen of Great Britain, no
one can doubt but the Representation was intended to be general and strictly
impartial; that every County, City and Borough should send to the General
Assembly, a Number of it is Inhabitants, duly elected, proportioned to it is Rank
and Importance: But by a Fluxation, which no human Policy can prevent, this
Representation, though in it is first Establishment it might have been perfectly
equitable, became every Day liable to such Changes as produced the present
Inequality. Ancient Cities and Boroughs lost their real Importance, and sunk
into Obscurity; while others, in the Course of a few Years, became of the
highest Value to the Community, by their extensive Trade and Manufactures. Though
the same Principles which first established this happy System demanded the
strictest Attention to this Alteration of Circumstances; yet has the partial
Policy of the Crown prevented it is receiving that Regard which is so evidently
it is due.

The Ministers of the Crown, ever solicitious to advance it is Prerogative, did,
by no Means, choose to increase this Power of Representation; but rather wished
to lessen it is Force, by having it lodged in such Hands as might become most
easily subjected to their Influence. To what can We so naturally attribute the
present Coincidence of Ministerial and Parliamentary Power, as to the Increase
of this pernicious Influence? -- an Influence which must very shortly affect
the Liberty of Great Britain as well as that of America, unless it receives a
sudden and seasonable Check! The Ancient Boroughs reduced to a State of
Obscurity and Poverty become easy Purchases for the Tools of the Court; and the
present Machiavelean Minister, refining upon a System established by his
Predecessor Sir Robert Walpole, has with great Economy, bought up all these
Bargains for such Gentlemen of the Army as have Talents fitted for the Support
of his Party. There are undoubtedly many military Gentlemen who have Abilities
to fill with Honor the most distinguished Stations: But, as a Friend to my
Country, and jealous of every Thing which may endanger it is Liberty, I must
confess, that I had rather see them upon the Parade at St. James's, than in the
Parliament House at Westminister. The military Members of the House of Commons
must be thought very improper Representatives of the Freemen of Great Britain.
Indeed They may, with great Propriety, be considered as no more than animated.
Puppets, directed by the arbitrary Hand of our great State Juggler who is sure
to evidence both the Extent of his Power and Policy, by punishing with a total
Degradation any One who may dare to think, speak or act inconsistent with that
Plan laid down for the Rule of his Political Conduct. The Removal of General
Conway from his military Command for daring to speak the Language of
Independence, must serve to convince Us, that, in the present Administration,
the most violent and arbitrary Measures will be used to extend and support this
dangerous Influence. When I mention the present Administration, I mean to take
no Notice of the many delusive changes which have been made to blind or amuse
the World.


This very naturally accounts for that Inequality which at present prevails in
the Representation of England; and, from a Consideration of this single
Circumstance, no Man can, with the least Pretensions to Reason, assert, that,
because the Inhabitants of Birmingham and Sheffield are not represented in
exact Proportion to their Number, Wealth and Importance, the numerous
Inhabitants of all the American Settlements shall not be entitled to any
Representation at all. Absurd as this Doctrine may appear, it has lately been
warmly supported by the refined Logic of our State Sophists; Who have, at a
great Expense of Thought, elaborated for Us a System of VIRTUAL REPRESENTATION,
without allowing Us one Representative, or any one Advantage which ought
naturally to attend this happy Institution.

The Members of the British Parliament can only be considered as Trustees for
the Care and Direction of the Liberty and Property of their Constituents; and,
of that They may at Discretion legally and constitutionally dispose: But, with
what Appearance of Reason, do They claim the Disposal of Property with which
They were never entrusted, or arrogate to Themselves a Power to determine upon
that Liberty which was never committed to their Care? Can the little,
Self-important Member for Malden look upon Himself as a proper Representative
for the Province of Massachusetts; or reasonably conceive Himself vested with
more Power than could be transferred to Him from the venal Wretches by whom He
was elected? Or can any Individual of the whole respectable Body, say, that He
is duly qualified to represent any one of the Colonies? Has He received any
Power -- does He own any Obligation; or is He influenced by the same Interests?
All these are essential Qualifications; and yet not one of these can He boast!
How then can He absurdly esteem Himself qualified to represent a Body of People
by whom He was never appointed -- to whom He owes no Duty; and whose Interests
are very probably incompatible with his own?

I am very far from being an Enemy to Parliamentary Power. I revere the House
of Commons as the Watchful Guardians presiding over the Liberty of their
Constituents; but when I see Them grasping at a Power altogether foreign, and
inconsistent with the Principles of their own Constitution; I could wish to see
Them reduced within their natural Bounds, and would even shelter myfelf under
the Wings of the Royal Prerogative. I would much more willingly see my Property
arbitratily disposed of by a privy Seal, than extorted from me by the
unwarrantable Power of a Parliament; whose Members would naturally endeavor to
lessen their own Burdens, and gratify the selfish Wishes of their Constituents
by sacrificing to Them the Interests of the Colonies.

As loyal and industrious Subjects We may expect impartial Favor from our
Prince; who must reasonably regard with an equal Eye the Happiness and Welfare
of all his Dominions. An ambitious and enterprising Monarch might possibly wish
to extend the Force of his Prerogative over those of his Subjects, Who, from
the Weakness of their Situation, might not be able to oppose it is Progress:
But, from the Freemen of Great Britain, who already view Us with a jealous Eye,
what can We reasonably hope for, but the malevolent Influence of that Jealousy,
which would sacrifice a Rival even in the Person of a Brother?

These Sentiments are unhappily confirmed by incontestable Facts; and the
slightest Examination of ancient History must serve to convince Us, that the
Colonies of popular Governments have ever suffered the severest Oppression, and
groaned under the most intolerable Slavery.

A Heart the most animated with the Spirit of Liberty, if directed by a Head
fraught with the least Information, would naturally prefer the despotic Sway of
one Man, to the arbitrary Influence of Millions. The One might be easily
satisfied, while the other would remain ever insatiable. By the one We might
reasonably expect to be raised to the Happiness of Subjects; but, by the other,
We should be actually confined to a State of Vassallage.

If We have not most egregiously erred in the Establishment of our Principles,
the World cannot be surprised at the Opposition which We have given to the
unwarrantable Exertion of Parliamentary Power: -- A Power, to which, if We once
tamely submit, We shall sacrifice all the most valuable Privileges of the best
established Society.

If the Prince requires a Revenue for his own private Purposes, the Parliament
grants Him an ample One, from a Duty laid upon our most necessary Importations.
If the Exigencies of Government require L 300, 000, the Parliament will raise L
400, 000 by a Stamp Duty. If our Exportations interfere with the Commerce of
Great Britain, the Parliament passes a restaining Law; and thus, by a regular
Progression of the same unlimitted Power, We may, with equal Appearance of
Reason, be denied the common Benefits of Life. They may ruin our Trade -- drain
all our Sources of Wealth; and, after binding our useless Hands, leave Us at
the Mercy of our savage Neighbors.

It may indeed be objected, that We cannot reasonably suppose a Proceeding so
inconsistent with the true Interest of the Mother Country. But, has not the
incomprehensible Policy of the present Ministry given Us Reason to suppose that
future Ministers may be guilty of still greater Absurdities?

With this unpromising Prospect before Them, in what Manner shall the distressed
Colonists exert their little Power to resist the Torrent of Oppression?

Let Us calmly remonstrate our Grievances; boldly assert our Rights; and
steadily support that Liberty which We received from our Ancestors. While
convinced of the Justice of our Cause, let Us not be intimidated by any
Superiority of Power Unless Corruption first deject the Pride
And Guardian Vigor of the freeborn Soul,
All crude Attempts of Violence are vain;
For firm within, and while at Heart untouched
Never yet by Force was FREEDOM overcome.
THOMPSON:
-- Let Us prove incontestably, that We are neither unreasonable nor
licentious, when We claim no more than the Liberties enjoyed by the Freemen of
Great Britain; and demand from our Prince and Parliament, a Constitution framed
upon the same Principles with the English Government, and reduced to a Form as
nearly resembling it as the Nature of our Situation will admit.

If still, after every moderate Effort, to convince the Judgment, and remove
the Prejudices of our unprovoked Enemies, We (...) the whole Power of
Oppression gathering over our Heads; let Us animate our Hearts, by calling to
our Memories the glorious Examples of Antiquity, and generously risque the
Whole to preserve the most valuable Part. Let Us draw our Term of Freedom out
In it is full Length, and spin it to the last,
So shall We gain still one Day's Liberty;
And, Let me perish, but in Cato's Judgment,
A Day -- an Hour of virtuous Liberty
Is worth a whole Eternity in Bondage.
ADDISON.


Upon the first Attempts toward the carrying into Execution this last
detestable Act of the British Parliament, the Genius of America was suddenly
awakened from her flattering Dream of ideal Security; and, with a Rapidity
scarcely to be conceived, communicated to her deluded Sons a just Sense of
their impending Danger. Alarmed at so bold an Attempt to deprive Them of the
most estimable Privileges of Society, in the first uncollected Moments of
Resentment, They could only evidence the Spirit of that Resolution, and the
Warmth of that Unanimity, by which They may hereafter raise Themselves to some
Degree of Importance, when their Motions may be directed by the Voice of Reason
and Experience. The Measures which They have already pursued have answered
their first important Purpose -- the preventing the immediate Execution of the
Act. They were too warm to look forward to ultimate Consequences. They felt too
sensibly to reason coolly; nor could They readily conceive, that, after going
the Lengths which They had proceeded, it would still be necessary to go one
Step further. The first grand Point gained by the Resignation of the
Stamp-Officers, They are too much elated with their sudden Success, to
consider, that, while They suffered the Pains and Penalties of the Act, to
deter Them from Proceeding in the usual Course of Business, They were giving it
sufficient Force to effect it is pernicious Purposes. The general Circulation in
a commercial Body, cannot be long obstructed without inducing the most fatal
Consequences; nor could the Enemies of America have fallen upon any Method
which would more effectually answer their Ends.

We have already shown that the Spirit of Liberty is not confined to the Shores
of Britain. Let Us now endeavor to support that Spirit, by such a prudential
Measure as shall serve to prove it is determined Nature; and, at the same Time,
give Us a more reasonable Hope of effecting our other Purposes. Let Us at once
boldly plead to the Jurisdiction of Parliament. -- Let Us totally disallow the
Force of that Act so evidently calculated to enslave Us; and unanimously
proceed in the Course of our internal Business as if no such Act had ever
passed. To appear irresolute in a Proceeding of such high Importance, will give
the greatest Advantage to the Enemies of American Freedom. The least Appearance
of Timidity will encourage Them in the Prosecution of their horrid Designs upon
our Liberty; and, to show any Doubt of our being able to support the Steps We
have already taken, will offer such a Proof of future Acquiescence, as must be
highly grateful to the Promoters of this odious Act.

In pursuing a Measure so well calculated to answer the Purposes of Opposition,
the Officers of Government will find Themselves most obnoxious to the Pains and
Penalties of the Act; and consequently will not choose to engage in the general
Dispute upon such unequal Terms They cannot willingly think of involving
Themselves in a Game, where their Stake is so much greater than that of their
Fellow Adventurers; and where the Prize which They might gain, would not be
more than equal. But, shall We suffer this partial Policy of a few Individuals
to interfere with the public Good; when the same spirited Conduct which obliged
the Collectors of the Stamp Duty to resign, would secure a ready Compliance
from the Officers of Government; and once more set the whole political Machine
in Motion?

FINIS.

