THE ANNALS OR HISTORY OF YALE-COLLEGE, IN NEW HAVEN, In the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, FROM The first FOUNDING thereof, in the Year 1700, to the Year
1766: With An APPENDIX, Containing the Present State of the College, the Method
of Instruction and Government, with the OFFICERS, BENEFACTORS and GRADUATES.

By THOMAS CLAP, A. M. PRESIDENT OF THE SAID COLLEGE.

NEW HAVEN: Printed for JOHN HOTCHKISS and B. MECOM. M,DCC,LXVI.

THE PREFACE.
THE Knowledge of the History of any Society is very necessary to direct the
Governors of it, how to conduct with Wisdom, Uniformity and Justice; and may be
useful and entertaining to many Others.

At the Desire of the Reverend Trustees of this College, in the Year 1744, I
compiled the Substance of this History, to that Time; which was read and
approved by them. -- It was collected principally from the Records and original
Papers; but several Circumstances, tending to set the Whole in a clear Light, I
received from sundry Gentlemen, who were contemporary with the Facts related;
among which were some of the Founders of the College, with whom I was
personally acquainted in the Year 1726.

As my principal Design, in writing this History, was to preserve these
important Facts from Oblivion, and to transmit them down, for the Use of
Posterity; I have confined myself to the proper Province of an Historian; which
is to give a just and simple Narration of Facts, without interspersing many
Embellishments, Observations or Reflections; leaving them to be made by the
judicious and candid Reader.

And since the Want of a certain and exact Knowledge of some ancient Facts, has
oftentimes been the Occasion of Controversies and Disputes, I have been more
minute in the Relation of some Circumstantials, than may probably be
entertaining to Strangers; yet not more than may, hereafter, be really
necessary, for those who will be immediately concerned.

I have digested this History in the Form of ANNALS, as supposing that the
chronological Order will be most easily understood and remembered: Yet,
sometimes, where Things are necessarily connected, I have put them into the
same Paragraph, although they occurred in different Years.

The greater Part of this History being wrote when the Paper-Currency of
New England was in a depreciating State, it was thought best that all Sums of
Money should be reduced to the Sterling Value. -- The College-Accounts, before
the Year 1726, are somewhat obscure; and therefore it is probable that some
Receipts and Disbursements of Money, before that Time, have not come to my
Knowledge; yet, since that Time, they stand very fair and clear.

To render this History the more complete, I have recited or referred to all
the Acts of the Honorable the General Assembly, relating to the College.

I had Thoughts of adding something upon the civil and ecclesiastical
Privileges of Colleges and Universities, but shall only refer the Reader to
those Authors who have wrote largely on that Subject, viz. -- Dr. Ayliffe's
ancient and present State of the University of Oxford; Wood's Institutes of the
common Law; Bp. Stillingfleet's Discourse in the House of Lords; Conringius, de
Antiquitatibus Academicis; and a short Piece I printed, in the Year 1754,
entitled The Religious Constitution of Colleges.

I have made Minutes of several other Things, which may be useful to Some; and
may hereafter prepare Materials for the Continuation of this History.

YALE-COLLEGE, March 1, 1766. THOMAS CLAP.

THE HISTORY OF YALE-COLLEGE.
THE original and primary Design of the Institution of Colleges and superior
Schools of Learning, was to educate young Men for the Work of the Ministry:
Centuriatores Magdeburgenses, Lib. 1, Cap. VII, and Lib. XI Cap. VII. Dr.
Lightfoots Works, Vol. 11, P. 86.
And therefore they have been generally esteemed to be of divine Institution,
Bp. Stillingfleets Works, Vol. 111. P. 878 Alstedii Chronologia Scholarum.
and were anciently called the Schools of the Church Scholae Ecclesiasticae.
To this Effect the Fathers of New England declare their Sentiments in sundry
Expressions in their early Synodical Acts. That we read in Scripture of Schools
and Colleges: Synod at Boston, 1679 2 Chronicles. 34. 22.
That they are necessary for the training up of such in good Literature as may
be called to the Office of a Pastor or Teacher in the Church. That the Doctor
or Teacher was instituted both for the Churches and the Schools. Cambridge
Platform Chap. 6.
That Samuel, Elijah, and Elisha were Presidents of the Schools of the
Prophets. 1 Samuel 19, 20. Centuriatores Mag. Lib. II. Cap. VII.
And that Ecclesiastical History informs us that great Care was taken by the
Apostles and their immediate Successors to settle Schools in all Places, where
the Gospel had been preached; that so the Interest of Religion might be
preserved, and the Truth propagated to succeeding Generations. Eusebii Hist.
Eccl. Lib V. Cap. X.


School
The Design of founding a College in the Colony of Connecticut, was first
concerted by the Ministers; among which the Rev. Mr. Pierpont of New Haven, Mr.
Andrew of Milford, and Mr. Russel of Branford, were the most forward and
active. They had sundry Meetings and Consultations, and received several
Proposals or Schemes relating to the Constitution and Regulation of such a
College. The first Plan was very formal and minute, drawn up by some Gentleman
in Imitation of the Protestant Colleges and Universities in France, founded by
their general Synods. See Quick's Synodicon in Gallia Reformata.
In which it was proposed, That a College should be erected by a general Synod
of the consociated Churches Dr. I. Mather, in his Order of the Gospel, says,
That a Consociation of Churches, has ever been the Profession and Practice of
those who have been called Congregationalists. The Churches in Connecticut,
from the Beginning were wont to Consociate upon special Emergencies: more
frequently, after the Synod at Boston in the Year 1662: and in a more fixed and
stated Manner, after the Synod at Saybrook, 1708.
in the Colony of Connecticut. To be under the Government of a President and
ten Inspectors or Trustees, any seven of them to be a Quorum. That the Synod
should nominate the first President and Inspectors, and should have some kind
of Influence in all future Elections, so far as should be necessary, to preseve
Orthodoxy in the Governors. That the Synod should agree upon a Confession of
Faith to be consented to by the President, Inspectors and Tutors. That the
College should be called the School of the Church. And that the Churches should
contribute toward it is Support. Accordingly there was a general Contribution
in 1703.
etc. There was no public Motion for the calling of a formal Synod, for that
Purpose, till three Years after; but in the mean Time, in the lesser
Conventions of Ministers in Associations and Councils, and in private
Conversation, ten of the principal Ministers in the Colony, were nominated and
agreed upon by a general 1699
Consent both of the Ministers and People, to stand as Trustees or Undertakers
to found, erect and govern a College, viz. The Rev. Messrs.
James Noyes, of Stonington. Israel Chauncy, of Stratford. Thomas Buckingham,
of Saybrook. Abraham Pierson, of Killingworth. Samuel Mather, of Windsor.
Samuel Andrew, of Milford. Timothy Woodbridge, of Hartford. James Pierpont, of
New Haven. Noadiah Russel, of Middletown. Joseph Webb, of Fairfield.


The Ministers so nominated, met at New Haven and formed themselves into a Body
or Society, 1700
to consist of eleven Ministers, including a Rector, and agreed to Found a
College in the Colony of Connecticut; which they did at their next Meeting at
Branford, in the following Manner, viz. Each Member brought a Number of Books
and presented them to the Body; and laying them on the Table, said these Words,
or to this Effect; "I give these Books for the founding a College in this
Colony." Then the Trustees as a Body took Possession of them; and appointed the
Rev. Mr. Russel of Branford to be the Keeper of the Library, which then
consisted of about 40 Volumes in Folio. Soon after they received sundry other
Donations both of Books and 1700
Money, which laid a good Foundation. This Library with the Additions, was kept
at Branford, in a Room set apart for that Purpose near three Years, and then it
was carried to Killingworth.

But afterward some began to doubt whether they were fully vested with a legal
Capacity to hold Lands, and whether private Donations and Contributions would
yield a Sufficiency to carry on so great a Design; it was therefore proposed to
make Application to the Hon. the General Assembly of the Colony for some
Assistance; and to ask for a Charter. The Expediency of this Proposal was
debated at several Meetings; and sundry Arguments were used on both Sides: and
some of the ablest Lawyers both in, and out of the Government, were consulted
upon it. After mature Consideration, they concluded that it was safe and best
to have a Charter, 1701
notwithstanding any Change of the Government which might possibly happen; and
wrote to the Hon. Judge Sewall, and Mr. Secretary Addington of Boston to
prepare a Draught of a Charter, to be presented to the next Assembly.

Whereupon a large Number of Ministers and others, drew up and signed a
Petition to the Hon. the General Assembly, representing, That from a sincere
Regard to, and Zeal for, upholding the Protestant Religion, by a Succession of
learned and orthodox Men, they had proposed that a Collegiate School should be
erected in this Colony, wherein Youth should be instructed in all Parts of
Learning, to qualify them for public Employments in Church and Civil State;
and that they had nominated ten Ministers to be Trustees, Partners or
Undertakers for the Founding, Endowing and Ordering the said School, viz. The
Rev. Mr. James Noyes, Mr. Israel Chauncy and the rest before mentioned And
thereupon desired that full Liberty and Privilege might be granted to the said
Undertakers for that End.

And in Order to facilitate the Design, James Fitch, 1701
of Norwich Esquire one of the Council, soon after the Assembly met, made a formal
Donation under his Hand, predicated upon the great Pains and Charge which the
Ministers had been at in setting up a Collegiate School; and therefore in order
to encourage a Work so pleasing to God, and beneficial to Posterity, he gave a
Tract of Land in Killingly, of about 600 Acres; and all the Glass and Nails
which should be necessary to build a College House and Hall: and promised to
give a more ample Conveyance of the Land, as soon as it could be resurveyed.

The Petition being presented to the Hon. Assembly, they appeared very ready to
encourage such a laudable and pious Design, and accordingly established the Act
or Charter drawn up by Mr. Secretary Addington, with some small Additions and
Alterations, which is as follows, viz.

Colony Seal
By the Governor in Council and Representatives of his Majesty's Colony of
Connecticut, in General Court assembled at New Haven, Octo. 9th 1701. An Act
for Liberty to erect a Collegiate School.
WHEREAS several well disposed and public spirited Persons of their sincere
Regard to and Zeal for upholding and propagating of the Christian Protestant
Religion, by a Succession of learned and orthodox Men, have expressed by
Petition their earnest Desires, that full Liberty and Privilege be granted unto
certain Undertakers for the founding, suitably endowing and ordering a
Collegiate School within his Majesty's Colony of Connecticut, wherein Youth may
be instructed in the Arts and Sciences, who through the Blessing of Almighty
God, may be sitted for public Employments both in Church and civil State. To
the Intent therefore that all due Encouragement be given to such pious
Resolutions, and that so necessary and religious an Undertaking may be set
forward, supported and well managed.

Be it Enacted by the Governor and Company of the said Colony of Connecticut in
General Court now assembled, and it is Enacted and ordained by the Authority of
the same, that there be, and hereby is, full Liberty, Right, and Privilege
granted unto the Rev. Mr. James Noyes, of Stonington, Mr. Israel Chauncy, of
Stratford, Mr. Thomas Buckingham, of Saybrook, Mr. Abraham Pierson, of
Killingworth, Mr. Samuel Mather, of Windsor, Mr. Samuel Andrew, of Milford, Mr.
Timothy Woodbridge, of Hartford, Mr. James Pierpont, of New Haven, Mr. Noadiah
Russel, of Middletown, and Mr. Joseph Webb, of Fairfield, being Reverend
Ministers of the Gospel, and Inhabitants within the said Colony; proposed to
stand as Trustees, Partners or Undertakers for the said School, to them and
their Successors, to erect, form, direct, order, establish, improve, and at all
Times in all suitable Ways for the future to encourage the said School in such
convenient Place or Places, and in such Form or Manner, and under such Order
and Rules, as to them shall seem Meet, and most conducive to the aforesaid End
thereof, so as such Rules, or Orders, be not repugnant to the Laws of the Civil
Government; as also to Employ the Moneys or any other Estates, which shall be
granted by this Court or otherwise contributed to that Use according to their
Discretion, for the Benefit of the said Collegiate School, from Time, to Time,
and at all Times henceforward.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the before-named
Trustees, Partners, or Undertakers together with such others as they shall
associate to themselves, (not exceeding the Number of eleven, or at any Time be
less than seven,) provided also, that Persons nominated or associated from Time
to Time to fill up said Number, be Ministers of the Gospel inhabiting within
this Colony, and above the Age of forty Years, or the Major Part of them, the
said James Noyes, Israel Chauncy, Thomas Buckingham, Abraham Pierson, Samuel
Mather, Samuel Andrew, Timothy Woodbridge, James Pierpont, Noadiah Russel, and
Joseph Webb, Undertakers, and of such Persons so chosen and associated as
aforesaid, at any Time hereafter have and shall have henceforward the
Oversight, full and complete Right, Liberty, Power and Privilege to furnish,
direct, manage, order, improve and encourage from Time to Time and in all Times
hereafter, the said Collegiate School so erected and formed by them in such
Ways, Orders and Manner, and by such Persons, Rector or Master and Officers
appointed by them, as shall according to their best Discretion be most
conducible to attain the aforementioned End thereof.

And moreover, It is enacted and ordered by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives of the Colony aforesaid met in General Assembly, that the said
Mr. James Noyes, Israel Chauncy, Thomas Buckingham, Abraham Pierson, Samuel
Mather, Samuel Andrew, Timothy Woodbridge, James Pierpont, Noadiah Russel and
Joseph Webb, Undertakers, Trustees, or Partners, and the said Persons taken
from Time to Time into Partnership, or associated as aforesaid with themselves,
shall have and receive, and it is hereby given and granted unto them, the full
and just Sum of One Hundred and Twenty Pounds in Country Pay, Equivalent to L.
60 Sterling.
to be paid annually and at all Times hereafter until this Court order
otherwise, to them and to such Person or Persons only, as they shall appoint
and empower to receive the same, to be faithfully disposed of by the said
Trustees, Partners, or Undertakers for the End aforesaid according to their
Discretion: which said Sum shall be raised and paid in such Ways and Manners,
and at such a Value as the Country Rates of said Colony are, and have been
usually raised and paid.

It is also further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the said
Undertakers and Partners, and their Successors be, and hereby are further
Empowered to have, accept, acquire, purchase, or otherwise lawfully enter upon
any Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to the Use of the said School, not
exceeding the Value of five Hundred Pounds per Annum, and Goods, Chattels Sum
or Sums of Money, whatsoever as have heretofore already been granted, bestowed,
bequeathed, or given, or as from Time to Time, shall be freely given,
bequeathed, devised, or settled by any Person or Persons whatsoever, upon and
to and for the Use of the said School, toward the founding, erecting, or
endowing the same, and to sue for, recover, and receive all such Gifts,
Legacies, Bequests, Annuities, Rents, Issues, and Profits, arising therefrom,
and to Employ the same accordingly, and out of the Estates, Revenues, Rents,
Profits, Incomes accruing and belonging to the said School, to support and pay
as the said Undertakers shall agree, and see Cause, the said Rector, or
Masters, Tutors, Ushers, or other Officers their respective annual Salaries or
Allowances, as also for the Encouragement of the Students, to grant Degrees, or
Licenses, as they or those deputed by them, shall see Cause to order and
appoint.

The Trustees receiving an additional Vigor from the Grants and Privileges
contained in this Charter, met soon after and entered the following solemn
Declaration, viz.

At a Meeting of the Collegiate Undertakers, holden at Saybrook, November 11,
A. D, 1701. PRESENT, The Reverend
Israel Chauncy, Thomas Buckingham, Abraham Pierson, Samuel Andrew, James
Pierpont, Noadiah Russel, Joseph Webb.

Whereas it was the glorious public Design of our now blessed Fathers, in
their Remove from Europe into these Parts of America, both to plant, and (under
the Divine Blessing) to propagate in this Wilderness the blessed reformed
Protestant Religion, in the Purity of its Order and Worship; not only to their
Posterity, but also to the barbarous Natives: In which great Enterprise they
wanted not the Royal Commands and Favor of his Majesty King Charles the
Second, to authorize and invigorate them.

We their unworthy Posterity, lamenting our past Neglects of this grand Errand,
and sensible of the equal Obligations, better to prosecute the same End, are
desirous in our Generation to be serviceable thereunto.

Whereunto the religious and liberal Education of suitable Youth is, under the
Blessing of God, a chief and most probable Expedient. Therefore, that we might
not be wanting in cherishing the present observable and pious Disposition of
many well-minded People, to dedicate their Children and Substance unto God in
such a good Service: And being ourselves, with sundry other Reverend Elders,
not only desired by our Godly People, to undertake as Trustees, for erecting,
forming, ordering and regulating a Collegiate School, for the Advancement of
such an Education: But having also obtained of our present religious
Government, both full Liberty and Assistance, by their Donations to such an
Use: Tokens likewise that particular Persons will not be wanting in their
Beneficence: Do, in Duty to God, and the Weal of our Country, undertake in the
aforesaid Design. And being now met, according to the Liberties and Aids
granted to us for the Use aforesaid; do order and appoint, that there shall be,
and hereby is erected and formed a Collegiate School, wherein shall be taught
the liberal Arts and Languages, in such Place or Places in Connecticut, as the
said Trustees with their Associates and Successors, do or shall, from Time to
Time, see Cause to order.

For the orderly and effectual Management of this Affair, we agree to and
hereby appoint and confirm the following RULES.

1st, That the Rector take special Care, as of the moral Behavior of the
Students at all Times, so with Industry, to instruct and ground them well in
Theoretical Divinity; and to that End, shall neither by himself, nor by any
other Person whomsoever, allow them to be instructed and grounded in any other
System or Synopsis of Divinity, than such as the said Trustees do order and
appoint: But shall take effectual Care, that the said Students be weekly (at
such Seasons as he shall see Cause to appoint) caused memoriter to recite the
Assembly's Catechism in Latin, and Ames's Theological Theses, of which, as also
Ames's Cases of Conscience, he shall make, or cause to be made, from Time to
Time, such Explanations as may (through the Blessing of God,) be most conducive
to their Establishment in the Principles of the Christian Protestant Religion.

2dly, The Rector shall also cause the Scripture daily (except on the Sabbath)
Morning and Evening, to be read by the Students at the Times of Prayer in the
School, according to the laudable Order and Usage of Harvard College, making
Expositions upon the same: And upon the Sabbath, shall either Expound practical
Theology, or cause the non-graduated Students to repeat Sermons: And in all
other Ways according to his best Discretion, shall at all Times studiously
endeavor in the Education of the Students, to promote the Power and purity of
Religion, and the best Edification of these New England Churches.

With sundry other Rules and Orders for the Regulation of the said School.

The Trustees chose the Rev. Mr. Abraham Pierson, who was one of their Number,
to take the Care of Instructing and Governing the Collegiate School; under the
Title and Character of RECTOR.

And in as much as it was originally proposed that there should be ten Trustees
besides the Rector, they chose the Rev. Mr. Samuel Russel, of Branford, to be a
Trustee to complete the Number of Eleven.

At the same Meeting, they entered upon the Consideration of the most
convenient Place in the Colony of Connecticut, in which they might erect and
fix the Collegiate School: they were not perfectly satisfied or united in it;
but after a considerable Debate they fixed upon Saybrook, as the most
convenient Place, at Present; unless upon further Consideration they should
alter their Minds: And this Matter was debated at several Meetings afterward.

They also desired the Rector to remove himself and Family to Saybrook; but
till that could be effected, they ordered that the Scholars should be
instructed at or near the Rector's House in Killingworth. As this School was
some Years in forming, 1702
several young Gentlemen were preparing for it under the more private
Instruction of some one of the Trustees or others: After the School became
furnished with a Rector and a Tutor, eight of them were admitted, and put into
different Classes, according to the proficiency they had antecedently made. So
that in a Year or two some were qualified for Degrees.

The first Commencement was held at Saybrook, on Sept. 13th, 1702. at which
four young Gentlemen, who had before been graduated at the College at
Cambridge, and one more, who had a private Education, received the Degrees of
Master of Arts. This and several Commencements following were held privately in
the House of the Rev. Mr. Buckingham, because the Trustees by a preceding Act,
had forbid all public Commencements; to avoid the Charge and other
Inconveniences attending them.

Mr. Nathaniel Lynde of Saybrook, was pleased generously to give a House and
Land for the Use of the Collegiate School, so long as it should be continued at
Saybrook. And James Fitch, Esquire in pursuance of his generous Donation made in
October last, gave an ample Deed of 637 Acres of Land at Killingly. There was
also a general Contribution throughout the Colony, 1703
to build a College House at Saybrook, or wherever the College should be
finally fixed: But we have no Account what was obtained by it.

The Trustees had a special Meeting at Guilford, March 17th, 1703, and wrote a
Circular Letter to the Ministers, proposing "to have a general Synod of all the
Churches in the Colony of Connecticut, to give their joint Consent to the
Confession of Faith, after the Example of the Synod in Boston, in 1680." This
Proposal being universally acceptable, the Churches in the several Counties met
in a consociated Council, and assented to the Westminster or Savoy Confessions;
and drew up some Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline; as Matters preparatory to
the Synod. Then each Council chose six Delegates, that is, three Ministers and
three Messengers, to meet in a general Synod. This Synod met at Saybrook, in
1708: And having compared the several Draughts of the Councils in each County,
unanimously agreed in these three general Acts.

Is It. They drew up and consented to a Confession of Faith; which is the same in
Substance, and nearly in the same Words with the Westminster and Savoy
Confessions.

IId. They consented to the general Plan of Ecclesiastical Government,
contained in the Heads of Agreement assented to, by the united Ministers, in
England, formerly called Presbyterian and Congregational.

IIIdly. They drew up some particular Articles and Rules for the Administration
of Church Discipline. The Substance of which (so far as they seemed to contain
any Thing new) was this, that whereas in former Times the Boundaries of the
several Councils of Churches Consociated for mutual Assistance, were unfixed,
and left in the general Terms of the Neighboring Churches. See Cambridge
Platform, Chap. XV. Synod at Boston, 1662.
Now the several Neighbourhoods of Churches were more precisely bounded, and
limited to the respective Counties or Districts. These Acts of the Synod were
established by the Laws of the civil Government: And are called the
Ecclesiastical Constitution of the Churches of the Colony of Connecticut: And
are frequently referred to in the Acts of the Trustees; according to the
original Plan of the College, mentioned in Page 2d.

The Trustees made several Essays to remove the Rector, with his Family, to
Saybrook, and proposed to give him 50 Pounds Sterling, to bear the Charges of
his Removal, and 60 Pounds Sterling Salary per Annum. But as this Encouragement
was but small, and his Removal was strongly opposed by his People, and many of
the Trustees were not so well satisfied in fixing the College at Saybrook, as
to act with so much Vigor as otherwise they would have done; his Removal was
never effected; but the Students continued at Killingworth till his Death; 1707
which was in April 1707, to the unspeakable Grief and Loss both of the College
and of his People.

He was educated at Harvard College and graduated there Anno. 1668; was a hard
Student, a good Scholar, a great Divine, and a wise, steady and judicious
Gentleman in all his Conduct: He was for many Years a faithful and well
respected Pastor of the Church in Killingworth, and after he was chosen Rector,
he instructed and governed the Infant College with general Approbation; and
composed a System of Natural Philosophy, which the Students recited for many
Years.

Upon the Death of Mr. Rector Pierson, the Rev. Mr. Andrew of Milford, was
chosen Rector pro Tempore, until one could be obtained who should reside at the
Collegiate School. Upon which the Senior Class were removed to Milford, to be
under his immediate Care and Instruction till the Commencement. The rest of the
Students were removed to Saybrook, and put under the Care of two Tutors.

The Tutors and Students being now about twenty in Number, resided and boarded
in private Houses, where they could be best accommodated. And the Students
every Day came to their Tutors Chambers to Recitations and Prayers: Mr. Andrew
moderated at the Commencements, and sometimes gave or sent Directions to the
Tutors, in special Cases: But inasmuch as he lived at a great Distance, Mr.
Buckingham of Saybrook, one of the Trustees, (while he lived) was substituted
to have some Kind of Inspection over the Tutors and Students. In this obscure
State the College continued at Saybrook about seven Years, without any
remarkable Occurrent or Alteration. And the Trustees not being fully agreed or
satisfied in their own Minds about the Place of the College; and their Incomes
being scarce sufficient to settle and support a Resident Rector; they made no
considerable Attempts to procure one in all that space of Time.

About this Time sundry Donations of valuable Books were made to the Library,
1713
particularly by Sir John Davie, of Groton, who had an Estate descended to him
in England, together with the Title of Baronet: Upon his going to England, he
sent a good Collection of Books to the Library.

But the greatest Donation of all was by the Generosity and Procurement of
Jeremiah Dummer, Esquire of Boston, then Agent at London, who in the Year 1714 sent
above 800 Volumes of very valuable Books; about 120 of which were at his own
Cost and Charge; and the rest by his Procurement from sundry principal
Gentlemen in England; particularly Sir Isaac Newton, Sir Richard Blackmore, Sir
Richard Steel, Dr. Burnet, Dr. Woodward, Dr. Halley, Dr. Bently, Dr. Kennet,
Dr. Calamy, Dr. Edwards, the Rev. Mr. Henry, and Mr. Whiston, severally gave a
Collection of their own Works, and Governor Yale put in about 40 Volumes: All
which I suppose to be worth 260 Pounds Sterling.

1714
The Trustees and the Colony in general were from the Beginning, not very well
agreed in their Sentiments about the Place where to fix the College; and most
Men's Sentiments were influenced by their Situation; and they generally chose
that Place which would best accommodate themselves. Three or four Places were
generally discoursed upon viz. Saybrook, Hew-Haven, and Hartford or
Weathersfield. The Scholars were also somewhat uneasy at their Situation, they
thought that Saybrook was not compact enough for their Accommodation, since
many of them were obliged to reside above a Mile from the Place of public
Exercises, 1715
and they were not pleased with their Instruction and Government; there being
no resident Rector, and the Tutors sometimes very young. Many of the Students
therefore, having manifested an Uneasiness and Disrespect toward their Tutors;
the Trustees met at Saybrook, Apr. 4 1716
and called the Students before them, and enquired into the Occasion of their
Uneasiness and Disorder. They principally insisted upon the insufficiency of
their Instruction; and sundry of them who lived in or near Hartford and
Weathersfield, said that it was a Hardship for them to be obliged to reside at
Saybrook, when they could as well or better be instructed nearer home. It is
said, that several of these Things were suggested to them by others, with a
Design to help forward a Removal of the College.


The Trustees entered into a long Debate upon all the Circumstances of the
Collegiate School, and it seems did not entirely agree in their Sentiments, and
secret Views and Motives of Action; but at length they condescended to give a
Sort of Toleration, that those Students who were uneasy, might go to other
Places for Instruction, till the next Commencement.

Whereupon the greater Part of the Students went to Weathersfield, 1716
and were under the Instruction of Mr. Elisha Williams; some went to other
Places, and some remained at Saybrook; but the Smallpox coming there, a little
after, most of them removed to East-Guilford, June
and continued there till the Commencement, under the Tuition of the Reverend
Mr. Heart, and Mr. Russel.

The Collegiate School being in this broken and tottering State, the People in
several Parts of the Country begun to Subscribe large Sums for Building the
College, to induce the Trustees to set it where it would best accommodate them.
About L. 700 Sterling I suppose the Whole of that Sum was not actually paid.
was subscribed for New Haven; and it is said that about L. 500 Sterling was
subscribed for Saybrook; and a considerable Sum for Hartford or Weathersfield.

The Trustees met at the Commencement at Saybrook, September 12, 1716, and
entered upon the Consideration of the State and Place of the Collegiate School,
but not being perfectly agreed they adjourned to New Haven, to meet on the 17th
Day of October following; where were present, The Rev. Messrs.
Samuel Andrew, Timothy Woodbridge, Joseph Webb, Samuel Russel, Moses Noyes,
John Davenport, Thomas Buckingham, Thomas Ruggles.


And Voted, that considering the Difficulties of continuing the Collegiate
School at Saybrook, and that New Haven is a very convenient Place for it, for
which the most liberal Donations are given, the Trustees agree to remove the
said School from Saybrook to New Haven, and it is now settled at New Haven
accordingly. Five Trustees present were in this Vote, Mr. Woodbridge and Mr.
Buckingham were for Weathersfield; and Mr. Noyes declared, that he did not see
the Necessity of removing the School from Saybrook; but if it must be removed,
his Mind was to settle it at New Haven.

At this Meeting the Trustees received 250 Pounds Sterling, which was granted
to them by the General Assembly some Years before (from the Sale of the
equivalent Lands;) and having now in their Treasury about 125 Pounds Sterling,
Part of which might probably be the Effect of the Contribution in 1703, and
Part of it saved by not having a Resident Rector; and being also encouraged by
the large Subscriptions beforementioned; they voted to build a large and
convenient College and Rector's House at New Haven; and appointed a Committee
to carry on the Work. The College accordingly was raised on the 8th Day of
October following.

They also Voted, that the Rev. Mr. Andrew should continue Rector, pro Tempore,
till a settled Rector could be obtained, which they would Endeavor with all
convenient Speed. And they chose two Tutors; and ordered that Notice should be
given to all the Students belonging to the School, that Provision was made for
their Instruction and Government here. And accordingly those Scholars who had
been at Guilford on Account of the Smallpox, came to New Haven; but none came
from Weathersfield. They also chose the Rev. Mr. Stephen Buckingham of Norwalk,
to be a Trustee; but he considering the present difficult State of Affairs,
(and especially his near Relatives at Saybrook) did not choose to act, for some
Time. Then the Trustees sent the Entries of their Acts at this Meeting, to the
Rev. Mr. James Noyes of Stonington, who signed them, and declared his hearty
Concurrence with every Vote, on the 19th of December following.

The Trustees met again at New Haven, April 5, 1717
1717, where were present, The Rev. Messrs.
James Noyes, Samuel Andrew, Samuel Russel, Joseph Webb, John Davenport, Thomas
Ruggles, Stephen Buckingham.


The foregoing Acts past at the last Meeting were all read and confirmed, and
subscribed to by all the Members present; except Mr. Stephen Buckingham. And
again on the 11th of September following.

These Proceedings were strongly opposed by many Gentlemen in the Northern and
Eastern Parts of the Government, and the Colony in general were much engaged on
one Side or the other; insomuch that the Affair was several Times moved in the
General Assembly, for their Interposition; which occasioned some warm Debates,
but no Vote was past.

Notwithstanding these Difficulties, the Trustees steadily pursued their own
Determinations of settling the College at New Haven; and accordingly held the
first Commencement here on September 11, 1717. To which four Senior Sophisters
came from Saybrook, and received the Degree of Bachelor of Arts, and several
others commenced Masters. Mr. Andrew moderated, and gave Degrees, as Rector pro
Tempore. The last Year 13 Scholars had resided at New Haven, 14 at
Weathersfield, and 4 at Saybrook.

Mr. Woodbridge and Mr. Buckingham were very desirous to stop the Proceedings
of the Trustees in New Haven, and therefore in October following, they entered
a Kind of Remonstrance to the General Assembly, then sitting at New Haven:
wherein they represented, that the Votes of the Trustees for fixing the College
at New Haven, past October 17th, 1716, and April 5th, 1717, were not legal
Votes; for that the Major Part of the Trustees were not in them. That there
were Nine Trustees at least, subsisting in October 1716, and but Four of them
in the Vote, viz. Mr. Andrew, Mr. Webb, Mr. Russel and Mr. Davenport. That Mr.
Ruggles was chosen before he was forty Years of Age, and therefore that Choice
was null. And that Mr. James Noyes's Consent to that Act, at such a Distance
and so long after, could be no Confirmation of it. And that in the Act of April
1717, there were but Five Trustees out of Ten.

To which the Trustees, being then convened, replied, That in October 1716,
there were but Nine Trustees, Mr. Pierpont being dead, and none then chosen in
his Room; and Mr. Mather of Windsor had been Bedridden many Years, and had
resigned the Ministry; and therefore could not be looked upon as a Trustee.
That if it should be granted that Mr. Ruggles could not act as a Trustee, at
the Time when he was first nominated, yet he was forty Years old before the
passing of that Vote; and the Trustees by permitting him, in pursuance to a
former Nomination, to sit and act with them, thereby associated him, according
to the Charter. That inasmuch as the Trustees were not limited in their Way and
Manner of acting or voting, Mr. Noyes, though absent from the Meeting, might give
his Consent to an Act by subscribing it at home, within two or three Months
after, as well as if he had been present. And so there was a Majority of Six
out of Nine. And in April 1717, after Mr. Stephen Buckingham was chosen, there
was a Majority of Six out of Ten. But if Mr. Ruggles should not be reckoned at
either of the Meeting, nor Mr. Noyes, nor any other Trustee when absent, then
there will be a Majority of those who were present, which makes a legal Act.

Whereupon the upper House were of Opinion, that the Objections against the
Vote of the Trustees were insufficient. And after a long Debate in the lower
House, they did not see Cause to Vote any Thing upon it.

The Trustees being then convened at New Haven, Oct. 30
and being inclined to cut of all Occasion of Objection for the future, past a
Vote, wherein they declared and associated Mr. Ruggles a Trustee. And another
Vote predicated upon sundry former ones, wherein they finally settled the
College at New Haven, to which Seven Trustees, for greater Solemnity, set their
Hands, Viz.

James Noyes, Moses Noyes, Samuel Andrew, Samuel Russel, Joseph Webb, John
Davenport, Thomas Ruggles.
The Reason assigned by the Trustees in their Votes (and other Papers) for
settling the College at New Haven, were these; the Difficulty of keeping it at
Saybrook, which arose partly from the Uneasiness of the Scholars, partly from
the continual Endeavors of some to carry it to Hartford, which they supposed
to be at too great a Distance from the Sea, and would no ways accommodate the
Western Colonies. That they looked upon New Haven to be in itself the most
convenient Place, on the Account of the commodiousness of its Situation, the
agreableness of the Air and Soil, and the Cheapness of Commodities; and that
very large Donations had been made toward the Building an House there, without
which they had not sufficient to defray the Charge.

The Major Part of the General Assembly, being desirous to strengthen the Hands
of the Trustees in the present Difficulties, past the following Vote, in the
same Session, viz. That under the present Circumstances of the Affairs of the
Collegiate School, the Rev. Trustees be advised to proceed in that Affair; and
to finish the House they have built in New Haven, for the Entertainment of the
Scholars belonging to the Collegiate School.

Notwithstanding these Votes of the Trustees and the General Assembly, some
Gentlemen still pursued their Design of carrying the College to Weathersfield,
and therefore encouraged the Scholars there, which were about 14 in Number, 1718
to continue there: and in May following they again moved the Affair to the
General Assembly at Hartford. The lower House voted, to desire the Trustees, to
Consent that the Commencements should be held alternately at Weathersfield and
New Haven, till the Place of the School be fully determined. The Upper House
were of Opinion that the Place of the School was fully determined already, by
the indisputable Votes of the Trustees, and the subsequent Advice of the
Assembly thereupon; and therefore did not concur.

Presently after this, the Collegiate School at New Haven, received sundry very
large and generous Donations; (which were very acceptable at this difficult
Time.) The greatest of which was from the Honorable ELIHU YALE, of London, Esquire
Governor of the East India Company. He was Heir to a Manor in Wales, of the
Value of 500 Pounds Sterling per Annum, besides the vast Treasures he got by
his personal Industry while he was in the East Indies. The paternal Estate (as
it was said) being entailed to the Male Heir of the Family, and he, having no
Son, but three Daughters, sent to his first Cousin and next Male Heir Mr. John
Yale of New Haven, with whom he had been formerly acquainted in England, to
send him one of his Sons, to inherit the paternal Estate. Accordingly in the
Year 1712, he sent his Son Mr. David Yale, to London, who upon his Return was
graduated at this College 1724.

These Things brought Governor YALE into Correspondence with the Honorable
Governor Saltonstall and the Rev. Mr. Pierpont of New Haven, which was the
Occasion of his generous Donations. In the Year 1714 he sent 40 Volumes of
Books in Mr. Dummer's Collection. Last Year he sent above 300 Volumes, both
which Parcels I suppose to be worth 100 Pounds Sterling. This Summer he sent
Goods to the Value of 200 Pounds Sterling at prime Cost, besides the King's
Picture and Arms; with some Intimations that he would yet add; and accordingly
three Years after, he sent to the Value of 100 Pounds more; both which Parcels
were sold here for an Equivalent to 400 Pounds Sterling.

Mr. Dummer at this Time also sent 76 Volumes of Books, whereof 20 were Folios,
in Value about 30 Pounds Sterling. The Honorable Gurdon Saltonstall, Esquire and
Jahaleel Brenton, of Newport, Esquire gave, each of them, 50 Pounds Sterling.

Upon the Receipt of these and other large Donations, the Circumstances of the
Collegiate School were very much altered for the better, and the Trustees were
now well enabled to finish the large and commodious College House, which they
had before erected; it was raised on the 8th Day of October 1717, and within a
Year after was so far finished, as to be fit for the commodious Reception of
the Students. It was 170 Feet long, 22 Feet wide, and 3 Story high; made a
handsome Appearance, and contained near 50 Studies in convenient Chambers,
besides the Hall, Library and Kitchen, and Cost about 1000 Pounds Sterling.

On September 12, 1718, there was a splendid Commencement held at New Haven,
where were present, besides the Trustees, the Honorable GURDON SALTONSTALL, Esquire
Governor of the Colony of Connecticut, the Honorable William Tailor, Esquire as
representing Governor Yale, the Honorable Nathan Gold, Esquire Deputy Governor,
sundry of the worshipful Assistants, the Judges of the Circuit, a great Number
of Rev. Ministers, and a great Concourse of Spectators.

The Trustees, in Commemoration of Governor Yale's great Generosity, called the
Collegiate School, after his Name, YALE-COLLEGE; and entered a Memorial thereof
upon Record, which is as follows.

GENEROSISSIMA, honoratissimi Domini ELIHU YALE Armigeri, Donatione, vigilantes
Scholae academicae, in splendido Novi Portus Connecticutensis Oppido
constitutae, Curatores, Aedificium Collegiale inceptum erectumque perficere
capaces redditi, Honorem tali tantoque Maecenati Patronoque debitum, animo
gratissimo meditantes, Memoriamque tanti Beneficii in hanc praecipue Coloniam
collati, in omne Aevum modo optimo perducere studiosi: Nos Curatores, Negotii
tanti, in commune praesertim hujus Provinciae Populi bonum, Momenti, Cura
honorati, omothumadon consentimus, statuimus et ordinamus, nostras Aedes
academicas Patroni munificentissimi Nomine appellari, atque YALENSP COLLEGIUM
nominari: ut haec Provincia diuturnum Viri adeo Generosi, qui, tanta
Benevolentia tantaque Nobilitate, in Commodum illorum maximum propriamque
Incolarum, et in praesenti and futuris Seculis, Utilitatem consuluit,
Monumentum retineat et conservet.

Jacobus Noyes, Moses Noyes, Samuel Andrew, Samuel Russel, Josephus Webb,
Johannes Davenport, Thomas Ruggles, Stephanus Buckingham.



Which I shall translate, for the Sake of the English Reader.

THE Trustees of the Collegiate School, constituted in the splendid Town of
New Haven, in Connecticut, being enabled by the most Generous Donation of the
Honorable ELIHU YALE, Esquire to finish the College House, already begun and
erected, gratefully considering the Honor due to such and so great a
Benefactor and Patron, and being desirous, in the best Manner, to perpetuate to
all Ages the Memory of so great a Benefit, conferred chiefly on this Colony: WE
the Trustees, having the Honor of being entrusted with an Affair of so great
Importance to the common Good of the People, especially of this Province, do
with one Consent agree, determine and ordain, that our College House shall be
called by the Name of it is Munificent Patron, and shall be named YALE-COLLEGE:
That this Province may keep and preserve a lasting Monument of such a Generous
Gentleman, who, by so great a Benevolence and Generosity, has provided for
their greatest Good, and the peculiar Advantage of the Inhabitants, both in the
present and future Ages.


On the Commencement Day Morning, this Monument both of Generosity and
Gratitude was with solemn Pomp read off in the College Hall, both in Latin and
English; then the Procession moved to the Meeting House, to attend the Public
Exercises of the Day: Wherein, besides the Oration made by one of the
Bachelors, the Rev. Mr. John Davenport, one of the Trustees, at the Desire of
the Body, made a florid Oration, wherein he largely insisted upon and highly
extolled the Generosity of Governor Yale. Eight Candidates received the Honor
of a Degree of Bachelor of Arts; and several more were created Masters. And the
Honorable Governor Saltonstall was pleased to Grace and Crown the whole
Solemnity, with an elegant Latin Oration; wherein he congratulated the present
happy State of the College, in being sixed at New Haven, and enriched with so
many noble Benefactions; and particularly celebrated the great Generosity of
Governor Yale, with much Respect and Honor.

After this the Trustees sent a very Complaisant Letter of Thanks to Governor
Yale; and gave him a particular Account of all the Transactions at the
Commencement. They also sent a Letter of Thanks to their great Friend and
Patron Jeremiah Dummer, Esquire for his late Donation of Books; and another to the
Honorable General Nicholson for his Donation of Books in Mr. Dummer's
Collection; and for a late Donation, the Number or Value of which I cannot find.

On the same Day upon which the Commencement was carried on at New Haven,
something like a Commencement was carried on at Weathersfield, before a large
Number of Spectators; five Scholars, who were originally of the Class, which
now took their Degrees at New Haven, performed public Exercises; the Rev. Mr.
Woodbridge acted as Moderator; and he and Mr. Buckingham and other Ministers
present signed Certificates, that they judged them to be worthy of the Degree
of Bachelor of Arts; these Mr. Woodbridge delivered to them in a formal Manner
in the Meeting House; which was commonly taken and represented as giving them
their Degrees.

Notwithstanding this Irregularity, which wise and good Men fell into in a Time
of Strife and Temptation; yet the Trustees were disposed to condescend, as far
as possible, to gain and reconcile those who had withdrawn from them; and
therefore ordered, Sept. 13.
that if any of those Five Scholars should produce to the Rector, a Testimony
under the Hands of any two Trustees, of their having been approved by them, as
qualified for a Degree, the Rector upon easy and reasonable Terms, should give
them a Diploma in the usual Form, and that their Names should be inserted in
the Class, as they were at first placed; which was done accordingly. They also
directed the rest of the Scholars remaining at Weathersfield to come to
New Haven, and paid for their Tuition while they were there.

Oct. 9.
The General Assembly in October following, in Order to quiet the Minds of
People, and introduce a general Harmony in the Public Affairs, ordered that a
State House should be built at Hartford, to compensate for the College at
New Haven; that 25 Pounds Sterling should be given to Saybrook for the Use of
the School, to compensate for the Removal of the College: That the Governor and
Council should, at the Desire of the Trustees, give such Orders as they should
think proper for the Removal of the Library from Saybrook to New Haven: That
the Scholars at Weathersfield, should go to New Haven; and the College should
be carried on, promoted and encouraged at New Haven, and all due Care taken for
its flourishing.

In December following the Governor and Council, at the Desire of the Trustees,
met at Saybrook; and gave a Warrant to the Sheriff, to deliver the Books to the
Trustees. The House where the Books were, was filled and surrounded with a
great Number of Men, who were determined to prevent the Removal of the Books;
and therefore resisted the Officer: But he, with his Attendants, broke open the
Door, and delivered the Books to the Trustees, or their Order; and so they were
conveyed to New Haven. But in this Tumult and Confusion, about 250 of the most
valuable Books, and sundry Papers of Importance were conveyed away by unknown
Hands, and never could be found again.

After this unhappy Struggle, the Spirits of Men began, by Degrees to subside;
and a general Harmony was gradually introduced among the Trustees, and the
Colony in general. The Rev. Mr. Woodbridge and Mr. Buckingham became very
friendly to the College at New Haven, and forward to promote all its Interests.
The Trustees, in Testimony of their Friendship and Regard to Mr. Woodbridge,
chose him Rector pro Tempore; and he accordingly moderated and gave Degrees at
the Commencement Anno 1723. Yet in this Time of Anarchy and Confusion, while
all College Order and Authority was in a Manner dissolved, the Scholars
contracted such licentious and vicious Habits, as were not wholly suppressed
and extirpated out of the College in several Years.

Governor Yale, 1721
the great Benefactor to this College died July 8th, 1721. He descended from an
ancient and wealthy Family in Wales; who for many Generations possessed the Manor
of Plas Grannow, and several other Messuages, near the City of Wrexham, of the
yearly Value of 500 Pounds. Thomas Yale, Esquire the Governor's Father, for the
Sake of Religion, came over to America with the first Settlers of New Haven, in
the Year 1638. Here the Governor was born, April 5, 1648. He went to England at
the Age of about 10 Years; to the East Indies at about 30, where he lived near
20 Years; acquired a very great Estate, was made Governor of Fort St. George;
married an Indian-Lady of Fortune, the Relict of Governor Hinmers, his
Predecessor; by whom he had three Daughters; viz. Katharine, who was afterward
married to Dudley North, Esquire commonly called Lord North. Ann, who was married
to the Lord James Cavendish, Uncle to the Duke of Devonshire. And Ursula, who
died unmarried. After his Return to London, he was chosen Governor of the
East India Company; and made the Donations beforementioned. And it is said,
that a little before his Death, he wrote his Will, wherein he gave 500 Pounds
more: But afterward, thinking it was best to execute that Part of his Will in
his Lifetime, he packed up Goods to that Value, ready to be sent; but before
they were shipped, he took a Journey into Wales, and died at Wrexham, in or
near the Seat of his Ancestors. So that the Goods were not sent; neither could
the Will obtain a Probate; although Governor Saltonstall took much Pains to
effect it.

He was a Gentleman, who greatly abounded in good Humor and Generosity, as
well as in Wealth: And his Name and Memory will be gratefully perpetuated in
YALE-COLLEGE.

After the College was fixed at New Haven, was enriched with sundry noble
Benefactions, and had a handsome and commodious House built for the Reception
of the Students, it began to flourish; and was much more taken Notice of in the
World, than it was in its more obscure State at Saybrook. The Number of the
Students was now about 40, who were under two Tutors, and sometimes visited by
Mr. Andrew, Rector pro Tempore. But yet the College was under great
Inconveniences both with Respect to Government and Instruction, for want of a
Resident Rector.

The Trustees therefore met at New Haven, 1719
in March 1719, and chose the Rev. Mr. Timothy Cutler, Minister of Stratford,
to be Resident Rector, till the next Meeting of the Trustees. He presently came
to New Haven, and entered upon the Business. At the next Commencement the
Trustees voted, that Mr. Cutler's Service hitherto in the Place of a Rector was
to their good Satisfaction, and therefore they desired him to continue in it.
1720
And after several Conferences with, and Proposals to the People at Stratford,
it was finally agreed, that the People at Stratford should have Mr. Cutler's
House and Home-lot there, in Consideration of his Removal; and that the
Trustees should give him 84 Pounds Sterling for it: Which was paid out of the
120 Pounds lately given by the General Assembly, by the Sale of Lands. 1721


To accommodate the Rev. Mr. Cutler and his Family, the Trustees built the
Rector's House, 1722
in the Year 1722, which with the Land and Appurtenances Cost 260 Pounds
Sterling, of which 35 Pounds was raised by Subscription, 55 Pounds by a general
Contribution, 115 Pounds by Impost on Rum, and 55 Pounds out of Governor Yale's
last Donation.

The College seemed now to be in a settled and flourishing State, but there was
a sudden and unexpected Change; for at the next Commencement, it was
discovered, that the Rector, one of the Tutors, and two of the neighboring
Ministers had agreed to leave the Communion of the Churches in the Colony of
Connecticut, and to go to England for episcopal Ordination. This Event was
somewhat surprising to the Trustees and to the Body of the People; for at that
Time there was not one episcopal Minister in the Colony of Connecticut; and but
very few of the Laity, who were episcopally inclined. Whereupon the Trustees
met, and passed the following Votes.

At a Meeting of the Trustees of Yale-College, in New Haven, October 17, 1722.
PRESENT, The Rev. Messieurs
Samuel Andrew, Timothy Woodbridge, Samuel Russel, Joseph Webb, John Davenport,
Thomas Buckingham, Stephen Buckingham, Thomas Ruggles, Eliphalet Adams.

9. Voted, That the Trustees, in faithfulness to the Trust reposed in them, do
excuse the Rev. Mr. Cutler from all further Service, as Rector of Yale-College.

10. Voted, That the Trustees accept of the Resignation which Mr. Brown has
made of his Office, as Tutor.

16. Voted, 'That all such Persons as shall hereafter be elected to the Office
of Rector or Tutor in this College, shall, before they are accepted therein,
before the Trustees, declare their Assent to the Confession of Faith owned and
consented to by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches in the Colony of
Connecticut, assembled by Delegation at Saybrook, September 9, 1708; and
confirmed by Act of the General Assembly; This is agreeable to the Constitution
of all the Universities in Scotland, in which all the Officers are admitted and
continued, upon Condition that they explicitly give their Consent to the
Westminster Confession of Faith, received in the Church of Scotland, as the
Confession of their Faith, agreeable to the Word of God, and containing the Sum
and Substance of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. This is confirmed by
sundry Acts of Parliament in Scotland, particularly that of William and Mary,
Parl. I. Sess. II. Act V. The King and Queens Majesty's and the three Estates
of Parliament conceiving it to be their bounden Duty, after the great
Deliverance which God had wrought for this Church and Kingdom, in the first
Place, to settle and secure therein the Protestant Religion according to the
Truth of Gods Word, do by these Presents ratify and establish the Confession of
Faith now read in their Presence, and voted and approved of, as the public
Confession of Faith in this Church; containing the Sum and Substance of the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. And in the 17th. Act of the same Session, it
was enacted, that no Officer in any University, College or School, shall be
admitted or allowed to continue in his Office, but such as do acknowledge and
profess the said Confession of Faith, etc. See also William and Mary, Parl. I.
Sess. IV. Act VI. All which Acts are established by the Act of Union between
the Kingdoms of England and Scotland: V. Ann Chap. VIII. and are made a
fundamental and unalterable Part of the Constitution of the Kingdom of
Great Britain. And every King, at his Accession to the Throne, is therein
expressly obliged to swear that he will inviolably maintain the true Protestant
Religion and the Rights of the Church of Scotland, as established by all these
Acts. See also Mr. Dunlop's Preface to the Westminster Confession, Page 58, etc.
and shall particularly give Satisfaction to them, of the soundness of their
Faith, in Opposition to Arminian and Prelatical Corruptions, or any other of
dangerous Consequence to the Purity and Peace of our Churches: But if it cannot
be before the Trustees, it shall be in the Power of any two Trustees, with the
Rector, to examine a Tutor, with Respect to the Confession and Soundness of his
Faith, in Opposition to said Corruptions.

1722
17. Voted, That upon just Ground of Suspicion of the Rector or Tutor's
Inclination to Arminian or Prelatic Principles, By Prelatical Principles, I
understand the Principle, that Prelacy or Episcopacy is of Divine Right, in
such an exclusive Sense as to Invalidate all Presbyterian Ordinations. But the
Opinion, that Episcopal Government is only most convenient, or may be complied
with as a civil Establishment; I suppose the Trustees did not esteem to be
inconsistent either with Academical or Christian Communion. See Dr.
Stillingfleet's Irenioum.
a Meeting of the Trustees shall be called, as soon as may be, to examine into
the Case.

1723
Mr. Daniel Turner of London sent to the Library sundry Volumes of his own
Works, on Physic and Surgery; and a Collection of other valuable Books,
principally on the same Subject; and particularly the large Volume of Cowper's
Anatomy. Whereupon the Trustees sent him a Diploma, creating him Doctor of
Physic.

The Controversy about moving the College had occasioned several Questions upon
the College Charter; Oct. 10 1723
whereupon the General Assembly made an Explanatory and additional Act; in
which it was declared, that any Trustee might resign his Office when he should
see cause. That seven Trustees convened at any Meeting, properly warned, should
be a Quorum; and have Power to act by a Majority then present: And to appoint a
Clerk to Register their Acts. That a Minister of Thirty Years of Age, might be
chosen a Trustee: And that the Rector should be a Trustee ex Officio. There
was, for a Time, some Hesitation about the Reception of this Act.

After Mr. Cutler's Removal there was no settled resident Rector for near 4
Years. In this Interval the Trustees agreed, that each of them, by turns,
should reside at College, about a Month at a Time, with the Authority of a
Rector. But this Form of Government did not very well answer the End; for though
there were several Instances of strict Discipline and Punishment of Offenses;
yet the ill Habits formerly contracted by the Students were not easily and
suddenly eradicated, and before the Vice-Rector could have Time to learn
sufficient Experience how to execute his Office to Advantage, he resigned his
Post. But at the Commencements, Mr. Andrew moderated, and gave Degrees, in the
Years 1724, 1725 and 1726.

In September 29, 1725, 1725
the Trustees chose the Rev. Mr. Elisha Williams, Minister of Newington, in
Weathersfield, to be Rector of the College; and appointed Mr. Woodbridge, Mr.
Buckingham and Mr. Whitman, to obtain his acceptance of the Office. In May
following they put in a Memorial to the General Assembly, desiring them to make
Satisfaction to the Parish of Newington, on the Account of their Minister's
Removal; and they accordingly released the Parish from their County Tax for
Three Years.

The Circumstances of Mr. Williams's Removal were 1726
not settled before the next Commencement. And therefore, Mr. Andrew still
presided. And on the next Day after, Mr. Rector Williams was installed, in the
following Manner, viz. In the Library, before the Trustees, he gave his Consent
to the Confession of Faith and Rules of Church Discipline, agreed upon by the
Churches of this Colony, in 1708. After Dinner he made a public Oration in the
Hall; and the Trustees successively came and saluted him as RECTOR.

After Mr. Rector Williams was settled in his Post, he began, by Degrees, more
effectually to suppress Vice and Disorder among the Students; and to introduce
and settle a Number of good Customs: A Taste for many Parts of useful and
polite Literature increased; and the State of the College has been gradually
growing better ever since.

1730
In the Year 1702, Major James Fitch gave a Deed, in Confirmation of the
Donation of Land, he had made some Time before. Afterward there was a
Controversy and Law Suit with Mr. John Fisk, and James Leavins, about the
Bounds of it, (they having a Survey which interfered with it.) A Clause in the
Deed to the College was construed to Limit the Grant to Saybrook. Upon an
Agreement with Major Fitch, in the Year 1719, he gave the Trustees a new Deed
of it; and they paid him 15 Pounds Sterling in Money, and expended 15 Pounds
more for pious Uses, according to Major Fitch's Direction. And finally, in the
Year 1730, to put an End to all Controversies with Mr. Fisk and Leavins, the
Trustees, by Way of Exchange, gave them a Deed of the Land given by Major
Fitch, and they gave the Trustees a Deed of 628 Acres of Land in SALISBURY. I
judge that the Trustees gave and expended, in various Ways on Account of the
said Land, near half the Value of it, at that Time.

1732
In October 1732, the General Assembly were pleased generously to Grant 1500
Acres of Land to the College, viz. 300 in each of the new Towns of Norfolk,
Canaan, Goshen, Cornwall and Kent. In Confirmation of which a Patent was given
May 16, 1741.

The Rev. Dr. GEORGE BERKELEY, then Dean of Derry, in Ireland, afterward
Bishop of Cloyne, came into North America, in Order to found an Episcopal
College. He resided a Year or two at Newport in Rhode Island, where he
purchased a Country Seat, with about 96 Acres of Land; and became acquainted
with the Rev. Mr. Jared Eliot of Killingworth, one of the Trustees, the Rev.
Mr. Samuel Johnson, Episcopal Minister at Stratford, and some other Gentlemen,
who informed him of the State and Genius of this College; he had also a
Correspondence with Mr. Rector Williams; all which were the Occasions of his
generous Donations. While he resided at Newport, he sent all his own Works, a
Present to the College. It so happened, that he did not pursue his Design of
founding a College in North America; but returned back to London. And being a
Gentleman who was furnished with a great Treasure of ingenious and polite
Learning, and endowed with a generous Disposition to promote and propagate the
same among Mankind; he sent a Deed of his Farm at Rhode Island to this College,
in the Year 1732. The Descriptions and Conditions in the Deed not being
perfectly adapted to the State of the College, at the Desire of the Trustees
he, next Year, sent another Deed, in which it was ordered, that the Rents of
the Farm, (after necessary Charges are deducted,) should be appropriated to the
Maintenance of the Three best Scholars in Greek and Latin, who should reside at
College, at least nine Months in a Year, in each of the Three Years between
their first and second Degrees: That on the 6th Day of May annually, or in Case
that should be Sunday, on the Seventh, the Candidates should be publicly
examined by the President or Rector, and the Senior Episcopal Missionary within
this Colony, 1733
who should be then present; and in Case none be present, then by the President
only. And in Case the President and Senior Missionary should not agree in their
Sentiments, who are the best Scholars, the Case shall be determined by Lot. And
that all Surplusages of Money which should happen by any Vacancies, shall be
distributed in Greek and Latin Books to such under-graduate Students as should
make the best Composition or Declamation in the Latin Tongue, upon such a moral
Theme as shall be given them.

This Premium has been a great Incitement to a laudable Ambition to excel in
the Knowledge of the Classics.

At the same Time the Rev. Dr. Berkeley pursuing his generous Intentions, sent
to this College the finest Collection of Books that ever came together at one
Time into America. The Number was near 1000 Volumes, (including those which he
had sent before) whereof 260 were Folios, and generally very large. I judge
that this Collection cost, at least 400 Pounds Sterling. This Donation of Books
was made, partly out of the Doctor's own Estate, but principally out of Moneys
which he procured from some generous Gentlemen in England. Upon the Receipt of
them, the Trustees sent the Doctor a Letter of Thanks, and have since given him
repeated Expressions of the grateful Sense which they retain of his Generosity
toward this College.

1739
The College flourished many Years under Mr. Rector Williams's Administration;
but the Sea Air and southerly Winds at New Haven did not agree with his
Constitution, and sometimes incapacitated him for Business, so that he found
himself by Degrees necessitated to resign his Office; which he accordingly did,
at a Meeting of the Trustees October the 31st, 1739. The Trustees returned him
their hearty Thanks for his good Service to the College.

After this he retired, and lived on his own Estate at Weathersfield; was soon
made Speaker of the Honorable House of Representatives, a Judge of the Superior
Court, and Colonel of a Regiment, in an intended Expedition against Canada.
Afterward he went to England, to receive the Wages due to himself and his
Regiment; and there cultivated a personal Acquaintance, with several Gentlemen
of Distinction; and married a Gentlewoman of superior Accomplishments. He then
returned to his Seat at Weathersfield; and died there, July 24th, 1755.

He was educated at Harvard-College in Cambridge, in New England, and graduated
there, Anno. 1711: Was furnished with most Parts and Kinds of academical
Literature: And left the College in a much better State than he found it. His
just Character is given at large in a funeral Sermon preached by the Rev. Mr.
Lockwood; and in the Appendix. The Rev. Dr. Doddridge, who had an intimate
Acquaintance with him in England, gives this Short, but comprehensive Character
of him, in a Letter to a Friend; I look upon Col. Williams to be one of the
most valuable Men upon Earth, he has joined to an ardent Sense of Religion,
solid Learning, consummate Prudence, great Candor and sweetness of Temper, and
a certain nobleness of Soul, capable of contriving and acting the greatest
Things, without seeming to be conscious of his having done them.

October 31, 1739, the Rev. Mr. Thomas Clap, Minister of Windham, was chosen
Rector of this College; and the Rev. Messieurs Ebenezer Williams, and Samuel
Woodbridge, were appointed a Committee to treat with him and his People, in
Order to obtain his Acceptance of the Office. The Committee went to Windham on
the 10th of November; having given previous Notice of their coming and Design.
The Generality of the People could not be satisfied that it was their Duty to
part with their Minister, on this Occasion; on the other Hand they were not
satisfied that they should be in the Way of their Duty to oppose his going; so
that after a considerable Debate, they did little or nothing, but left the
whole Affair to the Conduct of Providence.

The Committee moved for the calling of a Council of the Churches in the
County, to advise in this important Affair; who after a public Hearing of the
Objections, which some of the People made against his Removal, gave it as their
Opinion and Advice, That it was Mr. Clap's Duty to accept of the Office of
Rector of the College, as being a Call of Providence, to greater and more
extensive Usefulness. The Committee of the Trustees considering the great
Inconveniences which the College had formerly sustained by the long Intervals
in which it was destitute of a resident Rector, urged Mr. Clap to be speedy in
accepting and undertaking the Business: Whereupon he concluded to accept of it,
as a Call of Providence; and accordingly in December made a Visit to the
College.

1740
At a Meeting of the Trustees, on the 2d Day of April following, he was
installed, in the following Manner, viz. He gave his Consent to the Confession
of Faith and Rules of Church Discipline, agreed upon by the Churches in the
Colony of Connecticut, assembled by Delegation at Saybrook, in the Year 1708:
And gave Satisfaction as to the Soundness of his Principles, according to the
Act of the Trustees, Anno. 1722. Then they went into the Hall; the Rev. Mr.
Whitman, the Moderator began with Prayer; and one of the Students made an
Oration proper for the Occasion; then the Moderator made a Speech, in Latin,
wherein he committed the Care of instructing and governing the College to the
Rector; and he concluded the whole with an Oration.

The Trustees met at Hartford in May following; and the Committee of the first
Society in Windham, moved that they might have Recompense for the Removal of
their Pastor; they mutually agreed to refer it to three Gentlemen of the
General Assembly, to consider what Recompense they ought to have; those
Gentlemen were of Opinion, that inasmuch as Mr. Clap had been in the Ministry
at Windham 14 Years, which was about Half the Time Ministers in general
continue in their public Work; the People ought to have Half so much as they
gave him for a Settlement, which upon Computation was about 53 Pounds Sterling.
Whereupon the Trustees put in a Memorial to the General Assembly, praying them
to grant that Sum to the People of Windham; which they readily did.

The College was now, in the main, in a good State; yet not so perfect, but
that it would admit of sundry Emendations. The Rector therefore endeavored by
all Ways and Means in his Power, to bring it forward toward a State of
Perfection. The first Business of special Importance, which he entered upon,
was the compiling a Body of Laws. At the first founding of this College, it was
ordered, that where no special Provision was made by the Trustees, the Laws of
Harvard-College should be the Rule. About the Time the College was fixed at
New Haven, a short Body of Laws was drawn up, which was usually transcribed by
the Scholars at their Admission; but these, in Time, were found to be very
defective; and several of them became obsolete. In the Year 1735, the Trustees
appointed a Committee with the Rector, to draw up a new Body; but he, being in
a declining State of Health, did little or nothing upon it. As soon therefore
as Rector Clap was fixed in his Post, the Trustees desired him to enter upon
the Business; accordingly a large Body was drawn up, partly out of the ancient
Laws and Statutes of this College, partly from the principal and most important
Customs which had obtained, partly from the Laws of Harvard College, and partly
from the Statutes of the University of Oxford; and some few new ones were
added. This Body was perused by a Committee, then by most of their Members at
their own Homes, and after several Readings at the Trustee's Board, passed
their Sanction in 1745. These Laws were afterward translated into Latin and
printed in 1748: And some Additions have been made since, with several new
Editions.

About the same Time the Rector collected and wrote down, under proper Heads,
all the Customs of College, which had from Time to Time obtained and been
established by Practice, which made as large a Volume as the Statutes. By all
which Means, the Rules by which the Officers and Students of the College were
to conduct themselves, became better fixed and known, and the Government of the
College was rendered more steady and uniform, and less arbitrary.

Before this Time there never had been any perfect Catalogue of the Books in
the Library; 1742
for want of which the Students were deprived of much of the Benefit and
Advantage of them. The Rector therefore placed all the Books in the Library, in
a proper Order (but in Honor to the Rev. Dr. Berkeley, for his extraordinary
Donation, his Books stood by themselves, at the South End of the Library) and
put a Number to every Book in it is proper Class and Box; and then took three
Catalogues of the Books, one as they stood in their proper Order on the
Shelves; and another in an Alphabetical Order; and a Third, wherein the most
valuable Books were placed under proper Heads, according to the Subject Matter
of them; together with Figures referring to the Place and Number of each Book.
By which Means it might be easily known what Books were in the Library upon any
particular Subject, and where they might be found, with the utmost Expedition.
This Catalogue was printed, and was a great Incitement to the Diligence and
Industry of the Scholars in reading of them. About the same Time the General
Assembly augmented their annual Grant to the College, whereby they were enabled
to support three Tutors, one to each Class, including the Rector. This removed
a great Inconveniency which the College had before been under by one Tutor's
hearing two Classes, and sometimes more. And thereupon the Scholars studied and
recited much more than they had done in Years past.

1743
Mr. Anthony Nougier of Fairfield, in his Will, was pleased generously to bestow
on this College Twenty Seven Pounds Sterling, to be put out to Interest, and
the Interest thereof to be appropriated for the Maintenance of the Rector and
Tutors and their Successors forever, in Part. This Sum was received in 1744,
and put out to Interest accordingly.

1744
The former Acts or Charters did not establish the College in so perfect and
complete a Form as it was capable of; particularly the Name, Trustees, by which
the first Undertakers and Founders of the College and their Successors were
usually called, was not so proper and usual a Title for the Governors of a
College, in a more mature and perfect State. The Rector therefore drew up a
Draught of a new Charter, wherein the Trustees were incorporated by the Name
of, The President and Fellows of Yale-College in New Haven. This Draught was
revised by the Honorable Thomas Fitch, Esquire and approved by the Trustees, and by
them ordered to be presented to the Honorable the General Assembly for their
Sanction: Which was obtained in May following; and is as follows, viz.

BY THE GOVERNOR AND COMPANY of His MAJESTY'S Colony of CONNECTICUT in NEW
ENGLAND in AMERICA. 1745

An ACT for the more full and complete Establishment of YALE-COLLEGE in
NEW HAVEN, and for enlarging the Powers and Privileges thereof.
WHEREAS upon the Petition of several well-disposed and publick-spirited
Persons expressing their Desire that full Liberty and Privilege might be
granted unto certain Undertakers for the Founding, suitably Endowing and
Ordering a Collegiate School, within this Colony, wherein Youth might be
instructed in the Arts and Sciences; the Governor and Company of the said
Colony in General Court assembled at New Haven, on the 9th Day of October, in
the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and One, Granted unto the Rev.
Messrs. James Noyes, Israel Chauncy, Thomas Buckingham, Abraham Pierson, Samuel
Mather, Samuel Andrew, Timothy Woodbridge, James Pierpont, Noadiah Russel and
Joseph Webb, who were proposed to stand as Trustees, Partners or Undertakers
for the said Society, and to their Successors, full Liberty, Right and
Privilege to erect, form, direct, order, establish, improve, and at all Times
in all suitable Ways, to encourage the said School, in some convenient Place in
this Colony; and granted sundry Powers and Privileges for the attaining the End
aforesaid.

And whereas the said Trustees, Partners or Undertakers in pursuance of the
aforesaid Grant, Liberty and License, founded a Collegiate School at New Haven,
known by the Name of YALE-COLLEGE; which has received the favorable
Benefactions of many liberal and piously disposed Persons, and under the
Blessing of Almighty God, has trained up many worthy Persons for the Service of
God, in the State as well as in the Church.

And whereas the General Court of this Colony assembled at New Haven, the Tenth
Day of October in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty
Three, did explain and enlarge the aforesaid Powers and Privileges, granted to
the aforesaid Partners, Trustees or Undertakers and their Successors, for the
Purpose aforesaid; as by the respective Acts, reference thereto being had, more
fully and at large may appear.

And whereas the Rev. Messrs. Thomas Clap, Samuel Whitman, Jared Eliot,
Ebenezer Williams, Jonathan Marsh, Samuel Cook, Samuel Whittelsey, Joseph
Noyes, Anthony Stoddard, Benjamin Lord, and Daniel Wadsworth, the present
Trustees, Partners and Undertakers of the said School, and Successors of those
beforementioned; have petitioned, That the said School, with all the Rights,
Powers, Privileges and Interests thereof, may be confirmed; and that such other
additional Powers and Privileges may be granted, as shall be necessary for the
Ordering and Managing the said School, in the most advantageous and beneficial
Manner, for the promoting all good Literature in the present and succeeding
Generations. Therefore,

The GOVERNOR and COMPANY of his Majesty's said English Colony of Connecticut,
in General Court assembled, this Ninth Day of May, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty Five, enact, ordain, and declare, and by these
presents it is enacted, ordained and declared.

I. That the said THOMAS CLAP, Samuel Whitman, Jared Eliot, Ebenezer Williams,
Jonathan Marsh, Samuel Cook, Samuel Whittelsey, Joseph Noyes, Anthony
Stoddard, Benjamin Lord, and Daniel Wadsworth, shall be an Incorporate Society
or Body Corporate and Politic; and shall hereafter be called and known by the
Name of, THE PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF YALE-COLLEGE IN NEW HAVEN, and that by
the same Name, they and their Successors shall and may have perpetual
Succession; and shall and may be Persons capable in the Law to plead and be
impleaded; defend and be defended, and answer and be answered unto; and also to
have, take, possess, acquire, purchase or otherwise receive Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels or other Estates, and the same Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels or other Estates to grant, demise, lease, use,
manage or improve for the Good and Benefit of the said College, according to
the Tenor of the Donation and their Discretion.

II. That all Gifts, Grants, Bequests and Donations of Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels heretofore made to or for the Use, Benefit
and Advantage of the Collegiate School, aforesaid, whether the same be
expressed to be made to the President or Rector and to the rest of the
Incorporate Society of Yale-College, or to the Trustees or Undertakers of the
Collegiate School in New Haven, or to the Trustees by any other Name, Style or
Title whatsoever, whereby it may be clearly known and understood, that the true
Intent and Design of such Gifts, Grants, Bequests and Donations, was to and for
the Use, Benefit and Advantage of the Collegiate School aforesaid, and to be
under the Care and Disposal of the Governors thereof, shall be confirmed, and
the same hereby are confirmed, and shall be and remain to, and be vested in the
President and Fellows of the College aforesaid and their Successors, as to the
True and Lawful Successors of the original Grantees.

III. That the said President and Fellows and their Successors shall and may
hereafter have a common Seal, to serve and use for all Causes, Matters and
Affairs of them and their Successors; and the same Seal to alter, break and
make new, as they shall think fit.

IV. That the said THOMAS CLAP shall be, and he is hereby established the
present PRESIDENT, and the said Samuel Whitman, Jared Eliot, Ebenezer Williams,
Jonathan Marsh, Samuel Cook, Samuel Whittelsey, Joseph Noyes, Anthony
Stoddard, Benjamin Lord, and Daniel Wadsworth shall be, and they are hereby
established the present FELLOWS of the said College: And that they and their
Successors shall continue in their respective Places during Life, or until they
or either of them shall resign or be removed or displaced, as in this Act is
hereafter expressed.

V That there shall be a general Meeting of the President and Fellows of said
College, in the College Library, on the second Wednesday of September annually,
or at any other Time and Place which they shall see cause to appoint, to
consult, advise and act in and about the Affairs and Business of the said
College; and that on any special Emergency, the President and two of the
Fellows, or any four of the Fellows may appoint a Meeting at the said College,
provided they give Notice thereof to the Rest, by Letters sent and left with
them, or at the Places of their respective Abodes, five Days before such
Meeting; and that the President and six Fellows, or in Case of the Death,
Absence, or Incapacity of the President, seven Fellows, convened as aforesaid,
(in which Case the eldest Fellow shall preside) shall be deemed a Meeting of
the President and Fellows of said College, and that in all the said Meetings,
the Major Vote of the Members present shall be deemed the Act of the Whole; and
where an Equivote happens, the President shall have a casting Vote.

VI. That the President and Fellows of the said College and their Successors,
in any of their Meetings assembled as aforesaid, shall and may from Time to
Time, as Occasion shall require, elect and appoint a President or Fellow in the
Room and Place of any President or Fellow who shall die, resign, or be removed
from his Office, Place or Trust; whom the said Governor and Company hereby
declare, for any Misdemeanour, Unfaithfulness, Default or Incapacity, shall be
removeable by the President and Fellows of the said College; Six of them, at
least, concurring in such Act. And shall have Power to appoint a Scribe or
Register, a Treasurer, Tutors, Professors, Steward and all such other Officers
and Servants, usually appointed in Colleges or Universities, as they shall find
necessary, and think fit to appoint; for the promoting good Literature, and the
well ordering and managing the Affairs of said College; and them or any of
them, at their Discretion, to remove; and to prescribe and administer such
Forms of Oaths (not being contrary to the Laws of England or of this Colony) as
they shall think proper, to be administered to all those Officers and
Instructors of the said College, or to such and so many of them as they shall
think proper, for the faithful Execution of their respective Places, Offices
and Trusts.

VII. That the present President and Fellows of said College and their
Successors, and all such Tutors Professors and other Officers, as shall be
appointed for the public Instruction and Government of said College, before
they undertake the Execution of their respective Offices, and Trusts, or within
three Months after, shall publicly in the College-Hall take the Oaths, and
subscribe the Declaration appointed by an Act of Parliament made in the first
Year of King GEORGE the First; Entitled, an Act for the further Security of his
Majesty's Person and Government, and the Succession of the Crown in the Heirs
of the late Princess Sophia, being Protestants; and for extinguishing the Hopes
of the pretended Prince of Wales, and his open and secret Abettors; that is to
say, the President before the Governor, Deputy Governor, or any two of the
Assistants of this Colony, for the Time being; and the Fellows, Tutors and
other Officers before the President, for the Time being; who is hereby
empowered to administer the same. An Entry of all which shall be made in the
Records of said College.

VIII. That the President and Fellows shall have the Government, Care and
Management of the said College; and all the Matters and Affairs thereunto
belonging; and shall have Power from Time to Time, as Occasion shall require,
to make, ordain and establish all such wholesome and reasonable Laws, Rules and
Ordinances, not repugnant to the Laws of England, nor the Laws of this Colony,
as they shall think fit and proper, for the Instruction and Education of the
Students, and Ordering, Governing, Ruling and Managing the said College, and
all Matters, Affairs, and Things thereunto belonging, and the same to Repeal
and alter, as they shall think fit; which shall be laid before this Assembly,
as often as required, and may also be repealed or disallowed by this Assembly,
when they shall think proper.

IX. That the President of said College, with the Consent of the Fellows, shall
have Power to give and confer all such Honors, Degrees or Licenses as are
usually given in Colleges or Universities, upon such as they shall think worthy
thereof.

X. That all the Lands and Rateable Estate belonging to the said College, not
exceeding the yearly Value of Five Hundred Pounds Sterling, lying in this
Government, and the Persons, Families and Estates of the President and
Professors, lying and being in the Town of New Haven, and the Persons of the
Tutors, Students and such and so many of the Servants of said College, as give
their constant Attendance on the Business of it, shall be freed and exempted
from all Rates, Taxes, Military Service, Working at Highways, and other such
like Duties and Services.

XI. And for the special Encouragement and Support of said College, this
Assembly do hereby Grant unto the said President and Fellows, and their
Successors, for the Use of the said College, in Lieu of all former Grants, One
Hundred Pounds Silver Money, at the Rate of Six Shillings and Eight Pence per
Ounce, to be paid in Bills of public Credit, or other Currency equivalent to
the said Hundred Pounds (the Rate, or Value thereof to be stated from Time to
Time by this Assembly) in two equal Payments, in October and May annually. This
Payment to continue during the Pleasure of this Assembly.

IN FULL TESTIMONY and Confirmation of this Grant, and all the Articles and
Matters therein contained, the said Governor and Company do hereby Order, that
this Act shall be signed by the Governor and Secretary; and sealed with the
Public Seal of this Colony: and that the same, or a Duplicate or
Exemplification thereof, shall be a sufficient Warrant to the said President
and Fellows to hold, use and exercise all the Powers and Privileges therein
mentioned and contained. This Charter set the College in a much more perfect
and agreeable State, than it was before, and the annual Grant of L. 100, or a
supposed equivalent in Bills, as stated by the General Assembly, as often as
the depreciated State of the Bills seemed to require, was paid by the
Treasurer, till the Year 1755. When a French War and heavy Taxes came on, and
the Bills were ordered to be called in; so that the General Assembly did not
State an Equivalent, and nothing was paid by the Treasurer to the College, for
several Years. And by Reason of the great Number of Students, about that Time,
the College, with great Frugality was able to subsist. After the Charges of the
War were in some Measure abated, (though the Colony was still under pressing
Difficulties) the Assembly took the State and Exigencies of the College, into
Consideration: And thereupon a Question arose, in the Honorable House of
Representatives, Whether any legal Claim or Demand could be made upon the said
annual Grant, or the Arrearages of it. This Question was debated at several
Sessions, and the House were so near equally divided in their Sentiments upon
it, as that a Major Vote could not be obtained for the Payment or Grant of any
Money, upon a Supposition of the Truth of either Side of the Question. Upon a
Proposal made in the House, That the President and Fellows should do something
to remove that Difficulty, and a Committee of the House being thereupon
appointed; the President and Fellows, upon the Advice of the said Committee,
declared in Writing to the House in October 1765, That they would not make any
legal Claim or Demand upon the said annual Grant, or the Arrearages of it; and
would depend upon the Wisdom and Goodness of the Honorable Assembly, to grant
such Supplies, as the Circumstances of the Colony, and the Exigencies of the
College, should from Time to Time require. The Assembly, at that Time, gave L.
327-28 S. Lawful Money, toward building a Chapel.


By Order of the said Governor and Company, in General Court assembled.
Sigillum appendens

George Wyllys, Secretary. JONth. LAW, Gover.


Mr. Samuel Lambert, 1746
of New Haven, a Scotch Merchant, by his Will, dated February 19th, 1718, gave
almost all his Estate, for the Benefit of the College; and ordered, that Ten
Pounds should be paid to the Trustees, toward the Building of the College; and
the rest to be paid, three Pounds Sterling to each Scholar graduated at
New Haven, who should settle in the Ministry; and empowered his Executors to
sell his Lands for that End. The Executors paid the Ten Pounds to the Trustees,
but being informed that there was a large Debt due from the Estate, in England,
paid nothing to the graduated Ministers; and they living at a great Distance,
and some Difficulties intervening, did nothing further in many Years. In the
mean Time many of the young Ministers grew uneasy, and ventured to sell some of
the Lands, though none of them had any Authority to sell; and the greater Part
had no Right to the Money, because, as the Lands were appraised in the
Inventory, the Money would all be run out, before it came to them. And other
Persons, who had no Pretense of Right, got into Possession of some of the
Lands, and kept them so long as to claim them by Possession. And it appeared
that Mr. Lambert was cheated in some Parcels, because the Persons who sold them
to him, had no Right. The President being unwilling that the Estate should be
lost, as to the End for which it was given, set up a Notification in the Hall
at the Commencement 1744, desiring those Ministers who had any Interest, to
meet and consult upon it. They met and chose a Committee to Manage the Affair;
but they found it attended with so many Difficulties that they could not do it,
to any Advantage; and therefore agreed to resign it up to the President and
Fellows; who would be under a better Capacity to manage it. Accordingly most of
those who were supposed to have any Interest, freely resigned it up to the
President and Fellows, to be improved for the Benefit of the College, in such a
Manner as they should think best; and the rest of the Rights were purchased.
And the Executors gave to the President and Fellows a Deed of all the Lands of
which Mr. Lambert died seized; whereupon with considerable Pains and Expense,
they became possessed of about an Hundred Acres of Land in Wallingford, and
Sixty Two Acres, lying in five Parcels, in New Haven; exclusive of those sold
by the young Ministers.

The Honorable Phillip Livingston, Esquire one of his Majesty's Council for the
Province of New York, having had four Sons educated at this College, was
pleased generously to bestow Twenty Eight Pounds and Ten Shillings Sterling, to
be put out to Interest, and the Interest to be appropriated for the Support of
a Professor of Divinity, or to any other Use the President and Fellows should
think to be most for the Advantage of the College. And they being of Opinion
that a Professor of Divinity would be most Advantageous, appropriated the
Donation to that Use.

1748
The Number of Students being about One Hundred and Twenty, more than half of
them were obliged, for want of Room, to live out of the College; which was upon
many Accounts inconvenient. The President therefore projected a Scheme for
building a new College House. And accordingly, upon Consultation with some of
the Fellows, obtained of the General Assembly in May 1747, the Liberty of a
Lottery for that Purpose; by which Five Hundred Pounds Sterling was raised,
clear of all Charge and Deductions.

The Foundation of the House was laid April the 17th, 1750. And the Outside was
finished in September 1752. It took about 230,000 Bricks, and the Cost of the
Outside was about L. 1180 Sterling.
It is 100 Feet long, 40 Feet wide, 1750
and three Story high, besides the Garrets; and a Cellar under the whole,
containing 32 Chambers, and 64 Studies. It makes a good Appearance, and was set
back in the Yard that there might be a large and handsome Area before it, and
toward the North Side of the Yard, with a View that when the old College should
come down, another College or Chapel or both should be set on the South of the
present House; and additional Lands were purchased on the North and on the West
for better Accommodation.

The General Assembly in October 1749, ordered, that 363 Pounds in the Hands of
Gurdon Saltonstall, Esquire which came by a French Prize, taken by the Frigate
belonging to the Government; and in October 1751, ordered that the Remainder of
the Prize aforesaid, and the Effects of the said Frigate (which, after the War,
was sold) amounting to 500 Pounds more, and in October 1754, L. 280 in the
Hands of Gurdon Saltonstall, and Jabez Hamlin, Esqrs, on some old Accounts,
should be paid to the President, toward building the new College.

1751
The Outside of the House being finished, principally by the Generosity of the
Government, (though nothing came directly out of the public Treasury) the
President and Fellows, at the Commencement 1752, ordered that the New College
be called and named CONNECTICUT-HALL, and then walked, in Procession, into it,
and the Beadle, by Order, made the following Declaration, viz.

CUM e Providentiae Divinae Favore, per Coloniae Connecticutensis Munificentiam
gratissimam, hoc novum Edificium Academicum, Fundatum et Erectum fuerit; in
perpetuam tantae Generositatis Memoriam, Aedes haec nitida et splendida, AULA
CONNECTICUTENSIS nuncupetur.

In English thus; WHEREAS through the Favor of Divine Providence, this New
College House has been built, by the Munificence of the Colony of Connecticut:
In perpetual Commemoration of so great Generosity, this neat and decent
Building shall be called CONNECTICUT-HALL.

At a Meeting of the Corporation June 29, 1757, they examined and approved all
the Accounts of the Receipts and Disbursements of Money, for Building
Connecticut-Hall. And thereupon passed the following Vote, viz.
WHEREAS the Rev. President Clap has had the Care and Oversight of building
the New-College, called Connecticut Hall; and laying out the Sum of 1660 Pounds
Sterling, which appears to have been done with great Prudence and Frugality;
and the College built in a very elegant and handsome Manner; by Means of his
extraordinary Care, Diligence and Labor, through a Course of several Years:
All which the said President has generously given for the Service of said
College. And the said President having also, of his own proper Estate purchased
a Lot for the Professor of Divinity, which has cost 52 Pounds Lawful Money, and
given it to the College for the said Use for ever. This Corporation think
themselves bound, and do accordingly render their hearty and sincerest Thanks
to the Rev. President Clap, for these extraordinary Instances of his
Generosity: And as a standing Testimony thereof, voted, that this be entered on
their Records.

The Building of this new House was very necessary; for, after it was finished,
both Houses would not contain all the Students, which were then in Number more
than 170; so that more than 50 were obliged to live out of College.

Bishop Berkeley received Information from Time to Time, by Letters, and from
Gentlemen who were occasionally here, concerning the Management and Effects of
his generous Donations; particularly from an Irish Gentleman, who was present
at one of his Examinations, and carried to him two Calculations, made by his
Scholars, viz. one of the Place of the Comet, at the Time of the Flood; which
appeared Anno 1680, having a periodical Revolution of 575 Years; which Mr.
Whiston supposes to have been the Cause of the Deluge. And another of the
remarkable Eclipse of the Sun in the 10th Year of Jehoiakim; mentioned by
Herodotus, Lib. I. Cap. LXXIV. And in Ushers Annals. The Bishop, therefore,
about that Time, wrote several Complaisant Letters to the President, in one of
which dated July 25, 1751, he has these Words, viz.

The daily Increase of Religion and Learning, in the Seminary under your
auspicious Care and Government, gives me a very sensible Pleasure, and an ample
Recompense for all my Donations. He died within a few Months after; and this
College will always retain a most grateful Sense of his Generosity and Merits;
and probably, a favorable Opinion of his Idea of material Substance; as not
consisting in an unknown and inconceivable Substratum, but in a stated Union
and Combination of sensible Ideas, excited from without, by some Intelligent
Being. His just Character is elegantly summed up in his Epitaph.

GRAVISSIMO PRAESULI

The College Lands in the County of Litchfield, mentioned Anno 1732, lying in
the most remote and uncultivated Part of the Colony, had hitherto lain wholly
dormant; Land being so plenty in the County, none appeared as Tenants upon any
advantageous Terms. And the Corporation being desirous to put the Lands under
some profitable Improvement, more especially for maintaining a Professor of
Divinity; the President projected the following Scheme, viz. that the Lands
should be leased for the Term of 999 Years; the Rent to be the Interest of the
present Value of the Lands, at 5 per Centum; to be forfeited in Case of non
Payment of the Rent, at the annual Times appointed, but redeemable within Six
Months after, upon Payment of the Rent, with lawful Interest upon it. This
Method of Leasing appeared upon all Accounts, to be the most Advantageous both
for Landlord and Tenant. The Rents were secured to the College in the best
Manner, and they were free from the Trouble and Charge of Inspection and
Reparation. And the Tenants had all possible Encouragement to cultivate and
improve the Lands, as their own. And the Rents were much higher than most other
Lands were leased for, although cleared and fenced; though possibly in future Times
they may seem low. Upon these Terms sundry Parcels were leased out, from Time
to Time, as there was opportunity.

The Farm at Rhode Island given by Bishop Berkeley, in pursuance to the Advice
of the Rev. Mr. George Berkeley, the worthy Son of the Donor, was in the Year
1762 leased to Captain John Whiting, for the Term of 999 Years; upon the same
Conditions with the other College Lands, beforementioned. The annual Rent to
be 18 Pounds Sterling, and 40 Rods of Stone-Wall, to the Year 1769: Then L. 36,
to the Year 1810; and after that 240 Bushels of good Wheat, to the End of the
Term.

The College was in an agreeable and happy State, in most Respects, but had for
many Years been under, some Difficulties and Disadvantages with Regard to
Religion. The Corporation in the Year 1746, Voted, That they would choose a
public Professor of Divinity in the College, as soon as they could procure a
sufficient Support. In the Year 1752, 1752
the Necessity appearing to be greater, they Voted, That a Professor of
Divinity in the College would be upon all Accounts Advantageous, and therefore
resolved, that they would endeavor to get a Support for such a Professor, as
soon as may be; by all such Ways and Means as Prudence should direct: And
afterward, ordered, that one half of the College Lands, in the County of
Litchfield, should be leased out for that Purpose.

1753 Octo.
The General Assembly resolved, that one principal End proposed in erecting the
College was to supply the Churches in this Colony with a learned, pious and
orthodox Ministry; to which End it was requisite that the Students of the
College should have the best Instructions in Divinity, and the best Patterns of
Preaching, set before them. And that the Settling a Learned Pious, and Orthodox
Professor of Divinity in the College, would greatly tend to promote that good
End and Design. And therefore recommended a general Contribution to be made in
all the Religious Societies in the Colony, for that Purpose. A French War, and
extraordinary Taxes coming on, it was tha't best to have it in the Form of a
Subscription: Of which you have an Account afterward.
The College being in Danger of being infected with Errors, the Corporation
desired the President to undertake and carry on the Work of a Professor of
Divinity, by preaching to the Students in the College Hall on the Lord's Day,
until a Professor of Divinity could be obtained: which he accordingly did, with
the Assistance of sundry Ministers; in pursuance to the Advice of the general
Association. And to preserve and secure the Religion of the College upon it is
original Foundation and Constitution, they came into the following Act.

At a Meeting of the President and Fellows of Yale-College, November 21, 1753.
PRESENT, The Rev. Mr. THOMAS CLAP, President: The Reverend Messrs.
Jared Eliot, Fellow. Joseph Noyes, Fellow. Anthony Stoddard, Fellow. Benjamin
Lord, Fellow. William Russel, Fellow. Thomas Ruggles Fellow. Solomon Williams,
Fellow. Noah Hobart, Fellow.


WHEREAS the principal Design of the pious FOUNDERS of this College was to
educate and train up Youth for the Ministry, in the Churches of this Colony,
according to the Doctrine, Discipline and Mode of Worship received and
practiced in them; and they particularly ordered, that the Students should be
established in the Principles of Religion, and grounded in polemical Divinity,
according to the Assembly's Catechism, Dr. Ames's Medulla, and Cases of
Conscience, and that special Care should be taken, in the Education of
Students, not to suffer them to be instructed in any different Principles or
Doctrines; and that all proper Measures should be taken to promote the Power
and Purity of Religion, and the best Edification and Peace of these Churches.
See Anno School, 1701, and 1722.


We the Successors of the said Founders, being in our own Judgments, of the
same Principles in Religion with our Predecessors, and esteeming ourselves
bound in Fidelity to the Trust committed to us, to carry on the same Design,
and improve all the College Estate descended to us, for the Purposes for which
it was given, do explicitly and fully resolve, as follows, viz.

1. That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are the only Rule of
Faith and Practice, in all Matters of Religion, and the Standard by which all
Doctrines, Principles and Practices in Religion are to be tried and judged.

2. That the Assembly's Catechism and the Confession of Faith, received and
established in the Churches of this Colony, (which is an Abridgement of the
Westminster Confession) contain a true and just Summary of the most important
Doctrines of the Christian Religion; and that the true Sense of the sacred
Scriptures is justly collected and summed up in these Compositions: And all
Expositions of Scripture, pretending to deduce any Doctrines or Positions
contrary to the Doctrines laid down in these Composures, we are of Opinion are
wrong and erroneous.

3. If any Doubt or Dispute should happen to arise about the true Meaning and
Sense of any particular Terms or Phrases in the said Composures, they shall be
understood and taken in the same Sense in which such Terms and Phrases have
been generally used in the Writings of Protestant Divines, and especially in
their public Confessions of Faith.

4. That we will always take all proper and reasonable Measures, such as
Christian Prudence shall direct, to continue and propagate the Doctrines
contained in these Summaries of Religion, in this College, and transmit them to
all future Successions and Generations; and to use the like Measures to prevent
the contrary Doctrines from prevailing in this Society.

5. That every Person who shall hereafter be chosen a President, Fellow,
Professor of Divinity, or Tutor, in this College, shall before he enters upon
the Execution of his Office, publicly give his Consent to the said Catechism
and Confession of Faith, as containing a just Summary of the Christian
Religion, as before expressed; and renounce all Doctrines or Principles
contrary thereunto; and shall pass through such an Examination as the
Corporation shall think proper, in order to their being fully satisfied that he
shall do it truly, without any Evasion or Equivocation.

6. That since every such Officer is admitted into his Post upon the Condition
aforesaid, if he shall afterward change his Sentiments, entertain any contrary
Set of Principles or Scheme of Religion, and disbelieve the Doctrines contained
in the said Catechism or Confession of Faith, he cannot, consistent with common
Honesty and Fidelity, continue in his Post, but is bound to resign it.

7. That when it is suspected by any of the Corporation, that any such Officer
is fallen from the Profession of his Faith, as beforementioned, and is gone
into any contrary Scheme of Principles, he shall be examined by the Corporation.

8. That inasmuch as it is especially necessary, that a Professor of Divinity
should be found in the Faith; besides the common Tests before mentioned, he
shall publicly exhibit a full Confession of his Faith, drawn up by him in his
own Words and Phrases, and shall in full and express Terms renounce all such
Errors as shall in any considerable Measure prevail at the Time of his
Introduction. And if any Doubt or Question should arise about any Doctrine or
Position, whether it be Truth or Error, it shall be judged by the Word of God
taken in that Sense of it which is contained and declared in the said Catechism
and Confession of Faith; as being a just Exposition of the Word of God in those
Doctrines or Articles which are contained in them.

9. That every Person who shall be chosen President, Fellow, Professor of
Divinity or Tutor in this College, shall give his Consent to the Rules of
Church Discipline established in the Ecclesiastical Constitution of the
Churches of this Colony: It being understood, that our Ecclesiastical
Constitution may admit of Additions or Alterations, in such Circumstances as
according to our Confession of Faith are to be regulated by the Light of
Nature, and the Rules of Christian Prudence. And it is especially declared,
that if any Person shall deny the Validity of the Ordination of the Ministers
of this Colony, commonly called Presbyterian or Congregational, or shall hold,
that it is necessary or convenient that such Ministers should be re-ordained,
in order to render their Administrations valid, it shall be deemed an essential
Departure from our ecclesiastical Constitution; and inconsistent with the
Intentions of the Founders of this College, that such a Person should be chosen
an Officer in it.

10. Yet, we would suppose, that it is not inconsistent with the general Design
of the Founders, and is agreeable to our own Inclinations, to admit Protestants
of all Denominations to send their Children to receive the Advantage of an
Education in this College: Provided that while they are here, they conform to
all the Laws and Orders of it.

All the Fellows, who have been admitted, since this Act, have publicly given
their Consent to the Catechism, and Confession of Faith, in this Formula, viz.
I A. B. being chosen a Fellow of Yale-College, do hereby declare, that I
believe, that the Assembly's Catechism, and the Confession of Faith, received
and established in the Churches of this Colony, and in this College, contain a
true and just Summary of the most important Doctrines of the Christian
Religion; and that the true Sense of the Sacred Scriptures is justly collected
and summed up in those Compositions. And all Expositions of Scripture
pretending to deduce any Doctrine or Position contrary to the said Doctrines
laid down in those Composures, I believe are wrong and erroneous. And I will
always take all reasonable Measures, and such as Christian Prudence may direct,
in my Place and Station, to continue and propagate the Doctrines contained in
these Summaries of Religion, in this College, and transmit them to all future
Successions and Generations: and use the like Measures to prevent the contrary
Doctrines from prevailing in this Society.

I do also Consent to the Rules of Church Discipline established in the
Ecclesiastical Constitution of the Churches of this Colony. For the
Illustration of this, it may gratify a just Curiosity in the Reader to see the
Formula, for the same Purpose, in Use in the Church of Scotland; which is as
follows, viz.

I Do hereby declare, that I do sincerely own and believe the whole Doctrine
contained in the Confession of Faith, approven by the General Assemblies of
this National Church, and ratified by Law in the Year 1690, and frequently
confirmed by diverse Acts of Parliament since that Time, to be the Truths of
God, and I do own the same as the Confession of my Faith. As likewise I do own
the purity of Worship presently authorized and practiced in this Church: And
also the Presbyterian-Government and Discipline now so happily established
therein. Which Doctrine, Worship and Church Government, I am persuaded are
founded upon the Word of God, and agreeable thereto; and I promise that through
the Grace of God, I shall firmly and constantly adhere to the same; and to the
utmost of my Power, shall in my station assert, maintain and defend the said
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of this Church by Kirk Sessions,
Presbyteries, Provincial Synods and General Assemblies; and that I shall in my
Practice conform myself to said Worship, and submit to the said Discipline and
Government, and never endeavor directly nor indirectly, the Prejudice or
Subversion of the same, and I promise that I shall follow no divisive Course
from the present Establishment in this Church; renouncing all Doctrines, Tenets
and Opinions whatsoever, contrary to, or inconsistent with, the said Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline or Government of this Church.

See Dunlop's Preface to the Westminster Confession, P. 65.




A. B.

In September 1755 the Corporation nominated the Rev. Mr. Naphtali Daggett, 1755
Pastor of a Church on Long Island, to be Professor of Divinity. Upon
Application made to the Presbytery he was dismissed from his Charge; and in
November following came and preached in the College-Hall to good Satisfaction.

The President and Fellows met March 3, 1756, 1756
and spent a Day in examining Mr. Daggett, as to his Principles of Religion,
his Knowledge and Skill in Divinity, Cases of Conscience, Scripture History and
Chronology, Antiquity, Skill in the Hebrew Tongue, and various other
Qualifications for a Professor; in all which he acquitted himself to the good
Satisfaction of the Corporation. The next Day he preached a Sermon in the
College-Hall, upon that Text, 1 Corinthians. II. 2; and gave his full and explicit
Consent to all the Doctrines contained in our Catechism and Confession of
Faith, and to the Rules of Church Discipline established in the Churches of
this Colony. And also exhibited a full Confession of his Faith, of his own
Composure; and expressly renounced the principal Errors prevailing in these
Times; according to the Act of the Corporation, before recited. Then he was by
the Corporation, inaugurated and installed Professor of Divinity, in this
College; with nearly the same Solemnities and Formalities, as are usual at the
Instalment of other Ministers, who have been before ordained. All which are
particularly entered in the Records of the College.

Mr. Gershom Clark, of Lebanon, Graduated 1743.
generously gave 33 Pounds 10 Shillings Sterling to be put out to Interest, for
the Use of the Professor of Divinity. The Interest of which together with the
Interest of Mr. Livingston's Donation beforementioned, and the Rents of the
College Lands agreed to be leased, were sufficient for the annual Support of
the Professor.

The President having before given a Lot of Land, for the Use of a Professor of
Divinity, for the Time being, who should be settled and continued according to
the Act of the Corporation, November 21, 1753, and constantly preach in the
College-Hall or Chapel, except in Vacations: By Deed dated September 10, 1756.
Sundry generous and principal Gentlemen came into a Subscription, or
Contribution for Building a House for the Professor, under the like
Limitations. The House was raised in June 1757; 1757
completely finished the next Summer; and cost 285 Pounds Sterling. The
President in the Presence of a considerable Number of Gentlemen, with all
proper Formalities, put the Professor into the Possession of the House;
declaring that it was built, for the Use of a Professor of Divinity, in the
College, who should hold and preach all the Doctrines contained in our
Catechism and Confession of Faith; and in Case he, or his Successors should
hold, teach or maintain any contrary Doctrine, he or they would have no Right
to any Use or Improvement of it, etc. And the Solemnity was concluded with
Prayer and Singing a Psalm. August 28, 1758.


At a Meeting of the President and Fellows June 29, 1757. The Tutors and a
Number of the Students made Application as follows, viz.

WHEREAS this Rev. Corporation of their paternal Care and Goodness, have
settled a Professor of Divinity in this Ecclesiastical Society, whom we receive
as an able Minister of the New Testament; We the Subscribers, Members of this
Society, having been admitted Members in full Communion in sundry Churches, and
consenting to the Ecclesiastical Constitution of the Churches of this Colony,
as agreeable to the Word of God in Doctrine and Discipline; are desirous to
attend upon the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, under the Administration of the
Rev. Professor; and to walk together in stated Christian Communion and holy
Subjection to all the Ordinances of Christ; and desire the Approbation and
Sanction of this Rev. Body.

This was approved of by the Corporation; and a Sermon was preached in the Hall
by the Professor; and all proper Solemnities attended upon this Occasion. And
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is accordingly administered in the
College-Hall, or Chapel, on the first Lord's Day in each Month; agreeable to
the Practice of the Colleges in England. By all which the State and
Constitution of the College was rendered more perfect and agreeable; though not
pleasing to some particular Gentlemen of different Sentiments.

In May 1763, nine Gentlemen preferred a Memorial to the Honorable the General
Assembly, 1763
wherein they represented, that the General Assembly were the Founders of the
College; and as such, had right to appoint Visitors, to reform Abuses if any
were found. Which right the Memoralists suggested, ought to be seasonably, and
most explicitly vindicated and asserted: or otherwise the College might become
too independent. And therefore prayed, that the said Assembly, would pass an
Act, to authorize an Appeal, from any and every Sentence given by the Authority
of the College, to the Governor and Council of this Colony; for the Time being.
And that the said Assembly would immediately issue forth a Commission of
Visitation, enabling some suitable Persons to inquire into all the Affairs of
said College, and either of themselves rectify all Abuses, which they may
discover; or make Report of what they shall find, with their Opinions thereon,
to the said Assembly at their next Session.

The Counsel for the Memoralists alleged, that the General Assembly founded
the College by giving a Charter, in the Year 1701: which contained a Donation
of about Sixty Pounds Sterling, to be annually paid out of the public
Treasury; and by sundry subsequent Donations, especially five Tracts of Land in
the Year 1732. And that the present Assembly, as Successors to the Founders,
had a right of Visitation, by the Common Law. They further alleged, that such
an Appeal, and Visitation were very necessary to preserve the good Order and
Regulation of the College, upon all Accounts, and particularly to preserve
Orthodoxy in Religion.

To which the President replied;

That the General Assembly, in their Legislative Capacity, have the same
Authority over the College, and all the Persons and Estates belonging to it; as
they have over all other Persons and Estates in the Colony; and all that Power
which is necessary for the good of the College, or the general Good of the
Community. And that an especial Respect and Gratitude is due to them, as the
greatest Benefactors; yet they are not to be considered as Founders or Visitors
in the Sense of the Common Law. That the first Trustees, Undertakers and
Inspectors, who were nominated by the Ministers with the general Consent of the
People, and by Compact, became a Society or Quasi Corporation (as my Lord Coke
says) near two Years before they had a Charter, were the Founders of the
College; and that they formed it, by making a large and formal Donation of
Books; above a Year before they had a Charter from the Government. That the
College had a Being, not only in fieri in the Purpose and Intention of the
Undertakers (as Lord Coke says) Coke 10 Rep.
but in esse by the Donation of Books, Money and Land actually made to it,
before it had a Charter. That Major Fitch of Norwich, made a Donation, in
Writing, to the Undertakers, of Six Hundred Acres of Land, and some Materials
to build a College House, in the Time of the sitting of the Assembly, some Days
before the Charter was given. And this Donation he made to the Collegiate
School, as already set up by the great Pains and Charges of the Ministers. That
the King, by giving a License to found a College, does not thereby, in Law,
become the Founder in Sensu Dotationis. And that he is the Founder only of
those Colleges or Hospitals, to which he makes the first Donation for founding.
My Lord Coke distinguishes between Fundator Incipiens and Fundator Perficiens;
and says, that he only is the Founder quoad Dotationem, (to whose Heirs or
Successors the Law gives a Right of Visitation) who makes the FIRST DONATION.
Coke 10 Reports.
And the Right of Visitation arises in Law, from the Interest which the Founder
has in the College or Hospital by his Donation.

For if it be essentially perverted from the Design for which it was given, the
Donation becomes void, and reverts to the Donor or his Heirs. That the first
Donation only creates the Founder; and all subsequent Donations are presumed in
Law to be given upon the same End and Design with the first, unless some
particular Limitation be expressly made.

That if a common Person makes a Donation to found a College or Hospital, though
ever so small, and the King afterward endows it with large Possessions, yet
the common Person is the Founder and not the King. Wood's Institutes.


That a License to found, and a Charter of Incorporation, are in their own
Nature distinct; and either may be first, in Law, yet they are often Times both
contained in the same Instrument; and may either preceed or succeed the first
fundamental Donation.

When the fundamental Donation is made before the License to found, there the
License is only a formal and explicit Confirmation from the Crown, of what was
before done by the general License given by the Common and Statute Law; whereby
every Man may give his Estate, for public, pious and charitable Uses; upon
such Conditions and Regulations, as he shall see Cause. See 39 Eliz. C. 5, and
Connecticut Laws.
And the Feoffees in trust, are the legal Proprietors of such Donations;
according to the Conditions and Limitations with which they are made. And have
a legal Right to hold and lease; and to dispose of the Profits as a quasi
Corporation, for those particular Purposes. And may, by a long Course of stated
and regular Conduct, become a complete legal Corporation, by Prescription. And
the King's Charter or License only makes or declares that to be a legal
Corporation, at the first, which may become such, by immemorial Usage and
Custom.

In a License to found, the Words FOUND, ERECT or any other Words of the like
Import, are indifferent in Law; and sufficient to make a Foundation; And in the
first Charter or Grant to the College, these Words are promiscuously used, and
applied to the first Trustees only. The first Charter plainly supposes ten
Trustees, Partners or Undertakers antecedently existing; and a School already
founded, in fact, (though not fully and completely so in Law) by Donation of
Lands, Goods, and Moneys, before given; and therefore gives them a full legal
Right, Liberty and Privilege to proceed, in erecting, endowing and governing
the School; which they had a general and imperfect Right to do by the Common
Law. And the Charter declares them to be in a legal Capacity to demand, have,
hold, and possess all such Lands, Goods and Moneys as have heretofore been
given, (as well as those which might hereafter be given) for the founding,
erecting and endowing the said School.

And there is no Intimation, that their giving to the first Trustees, a Right
to receive Sixty Pounds out of the public Treasury, a Year after, and
annually, and to improve it, at their Discretion, for the Good of the School,
should be deemed the sounding of it; to be sure not in such a Sense as to annul
the former Foundation; much less could any Endowments made thirty Years after,
make them the Founders in the Sense of the Common Law. Besides the Preamble to
the Charter of 1745, expressly says, that the first Trustees founded the
College.

It was further observed, that an Appeal from all and every Sentence given by
the Authority of College; to the Governor and Council of this Colony, for the
Time being, (as proposed in the Memorial,) would retard and obstruct all the
Proceedings of the Authority of College. It being found, by universal
Experience, that in all Instances, wherein a Liberty of Appeal is allowed, the
Judgment appealed from, is of no Force or Efficacy; except that which may arise
from the extraordinary Trouble and Charge of bringing the Case to a Trial, in
the Court appealed to. That such a Constitution would take the Government of
the College wholly out of the Hands of those, in whom it was originally vested;
and be contrary to the Charter. That such a universal Liberty of Appeals,
especially in criminal Cases, is not allowed in any Community whatsoever; and
that those few Cases in which Appeals are allowed in some other Colleges, are
under peculiar Conditions and Restrictions.

It was also observed that the Power of Visitation is, by the Common Law,
expressly limited to the Statutes of the Founder; Lord Raymond's Reports, Vol.
I. P. 7.
which are the Conditions or Limitations of the Use of the Founder's Donation;
and the Visitor can do nothing but rectify those Things which are plainly
repugnant to those Limitations; or claim a Forfeiture. But as no such Statutes,
made by the General Assembly, can be found; such Visitors would have no Power
at all, or be altogether arbitrary, like the Visitors sent to Magdalen College,
by King James II.

If it should be supposed, that there is any Need of any Overseers, under the
Name and Title of Visitors; the first Trustees and their Successors, may
properly be denominated such: And in the first Plan of the College, they are
expressly called Inspectors. That to have Visitors over Visitors or Inspectors,
would make endless Trouble and Confusion. That Matters of Property must be
determined by the stated, executive Courts, according to the Course of the
Common Law; but to erect any new Kind of Court over the Affairs of the College,
which are committed to the President and Fellows, would be an Infringement on
their Charter. Though the General Assembly still retain such a supreme Power,
as that if there should be any plain Breach of Trust, cognizable by a Court of
Chancery, or any such Misconduct in the Corporation, as should be plainly
detrimental to the public Good, they may rectify it in their legislative
Capacity.

As to the Advantage of Visitors to preserve Orthodoxy in the Governors of the
College;

The President observed, that whatever was the Occasion, or Design of that
Argument, he was glad that such an important Point was moved. That it was well
known, that the President and Fellows or Trustees have from the Beginning,
shown a proper Care and Zeal to preserve Orthodoxy in all the Governors of the
College; and to such a Degree, as to be disagreable to some Gentlemen of late;
who have thereupon endeavored to obstruct the Government, and flourishing
State of the College. That the Orthodoxy of the College was settled and secured
upon the best Foundation, that human Wisdom, directed by the general Rules of
God's Word, could devise. That according to the original Design of the Founding
of the College, the President, Fellows, Professor of Divinity, and Tutors, are
to be admitted upon Condition of their Consent to the Confession of Faith,
agreed upon by the Churches in the Colony, Anno 1708, and established by the
Laws of the Government. See Anno 1753.
That there is not the like Security of the Orthodoxy of Visitors or any other
in the civil Order, except his most excellent Majesty; who, by the Act of
Union, is obliged to Consent to the Westminster Confession of Faith, received
in the Church of Scotland, as being agreeable to God's Word, and containing the
Sum and Substance of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. See Anno 1722.

Since the Act of Union every King takes the following Oath, viz.

I GEORGE, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. do faithfully promise and swear that I shall inviolably maintain and
preserve the Settlement of the true Potestant Religion, with the Government,
Worship, Discipline, Right and Privileges of the Church of Scotland, as
established by the Laws made there, in Prosecution of the Claim of Right; and
particularly by an Act, entitled, An Act for securing the Protestant Religion,
and Presbyterian Church Government, and by the Acts possed in the Parliaments,
of both Kingdoms for the Union of the two Kingdoms. So help me GOD.

GEORGE REX.

See Dunlop 's Preface to the Westminster Confession, P. 63.


And as the Governors of the College are satisfied that the Body of this
Honorable Assembly is fully orthodox, and so are entirely easy under their
Superintendency; relying principally upon the Care of the great Head of Church;
yet they cannot have the like Security of any other Order of Men, which may be
substituted by them. And one principal Reason why they oppose all Innovations
in the Constitution and Government of the College, is, lest they might
hereafter, have an ill Influence upon the Orthodoxy of it; which the President
and Fellows, according to the Trust reposed in them, by the Founders and by the
General Assembly, are fully determined to maintain and preserve to the Utmost
of their Power.

When these Arguments were considered by the Honorable the General Assembly,
but very few appeared to be of the Opinion, that the Assembly were the Founders
of the College; and so they acted nothing upon the Memorial. And it is
generally supposed that this Question will never be publicly moved again.

The Rev. Mr. Jared Eliot, of Killingworth, in his last Will, gave Seven Pounds
and Ten Shillings, Ster. to be put out to Interest; and the Interest thereof to
be expended in purchasing Books for the Library from Time to Time, at the
Discretion of the President and Fellows.

The Number of Students, for near ten Years past being about 170, it became
extremely inconvenient to carry on all religious and scholastic Exercises in
the old College-Hall; and to make Use of it for a Dining Room.

The Library was also too small for the Books and Apparatus. The President
therefore proposed a Scheme to build a new Hall or Chapel, with a Library over
it: And set forward a Subscription for that Purpose: the Foundation was laid in
April 1761, and the Outside was nearly finished that Summer: It is built of
Brick, fifty Feet long, and forty Feet wide, with a Steeple and Galleries, in
which are three Rostra for Orations, Disputations, etc. and a Library over the
whole. It is set near the South End of the Brick College, with a View that when
another College is built, it will be set near the South Side of the Chapel. In
June 1763, it was opened with a Sermon preached by the Professor, in the
Presence of the President and Fellows, and a large Number of other Gentlemen.
And the President and Fellows voted, that the Chapel should hereafter be used
for the Religious and Scholastic Meetings and Exercises, for which the old
College-Hall has been used heretofore. The Conveniences of it have been found
to be very many and great.

It has hitherto cost L. 715 3 9 Ster. Of which, Octo 1765
was raised by Subscription, 183 0 0 Paid out of the College Treasury, 286 10 0
Out of the Colony Treasury, 245 13 9

It is not finished withinside; but only a Desk and some Seats are set up for
present Use. As we have now nothing in the College Treasury but only the
Donations of Messrs. Nougier, Livingston and Clark, which are appropriated to
special Uses, as beforementioned, we must hope and wait for the further Help
and Assistance of some generous Gentlemen.

Richard Jackson, Esquire a Member of Parliament and Agent for the Colony of
Connecticut, has very generously given One Hundred Pounds, toward finishing
the Chapel.

And some Gentlemen in New Haven, have generously subscribed considerable
toward erecting a Spire upon it, for an Ornament to the Town, as well as the
Chapel. The larger of these Subscriptions will be in the List of Donations.

The Rev. Dr. Timothy Cutler, formerly Rector of this College, died in August
1765: He was educated at Harvard-College, in Cambridge, and graduated there in
1701. In the Year 1710 he was ordained over a Church at Stratford, according to
the Constitution of the Churches in Connecticut: In 1719 he was chosen Rector
of the College, as before related. After his Removal he went to England, and
took Episcopal Orders, and received the Degree of Doctor of Divinity, from both
the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge: and afterward was Rector of
Christ-Church in Boston, about 40 Years. He was a Gentleman of superior natural
Powers and Learning; had entertained a high Opinion of the Constitution of the
Church of England, and was zealously attached to it. His Character is given at
large, in a funeral Sermon, preached by the Rev. Mr. Henry Caner, of Boston.

AN APPENDIX, Containing the present State of the College; the Method of
Instruction and Government; and a List of Officers, Benefactors and Graduates.
THIS College is under the Government of a President and ten Fellows; who are
some of the principal Ministers, in the several Parts of the Colony: And
ordinarily meet on the second Wednesday in September, annually, and on special
Emergencies; to confer Degrees, settle the College Accounts, appoint
subordinate Officers, make Laws, and direct in the general and more important
Affairs of the College.

The President has the principal Care and Business of instructing and governing
the Students; with the Assistance of a Professor of Divinity, and three Tutors.
The President every Morning and Evening, reads and expounds a Chapter in the
Bible, and prays in the Chapel; at which all the Students are obliged to
attend. After Evening Prayers, he frequently makes Dissertations upon various
Subjects in Religion and Learning, and almost all the different Affairs and
Employments of Life.

The Professor of Divinity preaches Sermons in the Chapel, every Lord's Day, in
the Course of a Body of Divinity, Doctrinal and Practical; and occasional
Discourses or Lectures, at other Times; and frequently gives private Counsel
and Instruction.

The Number of undergraduate Students, for many Years past, has been about One
Hundred and Seventy; but by Reason of the distressing Difficulties which the
Country has been under, of late, the Number has been diminished, for two or
three Years past. They are divided into four Classes; according to the
respective Years, in which they were admitted. Each Class is under the
immediate Instruction of a particular Tutor; who carries them through a Course of
Studies, for three Years; and the President completes their Instruction in the
fourth. At their Admission they are able well to construe and parse Tully's
Orations, Virgil and the Greek Testament; and understand the Rules of common
Arithmetic. In the first Year, they learn Hebrew; and principally pursue the
Study of the Languages, and make a Beginning in Logic, and some Parts of the
Mathematics. In the second Year, they study the Languages; but principally
recite Logic, Rhetoric, Oratory, Geography and natural Philosophy: And some
of them make good Proficiency in Trigonometry and Algebra. In the third Year,
they still pursue the Study of natural Philosophy; and most Branches of the
Mathematics: Many of them well understand Surveying, Navigation and the
Calculation of the Eclipses; and some of them are considerable Proficients in
Conic Sections and Fluxions. In the fourth Year they principally study and
recite Metaphysics, Ethics and Divinity. In reciting any Book upon the Arts
and Sciences, the Tutor asks them Questions upon all the principal Points and
Propositions in it; and they give such Answers, as show whether they understand
it; and the Tutor explains it, as far as there is Occasion. In all Delineations
and Calculations, a select Number, with proper Instruments in their Hands, are
instructed at a Table.

The two upper Classes exercise their Powers in disputing every Monday in the
Syllogistick Form, and every Tuesday in the Forensick; which gives a greater
Scope to their Genius, and is better adapted to the common Use and Practice of
Mankind, in the Conduct of public Affairs. In these Disputes we often hear a
Summary of the best Arguments which can be produced out of any Author, on both
Sides of a disputed Question.

When they have alternately gone through all their Arguments, the Moderator
recapitulates those which seem to be the most plausible on each Side, shows
their real Force or Weakness, and gives his Opinion upon the Whole. The
Questions are taken from every Subject, which occurs in the whole Circle of
Literature, and upon almost all the doubtful Points, which have been publicly
disputed among Mankind.

Twice a Week five or six deliver a Declamation memoriter from the oratorical
Rostrum; the President makes some Observations upon the Manner of Delivery and
sometimes upon the Subject; and sometimes gives some small Laurel to him who
best acts the Part of an Orator. These Declamations are beforehand supervised
by their Tutor, who corrects the Othography and Punctuation. There are also two
Orations made every Quarter-Day, upon Examinations, and frequently on special
Occasions. And to train them up to an agreeable Style and Method of Writing, the
President directs them, that when any one has Business of special Importance
with him, they should make Application in the Form of a Letter.

Special Care is taken to form the Morals of the Youth; to keep them (as much
as may be) from all Excesses and Extravagancies; from all vain Affectations of
Show, which occasion unnecessary Expenses and divert their Minds from the
Pursuit of those Things which are of greater Importance; to instill into their
Minds true Notions of Honor, Politeness, and a Love of Virtue: And to impress
upon them a Sense, that the End of their Creation, and of all their special
Advantages, is not ultimately for themselves, or their own Sakes; but to
qualify them for the special Service of God; and to render them most useful to
their Fellow-Men.

Above all, Care is taken to instill into their Minds, the Principles of true
Religion, in Doctrine and Pratice, by public and private Discourses and
personal Conversations. To this End they are obliged to attend the public
Worship of God in the Chapel every Lord's Day, and Morning and Evening Prayers;
at which, Occasion is frequently taken, from the Portion of Scripture read, to
excite them to some particular Duty, and to Caution them against some
particular Sin.

The Sons of those, who prosess themselves to be Episcopalians, have Liberty to
go out on the Lord's Day, and at other Times, to attend on the Mode of Worship
in which they were educated, as often as will not be an Infraction on the
general Rules of Order in the College. Persons of all Denominations of
Protestants are allowed the Advantage of an Education here, and no Inquiry has
been made, at their Admission or afterward, about their particular Sentiments
in Religion. Yet, if it should manifestly appear, that any should take Pains to
infect the Minds of their Fellow-Students with such pernicious Errors, as are
contrary to the Fundamentals of Christianity, and the special Design of
founding this College, so that Parents should justly be afraid of venturing
their Children here, it is probable that some Notice would be taken of it. Act
of the Trustees 1722, and the (...) of the Honorable the General Assembly in
May 1742.


The principal Design of the Institution of this College, was to educate
Persons for the Work of the Ministry; which Design has been so far succeeded as
that above Four Hundred worthy Ministers have received their Education here, of
which 40 have been episcopally ordained, and four of them have been judged
qualified for the Degree of Doctor of Divinity, by the Universities in
Great Britain. Yet inasmuch as more have been educated, than are necessary for
the immediate Service of the Churches, and are designed for various other
public and important Stations in civil Life; the President therefore
frequently makes public Dissertations upon every Subjects necessary to be
understood, to qualify young Gentlemen for those various Stations and
Employments; such as the Nature of civil Government, the civil Constitution of
Great Britain, the various Kinds of Courts, and Officers superior and inferior,
the several Kinds of Laws by which the Kingdom is governed; as the Statute,
Common, Civil, Canon, Military and Maritime Laws; together with their several
various Origins and Extents; the several Forms of Ecclesiastical Government
which have obtained in the Christian Church; ancient History and Chronology,
the Nature and Form of obligatory Writings and Instruments, Agriculture,
Commerce, Navigation, with some general Sketches upon Physic, Anatomy,
Heraldry and Gunnery, so far as it falls under the Rules of Philosophy and
Mathematics; that so every one educated here might have, at least, a general
and superficial Knowledge of every important Affair of Life; and be directed to
those Books which may give him a more complete Knowledge of that particular Art
and Science, which may be most agreeable to his own Genius or Profession.

Almost all the Students reside in the College, and are boarded by the Steward
in the Hall, after the Manner of common Families without any Restriction of
Weight or Measure; for which they pay 4 s. 6 d. per Week Sterling. This
Provision is generally agreeable, so that the Tutors always, the President
frequently, the Fellows, and many other Gentlemen, occasionally are entertained
with it.

The undergraduate Students also pay for Tuition and Instruction 9 Shillings,
for the Rent of their Chambers and Studies 1 s. 2 d. for Repairs and other
contingent Charges One Shilling Sterling, per Quarter: Which Sums are collected
by the Steward, and paid out by Order from the President and Fellows. After the
necessary incident Charges are deducted, the Residue is applied for the Payment
of the Salaries of the Officers, which of late Years have been to the President
L. 110, to each of the three Tutors L. 43, and to the Senior Tutor, who is
Keeper of the Library, L. 6 Sterling more. Although those Salaries are scanty
enough, yet inasmuch as the Incomes are now lessened by Reason of the Poverty
of the Country, and the Diminution of the Number of Students, it is feared,
that either the Salaries, or the Number of the Officers must be diminished,
either of which will be inconvenient.

In the Exercise of Discipline, Care is taken to impress the Minds of the
Students with a Sense of the Amiableness of Virtue and the odious Nature of all
Vice and Disorder, and the Reasonableness of observing all the Laws and Orders
of the Society, from a Principle of Choice, Virtue and Honor. In those
Instances where these Motives have not their desired Influence, and any are
guilty of Misdemeanors of a lesser Kind, they are reprimanded, or punished with
some small Fine, as a Prelude or Earnest of a greater Punishment, if they
persist in doing the like: If they do persist, and are guilty of some greater
Crime, they are publicly admonished or rusticated, for some Months. If they
are guilty of an habitual Course of Idleness and Negligence in their Studies
and Attendance on Prayers and Recitations; or if they are guilty of a Course of
any considerable Crimes, after lesser Punishments, they are rusticated for a
Year, and put back in the next Class, or wholly dismissed from being Members of
College. And if they are guilty of gross Immoralities, or any Crimes of a
heinous and atrocious Nature, destructive to the Society, they are expelled.
When any of these greater Punishments are publicly inflicted upon any, the
President makes a solemn Address to the Rest, to impress upon their Minds a
Sense of the evil Nature and Consequence of such Crimes, and to persuade them
to take Warning not to do the like.

We have a good Library, consisting of about 4000 Volumes, well furnished with
ancient Authors; such as the Fathers, Historians, and Classicks, many modern
valuable Books of Divinity, History, Philosophy, and Mathematics, but not many
Authors who have wrote within these 30 Years. -- We have a good Air-Pump, Set
of Globes, Telescope, small Astronomical Quadrant, Microscope, Thermometer,
Theodolite, and an electrical Machine: but no other Apparatus, of any great
Consequence.

The Students enjoy all necessary Means of Instruction; and are under the
Advantage of geting all that valuable and useful Knowledge, which they can, or
will acquire in the Space of four Years.

In order to discover their Proficiency, and to excite them to a laudable
Ambition to excel, there is a public Examination of each Class, about once a
Quarter; with Orations or Speeches pertinent to the Occasion. In July,
annually, there is a formal Examination of the Candidates for the Degree of
Bachelor of Arts, in the Languages, Arts and Sciences; and in the whole Circle
of Academical Literature: which is carried on publicly in the Chapel, by the
Tutors and any other Gentlemen, of a liberal Education, who see cause to join
with them. After Examination, the Candidates are severally put to Vote, by the
Moderator, whether they are qualified for a Degree? And they accordingly return
a formal Certificate to the President. In some Instances, Compassion has had a
great Influence. On this Occasion, several pertinent Speeches are made, in
Latin, by the President and Tutors; and two public Orations, by the
Candidates: the one to give a Specimen of their Knowledge in the several
Branches of Academical Literature: and the other to give a grateful and
pathetick Valediction to all the Officers and Members of the Society. The Law
obliges all the Candidates for the Degree of Master of Arts to attend before
the Commencement, and give some Specimen of their Proficiency in Knowledge: but
this has been two generally dispensed with.

The public Commencement is ordinarily on the second Wednesday in September
annually: at which there is a large Assembly, consisting of the President and
Fellows, a great Number of Ministers, and other learned and superior Gentlemen.
The President begins the Solemnity with Prayer, one of the Candidates, for the
first Degree, makes a salutatory Oration to the Governor and Council, the
Officers of College, and the whole Assembly: the others give a Specimen of
their Learning, by disputing Syllogistically on the Questions, printed in their
Theses; which are then distributed. The like is done in the Afternoon by the
Candidates for the Degree of Master of Arts. Then the President, with the
Consent of the Fellows, gives them their Degrees, three at a Time, in this Form:

PRO Auctoritate mihi commissa, admitto vos ad Primum Gradum in artibus; pro
More Academiarum in Anglia. Vobisque trado hunc Librum, una cum Potestate
public Praelegendi, quotiescunque ad isthoc Munus evocati fueritis: cujus,
haec instrumenta, The President delivers to each of them a Diploma.
membrano scripta, Testimonio sint.

The like Form is used for the Masters, only instead of Primum, it is,
Secundum: and instead of Praelegendi, it is, Profitendi; and sometimes, instead
of Primum, the President says, Gradum Baccalaureatus; and instead of Secundum,
he says, Gradum Magistralem.

Then one of the Masters makes a Valedictory Oration: and the President
concludes the whole Solemnity with a Prayer.

The Proficiency made by the Students is various; according to their different
Genius and Application: a Number in each Class are generally finished Scholars
in the Languages, and the liberal Arts and Sciences: and if they were dignified
with some kind of peculiar Laurel, it might be an additional Stimulus: It is
also true, that some who have been educated and graduated here, have, by their
Conduct, been no Honor to the Society: and since the Honor of every Degree,
Title, or Office, will finally be to each Individual, according to the real
Merit of the Generality of those in the same Order; and every Instance of
Honor, conferred upon an unworthy Subject, is eventually, at the Expense of
those who are worthy; it is greatly to be desired, that more equal Justice
should be done in that Respect.
but their superior Qualifications are soon known to the World; and they, in a
little Time, make a useful Figure in Church or State. Most of our superior
Gentlemen, who have shined brightest at the Council Board, on the Bench, at the
Bar, or in the Army, have had their Education in this Society. And some of
them, of late Years have applied the Principles of Mechanical and Experimental
Philosophy, to the Improvement of Agriculture; and have been able to instruct
their Neighbors in that Science, for the public Good.

Diu floreat alma Matter Yalensia!
A CATALOGUE OF THE OFFICERS OF YALE-COLLEGE.
RECTORS or PRESIDENTS.
Came in Went out A.D. The Rev. Messrs. A.D. 1701 ABRAHAM PIERSON 1707 1719
TIMOTHY CUTLER 1722 1726 ELISHA WILLIAMS 1739 1739 THOMAS CLAP TRUSTEES or
FELLOWS
1700 JAMES NOYES 1719 1700 ISRAEL CHAUNCY 1703 1700 THOMAS BUCKINGHAM 1709
1700 ABRAHAM PIERSON 1707 1700 SAMUEL MATHER 1724 1700 SAMUEL ANDREW 1738 1700
TIMOTHY WOODBRIDGE 1732 1700 JAMES PIERPONT 1715 1700 NOADIAH RUSSEL 1713 1700
JOSEPH WEBB 1732 1701 SAMUEL RUSSEL 1730 1704 MOSES NOYES 1730 1707 JOHN
DAVENPORT 1731 1709 THOMAS BUCKINGHAM 1731 1711 THOMAS RUGGLES 1727 1716
STEPHEN BUCKINGHAM 1732 1720 ELIPHALET ADAMS 1738 1724 SAMUEL WHITMAN 1746 1726
ELISHA WILLIAMS 1739 1730 JARED ELIOT 1762 1730 JOSEPH MOSS 1731 1731 EBENEZER
WILLIAMS 1748 1732 SAMUEL WOODBRIDGE 1743 1732 JONATHAN MARSH 1745 1732 SAMUEL
COOK 1746 1732 SAMUEL WHITTELSEY 1752 1735 JOSEPH NOYES 1761 1738 ANTHONY
STODDARD 1760 1739 THOMAS CLAP 1740 BENJAMIN LORD 1743 DANIEL WADSWORTH 1747
1745 WILLIAM RUSSEL 1761 1746 NATHANAEL CHAUNCY 1752 1746 THOMAS RUGGLES 1748
ELNATHAN WHITMAN 1749 SOLOMON WILLIAMS 1752 NOAH HOBART 1755 ASHBEL WOODBRIDGE
1758 1758 MOSES DICKINSON 1760 JAMES LOCKWOOD 1761 EDWARD EELLS 1763 JONATHAN
MERICK 1763 GEORGE BECKWITH Professor of Divinity 1755 NAPHTALI DAGGETT
TREASURERS.
Came in Went out 1701 Nathanael Lynde 1701 1701 Richard Russel 1702 1702 John
Alling 1716 1716 John Prout 1766 1766 Roger Sherman TUTORS.
1702 Daniel Hooker 1703 1703 John Heart 1706 1706 Phinehas Fisk 1713 1707 James
Hale 1709 1709 Azariah Mather 1710 1710 Joseph Noyes 1715 1713 William Russel
1714 1714 Samuel Russel 1717 1715 Benjamin Lord 1717 1716 Samuel Johnson 1719
1716 Samuel Smith 1718 -- 16 Elisha Williams -- 18 -- 16 Samuel Hall -- 18 --
18 Daniel Brown -- 22 -- 22 James Pierpont -- 24 -- 22 William Smith -- 24 --
24 Robert Treat -- 25 -- 24 Jonathan Edwards -- 28 -- 25 Daniel Edwards -- 28
-- 28 Elnathan Whitman -- 32 -- 28 Daniel Hubbard -- 31 -- 31 John Sergeant --
35 -- 32 William Adams -- 34 -- 34 Samuel Whittelsey -- 37 -- 35 William
Woscott -- 36 1735 Abel Styles 1737 -- 37 James Lockwood -- 38 -- 38 Chester
Williams -- 40 -- 39 Chauncy Whittelsey -- 45 -- 39 Phinehas Lyman -- 42 -- 42
John Worthington -- 43 -- 43 Thomas Darling -- 45 -- 43 John Whiting -- 47 --
45 Samuel Fisk -- 48 -- 45 Noah Wells -- 46 -- 46 Warham Williams -- 50 -- 47
Alexander Phelps -- 49 -- 48 William Russel -- 50 -- 49 Ezra Styles -- 55 -- 50
Timothy Pitkin -- 51 -- 50 James Abraham Hilhouse -- 56 -- 51 Samuel Hopkins --
54 -- 54 Jonathan Wells -- 56 1755 Elizur Goodrich 1756 -- 56 Richard Woodhull
-- 61 -- 56 Seth Pomeroy -- 57 -- 56 Nathan Williams -- 60 -- 57 Nehemiah
Strong -- 60 -- 60 Benjamin Boardman -- 61 1760 Jonathan Lyman 1765 1761 John
Storrs 1762 1761 Noah Parsons 1761 1762 John Chandler 1762 1762 Seth Lee 1763
1762 Ebenezer Russel White 1765 1763 Richard Woodhull, again 1765 1765
Punderson Austin 1765 Diodate Johnson

THE BENEFACTORS OF YALE-COLLEGE, With their several Donations above 40 s.
Sterling.
L. s. d. 1700
THE FOUNDERS of the College, 40 Volumes of Books, in Folio, Value 30 0 0 1701
James Fitch, of Norwich, Esquire 637 Acres of Land in Killingly; exchanged for 628
Acres of Land in Salisbury. The Honorable the General Assembly of the Colony of
Connecticut, in the annual Grant about L. 60 per Annum, till the Year 1755. Sir
John Davie, of Groton, a good Collection of Books the Number and Value not
known. 1714
Jeremiah Dummer, of London, Esquire 120 Books: 600 more by his Procurement from
sundry Gentlemen in England, mentioned 1714. 60 200 1716
The General Assembly by sale of the equivalent Land, 250 The Honorable ELIHU
YALE, of London, 1717
Esquire 300 Vol. of Books, in Goods in the Years 1718 and 1721. 100 400 0 0 The
Honorable Francis Nicholson, Esquire a good Collection of Books. Jeremiah Dummer,
Esquire 76 Vols. of Books. 35 Mr. Samuel Mix of New Haven. 20 Capt. Theophilus
Munson of New Haven. 11 The Rev. Mr. Joseph Noyes of New Haven. 10 Capt. John
Prout of New Haven. 10 Mr. Samuel Lambert of New Haven. 10 John Prout, Esquire
Treasurer of New Haven. 8 Mr. Nathanael Heaton of New Haven. 7 Joseph Whiting,
Esquire of New Haven. 6 Capt. Francis Brown of New Haven. 6 Capt. Isaac Dickerman
of New Haven. 5 Deacon John Punderson of New Haven. 5 Mr. Richard Miles of
New Haven. 5 Mr. Jonathan Mansfield of New Haven. 5 Mr. Moses Mansfield of
New Haven. 5 Mr. James Gibbs of New Haven. 5 Mr. Daniel Brown of New Haven. 5
Mr. Jonathan Atwater of New Haven. 5 Mr. Joseph Mix of New Haven. 5 Mr.
Ebenezer Allen of New Haven. 5 The Rev. Mr. Samuel Russel of Branford. 5 Mr.
Edward Barker of Bradford. 5 Captain John Riggs of Derby. 5 Mr. William Moss of
Derby. 5 Smaller Donations from sundry Persons in New Haven, Branford, Milford,
Wallingford, and Derby, in Money, Materials and Labor, toward building the
College. In the whole about 100 The Honorable Governor Saltonstall 50 1717
Madam Saltonstall, L.10 Jahaleel Brenton, of Newport, Esquire 50 Mr. Joseph Peck,
of New Haven, two Acres of Land in the Yorkshire Quarter. The Proprietors of
New Haven eight Acres adjoining to it; forty Acres more near Samuel Cooper's
House. 1719
The Rev. Mr. Joseph Moss, of Derby, seven Acres of Land in New Haven. 1720
Mr. Joseph Moss Senior, of New Haven, seven Acres in New Haven. Capt. Samuel
Smith, of West-Haven, eight Acres in North-Haven. Dr. Daniel Turner, of London,
28 Vols. of Books, 14 1722
A Subscription to build the Rector's House, 35 A general Contribution for the
same End, 55 The General Assembly by Impost on Rum for the same Purpose, 115 By
Sale of Lands, 120 Madam

A general Computation of extraordinary Receipts and Disbursements, from the
Year 1716, to the Year 1722.
IN the College Treasury L. 125 Colony Donation 1716 250 Gov. Yale's Donations
in Money 400 Impost on (...) 115 Colony Donation 1722 120 Other Donations in
Money 458 L. 1468 College House cost L. 1060 Land, Well and Cellars 34 The
Rector's House and Land 260 Paid to Major Fitch, etc. 30 To Rector Cutler for
his Settlement, etc. 84 L. 1468

L. s. d. 1723
Madam Abigail Woodbridge, of Hartford, a Bell, 5 0 0 Jeremiah Dummer, Esquire two
valuable Books, 2 1729
Joseph Thompson, of London, Esquire 46 Vols. 1730
Books, 23 The Rev. Dr. Isaac Watts, of London, all his Works then published,
and the Berry-Street Sermons, and since, all his other Works, as they were from
Time to Time published, 8 The Honorable Samuel Holden, Esquire Governor of the Bank
of England, Mr. Baxter's Practical Works, 5 Vols. Folio, 10 The General
Assembly 300 Acres of Land in each of the Towns of Canaan, 1732
Norfolk, Goshen, Cornwall and Kent. The Rev. Dr. George Berkeley, Bishop of
Cloyne, 96 Acres of Land on Rhode Island. 1733
1000 Volumes of Books, including his own Works, given A. D. 1730, 400 Joseph
Thompson, of London, Esquire a complete Set of Surveying Instruments, 1734
21 A Reflecting Telescope, a Microscope, Barometer and sundry other
Mathematical Instruments purchased by Subscription of the Trustees, and sundry
other Gentlemen, 37 The Rev. Dr. Watts, two large Globes, 1738
8 The Rev. Dr. Watts, 5 Vols. of Books in Folio, 5 5 The General Assembly, to
the first Parish in Windham, 1740
on Account of Rector Clap's Removal, 53 Mr. Auditor Benson, of London,
Johnston's Latin Psalters, 9 Volumes. 2 1741
The General Assembly, for new covering the College, 42 1742
The Rev. Dr. Thomas Wilson, of London, 30 of the Bishop of Sodor's Instruction
to the Indians, to be given to the Students, 5 Madam Mary Clap, a new Bell for
the College, 8 The General Assembly, for a new Kitchen and Fence about the
Rector's House, 40 1744
Mr. Anthony Nougier, of Fairfield, 27 1745
The General Assembly, for new covering the President's House, 54 The Honorable
Philip Livingston, Esquire 28 10 9 Mr. Samuel Lambert, and his Legatees, One
Hundred and Sixty two Acres of Land in New Haven and Wallingford. 1748
Thomas Wells, of Glassenbury, Esquire for the New College, 10 Dr. Doddridge, 6
Vols. of Sermons, 2 1749
Given by the General Assembly, for the New College, 363 1751
Ditto, 500 1754
Do. 280 1751
The Rev. Dr. Johnson and the Rev. Dr. Barclay, five Littleton and West's
Defense, and other Books, 2 1752
Benjamin Franklin, L. L. D. of Philadelphia, Bowers's History of the Popes,
etc. 2 1756
The Rev. President Clap, a Lot of Land, for a Professor of Divinity, 40 Mr.
Gershom Clark, of Lebanon, for a Professor of Divinity, 33 10 0 Given by sundry
Gentlemen, toward purchasing an Air-Pump, 18 Christopher Kilby, of London, Esquire
an Astronomical Quadrant, and Dr. Shaw's Travels, 6

The 46 following Donations were for building the Professor's House
B L. s. d. THE Rev. Samuel Bird, of New Haven, 3 15 0 Mr. Samuel Bradley, of
Fairfield, 2 5 1756
Capt. Daniel Bull, of Hartford, 2 5 C The Rev. President Clap, of New Haven, 7
10 D Abraham Davenport, of Stanford, Esquire 3 5 Col. Thomas Dyar, of Windham, 3 3
Eliphalet Dyar, of Windham, Esquire 3 3 E The Rev. Edward Eells, of Middletown, 2 5
F The Hon. Thomas Fitch, of Norwalk, Esquire 4 0 Capt. James Fitch, of Lebanon, 3 0
Joseph Fowler, of Lebanon, Esquire 3 2 G John Gardener, of Gardiner's-Island, Esquire 7
10 Matthew Griswold, of Lyme, Esquire 2 14 H Thomas Hill, of Fairfield, Esquire 3 4
Capt. Jonathan Hills, of Hartford, 3 3 The Rev. Noah Hobart, of Fairfield, 2 8
Mr. John Hotchkiss, of New Haven, 2 6 Hezekiah Huntington, of Norwich, Esquire 2 15
Jabez Huntington, of Norwich, Esquire 2 14 I Mr. David Ingersoll, of Sheffield 2 5
The Rev. Stephen Johnson, of Lyme, 2 7 Mr. Timothy Jones, of New Haven, 7 10 K
Christopher Kilby, of London, Esquire 7 10 L John Ledyard, of Hartford, Esquire L. 3 4
L The Rev. Samuel Lockwood, of Coventry, 2 5 Mr. Joshua Lothrop, of Norwich, 3
7 Phinehas Lyman, of Suffield, Esquire 3 18 M Mr. John Mix, of New Haven, 3 15 The
Rev. Samuel Mosely, of Windham, 2 10 P The Honorable William Pitkin, of
Hartford, Esquire 3 4 Col. Joseph Pitkin, of Hartford, 2 5 S Thomas Seymour, of
Hartford, Esquire 3 3 Elisha Sheldon, of Litchfield, Esquire 2 10 Comfort Starr, of
Danbury, Esquire 3 4 Capt. Samuel Sturges, of Fairfield, 3 3 T Jonathan Trumble, of
Lebanon, Esquire 3 2 W Robert Walker, of Stratford, Esquire 3 5 Thomas Wells, of
Glassenbury, Esquire 4 0 Capt. Joel White, of Bolton, 2 17 The Rev. Thomas White,
of Bolton, 2 5 Madam Elizabeth Williams, of Weathersfield, 4 14 The Rev.
Solomon Williams, of Lebanon, 2 10 The Rev. Eliphalet Williams, of Hartford, 3
0 The Hon. Roger Wolcott, of Windsor, Esquire 2 0 Roger Wolcott, jun. of Windsor,
Esquire 3 2 The Rev. Ashbel Woodbridge, of Glassenbury, 2 5 Sundry other Donations
under 40 s. Sterling, amounting in the Whole to 102 6

The Forty two Donations following were for building the CHAPEL.
A L. s. d. Mr. Enes Alling, of New Haven, 15 0 0 B Mr. Nathan Beers, of
New Haven, 2 12 1761
The Rev. Samuel Bird, of New Haven, 4 15 Capt. Daniel Bull, of Hartford, 2 5 C
The Rev. President Clap, of New Haven, 25 0 Madam Mary Clap, of New Haven, 11
10 D The Rev. Moses Dickinson, of Norwalk, 2 7 Eliphalet Dyar, of Windham, Esquire
2 7 E The Rev. Edward Eells, of Middletown, 2 5 G Capt. Ebenezer Grant, of
Windsor, 2 5 Matthew Griswold, of Line, Esquire 3 15 H Thomas Hill, of Fairfield,
Esquire 3 15 Capt. Jonathan Hills, of Hartford, 3 15 The Rev. Noah Hobart, of
Fairfield, 3 15 Mr. John Hotchkiss, of New Haven, 30 0 Hezekiah Huntington, of
Norwich, Esquire 3 15 Jabez Huntington, of Norwich, Esquire 3 0 I Jared Ingersoll, of
New Haven, Esquire 3 0 L John Ledyard, of Hartford, Esquire 2 8 Peter V. B. Livingston,
of New York, Esquire 2 8 Philip Livingston, of New York, Esquire 2 5 The Rev. Benjamin
Lord, of Norwich, 2 5 Mr. Joshua Lothrop, of Norwich, 3 1^ Phinehas Lyman, of
Suffield, Esquire 2 5 M The Rev. Jonathan Merick, of Branford, 2 5 Mr. John Mix, of
New Haven, 9 0 R David Rowland, of Fairfield, Esquire 2 5 S Thomas Seymour, of
Hartford, Esquire 3 15 Capt. Jonathan Seymour, of Hartford, 2 5 Elisha Sheldon, of
Litchfield, Esquire 2 6 Roger Sherman, of New Haven, Esquire 7 10 The Rev. Charles
Jeffery Smith, of Brook-Haven, Long Island, 5 5 T Jonathan Trumble, of Lebanon,
Esquire 4 10 W Robert Walker, of Stratford, Esquire 2 5 Mr. Jonathan Wells, of
Glassenbury, 3 0 The Rev. Thomas White, of Bolton, 3 17 Capt. Jonathan White,
of Lebanon, 2 5 The Rev. Elnathan Whitman, of Hartford, 2 5 Madam Elizabeth
Williams, of Weathersfield, 3 15 The Rev. Solomon Williams, of Lebanon, 2 5 The
Rev. Eliphalet Williams, of Hartford. In this Account is included near L 40,
subscribed since October last; see Page 78.
3 0 Sundry lesser Donations amounting to 27 16 1762
The Rev. Jared Eliot, of Killingworth, 7 10 Bishop Sherlock, his Sermons, 4
Volumes, 6 Duplicates, 3 0 Dr. Hales and Dr. Wilson, 60 Sets of Dr. Leland's
View of Deistical Writers, 25 0 Daniel Scot, J. U. D. his Appendix ad Thesaurum
Stephani: 2 Vols. Fol. 2 0 The Rev. John Erskine, several valuable Books, 2 0
Mr. John Hotchkiss, of New Haven, Jefferies's, 1762
History of French America, Ward's Oratory, 2 Vols. Sheridan on Education, and
5 of Dr. Watts's Psalm-Books, with Notes, 4 0 Mr. Philip Schuyler, of Albany,
an electrical 1763
Instrument, and Books, 3 0 George Mills, of New Haven, Esquire Jefferies's 1765
History of French America, 2 0 Thomas Whately, Esquire a Member of Parliament, and
Secretary to the Board of Treasury; the Palace of Dioclesian, in Cutts, 3 0 The
Honorable the General Assembly, toward finishing the Chapel, 245 13 9 Richard
Jackson, Esquire a Member of Parliament, and Agent for the Colony of Connecticut,
toward finishing the Chapel, 100 0 Mr. John Hotchkiss of New Haven, Ridgley's
1766
Body of Divinity, 2 Vols. Folio, 2 10

HONOR VIRI UTEPABATUR


ERRATA.
Page 16, Line 8, for HEW, read NEW. 22, -- 1, for Reason, read Reasons. 29, --
20, read several. 35, -- 24, for County, read Country. 49, -- 27, (in some
Copies) for administr, read administer. 52, -- 23 (in the Margin) for 1755,
read 1765. 88, -- 22, membrano, read membrana. 92, -- 26, read 1724 Jonathan
Edwards 1726 93, -- 1, etc. read 1736 Abel Styles 1737 1737 James Lockwood 1738
1737 Timothy Woodbridge 1739 etc.

CATALOGUS Eorum qui in Collegio-Yalensi, quod est Novo-Portu Connecticutensium
ab Anno 1702, ad Annum 1765, alicujus Gradus Laurea donati sunt.
1702
* STephanus Buckingham Mr * Salmon Treat Mr [Socius * Josephus Coit Mr *
Josephus Moss Mr Socius * Nathanael Chauncy Mr Socius * Josephus Morgan Mr
1703
* Johannes Heart Mr Tutor
1704
* Johannes Russel Mr Cant. Nov. * Phinehas Fisk Mr Tutor * Jahakobus Heminway
Mr
1705
* Johannes Pickett Mr * Azariah Mather Mr Tutor * Samuel Whittelsey Mr Socius
* Samuel Cook Mr Socius * David Parsons Mr Cant. Nov. * Samuel Pomeroy
1706
* Jared Eliot Mr Cant. Nov. Socius * Timotheus Woodbridge Mr * Jonathan
Dickinson Mr Col. N. [ Caes. Praeses.
1707
* SAMUEL LYNDE Mr * SAMUEL WELLS Mr * Daniel Chapman Mr * Thomas Tousey *
Daniel Tailor Mr
1708
* Jonathan Russel Mr * Johannes Prout Mr Thesaurarius * Benjamin Allen Mr
1709
* Jeremiah Miller Mr * Gulielmus Russel Mr Tutor Socius Josephus Smith Mr *
Nathanael Burnham Mr * Benjamin Woolsey Mr * Richardus Sacket Mr * Josephus
Noyes Mr Tutor Socius * Daniel Boardman Mr * Josiah Deming Mr
1710
* Benjamin Cotton Mr * Johannes Bliss Mr
1711
Johannes Peirson Mr * Johannes Gardener Mr * Samuel Andrew Mr Cant. Nov.
1712
* Samuel Russel Mr Tutor * Samuel Maltby
1713
* Samuel Smith Mr Tutor * Daniel Elmer Mr * David Evans Mr
1714
* Josephus Haynes Nathanael Clark * Jedidiah Buckingham Mr Benjamin Lord Mr
Tutor Socius * Josephus Willard Mr. Cant. Nov. * Josephus Blague Mr * Jacobus
Wetmore Mr Samuel Johnson Mr Oxon et. Cant. [ Tutor S. T. D. Oxon. Col. N. [
Ebor. Praeses. * Daniel Brown Mr Tutor Johannes Graham Mr 1737
1715
* Nathanael Mather * Josephus Webb Mr * Henricus Wills Mr
1716
Samuel Hall Mr Tutor * Gulielmus Worthington Mr * Benjamin Doolittle Mr
1717
* Georgius Griswold Mr * Hezekiah Lord Mr * Josephus Lamb Mr * Isaacus Burr Mr
Moses Dickinson Mr Socius
1718
Jacobus Pierpont Mr Tutor * Samuel Pierpont Mr * Ebenezer Rosseter Mr *
Isaacus Buckingham Mr * Elisaeus Lord Mr Robertus Treat Mr Tutor Timotheus
Collens Mr * Samuel Hopkins Mr * Stephanus Steel Mr Ebenezer Prime Mr * Daniel
Buck Mr * Josephus Backus Mr * Daniel Newell Mr
1719
* Richardus Treat Mr Josephus Smith Mr Johannes Curtiss GULIELMUS SMITH Mr
Tutor
1720
Daniel Turner M. D. * Ebenezer Wakeman Mr * Thomas White Mr * Gulielmus
Billings Mr * DANIEL EDWARDS Mr Tutor * Jonathan Edwards Mr Tutor [ Col. N.
Caes. Praeses. Daniel Kirtland Mr * Samuel Mix Mr * Hezekiah Kilborn Mr *
Abrahamus Not Mr * Johannes Walton
1721
Benjamin Ruggles Mr Cant. Nov. * Henricus Allyn Mr * Johannes Howell *
Stephanus Johannes Chester *Gulielmus Brintnal Mr Cant. No * Peleg Heath Mr
Cant. Nov. * Daniel Dwight Mr THOMAS FITCH Mr * David Hubbard Mr * Johannes
Griswold Mr * Gulielmus Hide Mr * Daniel Fuller Mr Johannes Beach Mr Gulielmus
Gager Mr * David Yale Mr 1724

1722
* Ebenezer Russel Mr * Carolus Treat Mr * Jonathan Williams * Johannes Wick *
Josiah Frisby Mr Jedidiah Mills Mr * Isaacus Styles Mr Isaacus Butler *
Gilbertus Tennent Mr 1725
Benjamin Franklin Mr L. L. D. [ Oxon. S. R. S. 1753
Franciscus Allison Mr Acad. Philad. [ Rector S. T. D. Glasc. 1755

1723
* Ichabod Wolcott Chauncy Mr * Josephus Buckingham Mr Thomas Ruggles Mr Socius
* Gulielmus Hooker * Nehemiah Bull Mr Abrahamus Bradley Mr * Jonathan Arnold Mr
Oxonii. Thomas Norton * Josephus Morgan Ebenezer Gould Mr * Nathanael Hubbel Mr
1724
Johannes Eells Mr * Ashbel Woodbridge Mr Socius * Daniel Russel Mr * Richardus
Lord * Elisaeus Mix Mr Joshua Babcock Mr Thomas Seymour Mr * Ebenezer Wright Mr
Benjamin Stilman Mr Jeremiah Curtiss Mr Nathanael Farrand Mr Henricus Caner Mr
Oxonii. Pelatiah Kilborn * Jonathan Hubbard Mr * Thomas Goodsell Mr * Johannes
Goodsell Mr * Simon Backus Mr Samuel Arnold
1725
GURDONUS SALTONSTALL Mr Richardus Treat Mr * Jacobus Searing Mr * Daniel
Trowbridge * Benjamin Fenn * Stephanus Munson Mr Jonathan Merick Mr Socius *
Jacobus Calking Mr Samuel Allyn
1726
* Benjamin Pierpont Mr Johannes Whiting Mr Elnathan Whitman Mr Tut. Socius *
JOHANNES BULKLEY Mr Johannes Woodbridge Mr Samuel Mather Mr * Jacobus Noyes *
Nathanael Stanly Mr * Daniel Wadsworth Mr Socius * Richardson Miner Mr *
Rogerus Newberry Mr * Judah Lewis Mr * Georgius Clark Mr Samuel Belding Mr *
Ebenezer Punderson Mr Timotheus Porter Mr * Daniel Munson Mr Samuel Sherman Mr
* Sethus Pain * Henricus Baldwin Ebenezer Grant Mr * Abijah Moore Mr Cornelius
Bennet Mr
1727
* Johannes Nutman Mr Johannes Hubbard Mr * Daniel Hubbard Mr Tutor Edmundus
Ward Mr EBENEZER SILLIMAN Mr Gideon Southworth Mr Theophilus Hall Mr Josephus
Perkins Mr Abrahamus Todd Mr Johannes Smith Mr * Eleazarus Wales Mr
1728
JABEZ HAMLIN Mr DAVID OGDEN Mr * Samuel Rosseter * Ebenezer Dimon Mr *
Johannes Brown Mr Matthaeus Rockwell Mr * Samuel Tudor Mr * Samuel Heaton
Johannes Patterson Mr Georgius Beckwith Mr Socius * Isaacus Chalker Mr Josephus
Nightingal
1729
Georgius Wyllys Mr Epaphras Lord Mr * Ichabod Lord Mr Samuel Whittelsey Mr
Cant. Nov. * Nathanael Hooker Mr [ Tutor Josephus Hunt Mr * Johannes Sergeant
Mr Tutor * Mason Fitch Mr Gulielmus Partridge Mr Johannes Allen Mr Jonathan
Parsons Mr et N. Caes. Jahakobus Caldwell * Johannes Pierson Mr Solomon Palmer
Mr * Ephraim Bostwick Mr Elisaeus Kent Mr Isaacus Brown
1730
Gulielmus Adams Mr Tutor Oliverus Partridge Mr Samuel Cook Mr Edvardus
Williams Mr Johannes Ashley Mr * Moses Mansfield Mr David Lewis Mr ELISAEUS
SHELDON Mr David White Mr Josephus Ashley Mr * Israel Ashley Mr Jonathan Ashley
Mr Gulielmus Gaylord Mr Robertus Walker Mr Jonathan Barber Mr * Daniel Grainger
Mr * Azariah Dickinson Mr Moses Bartlit Mr
1731
Petrus Van-Brugh Livingston Mr Elihu Hall Mr Alexander Wolcott Mr Simon Horton
Mr Noah Merick Mr Abner Reeve Mr * Chiliab Brainerd Mr Timotheus Mix Mr Samuel
Cole Mr * Jahakobus Baker * Nathanael Hunn Mr Andreas Bartholomew Mr * Jonathan
Dickinson Mr
1732
Abrahamus Davenport Mr * Jacobus Davenport Mr et. N. Caes. Nathanael Ruggles
Mr * Nehemiah Brainerd Mr Gulielmus Burr Mr * Willoughby Lynde Mr Timotheous
Woodbridge Mr Tutor * Stephanus Hosmer Mr Gulielmus Heart Mr Ebenezer Devotion
Mr * Johannes Prout * Johannes Pickett * Timotheus Meigs Mr Johannes Bosch *
Daniel Bliss Mr Cant. Nov. Jonathan Todd Mr Sethus Field Mr SHUBAEL CONANT Mr
Daniel Humphry Mr Samuel Sturges Mr David Rowland Mr Gershom Banks Nathanael
Robearts Mr
1733
Samuel Talcott Mr Johannes Livingston Mr Josephus Platt Mr * Samuel Doty Mr *
Gulielmus Leete Mr Benjamin Gale Mr Daniel Lothrop Mr * Daniel Huntington Mr
Ebenezer White Mr Eleazarus Wheelock Mr Benjamin Pomeroy Mr Hezekiah Bissel Mr
Abel Styles Mr Tutor Stephanus Heaton Mr * Benajah Cass Mr Ebenezer Thompson Mr
1734
* Henricus Barclay Mr S. T. D. Oxo. Dudleius Woodbridge Samuel Treat Mr
Gulielmus Nicoll Mr * Benjamin Nicoll Mr Benjamin Throop Mr * Gamaliel Clark Mr
Gulielmus Wolcott Mr Tutor Gulielmus Seward Mr * Moses Burr Mr Samuel Todd Mr
Ebenezer Dibble Mr * Josephus Nichols Benjamin Strong
1735
Elisaeus Williams Mr * Samuel Williams Mr * Samuel Whitman Mr * Samuel Eliot
Mr * Chester Williams Mr Tutor * Jonathan Hunting Mr Jonathan Marsh Mr Samuel
Mansfield Mr Johannes Chatfield Mr Benajah Bushnel Mr Johannes Roosevelt Mr
Daniel Buckingham Mr Jacobus Lockwood Mr Tutor Socius Moses Lion * Aaron Burr
Mr Col. N. Caes. Praes. Moses Cooley Azariah Horton Mr Isaacus Baldwin * Daniel
Hull Mr * Gaulterus Willmot Mr Johannes Trumble Mr Johannes Bunnel Mr Josephus
Bellamy Mr * Samuel Merriman Mr
1736
* Deodatus Woodbridge * Hobartus Estabrook Mr Georgius Macknish * Johannes
Gardener Mr David Gardener Mr Josiah Dwight Mr David Wells Mr * Isaacus
Dickerman * Silas Leonard Mr Stephanus White Mr Petrus Pratt Mr Samuel Barker
Mr Jonathan Ingersoll Mr * Jonathan Hall Mr Nathan Birdsey Mr Jared Harrison Mr
* Richardus Caner Mr Josephus Farnsworth Mr Timotheus Allen Mr
1737
Johannes Still Winthrop Mr Philippus Livingston Mr Christophorus Christophers
Mr * Thomas Adams Mr * Eli Colten Mr Nathanael Hill Mr * Jacobus Cuyler Nathan
Bulkley Mr Robertus Silliman Mr Timotheus Judd Mr Nicholaus Hallam Mr DARIUS
SESSIONS Mr * Riceus Hall Thimotheus Jones Mr Ephraim Strong Mr Johannes
Chapman Simon Rhodes Mr Gideon Mills Mr Johannes Norton Mr Marcus Leavenworth
Mr Hezekiah Watkins Mr * Moses Halladay * Samuel Steel Mr Cant. Nov. *
Barzillai Dean Mr
1738
* Stephanus Wakeman Mr Chauncy Whittelsey Mr Tutor * Daniel Chapman Mr Joshua
West Mr David Judson Mr Elisaeus Webster Mr David Wooster Mr Eleazarus Mather
Mr Aaron Day Mr * Amos Munson PHINEHAS LYMAN Mr Tutor Ebenezer Mills Sethus
Dean Mr * Shadrach Hatheway Mr Elisaeus Tracy Mr Thomas Williams Mr
1739
* Guliemus Williams * Samuel Andrew Mr Samuel Evans Mr Solomon Wells Mr *
Abrahamus Mead Moses Mather Mr Samuel Newell Mr Thomas Canfield Mr Cyrus Marsh
Mr Alexander Gaylord
1740
Johannes Whiting Mr Tutor * Augustus Eliot Mr Benjamin Woodbridge Mr Nathanael
Chauncy Mr * Joel Evans Johannes Graham Mr * Johannes Woodward Ezra Clap Mr
ELIPHALET DYAR Mr et. Cant. Nov. Petrus Curtiss Mr * Josephus Bryan Mr
Christophorus Newton Mr Johannes Worthington Mr Tut. Thomas Strong Mr Benjamin
Styles Mr Petrus Sweatland Mr Josephus Adams Mr Jahakobus Johnson Mr Thomas
D^^ling Mr Tutor Adonijah Bidwell Mr Johannes Diggens Mr
1741
Gulielmus Livingston Mr Stephanus Williams Mr * Daniel Southmayd Mr Richardus
Mansfield Mr Thomas Youngs Mr Samuel Hopkins Mr Samuel Buel Mr Johannes Herpin
Mr Simon Huntington Mr Jacobus Sproutt Mr Jonathan Judd Mr Noah Wells Mr Tutor
David Webster Mr Josephus Lamson Mr * Johannes Grant Thomas Lewis Mr et. Nov.
Caes. et. N. Ebor. * Reuben Judd * David Youngs Johannes Moore JABEZ HUNTINGTON
Mr
1742.
* Josephus Eliot Mr Gulielmus Smith Mr * Henricus-Hans Hansen Mr et Cant. No.
Josephus Hawley Mr Josiah Wolcott Mr Samuel Fitch Mr Elizur Hale Mr Asher
Rosseter Mr Jared Ingersoll Mr Nehemiah Barker Mr Edvardus Dorr Mr Nathan
Strong Mr Isaacus Jones Mr * Jonathan Lyman Mr Jonathan Lee Mr Jacobus Cogswell
Mr * Timotheus Griffith Mr Johannes Kimberly Mr 1764.
1743.
Nathan Whiting Mr Elnathan Chauncy Mr * Solomon Williams Eliphalet Williams Mr
* Samuel Fisk Mr Tutor David Burr Mr Daniel Farrand Mr * Caleb Smith Mr
Eleazarus Fitch Mr Joshua Lothrop Mr Stephanus Johnson Mr * Myndert Lansingh Mr
* Gershom Clark Mr * Galielmus Throop Mr et N. Caes Samuel Huntington Mr
Josephus Fowler Mr Job Prudden Mr Joshua Belding Mr Ichabod Camp Mr Israel
Bunnel Mr David Sherman Rowland Mr Aaron Richards Mr Nathan Dewolf Mr * Thomas
Arthur Mr
1744.
* Hezekiah Huntington Benjamin Woolsey Mr Gulielmus Samuel Johnson Mr et Cant.
Nov. et N. Ebor. * Ebenezer Rosseter Mr Timotheus Dwight Mr Leverett Hubbard Mr
Johannes Hubbard Mr * Antonius Rutgers Caleb Smith Mr Samuel Tracy Mr Alexander
Phelps Mr Tutor. David Wilcockson, Mr Agur Tomlinson Mr Elijah Mason Mr *
Jonathan Copp
1745
Gulielmus Russel Mr Tutor Warhamus Williams Mr Tutor Johannes Haynes Lord Mr
Gulielmus Sturgeon Mr * Nathanael Lloyd Mr Gulielmus Smith Mr Thomas Bradbury
Chandler Mr et. Oxonii. et S. T. D. Oxon. Samuel Lockwood Mr et. N. Caes.
Jacobus Beebee Mr * Jonathan Colton Mr * Simon Ely Mr * Freegrace Leavitt Mr
Samuel Field Mr Daniel Lyman Mr * Elihu Lyman Mr David Strong Mr Daniel
Brinsmade Mr Johannes Richards Mr Samuel Tuthill Johannes Cleaveland Mr 1764
Nathanael Draper Thaddaeus B^tts Mr Josephus Clark Mr Jeremiah Leaming Mr
Nathanael Tailor Mr Moses Tuttle Mr Johannes Searl Mr
1746
Thomas Fitch Mr [S. T. D. Edin. Ezra Styles Mr et Cant. Nov. Tutor Johannes
M'Kinstry Mr Enos Alling Mr Johannes Morin Scott Mr Thomas Fosdick Mr * Ephraim
Judson Mr * Ebenezer Basset Mr Pelatiah Webster Mr Johannes Brainerd Mr et N.
Caes. Elihu Spencer Mr
1747
Oliverus Wolcott Mr * Elisaeus Whiting Mr Timotheus Pitkin Mr Tutor *
Gulielmus Cook Mr Chauncy Graham Mr et N. Caes. Jedidiah Mills Mr Johannes
Benedict Mr * Nathanael Huntington Mr Lyman Hall Mr Johannes Maltby Mr et N.
Caes. Benjamin Tallmadge Mr Joshua Chandler Mr Gulielmus Bryant Mr Benjamin
Fisk Mr * Josephus Clark Isaacus Lyman Mr Daniel Sheldon Mr Jonathan Elmer Mr
Samuel Lankton Mr * Job Strong Mr Johannes Hubbard Mr Daniel Griswold Mr *
Johannes Reynolds Mr Timotheus Todd Mr Matthias Crane Jacobus Brown Mr et N.
Caes. * Daniel Dewolf Mr Aaron Hutchinson Mr Cant. Nov.
1748
Jonathan Fitch Mr et. Cant. Nov. * Gulielmus Johnson Mr et. Cant. Nov. et Oxo.
et Cant. Samuel Seabury Mr et N. Ebor. * Johannes Cornelius Cuyler * Jamison
Johnston Eleazarus Porter Mr * Daniel Hubbard Mr Gulielmus Smith Mr Solomm Mead
Mr Jacobus Wadsworth Mr Thomas Williams Mr Johannes Ogilvie Mr N. Ebor. David
Baldwin Mr Johannes Coleman Mr Renoldus Marvin Mr Judah Nash Mr Izrabiah
Wetmore Mr Daniel Stocking Mr Elijah Lyman Hobartus Mason Daniel Bennit Mr
Eliphalet Ball Mr Michael Todd Mr Johannes Hotchkiss Mr et Cant. Nov. Ebenezer
Booge Mr Elijah Sill Mr * Johannes Shepard Joshua Elderkin Mr Thomas Pain Mr *
Noadiah Warner Nephtali Daggett Mr S. T. P. Johannes Darbe Mr Nehemiah Greenman
Mr Moses Gunn Mr
1749
Thomas Russel Mr Samuel Dickinson Mr Samuel Hopkins Mr et Cant. Nov. Tutor
Jacobus-Abrahamus Hilhouse Mr Tutor * Petrus Buel Samuel Sherwood Mr et Nov.
Caes. Aaron Brown Mr Josephus Strong Mr Samuel Brown Mr et Nov. Ebor. David
Ripley Mr et Cant Nov. * Benjamin Griswold Elijah Lothrop Mr Johannes Clark Mr
Gideon Hawley Mr et Cant. Nov. Daniel Osborn Mr * Nathanael Porter Mr
Augustinus Munson Mr Daniel Welsh Mr Josiah Toppan Nymphas Ma^ston Mr Johannes
Vanhorn Mr Deliverance Smith Mr Nathanael Bartlit Mr
1750
Josephus Platt Cook Mr Noadiah Russel Mr Elisaeus Steel Mr * Daniel Newell Mr
Samuel Raynolds Mr Elihu Tudor Mr Thomas Jones * Ebenezer ^yar Mr Perez Fitch
Mr * Richardus Hall Mr * Elijah Blague Mr Platt Townsend Mr * Georgius Loomiss
* Nathan Starr * Isaacus Isaacs Mr Benjamin Palmer Jedidiah Smith Mr
1751
Richardus Law Mr Roswell Saltonstall Mr Hezekiah Gold Mr Aegidius Russel Mr
Stephanus Munson Mr Jonathan Wells Mr et C. Nov. Tutor Russel Hubbard Mr
Josephus Pierpont Mr Hudsonius Blackleach Mr Thomas Belding Mr * Josephus
Belding Mr Johannes Hooker Mr Nicholaus Street Mr Thomas Moseley Mr. Judah
Champion Mr. Thomas Potwine Mr * Jabez Mix Mr * Eli Todd Mr Abel Newell Mr *
Sethus Norton Mr et Cant Nov. Cotton Mather Smith Mr Josephus Gulielmus Bissel
Mr
1752
* Gurdonus Saltonstall Mr Gold Selleck Silliman Mr Moss Kent Jacobus Babcock
Mr Henricus Babcock Mr Josiah Whitney Mr Caleb Hall Mr Abrahamus Keteltas Mr et
N. Caes. Elizur Goodrich Mr Tutor Eleazarus May Mr Stephanus Holmes Mr
Richardus Woodhull Mr Tutor Thomas Wiggins Mr. N. Caes. Asa Spalding Mr
1753
Johannes Law Mr Johannes Noyes Mr * Josephus Lord Mr Ebenezer Lord Mr *
Jacobus Usher Mr Elisaeus Pitkin Mr Sethus Pomeroy Mr et Cant. Nov. Tutor *
Johannes Fitch Mr * Isaacus Burr Eleazarus Wales Mr Amos Fowler Mr Nicoll
Havens Gideon Wells Mr Aeneas Munson Mr * Johannes Pain Johannes D'Honneur
Gulielmus Wickham Mr
1754
* Samuel Hall Johannes Devotion Mr Benjamin Hall Mr Gulielmus Williams Mr
Thomas Eyres Mr Thomas Wickham Paulus Mumford Richardus Ely Mr Jacobus Greaton
Mr et Cant. Nov. Ezra L'Hommedieu Mr Jacobus Tailor Mr Joshua Porter Mr Justus
Forward Mr Elisaeus Sill Mr * Josephus Buroughs Josephus Lothrop Mr
1755
Ashbel Pitkin Mr Nathan Williams Mr Tutor Ebenezer Punderson Mr et N. Eb.
Cyrus Punderson Mr et N. Ebor. Johannes Eells Mr Jonathan Babcock Lucas Babcock
Mr Nathanael Hooker Mr Thomas Seymour Mr Peleg Chesebrough Mr Stephanus West Mr
* Simeon Stoddard Mr Elisaeus Baker Mr * Petrus Murdock David Sanford Mr Moses
Bliss Mr Johannes Woods Mr Gideon Noble Mr Johannes Stoughton Mr Nehemiah
Strong Mr Tutor Samuel Carry Thomas Brooks Mr Ephraim Starkweather
1756
Winthrop Saltonstall Solomon Stoddard Mr * Harding Jones Thomas Williams Mr
Georgius Colton Mr Elnathan Rosseter Mr Johannes Cotton Rosseter Mr Johannes
Owen Chandler Robbins Mr et Cant. Nov. Robertus Breck Mr Shubael Conant Mr
Henricus Cuyler Samuel Mather Mr * Edmundus Lewis Jacobus Church Mr Job Lyman
Mr * Henricus Bush Mr Amos Hallam Mr Gulielmus Roe Miner Mr Ephraim Fitch
Johannes Storrs Mr Tutor Simeon Strong Mr Eliphalet Leonard Ludovicus Bliss Mr
Joel Bordwell Mr Daniel Sherwood Mr Johannes Smalley Mr Timotheus Danielson Mr
Ebenezer Martin Jeremiah Day Mr * Hieronymus Topliff Jesse Clark Gulielmus
Jackson Mr a Traject. Batavo. Jesse Denison 1757
1757
Samuel Talcott Mr Gurdonus Huntington Mr Johannes-Sloss Hobart Mr Sylvanus
Griswold Mr Daniel Humphry Mr Josephus Pyncheon Mr Johannes Richards Medad
Pomeroy Mr Samuel Lynde Mr Carolus Calfrudus Smith Mr Jabez Bowen Mr Edmundus
(...) Mr et Cant Nov. Samuel Beach Mr Abrahamus Beach Mr Titus Hosmer Mr *
Ebenezer ^^nsey Mr Georgius Buttolph Hun^ Mr Johannes Hopson Mr Nathanael
Caldwell Mr Timotheus Jones Mr et Cant. No. Isaacus Jones Mr Daniel Bontecou Mr
Jacobus Scovil Mr et N. Ebor. Ezra Reeve Noah Parsons Mr Tutor Reuben Smith Mr
* Ebenezer Cass Mr Andreas Rowland Mr et Cant. Nov. * Zenas Huggins Job Wright
Mr Noah Williston Mr Jeremiah Child Amos Geer Oliverus Noble Mr Samuel-Andreas
Peter's Mr et N. Ebor. Elenezer Kellogg Mr Nathanael Webb Mr Eden Buroughs Mr
Noah Wetmore Mr Johannes Pell
1758
Israel Stoddard Samuel Wyllys Mr Ambrosius Collens Mr Ephraim Lewis Mr Daniel
Brewer Breck Mr Jonathan Ashley Mr Jabez Huntington Mr * Johannes Ellery Mr
Zephaniah Leonard Mr Cant. Nov. Nathanael Ruggles Mr Johannes Ashley Mr Samuel
Cook Mr Daniel Hopkins Mr Marcus Hopkins Mr Shem Burbank Mr Rogerus Viets
Bildad Phelps Philippus-Burr Bradley Mr Sethus Warner Rogerus Newton Mr
Johannes Dibble Mr Jonathan Leavitt Mr Aaron Phelps (...) Hubbard Mr et N.
Ebor. Israel Dickinson A. B. N. Caes. Eliphalet Banks Mr Jonathan Lyman Mr
Tutor Silas Dean Mr Jesse Ives Mr Ebenezer Parmele Mr et N. Ebor. Thomas Burgis
Mr Bulkley Olcott Mr Clemens Sumner Mr Johannes Gillit Mr Josiah Cass Mr
Benjamin Boardman Mr Tutor Eliphalet Hull Mr Thomas Niles Mr Caleb Turner Mr
Caleb Fuller Mr Benjamin Wildman Mr Thomas Davies Mr Johannes Felch
1759
Simon Backus Mr Albericus Hall Mr Edmundus Grindallus Rawson Mr Ebenezer
Devotion Mr Dyar Throop Mr Jesse Leavenworth Mr * Nathanael Hubbard Mr Bethuel
Treat Mr David Gardener Mr et A. B. N. Caes. Andreas Hill Mr Jonathan Sturges
Gideon Wakeman Enochus Huntington Mr Samuel Gilbert Sethus Lee Mr Tutor
Eliphalet Huntington Mr Lemuel White Mr Ebenezer Craft Mr Matthaeus Merriam Mr
et Cant. Nov. * Samuel-Sharp Beadle Abner Johnson Mr Abrahamus Burbank Johannes
Greenough Mr et Cant. Nov. David Manwaring Mr Johannes Phelps Mr Johannes
Peter's Lemuel Barnard Mr Asa Beebee Simon Waterman Mr Jacobus Treadway Mr
Johannes Chandler Mr Tutor Joshua Pain Mr Abisaeus Sabin Mr Ebenezer Grosvenor
Mr et Cant. Nov. Josephus Sumner Mr Ephraim Hide Mr et Cant. Nov. Ezra Weld Mr
Benjamin Trumble Mr Asahel Hatheway Mr Alexander King Samuel Andrews Mr N.
Ebor. Experience Storrs Mr Noadiah Warner Mr Stephanus Hawley Mr Benjamin
Dunning Mr Knight Sexton Mr Josephus Isham Mr Fisher Gay Mr Jahakobus Sherwin
Mr
1760
Neziah Bliss Richardus Crouch Graham Ammi Ruhamah Robbins Mr Josephus Moss
White Mr Ebenezer Russel White Mr Tutor Andreas Adams Mr Jacobus Fitch Mr Levi
Heart Mr Benjamin Douglass Mr Woodbridge Little Mr Appleton Robbins Mr Robertus
Robbins Mr Daniel Collens Mr Jonathan Palmer Andreas Storrs Mr et Cant. Nov.
Gulielmus Lynde Mr Thomas Lewis Mr Petrus Van Fleming Benjamin Goldsmith Mr *
Agur Treadwell Mr Ebenezer Jesup Benjamin Johnson Mr Gideon Granger Mr Josephus
Dana Mr Elijah Abel Mr Eliakim Fish Olivetus Deming Mr * Sethus Phelps Jared
Potter Mr David Rose Mr Jacobus Johnson David Sutton Simeon Bristol Mr
1761
Georgius Brock Mr Johannes Avery Ephraim Avery Gulielmus Coit Stephanus
Babcock Mr David Ingersoll Abrahamus Jarvis Mr Hadlock Marcy Mr Daniel
Hitchcock Mr Pelatiah Tingley Mr * Amicus Grant Benjamin Huntington Radulphus
Isaacs Benajah Phelps Jedidiah Strong Mr Hezekiah Goodwin Mr Gulielmus
Southmayd Mr Simeon Olcott Mr Ebenezer Kneeland Johannes Bliss Mr Johannes
Strickland Mr Johannes Lion David Lambert Mr Benjamin Prime Nathan Brownson
Gulielmus Sumner Jesse Goodell Mr Judah Kellogg Mr Robertus Millard
1762
Israel Williams Mr Thomas Barber Thomas Skinner Hezekiah Bissel Gulielmus
Cornelius George A. B. N. Ebor. Johannes Livingston Mr Josephus Huntington Mr
Johannes Canfield Mr Simeon Hinman Mr Johannes Patterson Gideon Bostwick Mr
Allan MacLean Mr Isaacus Moseley Mr Eleazarus Storrs Mr Simeon Belding Mr
Simeon Miller Mr Gulielmus Nichols Philippus Daggett Mr Gulielmus Jones Mr
Chauncy Brewer Josiah Heart Mr Moses Hartwell Mr Richardus Clark Mr et N. Ebor.
Samuel Field Mr Punderson Austin Mr Tutor Consider Morgan Theodorus Hinsdale Mr
Benjamin Mills Mr Solomon Wadhams Mr Johannes Lothrop Mr Josiah Pomeroy Mr Amos
Northrop Mr Jabez Swift Mr Jedidiah Chapman Mr et N. Caes. Daniel Fuller Mr
Oliverus Fuller * Benjamin Halliock David Brownson Burrage Merriam Mr Samuel
Seward Mr Whitman Welsh Mr Elijah Smith Mr Petrus Pratt Mr Ephraim Crocker Mr
1763
Phinehas Lyman Samuel Woodbridge Ebenezer Moseley Moses Bartlit Nehemiah
Brainerd Jacobus Eells * Josephus Whiting Marsh Jonathan Lee Stephanus Van
Ransselaer Timotheus Stone Jonathan Landon Hezekiah Brainerd Vine Elderkin
Cyprianus Strong Ebenezer Gray Ephraim Judson Daniel Osborn Josephus Kellogg
Hezekiah Ripley Bradfordus Ripley Sanfordus Kingsbury Ruggles Kent Zachariah
Chapman Salmon Hulbert Josephus Trowbridge Robertus Geer Joshua Howard Samuel
Munson Ebenezer Baldwin Stephanus Mix Mitchell Amos Botstord David Ingersoll
Elisaeus Rexford Silas Humphreville Josephus Denison Ebenezer Chaplin Cyrus
Brewster Gulielmus Giles Gulielmus Judd Nathan Tuttle Truman Wheeler
1764
Samuel Whittelley Elihu Bartlit Chauncy Whittelsey Deodatus Johnson Tutor
Samuel Ely Samuel Danielson Josephus Kidder David Noble Job Lane Enochus White
Bezaleel Woodward Titus Smith Petrus Colt Samuel Camp Samuel Johannes Mills
Hezekiah Ripley Asahel Heart Jonathan Bascom Jeremiah Hedges Eliphalet Steel
Oliverus (...) Johannes Smith Petrus Starr Johannes Watson Elisaeus Hall
Shubael Abbe Henricus Jackson
1765
Rogerus Conant Hezekiah Wyllys Robertus Walker Timotheus Woodbridge Samuel
Eells Samuel Mills Josephus How Radulphus Wheelock Johannes Chester Williams
Jonathan Judd Apollos Leonard Gulielmus Woodbridge Hezekiah Tomlinson Elijah
Fitch Ichabod Lewis Jonathan Bull Thomas Grosvenor Roswell Grant Samuel Whiting
Gideon Buckingham Ephraim Woodbridge Gulielmus Billings Isaacus Lewis Johannes
Elderkin Thomas Yale Job Swift Daniel Brewer Aaron Church Seldom Church
Josephus Kirby Elam Potter Blackleach Burritt Josiah Hale Thomas Jeduthun Smith
Samuel Norton Sethus Coleman * Obadiah Pease Johannes Tyler Jacobus Hough
Starlinus Graves Johannes Foot Samuel Orton Manasseh Cutler Theophilus
Chamberlain Thomas Wells Bray Aaron Kin
HARVARDINI Laurea Yalensi Donati.
1724
Samuel Mather Mr et Glascuae 1725
1732
Thomas Tyler Mr 1730
1733
Philemon Robbins Mr 1729
1737
* Antonius Davis Mr 1735
1740
Elisaeus Marsh Mr 1737
1741
Thomas Balch Mr 1733
1750
GULIELMUS ELLERY Mr 1722 Stephanus Greenleaf, Mr 1723 Samuel Cooper Mr 1743
ROYAL TYLER Mr 1743 Thomas Cushing Mr 1744 Nathanael Coffin Mr 1744 JACOBUS
BOWDOIN Mr 1745 Ebenezer Storer Mr 1747
1751
Josephus Green Mr 1746 Edvardus Wigglesworth Mr S. T. P. Holl. 1749
1753
Grindallus Rawson Mr 1741 Samuel Fayrweather Mr Oxon et Cant. 1743 Jonathan
Dorby Mr 1747 Josephus Palmer Mr 1747 Nathanael Robbins Mr 1747 Georgius
Leonard Mr 1748 Johannes Ellis Mr 1750 Gulielmus Cushing Mr 1771 Gulielmus
Williams Mr 1751
1754
Johannes Mascarene Mr 1741 Perez Marsh Mr 1748 * Samuel Epes Mr 1751
1755
Josephus Perry Mr 1752
1757
Mather Byles Mr 1751 Edvardus Walker A. B. 1757
1758
Gulielmus Patten Mr 1754
1759
Johannes Crocker Mr 1743 Ephraim Otis Mr 1756 Benjamin Pickman A. B. 1759
Johannes Aver^^ A B. 1759 Justinus Ely A. B. 1759 Lemuel Hedge A. B. 1759
1761
Samuel Barret Mr 1757
1765
Johannes Moore Mr 1761 Thomas Bridgman Mr 1762 Joshua Upham A. B. 1763 Moses
Hubbard A. B. 1765 Josephus Lee A. B. 1765 Josephus Willard A. B. 1765
Nathanael Battle A. B. 1765
NEO-CAESARIENSES Laurea Yalensi Donati.
1754
Jacobus Beard Mr 1750 Robertus Ross Mr 1751
1757
Samuel Clark Mr 1751 Sylvanus Osborne Mr 1754
1758
Benoni Bradner Mr 1755
1759
Thaddaeus Burr Mr 1755
1760
Benjamin Youngs Prime Mr 1751 Josephus Montgomery Mr 1755 Noah Benedict Mr
1757 Henricus Wells Mr 1757
1761
Benjamin Chapman Mr 1754
1764
Noah Wadhams Mr 1754
1765
Josiah Sherman Mr 1754 Samuel Tailor Mr 1757 Josiah Thacher Mr 1760
Magistratus, Charactere Capitali 19 Ministri, Charactere Italico 417 Numerus
Integer 1177 E^vivis cesserunt stelligeri 286 Supersunt adhuc 892
Collegii Yalensis ALUMNI, alphabetice dispositi: A Johanne Hotchkiss adjecti.
SENIORES.
Nathanael Brown Beckwith Georgius Beckwith Caleb Billings Aaron Bliss
Gulielmus Bowen Eliphalet Bulkley Noah Bulkley Josephus Camp Hezekiah Chapman
Johannes Chester David Dickinson Moses Graves Jonathan Fitch Caleb Hotchkiss
Stephanus Whitehead Hubbard Zadok Hunn Jonathan Ingersoll Jared Ingersoll
Thomas Kimberly Andreas Lee Jacobus Lockwood Asa Hall Lion Thaddaeus Maccarty
Israel Moseley Jonathan Murdock Caleb Rice Eliud Rockwell Gulielmus St. John
Edvardus Scovil David Shepard Johannes Strong Major Tailor Josephus Bissel
Wadsworth Gulielmus Walker Jacobus Ward Thomas Phillips White Dudleius
Woodbridge Robertus Woodhouse
JUNIORES.
Israel Ashley Moses Ashley Amos Butler Edvardus Carrington Jonathan Dwight
Bela Elderkin Nathanael Emmons Jehiel Hoadly Leverett Hubbard ^amuel Hunting
Elias Jones Carolus Kellogg Jonathan Kingsbury Jesse Knight Josephus Lyman Jehu
Miner Daniel Moss Isaiah Potter Johannes Treadwell Johannes Trumble Samuel
Wales Elisaeus Williams
SOPHIMORE.
Jonathan Bird Thomas Brockway David Brooks Josephus Church Benjamin Day
Johannes Ford Abel Forward Samuel Fowler Samuel Goodrich Josiah Graves Johannes
Augustus Graham Elihu Hall Jonathan Heart Sethus Hunt Josiah Huntington Samuel
Johnson Lemuel Lebaron Amzi Lewis Jesse Maccantier Theophilus Munson Josiah
Norton Allen Olcott Johannes Paddleford Elijah Parsons Sethus Sage Buckingham
St. John Oliverus Stanly Edmundus Wells Nathanael West Thomas Wooster
RECENTES.
David Avery Carolus Backus Leonardus Chester Samuel Darling Asahel Dudley
Josiah Dunham Timotheus Dwight David Ely Phinehas Fanning Daniel Grosvenor
Nathan Hale Johannes Hall Jabez Hamlin Robertus Hubbard Levi Hubbel Johannes
Keep Johannes Livingston David Macluer Thomas Miner Georgius Phillips Gulielmus
Plumb Gulielmus Seward Nathan Strong Simeon Tryon
Alumnorum Numerus 114

