SOME REASONS THAT INFLUENCED THE GOVERNOR TO TAKE, AND THE COUNCILLORS TO
ADMINISTER THE OATH, Required by the Act of PARLIAMENT; commonly called the
STAMP ACT. Humbly submitted to the Consideration of the PUBLIC.

MDCCLXVI. HARTFORD; Printed and sold by THOMAS GREEN.

Some Reasons, etc.
CONSIDERING the different Opinions among the People of the Colony of
Connecticut, relative to the Conduct of the GOVERNOR in taking, and of the
COUNCILLORS in administering the Oath enjoined by the Act of Parliament,
charging certain Stamp-Duties on the Colonies and Plantations in America,
commonly called the Stamp Act. And that such differing Sentiments, occasion
Disputes, Disquietudes and Uneasiness among some of the Inhabitants.

It may be expedient, and expected, that a brief Account of the Reasons of that
Conduct should be published, for the Information and Satisfaction of such as
are desirous to be acquainted with the same.

To the End therefore, that Truth may appear, in regard to that Matter; and
that the Occasions of Uneasiness concerning that Affair, may be removed. The
following Observations and Hints are offered to candid Consideration.

It is well known to the People of this Colony, who have printed Copies of the
Stamp Act in their Hands; that all the then present Governors or Commanders in
Chief of any British Colony, were expressly required before the first Day of
November, 1765; and all who shall hereafter be made Governors or Commanders in
Chief of the Colonies and Plantations, or any of them before their Entrance
into their Governments, to take a solemn Oath, to do their utmost, that all,
and every the Clauses contained in that Act, should be punctually, and bona
fide, observed according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, so far as
appertains unto the said Governors or Commanders in Chief respectively, under
the like Penalties, Forfeitures and Disabilities, either for neglecting to take
the said Oath, or for wittingly neglecting to do their Duty accordingly, as are
mentioned and expressed in An Act made in the 7th and 8th Year of the Reign of
King WILLIAM the Third, entitled, "An Act for preventing Frauds, and
regulating Abuses in the Plantation Trade." And that the Persons who have been,
or shall be appointed to administer the Oath required to be taken by the said
Act of King WILLIAM, are expressly required to administer the Oath required by
the Stamp Act.

The Act of WILLIAM the Third, to which the Stamp Act refers, requires the said
Governors or Commanders in Chief, to take the like Oath respecting the Clauses
in that Act; and also, respecting the Clauses in An Act made in the 12th Year
of CHARLES the Second; and in another Act made in the 15th Year of the same
Reign: And that such Oath should be administered by such Persons as His Majesty,
His Heirs or Successors should appoint; And by the aforesaid Act of WILLIAM, it
is further enacted, that upon Complaint and Proof, before His Majesty, His
Heirs or Successors, or such as should be by him or them thereunto authorized
and appointed, by the Oath of two or more credible Witnesses; that any of the
said Governors or Commanders in Chief, have neglected to take the said Oath at
the Times aforesaid, or have been wittingly or willingly negllgent in doing
their Duty accordingly. The said Governor so neglecting or offending, shall be
removed from his Government, and forfeit the Sum of One Thousand Pounds
Sterling.

And although it does not appear, that any Persons were appointed in
Consequence of the Acts of the 12th and 15th of CHARLES the Second, to
administer the Oaths to the Governors, required to be taken by those Acts (in
both of which the Governors were required to be sworn, much to the same
Purpose, as in the Act of WILLIAM is mentioned) yet in Pursuance of the Act of
WILLIAM, the King appointed the Governor of the Massachusetts, to administer
that Oath to the Governor of Connecticut; upon which the Colony represented to
the King, the Hardships and Difficulties of such a Measure, which obliged the
Governor to go to Boston to be qualified, before he could act in his Office
with Safety. Upon which the King was graciously pleased by His Commission to a
certain Number of the Council by Name, etc. Which he calls his Council for the
Colony of Connecticut, to appoint them, or any Three or more of them to
administer the Oath to the Governor; and that Commission stands now directed
to, and appointing any Three or more of the Council of the Colony, for the Time
being, to administer that Oath to the Governor; (none else therefore, may do
it) and these Persons, the Stamp Act expressly required to administer the Oath,
required by that Act, to be taken by the Governor.

By Virtue of that Commission under the Great Seal, lodged in the Secretary's
Office, that Oath has been administered to the successive Governors of the
Colony ever since; which is near Seventy Years.

These being the principal Facts, it may from thence be justly observed,

First. That as the Commission of King WILLIAM, to the Council of the Colony,
was obtained on the Request quest of the Colony; there can be no Doubt, but the
Colony esteemed it a great Favor, and thankfully accepted it. And that such
Request and Acceptance must imply on the Colony's Part, an Agreement to comform
to it; and also, that the Council whom the People should elect for the King
should act under and according to it. And this every Councillor by the
Acceptance of his Office engages to do: And as it is a Maxim of Law in the
British Constitution, That the King has an Interest in, and a Right to the
Service of all his Subjects; and more especially to the Service of Those who
are the Officers of the Crown; and by that Means are under particular and
express Obligations to Obedience.

Every Governor and Councillor are bound, not only by their Allegience, but by
their Office, and in the present Case also, by Agreement or Contract, by
accepting their Offices to which the aforesaid Commission is annexed, to yield
Obedience to the Requirements of the King and Parliament.

It is taken for granted by the King and Parliament, That all his Majesty's
Officers will obey their Commands. And on this Presumption, the Execution of
Royal Commands, Acts of Parliament, and even Acts of Provincial Legislatures
are often made dependant. The King therefore, in every such Case, expects all
his Officers, as well those which the People elect* and disignate for him, as
those whom he, by his immediate Commission or Warrant appoints, will obey his
Commands.

In Case any Officers, who are immediately appointed by the Crown, refuse
Obedience; it is natural to suppose they will be displaced, and others more
loyal and obedient put in their Room. But the Government to which they belong,
or for which they are appointed will be in no Danger of a Censure in that Case.
It must nevertheless, be supposed, the Consequence would be very different, if
those Officers whom the People elect, should refuse such Obedience, and so
frustrate the Intention and Requirements of the Act, in any particular; for, in
such a Case, it may justly be expected, the King will at least appoint others,
and that in another Government, in whom he can confide, and not continue the
Honor of a Betrustment to such, for the Time being, as the People should
designate, on whom he can have no Dependence. Yea, it is to be presumed, that
if the Governor and Council, whom the People choose, should refuse Obedience,
the King, or the King and Parliament would deprive the People of the Privilege
of electing such Officers; and then the whole Charter would be at once struck
up. That this would be the Event, in such Case, must be more than probable.

The Governor and the Councillors, apprehending their Noncompliance with the
Stamp Act, in the Particular aforesaid, would be fatal to the Charter
Privileges granted to the good People of this Colony (for which they have the
tenderest Regard, and highest Value) held themselves bound to conduct so as not
to endanger, but rather, if possible, to save them to themselves, and the
People, for whose Welfare they were seriously concerned. It Is not amiss to
observe here, that many entertain very mistaken Apprehensions concerning the
Part the Governor is bound to act by Virtue of the Oath he has taken; they
suppose he is obliged to exert his power, as Governor, to enforce said Act upon
the People, either by taking upon himself the Office of Stamp-Distributor, or
appointing some other to that Office, or the like. When in Truth no such Thing
is expected or required -- the Oath now taken, is not different from that which
all the successive Governors have taken ever since the Act of Trade took Place;
but that never made them Judges of Admiralty, Surveyors of the Woods, etc. or
empowered them to appoint any. All that any former Governors were obliged to
do, with Relation to the Act of Trade, or that the present Governors have to do
with Regard to the Stamp Act, is only to afford due Protection to the King's
Officers; and, on proper Information, to prevent and punish Frauds and
Impositions. The Governor swears, That he will do his utmost, that all, and
every the Clauses contained in said Act, be punctually and Bona fide observed,
according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, so far as appertains to him,
as Governor. But here a Question naturally arises, What additional Duty is
incumbent on the Governor, in Consequence of his having taken this Oath?
Indeed, little or nothing more than was his Duty before, and to which he was
bound, by his Office-Oath, and the Rules of the Common Law. And the Oath
required the Stamp Act, is only to be considered as a further Security on the
Governor, to discharge that which he was before bound to perform.


Besides all this, it is natural to suppose both the Governor and Councillors,
by a Refusal, would have exposed themselves to the King's highest Displeasure;
and what that means many have been made sensible of by fatal Experience. There
can be no Objections against such a Compliance with the express Requirements of
the Stamp Act, unless they arise from the Force of some superior Law, or from
the Force of some prior Oath which such Officers are under: To this it will
readily be conceded, that Oath ought not to be against Oath, nor ought a
superior Law to be disobeyed by a Compliance with one subordinate to it; but if
neither of these happen in the present Case, the Objection vanishes: And if on
the Contrary, former Oaths, and a superior Law also, oblige to this Conduct,
the Objection will appear yet more Groundless. That this is truly the Case,
will appear, if it be considered,

Secondly, That the Governor and Council were, by their Office-Oath, bound to
such a Conformity to the Act. -- It is well known to every one who has
inspected the Governor's and Assistant's Oaths, in the Colony-Law-Book, that
they are sworn to maintain all the lawful Privileges of the Colony, etc. By
which they are bound to do their utmost for that Purpose: And the same
Obligation lies upon them, not to neglect or refuse doing that, the Omission of
which would endanger the Loss of those Privileges. This must appear plain to
every candid Reader If therefore, the Governor and Council, whom the People
choose, by their refusing Obedience to the Commands of an Act of Parliament,
would endanger the Loss of the Privileges which they, and their Electors enjoy,
as has been shown to be the Case; it necessarily follows, they are bound by
their said Oaths, not to refuse such Obedience; and also, that while they view
Matters in this Light their Disobedience, or Noncompliance, could not, in
their Opinion, come short of a Breach of their Office-Oaths. This shows the
greatest Injustice, of being charged with Perjury, on Account of a Fulfillment
of those sacred Obligations comprehended in the Office-Oaths aforesaid.

Let it be considered, Thirdly, That the Governor, by a refusal to take the
Oath, by the Time prescribed in the Act, would have exposed himself, besides
what has been before mentioned, to the Penalty of being removed from his
Government, and the Forfeiture of One Thousand Pounds Sterling. And as his
Trial must be before the King, or such Persons as he should appoint, there
could be no avoiding a Condemnation, it would be to no Purpose, unless to
aggrevate the Offense, to plead any Thing against the Operation of the Act,
before those Judges. -- A Judgment, in such a Case, would not only subject the
Governor to the Payment of a large Fine, too heavy for a Governor of this
Colony to bear; and to a Removal from his Office, but would also render him
Infamous, and deprive him of any further Usefulness in Life: And how that would
feel, let any Man, who has any Value for his Character and Reputation, make it
his own Case, and thereon heartily judge for himself, and in so doing, he will
judge for another.

It has been objected, That although the Governor is subject, by the Act of
Parliament, to a very severe Penalty in Case of his Neglect or Refusal to take
the Oath, yet no Penalty is imposed on the Council, in Case they neglect or
refuse to administer the same: -- And though it might be wise and prudent, for
the Governor to offer to take the Oath, and in a Sense necessary for him so to
do; yet surely the Council were under no such Obligation or Necessity to
administer the same: -- And that, whatever might be said, by Way of Excuse, on
Account of the Governor, nothing can be said, in Favor of the Councillors, who
undertook to administer the same, as their Neglect or Refusal exposed them to
no Penalty at all. --

To this it may be answered, That, although no particular Penalty is expressly
mentioned, in said Statute, to be inflicted on the Council, in case they should
refuse or neglect to administer the Oath required; yet, as the Commission
expressly empowers and directs them to administer the same, their Neglect, or
Disobedience would have been a great Breach of Trust, and such a high Contempt
of the Authority both of the King and Parliament, as would be punishable even
at Common Law. Is it not a known Rule of the Law, in all such Cases, where no
particular Penalty is expressly mentioned, that the Offender lies at the King's
Mercy, and may be punished at Discretion (saving Life) either by the Courts of
Common Law, or the Court of Chauncery? And it is apprehended, that the least
such Councillors could expect, would be to suffer the same Pains and Penalties
that the Governor would have incurred, had he been the faulty Party, and
refused to take the Oath. Let the impartial World heartily consider this, and
say, Is it reasonable the Councillors should expose themselves to such a
Sentence as this? If, as the Objection supposes, the Penalty is too great for a
Governor of this Colony bear, surely, with more Reason it may be said, that
it is much too heavy for any Councillors to endure!

This Matter, and the Consequences, as they respected the Governor, appeared so
clear to the Council, when discoursed among themselves, that the whole Council
present, were of Opinion, it was advisable for the Governor to offer to take
the Oath required: They also see, that if one Governor was removed for Refusal,
another would be in the same Case, and so on. Therefore the Colony must, in
that Case, give up all Pretense of having a Governor or Commander in Chief,
unless he complied with the Act. And whether the Charter itself could subsist,
without such an Officer, is no difficult Question to determine. If, therefore,
it was the Governor's Duty to offer to take the Oath, it must certainly be
right for him to take it, in Case the Council would administer it: And that
they were bound to administer it, has been clearly evinced: So that the Whole
of their Conduct, in the Matter aforesaid, appears not only to be barely
justified; but also, that it deserves the Applause of all who desire the Safety
of the Privileges of the Colony. Whoever heartily consider these Things, will,
as it is conceived, judge the Governor and Councillors, by their aforesaid
Conduct, acted the Part of faithful Officers to the Crown, and that of true
Patriots to their Country. Upon the Whole then, it may be justly concluded,
they were moved from Principles of Loyalty to the King; from a serious and
tender Concern for the Privileges of the Colony; a conscientious Regard to the
solemn Obligations of their Office-Oaths; and a just Value for their own
Interest, Reputation, and Usefulness in Life.


