A CAUTION AND WARNING TO GREAT BRITAIN AND HER COLONIES IN A SHORT
REPRESENTATION OF THE CALAMITOUS STATE OF THE ENSLAVED NEGROES in the BRITISH
DOMINIONS. Collected from various AUTHORS, and submitted to the SERIOUS
CONSIDERATION of ALL, more especially of THOSE in POWER. By ANT. BENEZET.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by HENRY MILLER, in Second-Street. MDCCLXVI.

A CAUTION AND WARNING etc.
AT a time when the general rights and liberties of mankind, and the
preservation of those valuable privileges transmitted to us from our ancestors,
are become so much the subjects of universal consideration; can it be an
inquiry indifferent to any, how many of those who distinguish themselves as the
Advocates of Liberty, remain insensible and inattentive to the treatment of
thousands and tens of thousands of our fellow-men, who, from motives of
avarice, and the inexorable degree of tyrant custom, are at this very time kept
in the most deplorable state of slavery, in many parts of the British Dominions.

The intent of publishing the following sheets, is more fully to make known the
aggravated iniquity attending the practice of the Slave Trade; whereby many
thousands of our fellow creatures, as free as ourselves by nature, and equally
with us the subjects of Christ's redeeming grace, are yearly brought into
inextricable and barbarous bondage; and many, very many, to miserable and
untimely ends.

The truth of this lamentable complaint is so obvious to persons of candor,
under whose notice it has fallen, that several have lately published their
sentiments thereon; as a matter which calls for the most serious consideration
of all who are concerned for the civil or religious welfare of their country.
How an evil of so deep a dye, has so long, not only passed uninterrupted by
Those in Power, but has even had their countenance, is, indeed, surprising,
and, charity would suppose, must, in a great measure, have arisen from this,
that many persons in government, both of the Clergy and Laity, in whose power
it has been to put a stop to the Trade, have been unacquainted with the
corrupt motives which gives life to it; and the groans, the dying groans, which
daily ascend to God, the common Father of mankind, from the broken hearts of
those his deeply oppressed creatures; otherwise the powers of the earth would
not, I think I may venture to say, could not, have so long authorized a
practice so inconsistent with every idea of liberty and justice, which, as the
learned James Foster says, Bids that God, which is the God and Father of the
Gentiles, unconverted to Christianity, most daring and hold defiance; and
spurns at all the principles both of natural and revealed Religion.

Much might justly be said of the temporal evils which attend this practice, as
it is destructive of the welfare of human society, and of the peace and
prosperity of every country, in proportion as it prevails. It might be also
shown, that it destroys the bonds of natural affection and interest, whereby
mankind in general are united; that it introduces idleness, discourages
marriage, corrupts the youth, ruins and debauches morals, excites continual
apprehensions of dangers, and frequent alarms, to which the Whites are
necessarily exposed from so great an increase of a people, that, by their
bondage and oppressions, become natural enemies, yet, at the same time, are
filling the places and eating the bread of those who would be the support and
security of the country. But as these and many more reflections of the same
kind, may occur to a considerate mind, I shall only endeavor to show, from the
nature of the Trade, the plenty which Guinea affords its inhabitants, the
barbarous treatment of the Negroes, and the observations made thereon by
authors of note, that it is inconsistent with the plainest precepts of the
gospel, the dictates of reason, and every common sentiment of humanity.

In an account of the European Setttlements in America, printed in London,
1757, the author speaking on this subject, says: The Negroes in our Colonies
endure a slavery more complete and attended with far worse circumstances than
what any people in their condition suffer in any other part of the world, or
have suffered in any other period of time: proofs of this are not wanting. The
prodigious waste which we experience in this unhappy part of our species, is a
full and melancholy evidence of this truth. The Island of Barbados, (the
Negroes upon which do not amount to eighty thousand) notwithstanding all the
means which they use to increase them by propagation, and that the climate is
in every respect except that of being more wholesome) exactly resembling the
climate from whence they come; notwithstanding all this, Barbados lies under a
necessity of an annual recruit of five thousand slaves, to keep up the stock at
the number I have mentioned. This prodigious failure, which is at least in the
same proportion in all our Islands, shows demonstratively that some uncommon
and unsupportable hardship lies upon the Negroes, which wears them down in such
a surprising manner; and this, I imagine, is principally the excessive labor
which they undergo. In an account of part of North America, published by Thomas
Jeffery, printed 1761, speaking of the usage the Negroes receive in the
West India Islands, thus expresses himself: It Is impossible for a human heart
to reflect upon the servitude of these dregs of mankind, without in some
measure feeling for their misery, which ends but with their lives. -- Nothing
can be more wretched than the condition of this people. One would imagine, they
were framed to be the disgrace of the human species, banished from their
country, and deprived of that blessing Liberty, on which all other nations set
the greatest value, they are in a manner reduced to the condition of beasts of
burden: In general a few roots, potatoes especially, are their food, and two
rags, which neither screen them from the heat of the day, nor the extraordinary
coolness of the night, all their covering; their sleep very short; their labor
almost continual, they receive no wages, but have twenty lashes for the
smallest fault.

A considerate young person who was late in one of our West India Islands,
where he observed the miserable situation of the Negroes, makes the following
remarks, I meet with daily exercise, to see the treatment which these miserable
wretches meet with from their masters, with but few exceptions. They whip them
most unmercifully, on small occasions. They beat them with thick clubs, and you
will see their bodies all whaled and scarred; in short, they seem to set no
other value on their lives than as they cost them so much money; and are not
restrained from killing them, when angry, by a worthier consideration than that
they lose so much. They act as though they did not look upon them as a race of
human creatures, who have reason, and remembrance of misfortunes, but as
beasts, like oxen, who are stubborn, hardy and senseless; fit for burdens, and
designed to bear them. They will not allow them to have any claim to human
privileges, or scarce, indeed, to be regarded as the work of God. Though it was
consistent with the justice of our Maker to pronounce the sentence on our
common parent, and through him on all succeeding generations, That he and they
should eat their bread by the sweat of their brow; yet, does it not stand
recorded by the same eternal truth, That the Labourer is worthy of his hire? It
cannot be allowed in natural justice that there should be a servitude without
condition: A cruel endless servitude. It cannot be reconcilable to natural
justice, that whole nations; nay whole continents of men, should be devoted to
do the drudgery of life for others, be dragged away from their attachments of
relations and societies; and made to serve the appetites and pleasures of a
race of men whose superiority has been obtained by an illegal force.

A particular account of the treatment these unhappy Africans receive in the
West Indies, was lately published, which even by those who, blinded by
interest, seek excuses for the Trade, and endeavor to palliate the cruelty
exercised upon them, is allowed to be a true, though rather too favorable
representation of the usage they receive, which is as follows, viz. The
iniquity of the Slave Trade is greatly aggravated by the inhumanity with which
the Negroes are treated in the Plantations, as well with respect to food and
clothing, as from the unreasonable labor which is commonly exacted from them.
To which may be added the cruel chastisements they frequently suffer, without
any other bounds than the will and wrath of their hard taskmasters. In
Barbados, and some other of the Islands, six pints of Indian corn and three
herrings are reckoned a full week's allowance for a working slave, and in the
System of Geography it is said, That in Jamaica the owners of the
Negroe-slaves, set aside for each a parcel of ground, and allow them Sundays to
manure it, the produce of which, with sometimes a few herrings, or other salt
fish, is all that is allowed for their support. Their allowance for clothing
in the Islands is seldom more than six yards of osenbrigs each year: and in the
more northern Colonies, where the piercing westerly winds are long and sensibly
felt, these poor Africans suffer much for want of sufficient clothing, indeed
some have none till they are able to pay for it by their labor. The time that
the Negroes work in the West Indies, is from daybreak till noon; then again
from two o'clock till dusk: (during which time they are attended by overseers,
who severely scourge those who appear to them dilatory) and before they are
suffered to go to their quarters, they have still something to do, as
collecting of herbage for the horses, gathering fuel for the boilers, etc. so
that it is often half past twelve before they can get home, when they have
scarce time to grind and boil their Indian corn; whereby it often happens that
they are called again to labor before they can satisfy their hunger: and here
no delay or excuse will avail, for if they are not in the field immediately
upon the usual notice, they must expect to feel the overseers lash. In
crop-time (which lasts many months) they are obliged (by turns) to work most of
the night in the boiling-house. Thus their owners, from a desire of making the
greatest gain by the labor of their slaves, lay heavy burdens on them, and yet
feed and clothe them very sparingly, and some scarce feed or clothe them at
all, so that the poor creatures are obliged to shift for their living in the
best manner they can, which occasions their being often killed in the
neighboring lands, stealing potatoes, or other food, to satisfy their hunger.
And if they take any thing from the plantation they belong to, though under such
pressing want, their owners will correct them severely, for taking a little of
what they have so hardly labored for, whilst they themselves riot in the
greatest luxury and excess. -- It is a matter of astonishment, how a people
who, as a nation, are looked upon as generous and humane, and so much value
themselves for their uncommon sense of the benefit of Liberty, can live in the
practice of such extreme oppression and inhumanity, without seeing the
inconsistency of such conduct, and without feeling great remorse: Nor is it
less amazing to hear these men calmly making calculations about the strength
and lives of their fellow-men; in Jamaica, if six in ten, of the new imported
Negroes survive the seasoning, it is looked upon as a gaining purchase: And in
most of the other plantations, if the Negroes live eight or nine years, their
labor is reckoned a sufficient compensation for their cost. -- If calculations
of this sort were made upon the strength and labor of beasts of burden it
would not appear so strange, but even then a merciful man would certainly use
his beast with more mercy than is usually shown to the poor Negroes. -- Will
not the groans of this deeply afflicted and oppressed people reach heaven, and
when the cup of iniquity is full, must not the inevitable consequence be
pouring forth of the judgments of God upon their oppressors. But, alas! is it
not too manifest that this oppression has already long been the object of the
divine displeasure, for what heavier judgment, what greater calamity can befall
any people, than to become a prey to that hardness of heart, that forgetfulness
of God, and insenbility to every religious impression; as well as that general
depravation of manners, which so much prevails in the Colonies, in proportion
as they have more or less enriched themselves, at the expense of the blood and
bondage of the Negroes.

The situation of the Negroes in our Southern provinces on the Continent, is
also feelingly set forth by George Whitefield, in a letter from Georgia, to the
inhabitants of Maryland, Virginia, North-and South Carolina, printed in the
year 1739, of which the following is an extract, As I lately passed through
your provinces, in my way hither, I was sensibly touched with a fellow-feeling
of the miseries of the poor Negroes. Whether it be lawful for Christians to buy
slaves, and thereby encourage the nations from whom they are bought, to be at
perpetual war with each other, I shall not take upon me to determine; sure I
am, it is sinful, when bought, to use them as bad, nay worse, than as though
they were brutes; and whatever particular exception there may be, (as I would
charitably hope there are some) I fear the generality of you, that own Negroes,
are liable to such a charge; for your slaves, I believe, work as hard, if not
harder, than the horses whereon you ride. These, after they have done their
work, are fed and taken proper care of; but many Negroes, when wearied with
labor, in your plantations, have been obliged to grind their own corn, after
they return home; your dogs are caressed and fondled at your tables; but your
slaves, who are frequently styled dogs or beasts, have not an equal privilege;
they are scarce permitted to pick up the crumbs which fall from their master's
table. -- Not to mention what numbers have been given up to the inhuman usage
of cruel talk-master, who, by their unrelenting scourges, have ploughed their
backs, and made long furrows, and at length brought them even to death. When
passing along, I have viewed your plantations cleared and cultivated, many
spacious houses built, and the owners of them faring sumptuously every day, my
blood has frequently almost run cold within me, to consider how many of your
slaves had neither convenient food to eat, or proper raiment to put on,
notwithstanding most of the comforts you enjoy were solely owing to their
indefatigable labors. -- The Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the ox that
treads out the corn. Does God take care for oxen; and will he not take care
of the Negroes also? undoubtedly he will. -- Go to now ye rich men, weep and
howl for your miseries that shall come upon you: Behold the provision of the
poor Negroes, who have reaped down your fields, which is by you denied them,
cries; and the cries of them, which reaped, are entered into the ears of the
Lord of Sabbath. We have a remarkable instance of God's taking cognizance of,
and avenging the quarrel of poor slaves, 2 Samuel xxi. 1. There was a famine in
the days of David, three years, year after year; and David enquired of the
Lord: And the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and his bloody house, because he
slew the Gibeonites. Two things are here very remarkable: First, These
Gibeonites were only hewers of wood and drawers of water, or in other words,
slaves like yours. Secondly, That this plague was sent by God many years after
the injury, the cause of the plague, was committed. And for what end were this
and such like examples recorded in holy Scriptures, without doubt, for our
learning. -- For God is the same today, as he was yesterday, and will continue
the same for ever. He does not reject the prayer of the poor and destitute; nor
disregard the cry of the meanest Negro. The blood of them spilt for those many
years in your respective provinces will ascend up to heaven against you.

Some who have only seen Negroes in an abject state of slavery, broken-spirited
and dejected, knowing nothing of their situation in their native country, may
apprehend, that they are naturally unsensible of the benefits of Liberty, being
destitute and miserable in every respect, and that our suffering them to live
amongst us (as the Gibeonites of old were permitted to live with the
Israelites) though even on more oppressive term, is to them a favor; but these
are certainly erroneous opinions, with respect to far the greatest part of
them: Although it is highly probable that in a country which is more than three
thousand miles in extent from north to south, and as much from east to west,
there will be barren parts, and many inhabitants more uncivilized and barbarous
than others; as is the case in all other countries: Yet, from the most
authentic accounts, the inhabitants of Guinea appear, generally speaking, to be
an industrious, humane, sociable people, whose capacities are naturally as
enlarged, and as open to improvement, as those of the Europeans; and that their
Country is fruitful, and in many places well improved, abounding in cattle,
grain and fruits: And as the earth yields all the year round a fresh supply of
food, and but little clothing is requisite, by reason of the continual warmth
of the climate; the necessaries of life are much easter procured in most parts
of Africa, than in our more northern climes. This is confirmed by many authors
of note, who have resided there; among others M. Adanson, in his account of
Goree and Senegal, in the year 1754, says, Which way soever I turned my eyes on
this pleasant spot, I beheld a perfect image of pure nature; an agreeable
solitude, bounded on every side by charming landscapes, the rural situation of
cottages in the midst of trees; the ease and indolence of the Negroes reclined
under the shade of their spreading foliage; the simplicity of their dress and
manners; the whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and I
seemed to contemplate the world in its primitive state: they are, generally
speaking, very good-natured, sociable and obliging. I was not a little pleased
with this my first reception; it convinced me, that there ought to be a
considerable abatement made in the accounts I had read and heard everywhere of
the savage character of the Africans. I observed, both in Negroes and Moors,
great humanity and sociableness, which gave me strong hopes, that I should be
very safe amongst them, and meet with the success I desired, in my inquiries
after the curiosities of the country.

William Bosman, a principal factor for the Dutch, who resided sixteen years in
Guinea, speaking of the natives of that part, where he then was, says, They are
generally a good sort of people, honest in their dealings;' others he describes
as 'being generally friendly to strangers, of a mild conversation, affable and
easy to be overcome with reason.' He adds, That some Negroes, who have had an
agreeable education, have manifested a brightness of understanding equal to any
of us.' Speaking of the fruitfulness of the country, he says, 'It was very
populous, plentifully provided with corn, potatoes and fruit, which grew close
to each other; in some places a foot-path is the only ground that is not
covered with them; the Negroes leaving no place, which is thought fertile,
uncultivated; and immediately after they have reaped, they are sure to sow
again.' Other parts he describes, as 'being full of towns and villages; the
soil very rich, and so well cultivated as to look like an entire garden,
abounding in rice, corn, oxen and poultry, and the inhabitants laborious.

William Smith, who was sent by the African Company to visit their settlements
on the coast of Guinea, in the year 1726, gives much the same accout of the
country of Delmina and Cape Corse, etc. for beauty and goodness, and adds, The
more you come downward toward that part, called Slave-Coast, the more
delightful and rich the soil appears.' Speaking of their disposition, he says,
'They were a civil, good-natured people, industrious to the last degree. It is
easy to perceive what happy memories they are blessed with, and how great
progress they would make in the sciences, in case their genius was cultivated
with study.' He adds, from the information he received of one of the Factors,
who had resided ten years in that country, 'That the discerning natives account
it their greatest unhappiness, that they were ever visited by the Europeans. --
That the Christians introduced the Traffic of Slaves; and that before our
coming they lived in peace.

Andrew Brue, a principal man in the French Factory, in the account he gives of
the great river Senegal, which runs many hundred miles up the country, tells
his readers, The farther you go from the sea, the country on the river seems
more fruitful and well improved. It abounds in Guinea and Indian corn, rice,
pulse, tobacco, and indigo. Here are vast meadows, which feed large herds of
great and small cattle; poultry are numerous, as well as wild fowl.' The same
author, in his travels to the south of the river Gambia, expresses his
surprise, 'to see the land so well cultivated; scarce a spot lay unimproved;
the low grounds, divided by small canals, were all sowed with rice; the higher
ground planted with Indian corn, millet, and peace of different sorts, beef and
mutton very cheap, as well as all other necessaries of life.' The account this
author gives of the disposition of the natives, is, 'That they are generally
good-natured and civil, and may be brought to any thing by fair and soft
means.' Artus, speaking of the same people, says, 'They are a sincere,
inoffensive people, and do no injustice either to one another or strangers.

From these accounts, both of the good disposition of the natives, and the
fruitfulness of most parts of Guinea, which are confirmed by many other
authors, it may well be concluded, that their acquaintance with the Europeans
would have been a happiness to them, had those last not only bore the name, but
indeed been influenced by the spirit of Christianity; but, alas! how has the
conduct of the Whites contradicted the precepts and example of Christ? Instead
of promoteing the end of his coming, by preaching the gospel of peace and
good will to man, they have, by their practices, contributed to inflame every
noxious passion of corrupt nature in the Negroes; they have incited them to
make war one upon another, and for this purpose have furnished them with
prodigious quantities of ammunition and arms, whereby they have been hurried
into confusion, bloodshed, and all the extremities of temporal misery, which
must necessarily beget in their minds such a general detestation and scorn of
the Christian name, as may deeply affect, if not wholly preclude their belief
of the great truths of our holy religion. Thus an insatiable desire of gain
has become the principal and moving cause of the most abominable and dreadful
scene, that was perhaps ever acted upon the face of the earth; even the power
of their kings has been made subservient to answer this wicked purpose,
instead of being protectors of their people, these rulers, allured by the
tempting bait laid before them by the European Factors, etc. have invaded the
Liberties of their unhappy subjects, and are become their oppressors.

Diverse accounts have already appeared in print declarative of the shocking
wickedness with which this Trade is carried on; these may not have fallen into
the hands of some of my readers, I shall, therefore, for their information,
select a few of the most remarkable instances that I have met with, showing the
method by which the Trade is commonly managed all along the African coast.

Francis Moor, Factor to the African Company on the river Gambia, relates, That
when the King of Barsalli wants goods, etc. he sends a messenger to the English
Governor at James' Fort, to desire he would send up a sloop with a cargo of
goods; which (says the author) the Governor never fails to do: against the time
the vessel arrives, the King plunders some of his enemies towns, selling the
people for such goods as he wants. -- If he is not at war with any neighboring
King, he falls upon one of his own towns, and makes bold to sell his own
miserable subjects.

N. Brue, in his account of the Trade, etc. writes, That having received a
quantity of goods, he wrote to the King of the country, That if he had a
sufficient number of slaves, he was ready to trade with him. This Prince (says
that author) as well as other Negroe Monarchs, has always a sure way of
supplying his deficiencies by selling his own subjects. -- The King had
recourse to this method, by seizing three hundred of his own people, and sent
word to Brue, that he had the slaves ready to deliver for the goods.

The misery and bloodshed, consequent of the Slave Trade, is amply set forth by
the following extracts of two voyages to the Coast of Guinea for slaves. The
first in a vessel from Liverpool, taken verbatim from the original manuscript
of the Surgeon's journal, viz.

Sestro, December the 29th, 1724. No trade today, though many Traders come on
board, they inform us, that the people are gone to war within land, and will
bring prisoners enough in two or three days; in hopes of which we stay.

The 30th. No trade yet, but our Traders came on board today, and informed us,
the people had burnt four towns of their enemies, so that tomorrow we expect
slaves off. Another large ship is come in: yesterday came in a large Londoner.

The 31st. Fair weather, but no trade yet; we see each night towns burning; but
we hear the Sestro men are many of them killed by the inland Negroes, so that
we fear this war will be unsuccessful.

The 2d January. Last night we saw a prodigious fire break out about eleven
o'clock, and this morning see the town of Sestro burnt down to the ground, (it
contained some hundreds of houses) so that we find their enemies are too hard
for them at present, and consequently our trade spoiled here; so that about
seven o'clock we weighed anchor, as did likewise the three other vessels to
proceed lower down.

The second relation, also taken from the original manuscript journal of a
person of credit, who went Surgeon on the same account, in a vessel from
New York to the Coast of Guinea, about eighteen years past, is as follows, viz.
Being on the coast at a place called Basalia, the Commander of the vessel,
according to custom, sent a person on shore with a present to the King,
acquainting him with his arrival, and letting him know, they wanted a cargo of
slaves. The King promised to furnish them with slaves, and in order to do it,
set out to go to war against his enemies, designing also to surprise some town,
and take all the people prisoners: Sometime after, the King sent them word, he
had not yet met with the desired success, having been twice repulsed, in
attempting to break up two towns; but that he still hoped to procure a number
of slaves for them; and in this design he persisted till he met his enemies in
the field, where a battle was fought, which lasted three days, during which
time the engagement was so bloody, that four thousand five hundred men were
slain on the spot. The person, that wrote the account, beheld the bodies as
they lay on the field of battle. Think (says he in his journal) what a pitiable
sight it was, to see the widows weeping over their lost husbands, orphans
deploring the loss of their fathers, etc. etc.

Those, who are acquainted with the Trade, agree, that many Negroes on the
seacoast, who have been corrupted by their intercourse and converse with the
European Factors, have learnt to stick at no act of cruelty for gain. These
make it a practice to steal abundance of little Blacks of both sexes, when
found on the roads or in the fields, where their parents keep them all day to
watch the corn, etc. Some authors say, the Negroe Factors go six or seven
hundred miles up the country with goods, bought from the Europeans, where
markets of men are kept in the same manner as those of beasts with us; when the
poor slaves, whether brought from far or near, come to the seashore, they are
stripped naked, and strictly examined by the European Surgeons, both men and
women, without the least distinction or modesty; those which are approved as
good, are marked with a redhot iron with the ship's mark, after which they are
put on board the vessels, the men being shackled with irons two and two
together. Reader bring the matter home, and consider whether any situation in
life can be more completely miserable than that of those distressed captives.
When we reflect, that each individual of this number had some tender attachment
which was broken by this cruel separation; some parent or wife, who had not an
opportunity of mingling tears in a parting embrace: perhaps some infant or aged
parent whom his labor was to feed and vigilance protect; themselves under the
dreadful apprehension of an unknown perpetual slavery; pent up within the
narrow confines of a vessel, sometimes six or seven hundred together, where
they lie as close as possible. Under these complicated distresses they are
often reduced to a state of desperation, wherein many have leaped into the sea,
and have kept themselves under water, till they were drowned; others have
starved themselves to death, for the prevention whereof some masters of vessels
have cut off the legs and arms of a number of those poor desperate creatures,
to terrify the rest. Great numbers have also frequently been killed, and some
deliberately put to death under the grearest torture, when they have attempted
to rise, in order to free themselves from their present misery, and the slavery
designed them. An instance of the last kind appears particularly in an account
given by the master of a vessel, who brought a cargo of slaves to Barbadoz;
indeed it appears so irreconcilable to the common dictates of humanity, that
one would doubt the truth of it, had it not been related by a serious person of
undoubted credit, who had it from the captain's own mouth. Upon an inquiry,
What had been the success of his voyage? He answered, That he had found it a
difficult matter to set the Negroes a fighting with each other, in order to
procure the number he wanted; but that when he had obtained this end, and had
got his vessel filled with slaves, a new difficulty arose from their refusal to
take food; those desperate creatures choosing rather to die with hunger, than to
be carried from their native country. Upon a farther inquiry, by what means he
had prevailed upon them to forego this desperate resolution, he answered, That
he obliged all the Negroes to come upon deck, where they persisting in their
resolution of not taking food, he caused his sailors to lay hold upon one of
the most obstinate, and chopped the poor creature into small pieces, forcing some
of the others to eat a part of the mangled body; withal swearing to the
survivors, that he would use them all, one after the other, in the same manner,
if they did not consent to eat. This horrid execution he applauded as a good
act, it having had the desired effect, in bringing them to take food.

A similar case is mentioned in Astley's Collection of Voyages, by John Atkins,
Surgeon on board Admiral Ogle's squadron, Of one Harding, master of a vessel,
in which several of the men-slaves, and a woman-slave, had attempted to rise,
in order to recover their liberty; some of whom the master, of his own
authority, sentenced to cruel death; making them first eat the heart and liver
of one of those he killed. The woman he hoisted by the thumbs; whipped and
slashed with knives before the other slaves, till she died.

As detestable and shocking as this may appear to such, whose hearts are not
yet hardened by the practice of that cruelty, which the love of wealth, by
degrees, introduces into the human mind; it will not be strange to those who
have been concerned or employed in the Trade. Now here arises a necessary query
to those who hold the balance and sword of justice; and who must account to
God for the use they have made of it. Since our English law is so truly
valuable for its justice, how can they overlook these barbarous deaths of the
unhappy Africans without trial, or due proof of their being guilty, of crimes
adequate to their punishment? Why are those masters of vessels (who are often
not the most tender and considerate of men) thus suffered to be the sovereign
arbiters of the lives of the miserable Negroes; and allowed, with impunity,
thus to destroy, may I not say, murder their fellowcreatures, and that by means
so cruel as cannot be even related but with shame and horror.

When the vessels arrive at their destined port in the Colonies, the poor
Negroes are to be disposed of to the planters, and here they are again exposed
naked, without any distinction of sexes, to the brutal examination of their
purchasers; and this, it may well be judged is to many of them another occasion
of deep distress, especially to the females: Add to this, that near connections
must now again be separated, to go with their several purchasers: In this
melancholy scene mothers are seen hanging over their daughters, bedewing their
naked breasts with tears, and daughters clinging to their parents; not knowing
what new stage of distress must follow their separation; or if ever they shall
meet again; and here what sympathy, what commiseration are they to expect; why
indeed, if they will not separate as readily as their owners think proper, the
whipper is called for, and the lash exercised upon their naked bodies, till
obliged to part.

Can any human heart, that retains a fellow-feeling for the sufferings of
mankind, be unconcerned at relations of such grievous affliction, to which this
oppressed part of our species are subjected: God gave to man dominion over the
fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over the cattle, etc. but
imposed no involuntary subjection of one man to another.

The truth of this position, has of late been clearly set forth by persons of
reputation and ability, particularly George Wallis, in his System of the Laws
of Scotland, whose sentiments are so worthy the notice of all considerate
persons, that I shall here repeat a part of what he has not long since
published, concerning the African Trade, viz. If this trade admits of a moral
or a rational justification, every crime, even the most atrocious, may be
justified: Government was instituted for the good of mankind. Kings, Princes,
Governors are not proprietors of those who are subjected to their authority,
they have not a right to make them miserable. On the contrary, their authority
is vested in them, that they may by the just exercise of it, promote the
happiness of their people: Of course, they have not a right to dispose of their
Liberty, and to sell them for slaves: Besides, no man has a right to acquire or
to purchase them; men and their Liberty are not either saleable or purchasable,
one therefore has no body but himself to blame, in case he shall find himself
deprived of a man, whom he thought he had, by buying for a price, made his own;
for he dealt in a trade which was illicit, and was prohibited by the most
obvious dictates of humanity. For these reasons, every one of those unfortunate
men, who are pretended to be slaves, has a right to be declared to be free, for
he never lost his Liberty, he could not lose it; his Prince had no power to
dispose of him: of course the sale was void. This right he carries about with
him, and is entitled every where to get it declared. As soon, therefore, as he
comes into a country, in which the judges are not forgetful of their own
humanity, it is their duty to remember that he is a man, and to declare him to
be free. -- This is the law of nature, which is obligatory on all men, at all
times, and in all places. -- Would not any of us, who should be snatched by
pirates from his native land, think himself cruelly abused, and at all times
entitled to be free? Have not these unfortunate Africans, who meet with the
same cruel fate, the same right? Are not they men as well as we, and have they
not the same sensibility? Let us not, therefore, defend or support a usage,
which is contrary to all the laws of humanity?

Francis Hutchison, also in his System of Moral Philosophy, speaking on the
subject of Slavery, says, He who detains another by force in slavery, is always
bound to prove his title. The slave sold or carried away into a distant
country, must not be obliged to prove a negative, That he never forfeited his
Liberty. The violent possessor must, in all cases, show his title, especially
where the old proprietor is well known. In this case each man is the original
proprietor of his own Liberty: The proof of his losing it must be incumbent on
those, who deprived him of it by force. Strange, (says the same author) that in
any nation, where a sense of Liberty prevails, where the Christian religion is
professed, custom and high prospect of gain can so stupify the consciences of
men, and all sense of natural justice, that they can hear such computation made
about the value of their fellow-men and their liberty, without out abhorence
and indignation?

The noted Baron Montesquieu gives it, as his opinion, in his Spirit of Law,
page 348, That nothing more assimilates a man to a beast than living amongst
freemen, himself a slave, such people as these are the natural enemies of
society, and their number must always be dangerous.

The author of a pamphlet, lately printed in London, entitled, An Essay in
Vindication of the Continental Colonies of America, writes, That the bondage we
have imposed on the Africans, is absolutely repugnant to justice. That it is
highly inconsistent with civil policy: First, as it tends to suppress all
improvements in arts and sciences; without which it is morally impossible that
any nation should be happy or powerful. Secondly, as it may deprave the minds
of the freemen; steeling their hearts against the laudable feelings of virtue
and humanity. And, lastly, as it endangers the community by the destructive
effects of civil commotions, need I add to these, (says that author) what every
heart, which is not callous to all tender feelings, will readily suggest; that
it is shocking to humanity, violative of every generous sentiment, abhorrent
utterly from the Christian religion; for as Montesquieu very justly observes,
We must suppose them not to be men, or a suspicion would follow that we
ourselves are not Christians. -- There cannot be a more dangerous maxim, than
that necessity is a plea for injustice. For who shall six the degree of this
necessity? What villain so atrocious, who may not urge this excuse; or, as
Milton has happly expressed it, -- And with necessity
The tyrant's plea, excuse his devilish deed?
That our Colonies want people, is a very weak argument for so inhuman a
violation of justice. -- Shall a civilized, a Christian nation encourage
slavery; because the barbarous, savage, lawless African has done it? Monstrous
thought! To what end do we profess a religion whose dictates we so flagrantly
violate? Wherefore have we that pattern of goodness and humanity, if we refuse
to follow it? How long shall we continue a practice, which policy rejects,
justice condemns, and piety dissuades? Shall the Americans persist in a
conduct, which cannot be justified; or persevere in oppression from which their
hearts must recoil? If the barbarous Africans shall continue to enslave each
other let the demon slavery remain among them, that their crime may include
its own punishment. Let not Christians, by administering to their wickedness,
confess their religion to be a useless refinement, their profession vain, and
themselves as inhuman as the savages they detest.

James Foster, in his Discourses on Natural Religion and Social Virtue, also
shows his just indignation at this wicked practice, which he declares to be a
criminal and outrageous violation of the natural right of mankind. At page 156,
2 vol. he says, Should we have read concerning the Greeks or Romans of old,
that they traded, with view to make slaves of their own species, whom they
certainly knew that this would involve in schemes of blood and murder, of
destroying or enslaving each other, that they even fomented wars, and engaged
whole nations and tribes in open hostilities, for their own private advantage;
that they had no detestation of the violence and cruelty; but only feared the
ill success of their inhuman enterprises; that they carried men like
themselves, their brethren, and the offspring of the same common parent, to be
sold like beasts of prey, or beasts of burden, and put them to the same
reproachful trial, of their soundness, strength and capacity for greater bodily
service; that quite forgetting and renounceing the original dignity of human
nature, communicated to all, they treated them with more severity and ruder
discipline, than even the ox or the ass, who are void of understanding, --
should we not, if this had been the case, have naturally been led to despise
all their pretended refinements of morality; and to have concluded, that as
they were not nations destitute of politeness, they must have been entire
strangers to virtue and benevolence. But, notwithstanding this, we ourselves
(who profess to be Christians, and boast of the peculiar advantage we enjoy, by
means of an express revelation of our duty from heaven) are in effect, these
very untaught and rude heathen countries. With all our superior light, we
instill into those, whom we call savage and barbarous, the most despicable
opinion of human nature. We, to the utmost of our power, weaken and dissolve
the universal tie, that binds and unites mankind. We practice what we should
exclaim against, as the utmost excess of cruelty and tyranny, if nations of the
world, differing in color, and form of government from ourselves, were so
possessed of empire, as to be able to reduce us to a state of unmerited and
brutish servitude. Of consequence, we sacrifice our reason, our humanity, our
Christianity, to an unnatural sordid gain. We teach other nations to despise
and trample under foot, all the obligations of social virtue. We take the most
effectual method to prevent the propagation of the gospel by representing it as
a scheme of power and barbarous oppression, and an enemy to the natural
privileges and rights of men.

Perhaps all, that I have now offered, may be of very little weight to restrain
this enormity, this aggravated iniquity. However, I shall still have the
satistaction, of having entered my private protest against a practice which, in
my opinion, bids that God, who is the God and Father of the gentiles,
unconverted to Christianity, most daring and bold defiance, and spurns at all
the principles, both of natural and revealed religion?



How the British nation first came to be concerned in a practice, by which the
rights and liberties of mankind are so violently infringed, and which is so
opposite to the apprehensions Englishmen have always had of what natural
justice requires, is indeed surprising. It was about the year 1563, in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, that the English first engaged in the Guinea Trade;
when it appears, from an account in Hill's Naval History, page 293, That when
Captain Hawkins returned from his first voyage to Africa, that generous
spirited Princess, attentive to the interest of her subjects, sent for the
Commander, to whom she expressed her concern lest any of the African Negroes
should be carried off without their free consent, declaring it would be
detestable, and call down the vengeance of heaven upon the undertakers. Captain
Hawkins promised to comply with the Queen's injunction: nevertheless, we find
in the account, given in the same History, of Hawkins' second voyage, the
author using these remarkable words, Here began the horrid practice of forcing
the Africans into slavery.

Labut, a Roman Missionary, in his account of the Isles of America, at page
114, of the 4th vol. mentions, that Lewis the 13th, father to the present
French King's grandfather, was extremely uneasy at a law by which all the
Negroes of his Colonies were to be made slaves; but it being strongly urged to
him, as the readiest means for their conversion to Christianity, he acquiesced
therewith.

And although we have not many accounts of the impressions which this piratical
invasion of the rights of mankind, gave to serious minded people, when first
engaged in; yet it did not escape the notice of some, who might be esteemed in
a peculiar manner as watchmen in their day to the different societies of
Christians, whereunto they belonged. Richard Baxter, an eminent preacher
amongst the Nonconformists, in the last century, well known and particularly
esteemed by most of the serious Presbyterians and Independents, in his
Christian Directory mostly, wrote about an hundred years ago, fully shows his
detestation of this practice in the following words, Do you not mark how God
has followed you with plagues, and may not conscience tell you, that it is for
your inhumanity to the souls and bodies of men. -- To go as pirates and catch
up poor Negroes, or people of another land that never forfeited life or
liberty, and to make them slaves, and sell them, is one of the worst kind of
thievery in the world, and such persons are to be taken for the common enemies
of mankind; and they that buy them, and use them as beasts, for their mere
commodity, and betray, or destroy, or neglect their souls, are fitter to be
called devils than Christians. It is an heinous sin to buy them, unless it be
in charity to deliver them. -- Undoubtedly they are presently bound to deliver
them; because by right the man is his own; therefore no man else can have a
just title to him.

We also find George Fox, a man of exemplary piety, who was the principal
instrument in gathering the religious society of people, called Quakers,
expressing his concernand fellow-feeling for the bondage of the Negroes: In a
discourse taken from his mouth, in Barbados, in the year 1671, says, Consider
with yourselves, if you were in the same condition as the Blacks are, -- who
came strangers to you, and were sold to you as slaves. I say, if this should be
the condition of you or yours, you would think it hard measure. Yea, and very
great bondage and cruelty. And, therefore, consider seriously of this, and do
you for and to them, as you would willingly have them, or any other, to do unto
you, were you in the like slavish condition; and bring them to know the Lord
Christ. And in his journal, page 431, speaking of the advice he gave his
friends at Barbados, he says, I desired also, that they would cause their
overseers to deal mildly and gently with their Negroes, and not to use cruelty
toward them, as the manner of some had been, and that after certain years of
servitude they should make them free.

In a book printed in Liverpool, called The Liverpool Memorandum-book, which
contains, among other things, an account of the trade of that port, there is an
exact list of the vessels employed in the Guinea trade, and of the number of
Slaves imported in each vessel, by which it appears, that in the year 1753, the
number imported to America, by vessels belonging to that port, amounted to
upwards of thirty thousand; and from the number of vessels employed by the
African Company in London and Bristol; we may, with some degree of certainty,
conclude, there is, at least, One Hundred Thousand Negoes purchased and brought
on board our ships yearly from the coast of Africa, on their account. This is
confirmed in Anderson's History of Trade and Commerce, printed the year before
last, where it is said, at page 68 of the Appendix, That England supplies her
American Colonies with Negro-slaves, amounting in number to above One Hundred
Thousand every year. When the vessels are full freighted with slaves, they set
out for our plantations in America, and may be two orthree months on the
voyage, during which time, from the filth and stench that is among them,
distempers frequently break out, which carry off a great many, a fifth, a
fourth, yea sometimes a third of them; so that taking all the slaves together
that are brought on board our ships yearly, one may reasonably suppose, that at
least ten thousand of them die on the voyage. And in a printed account of the
State of the Negroes in our plantations, it is supposed that a fourth part,
more or less, die at the different Islands, in what is called the seasoning.
Hence it may be presumed, that, at a moderate computation of the slaves, who
are purchased by our African merchants in a year, near thirty thousands die
upon the voyage and in the seasoning. Add to this, the prodigious number who
are killed in the incursions and intestine wars, by which the Negroes procure
the number of slaves wanted to load the vessels: How dreadful then is this
Slave Trade, whereby so many thousands of our fellow creatures, free by nature,
endued with the same rational faculties, and called to be heirs of the same
salvation with us, lose their lives, and are truly, and properly speaking,
murdered every year. For it is not necessary, in order to convict a man of
murder, to make it appear, that he had an intention to commit murder. Whoever
does, by unjust force or violence, deprive another of his Liberty; and, while
he has him in his power, reduces him, by cruel treatment, to such a condition
as evidently endangers his life; and the event occasions his death, is actually
guilty of murder. It is no less shocking to read the accounts given by Sir Hans
Sloan, and others, of the inhuman and unmerciful treatment those Blacks meet
with, who survive the seasoning in the Istands, often for transgressions, to
which the punishment they receive bears no proportion. And the horrid
executions, which are frequently made there upon discovery of the plots laid by
the blacks, for the recovery of their liberty; of some they break the bones,
whilst alive, on a wheel; others they burn or rather roast to death; others
they starve to death, with a loaf hanging before their mouths. Thus they are
brought to expire, with frightful agonies, in the most horrid tortures. For
negligence only they are unmercifully whipped, till their backs are raw, and
than pepper and salt is scattered on the wounds to heighten the pain and
prevent mortification. Is it not a cause of much sorrow and lamentation, that
so many poor creatures should be thus racked with excruciating tortures, for
crimes which often their tormentors have occasioned: Must not even the common
feelings of human nature have suffered some grievous change in those men, to be
capable of such horrid cruelty, toward their fellow men? If they deserve
death, ought not their judges, in the death decreed them, always to remember
that these their hapless fellow creatures are men, and themselves professing
Christians. The Mosaic law teaches us our duty in these cases, in the merciful
provision it made in the punishment of transgressors, Deuter. xxv. 2. And it
shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause
him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a
certain number, Forty stripes he may give him and not exceed. And the reason
rendered is out of respect to human nature, viz. Lest if he should exceed, and
beat him above these, with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto
thee. Britons boast themselves to be a generous, humane people, who have a true
sense of the importance of Liberty; but is this a true character, whilst that
barbarous, savage Slave Trade, with all its attendant horrors, receives
countenance and protection from the Legislature, whereby so many thousand lives
are yearly sacrificed. Do we indeed believe the truths declared in the gospel?
Are we persuaded that the threatenings, as well as the promises therein
contained, will have their accomplishment? If indeed we do, must we not tremble
to think what a load of guilt lies upon our Nation generally and individually,
so far as we in any degree abet or countenance this aggravated iniquity.

We have a memorable instance in history, which may be fruitful of instruction,
if timely and properly applied; it is a quotation made by Sir John Temple, in
his history of the Irish rebellion, being an observation out of Giraldus
Cambrensis, a noted author, who lived about six hundred years ago, concerning
the causes of the prosperity of the English undertakeings in Ireland, when they
conquered that Island, he says, That a synod, or council of the Clergy, being
then assembled at Armagh, and that point fully debated, it was unanimously
agreed, that the sins of the people were the occasion of that heavy judgment
then fallen upon their nation; and that especially their buying of Englishmen
from merchants and pirates, and detaining them under a most miserable hard
bondage, had caused the Lord, by way of just retaliation, to leave them to be
reduced, by the English, to the same state of slavery. Whereupon they made a
public act in that council, that all the English, held in captivity throughout
the whole land, should be presently restored to their former Liberty.

I shall now conclude with an extract from an address of a late author to the
merchants, and others, who are concerned in carrying on the Guinea Trade: Which
also, in a great measure, is applicable to others, who, for the love of gain,
are in any way concerned in promoting or maintaining the captivity of the
Negroes.

As the business, you are publicly carrying on before the world, has a bad
aspect, and you are sensible most men make objection against it, you ought to
justify it to the world, upon principles of reason, equity and humanity; to
make it appear, that it is no unjust invasion of the persons, or encroachments
on the rights of men; or for ever to lay it aside. -- But laving aside the
resentment of men, which is but of little or no moment in comparison with that
of the Almighty, think of a future reckoning: consider how you shall come off
in the great and awful day of account: You now heap up riches and live in
pleasure; but, oh! what will you do in the end thereof? and that is not far
off: what, if death should seize upon you, and hurry you out of this world,
under all that load of blood-guiltiness, that now lies upon your souls? The
gospel expressly declares, that thieves and murderers shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. Consider, that at the same time, and by the same means, you now
treasure up worldly riches, you are treasuring up to yourselves wrath, against
the day of wrath, and vengeance that shall come upon the workers of iniquity,
unless prevented by a timely repentance.

And what greater iniquity, what crime that is more heinous, that carries in it
more complicated guilt, can you name than that, in the habitual, deliberate
practice of which you now live? How can you lift up your guilty eyes to heaven?
How can you pray for mercy to him that made you, or hope for any favor from
him that formed you, while you go on thus grossly and openly to dishonor him,
in debasing and destroying the noblest workmanship of his hands in this lower
world? He is the father of men; and do you think he will not resent such
treatment of his offspring, whom he has so loved, as to give his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have everlasting
life? This love of God to man, revealed in the gospel, is a great aggravation
of your guilt; for if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. You
remember the fate of the servant, who took hold of his fellow servants, who was
in his debt, by the throat, and cast him into prison: Think then, and tremble
to think, what will be your fate, who take your fellow servants by the throat,
that owe you not a penny, and make them prisoners for life.

Give yourselves leave to reflect impartially upon, and consider the nature of,
this Man-Trade, which, if you do, your hearts must needs relent, if you have
not lost all sense of humanity, all pity and compassion toward those of your
own kind, to think what calamities, what havoc and destruction among them, you
have been the authors of, for filthy lucre's sake. God grant you may be
sensible of your guilt, and repent in time.

FINIS.

