FAMILY PRAYER not to be neglected. A DISCOURSE, WHEREIN IS OPENED, The NATURE
of PRAYER in general, AND The Warrant for Family Prayer in particular: WITH
Answers to sundry Excuses for the Neglect thereof: AND ADDRESSES to several
Sorts of Persons.

By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR of a CHURCH in MIDDLEBOROUGH.

Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense; and the lifting up of my
Hands, as the Evening Sacrifice.

PSALM cxli. 2. NEWPORT: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, on the Parade.

To the READER.
NEW ENGLAND has formerly been a place famous for religion in general, and for
family worship in particular; but of late, the neglect of this, as well as of
other religious duties, has evidently been growing upon us; which has caused
much grief to pious souls: yet I have not heard that any discourse has been
published upon this subject here, these many years: and as there have lately
heen numbers remarkably a^^^ened in some parts of the land, that were trai^^^
up in the neglect of family prayer, who are still at a loss about the scripture
authority for the daily practice thereof: Therefore the following
considerations, by the advice of friends, are humbly offered to the public.

FEBRUARY 6, 1766.
Family Prayer not to be neglected. A DISCOURSE, etc.
I PETER, III. 7. -- That your Prayers be not hindered.


THE inspired author of this epistle, having spoken of the living stone, which
is disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious; on whom the
saints, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house: and having shown that
though many stumbled, and took offense at this glorious rock, yet that he is
precious to believers, who are a peculiar people; that they should show forth
the praises of him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light: He then proceeds to lay down many instructions and exhortations
concerning a right behavior in their several circumstances and relations; and
among the rest. he speaks particularly to husbands and wives, concerning how
they ought to act toward each other; and gives this as a weighty consideration
to move them to a right walk together, namely, That your prayers be not
hindered: As if he had said, You are to maintain a constant trade of coming to
that living stone, and as you are heads of a family, you are daily to practice
social worship: But if relative duties are neglected, and the adversary can
prevail to make a breach between you, that will have a dreadful tendency to
hinder your daily united prayers. For, that family prayer is here intended, I
think is plain from this consideration, viz. Injurious treatment, even from
near friends, is so far from hindering pious souls from personal addresses to
the throne of grace, that it often makes them more forward and earnest therein.
In the prophet Micah's time, when corruption had so far prevailed, that no
faithful friend was to be seen, and the caution is given, Keep the doors of thy
mouth from her that lies in thy bosom; and when a man's enemies were the men
of his own house, then he says, Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will
wait for the God of my salvation: My God will hear me. Micah vii. 5 -- 7. Thus
you may ^^e that the ill behavior of wife or family may excite, instead of
hindering secret prayer. ( David says, For my love, they are my adversaries:
But I give myself unto prayer. Psalm. cix 4.) But there must be agreement in
order for social worship: From whence it appears plain that family prayer is
here intended; which I shall attempt to say something farther upon, in the
following manner: I. I shall endeavor to open something of the nature of
prayer in general. II. Produce some scripture evidences for the daily practice
of family prayer in particular. III. Labor to remove some hindrances that
seem to lie in the way of this duty: And then close with addresses to several
sorts of persons.


I. I shall endeavor to open something of the nature of prayer in general.

And I conceive that prayer is the soul's approach to God through a glorious
Mediator, by the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to present our supplications,
praises, etc. unto him. David calls it a pouring out our hearts before him.
Psalm. lxii. 8. Which may be considered as comprehending the soul's expressing
its views of him, its regards to him, its desires of help from him, and its
returns of gratitude for favors received. Here observe, it is heart exercise.
Many draw near with their mouths, while their hearts are far from God: But the
prophet says, With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early. Isai. xxvi. 9. And in true prayer, the
heart is poured out; the inmost griefs, burdens and desires of the soul are
laid open before God: Sins are confessed, wants and miseries are presented,
help is requested, arguments are used of various kinds: Petitions and requests
are also brought for others, at home and abroad, in all places and relations.
There is likewise in a right performance of this exercise, a self dedication
and surrender of our all unto God: As in Psalm. cxix. 94. I am thine: Save me,
for I have sought thy precepts. See also Isai. lxiv. 8, 9. Yea, the very nature
of prayer implies in it an engagement to receive and improve what favors the
Lord shall grant, to his glory, and in a way of conformity to his will. Hence
the work of praise is twice called by the sweet psalmist of Israel, a paying
his vows, in Psalm. cxvi. and in Psalm. lxi. 4, 5, 8. he says, I will trust in
the covert of thy wings, for thou, O God, have heard my vows. -- So will I sing
praise unto thy name forever, that I may daily perform my vows. Here take good
notice, that this duty was not to be performed only once in a year, month or a
week; but it was his daily exercise; which leads me,

II. To produce some scripture evidences for the daily practice of family
prayer in particular.

And the first shall be taken from our relation to God as his children.

He is the father of all flesh, as he gave them their existence, and gives all
their enjoyments: And he is the covenant-father in Jesus Christ, to all
regenerate souls. Now children, especially little ones, as saints are often
called, Matthew. xviii. 3. John xiii. 33. 1 John ii. 1.12, 13. and iv. 4. and v.
21.
are bound both by duty and inclination very often to come to their parents:
And as it is not their business to provide for themselves, or to be anxious
about their future support, but to come to their parents for whatever they
need; so it is their duty, daily to come for instructions about what they
should do, and faithfully to observe the same. And how loudly does this speak
forth the importance of daily prayer? Hence, as our Savior has informed us
that our Father knows what we need; so he has taught us to pray after this
manner, Our Father which art in heaven. Matthew. vi. 9 -- 13.
Which words have been very justly expounded as a lesson that teaches us to
draw near to God with all holy reverence and confidence, as children to a
father, able and ready to help us, and that we should pray with and for others.
And that he intended we should come in this manner unto our heavenly father,
every day, appears exceeding plain from the fourth petition, which is, Give us
THIS DAY our daily bread: For as bread (take it in a natural or spiritual
sense) is what we need every day, and as it is the living God who gives us
richly all things to enjoy; 1 Timothy vi. 17.
so what can we do less than to ask him for what we need, and give him thanks
for what we receive? Christ does not say, give us this week, or this year, but
give us this day our daily bread: -- And though the father of our spirits needs
no information about our case, yet he will be enquired of Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37.
by us: -- He will have us own our dependence on him, and our obligations to
him. And as we have not only personal, but also family necessities and mercies,
and as we are taught to say, Our father, give us this day our daily bread, I
think the evidence appears very clear from hence for the daily practice of
family worship.

2. The spiritual priesthood of the saints will afford further evidence for
this duty. Our apostle in chap. ii. 5, 9. calls them a holy, and a royal
priesthood: And John styles them kings and priests unto God. Rev. i. 6. Now the
main business of the priests was to minister in God's sanctuary, and offer
sacrifice upon his altar. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 10. The high priest was an eminent type
of Jesus Christ, who is now entered, not into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. Heb. ix. 24. All the levitical sacrifees of atonement
pointed out that one offering, by which he has perfected forever them that are
sanctified. Heb. x. 14. He alone has answered for all our sins: But their thank
offerings and freewill-offerings were a figure of the gracious exercises of the
saints. It is their reasonable service to present their bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. Romans xii. 1. And their liberality is
called, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to
God. Phil. iv. 18. Heb. xiii. 16. Though what comes more directly to our present
purpose, is that their prayers and praises are so called. David understood them
so in his day: Let my prayer (says he) be set forth before thee as incense; and
the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. Psalm. cxli. 2. And John
speaks repeatedly of odours and incense which came with the prayers of the
saints. Rev. v. 8. and viii. 3, 4. Those sacrifices were to be presented at
God's altar, which sanctified the gift: Hence the sacred writer to the Hebrews,
in explaining and improving the spiritual design of those ancient ceremonies,
says, We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
tabernacle. Heb. xiii. 10. i. e. They that still held to the shadow when the
substance was come, by their unbelief excluded themselves from the benefits of
this glorious altar, from whence the prayers of all saints ascend up before
God. The inspired penman having mentioned the place and way of coming, proceeds
to our duty in relation thereto. -- By him therefore (says he) let us offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving
thanks to his name. Ver. 15.

Now as he was writing to the Hebrews, there is abundant reason to conclude
that in this he has a particular reference to their morning and evening
sacrifice: for in the first appointment thereof, they were told that it was
what they should offer upon the altar day by day continually; and that it
should be a continual burnt-offering throughout their generations. Exodus xxix.
38, 42. And it is afterward called (...) continual burnt offering, no less
than ten times in two chapters. Numb. xxviii. 3, 6, 10, 15, 24, 31. and xxix.
11, 16, 19, 22.
How clear, then, does the evidence appear, that the command to offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually, intends that christians should be as
constant in their offerings of praise as the Jews were in their morning and
evening sacrifice?

It might be farther observed, that the word continually, is repeatedly
explained by Isaiah, to mean the same as every day. Isai. li. 13. and lii. 5.
And it is used in three places in scripture for persons daily diet. David said
to Mephibosheth, Thou shall eat bread at my table continually. 2 Samuel ix.. 7.
(See also 2 King. xxv: 29. Jer. lii. 33.) with which compare Psalm. lv. 17.
Evening and morning, and at noon, will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear
my voice: By which it appears that his addresses to God, were as frequent and
constant as his stated meals: and that was according to the divine command in
Deuteronomy. viii. 10. When thou have eaten, and art full, then thou shall bless the
Lord thy God, for the good land which he has given thee. And the custom of
looking to God for a blessing on their food was so well known in Samuel's time,
that the young maidens that Saul and his servant met, could tell them
concerning Samuel's going up to the sacrifice (or feast, as the margin reads
it) that, The people will not eat until he come, because he does bless the
sacrifice, and afterward they eat that be bidden. 1 Samuel ix. 13. Which custom
we have so fully confirmed by the example of our Lord and Master, that we have
the accounts of his practicing of it, mentioned in no less than seven places by
the evangelists; Matthew. xiv. 19. and xv. 36. Mar. vi. 41. and viii. 6, 7. Luke
ix. 16. John vi. 11, 23.
and the apostle Paul not only imitated this example of his divine master, Acts
xxvii. 35.
but also declares, that the meats which seducers would command men to abstain
from, God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe
and know the truth: for (says he) every creature of God is good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the
word of God, and prayer. 1 Timothy iv. 3 -- 5. What can be plainer than this is to
show that we ought to practice prayer to God that he would sanctify our food to
us when we partake of it, and give thanks to him for it. Nay the language of
the text plainly shows that we have no right to receive the good creature
without thanksgiving: for the apostle holds forth that God created them for
that end, namely, to be received with thanksgiving: and he says, that nothing
is to be refused, IF it be received with thanksgiving: q. d. They are all God's
creatures, and we have no right to any of them without leave: well they are
sanctified by the word of God and prayer; i. e. the word gives us warrant to
receive them in the way of prayer for a blessing on them, and thanksgiving for
them; and in no other way. For if we take them without this, what do we better
than pilfering or robbing; as God charged the Jews with doing of old, Ye have
robbed me, even this whole nation, therefore they had a curse even on their
blessings, because they would not lay it to heart to give glory to God 's name.
Mal. ii. 2. and iii. 9. This duty was so well known in the primitive times of
christianity, that Paul founds his argument upon it, and gives it as a good
reason why the weak believer, who still thought some meats to be unclean,
should not judge him that believed they were clean, and so partook of them,
viz. because, he that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks.
Romans xiv. 6. By which it is plain that he did not suppose that any believer
would eat of God's good creatures without giving him thanks. To the same
purpose he speaks to the Corinthians, when he asks, Why am I evil spoken of for
that for which I give thanks? And then adds this command, Whether therefore ye
eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. x. 30,
31. Should any say, that we may give thanks in our hearts, when it is not
openly expressed, I readily grant it; yet where a number make a meal together,
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth ought to speak; and they must have
strange notions indeed, who can hold that all these scripture instructions and
examples refer only to the secret exercises of the heart!

Thus by the way I thought it proper to say something concerning the right
manner of receiving our food. Our

3. Evidence for family prayer, shall be drawn from ancient example. The
Patriarch Abraham, when he was called of God out of his own country, into the
land of Canaan; his heavenly friend first appeared to him in the plain of
Moreh, and there he builded an altar to him. Then he removed to the East of
Bethel, and there built another, and called upon the name of the Lord. The like
he did at Hebron: and so did Isaac at Beersheba, and Jacob, both ar Shechem,
and Bethel. Genesis xii 7, 8. and xiii. 18. and xxxiii. 20. and xxxv. 7.
Thus these three eminent fathers, as they removed from place to place, in the
place where they pitched their tents, and where their families dwelt, there
they erected altars, and called on the name of the Lord: which speaks forth
family prayer strongly indeed. And that David did the like, seems to be clear
from Psalm. cxli. 2. So did our Lord with his disciples. Luke xi. 1. These are
some of the footsteps of the flock, which we are directed to go forth by. Sol.
Song i. 8. To which we may add,

4. That many positive precepts, which we have in the New Testament, plainly
include family prayer; such as that, Pray without ceasing: In every thing give
thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus, concerning you 1 These. v.
17, 18 And that in Ephesians. vi. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication
in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication
for all saints. None will suppose that to pray without ceasing, and to pray
always, intends that we should do nothing else but pray; yet surely it implies
the daily practice thereof: And we are here expressly required to give thanks,
not only for some things, or upon some occasions, but in every thing; which
must include family favors as well as others: yea, we are commanded to pray
always with all prayer; and who dare say, that all prayer does not intend
family prayer, as well as that which is secret, and that which is public? And
these duties are to be observed, not only for a season; but we are required to
watch thereunto with all perseverance. Other passages might be mentioned to the
same purpose; but I shall omit them, and hasten to observe,

5. And lastly, That this exercise is one character by which God's people are
distinguished from all others. When the prophet Jeremiah would distinguish the
Heathen, which knew not God, from his people, he marks them out by this, that
they were families that called not on God's name. Jer. x. 25. -- Here let none
mistake, and think that an external observation of this duty is enough. Men may
do that, and yet be in a miserable state: but it is with this, as it is with
morality; though a person may have outward morality without saving grace, yet
an immoral man is a wicked man: So here, they may pray in their families and
closets too, whose hearts are not right with God; but prayerless families are
called heathen families.

Thus I have touched upon some of the evidences from scripture, that we have
for this practice, which are so plain, that it may well seem strange that any,
who hold to the scriptures, should neglect it; but since many do, I shall
proceed,

III. To labor to remove some hindrances that seem to lie in the way of this
duty. And,

First, I have known some who would allow that family prayer was a good custom
enough, but denied there being any command for it. But if Christ has required
us to come with the language of Our father, -- to ask that he would give us
this day our daily bread, which so strongly implies that we should come thus
every day; and if we are commanded to offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, which word is so often used for the morning and evening sacrifice;
and if Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, practiced calling on the name of the Lord,
wherever their families dwelt; if David, and also Christ himself did the like;
are we commanded to pray always, with all prayer, and are husbands and wives
required to walk so together that their prayers may not be hindered; and have
we so many precepts and examples for this exercise at meal-times; and are such
called heathen families, that call not on God's name, (as has been proved
above) what would mortals desire more to prove to them that God requires them
thus to practice? Should any (to evade the force of this reasoning) say, That
these priests, altars and sacrifices that have been so often mentioned, refer
to old Jewish ceremonies, that have been long out of date: In reply, I would
desire to ask such persons a few questions. -- Were not those ancient
ceremonies of God's appointment? And had he not some wise design therein? Were
they not shadows of good things to come? Yea, and were they not a part of the
scriptures that were written for our learning? Where is the christian that dare
deny these things? Surely then, instead of disregarding of them, we ought to
give the more earnest heed to these things which were first represented by such
lively figures, and that have been so clearly explained to us in the
new testament. But,

I shall come, secondly, to that which I take to be the greatest hinderance of
this duty, and that is, the want of a frame and inclination for it. "Prayer
(say many) should be heart exercise, and when the Israelites hearts were not
right with God, their prayers were looked upon as flatteries and lies." Psalm.
lxxviii. 36, 37. But is it not strange that those sinners crimes are now
brought for others excuse? They refused to walk in God's law; and instead of
taking a thankful notice of his dealings, they forgot his works, and his
wonders that he had showed them. Ver. 10, 11. And instead of seeking to him for
their food, they rather questioned whether he was able to supply them or not:
they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? ver. 19. And when he had
given them abundant evidence of his power and goodness, and also some awful
rebukes for their wickedness; yet, for all this, they sinned still: and
believed not for all his wondrous works. Ver. 32. They stood it out 'till death
stared them in the face, and then they would pray. When he slew them, then they
sought him. Ver. 34. This is the old way that wicked men have trodden. And, O
soul, do thou choose their path! They, it seems, would not mock God while they
thought they could do without him: no, then they turned their back unto him,
and not their face: but in the time of their trouble, they will say, Arise and
save us! Jer. ii. 27.

One dreadful ingredient in this excuse, is, making our own inclination,
instead of the divine precept, our rule: for though the command is to pray
always with all prayer, yet the import of this objection is, "Because I have
not an inclination to such exercises, therefore I am excused from regarding of
them." Horrid excuse with a witness! Yet horrid as it is, a great deal of pains
has been taken to dress it up, so that its odiousness may not appear. Some will
plead that saints are called to liberty; but that to pray when they have not
freedom of mind for it, would be to work under a yoke of bondage: but such
greatly mistake the nature of the saints liberty, a great part of which, is
their open access to the Father, through Jesus Christ, in all their wants. Ephesians.
ii. 18. Heb. iv. 16. David cries out, O thou that hear prayer, unto thee
shall all flesh come. Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions,
thou shall purge them away. Psalm. lxv. 2, 3. Here note well, that what many
bring as an excuse to keep away, he takes as an errand to come upon: q. d. I
find rising corruptions, and wrong dispositions to be too strong for me;
therefore I come to thee, who art able and ready, both to pardon, and also to
subdue them all. See also Micah vii. 19. and 1 John i 9.
Our Savior often bids us watch and pray that we enter not into temptation:
but this excuse would rather teach us to yield to temptation, even when we are
drawn away of our own lusts, and enticed. Jam. i. 14.
Little do many see where this would lead them to. I once met with a man who
soon began to talk of the great liberty that he said saints were coming into,
and not to go on in such bondage as they used to do, that they must pray in
their families night and morning, let them feel how they would: but said he,
When I get up in the morning, if I feel a spirit of prayer, I will pray in my
family; if not, God does not call me to pray then, etc. and so spoke much about
liberty, which soon brought to my mind that passage in 2 Pet. ii. 19. And it
was not long after, before that liberty lead him into base company, and to
swear, cheat and lie, and he became one of the worst of men.


Others will plead that this insisting upon daily prayer, will build people up
upon works. But to this, it may be replied, that though there is a great
propensity in mankind, like the Pharisee, to bring in an account of what they
have done; and like the Jews of old, to think to exact of God, pay for all
their labor; Luke xviii. Isai. lvii. 3.
yet the true nature of prayer, is directly contrary to any such thing. Prayer
is for a needy creature to come to God for what it wants, and thank him for
what it receives: and surely there is a great difference between a guilty or
miserable creature that comes to beg for pardon and help, and a merchant that
comes with his goods to trade for more. The beggar, the more destitute he finds
himself, the more earnest and incessant are his cries: but the trader, if his
goods fail, he draws off 'till he can get more. And Mary says, that the Lord
has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away
Luke i. 53. Hence it appears that this very plea springs from a proud,
self-righteous disposition. It implies as much as this, that if I feel in a
good frame of mind, and have something that is good to bring, then I will come,
and if not, I will stay away. David once got into such a frame that he kept
silence, 'till God's hand was so heavy upon him that he could hold in no
longer; then he confessed his transgressions, and the Lord forgave his sins:
and he adds, for this shall every one that is godly, pray unto him. Psalm.
xxxii. 3 -- 6. But least any should imagine that this was the right way to hold
in 'till they were thus overpowered, he proceeds to say, I will instruct thee,
and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I will guide thee with mine eye:
be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have no understanding: whose mouth
must be held in with bit and bridle, ver. 8, 9. Which plainly shows that this
keeping silence, and holding back 'till we are overcome, is acting more like
stupid beasts, than like rational souls, who have a father in heaven, who is
able and ready to supply all our wants. The regard that he shows to the prayer
of the destitute, and to the cry of the publican, may well encourage needy
creatures to come to him. Psalm. cii. 17. Luke xviii. 13, 14.

A just view of our standing before God, and of our obligations to him, would
silence a thousand such objections: for we cannot live, move, nor draw a breath
without him, whether we acknowledge it or not; and all things are naked, and
opened unto his eyes. Heb. iv. 13.
He sees when we turn to him, the back and not the face, and takes notice of
such as will not frame their doings to turn unto him, who yet in their
affliction will seek him early, and in their trouble will say, Arise and save
us. Jer ii. 27. Hos. iv. 15.
How soon would a just sight of this, make any soul cry out, God be merciful to
me a sinner! And if he grants pardon, or a disposition and ability to perform
any duty aright, as all is received from God, so we owe all to him, and are
still deeper involved in the debt of love by all that we thus receive or do:
what then have we to boast of, or trust in of our own? These things are set in
a very moving light in the behavior of that pious king that we have often had
recourse to before. When he had made vast preparations for the temple of God,
out of his own proper goods, and had moved the elders of Israel to do the like,
so that they had collected as much gold and silver as is computed at about
thirty million sterling, See the margin of Can bible, at the place.
besides other materials; yea, and had done it joyfully and willingly too: yet,
at what a distance he was from thinking that God was indebted to him for all
this, you may see in his language before a great assembly of people. Thine,
says he, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven, and in the earth, is
thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.
Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine
hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all. Now, therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious name. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine
own have we given thee. We are strangers before thee, and sojourners, -- all
this store that we have prepared, -- comes of thine hand, and is all thine
own. 1 Chronicles. xxix. 11 -- 16.

Here it might be worth while to compare this with the language of the proud
king of Babylon, and proud Pharisee of Jerusalem; the first of which says, Is
not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? And the other prayer is,
God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, -- I fast twice in the week,
I give tithes of all that I possess. Dan. iv. 30. Luke xviii. 11, 12. Mark well
the difference; one uses the ambitious pronouns I and my, three times, in a way
that ascribes all temporal things to self, without the mention of God's name in
the affair: the other, after just mentioning the divine name once, has the
great I over as often with relation to his religious exercises; while this king
of Israel out-does them both on the other hand, yea, more than double; for he
makes use of the terms, thine, thou, thee and thy, no less than sixteen times
in this passage, in a sense that ascribes all his enjoyments and performances
to God, both temporal and spiritual: yea he speaks of it with thankful wonder,
that they should be able to offer so willingly as well as that they should be
allowed to handle so many of their master's goods, and lay them at his feet;
for, says he, of thine own have we given thee. This is a pattern worthy of our
most constant regard. It is ignorance of God, and keeping at a distance from
him, that promotes self-righteous conceits, which all vanish when we come near
to him. When Job had wandered from his God, he was greatly ensnared with a
self-justifying disposition: when he was bro't near to him, he says, I abhor
myself, and repent in dust and ashes. Job xlii. 6.

Other hindrances I shall have occasion to speak of in my addresses to several
sorts of persons, to which I now proceed. And,

I. To heads of families who neglect the daily practice of family worship.

Dear Sirs, will you permit an unworthy instrument, to ask you a few serious
questions about this matter? As,

1. Is this neglect because you see no warrant for this duty? If so, pray then
review the case again, and in the fear of God, search his word, and consider
well if there is not as plain evidence for it, both by precept and example, as
there is for almost any point of christian practice. And consider also, if it
is not our reasonable service, that we should seek the Lord, and that daily,
since it is in him we live, move, and have our being; Act. 27, 28.
yea, and whether such as neglect it, don't act more absurdly than irrational
animals: for we are told, that the young lions roar after their prey, and seek
their meat from God: and that, He gives to the beast his food, and the young
ravens that cry. Psalm. civ. 21. and cxlvii. 9. Or,

2. Is your neglect owing to a want of a disposition to such exercises? Surely
the thought of that might well alarm thy soul; for the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness. It is a great truth, that God is a spirit, and is to
be worshipped spiritually; yet this truth is held in unrighteousness, while it
is held as an excuse from our daily acknowledgements of his favors: for (says
the apostle) the invisible things of him from the creation of the world, are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power, and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: because that when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, NEITHER WERE THANKFUL. Romans i. 18, 20,
21. And the following part of the chapter, shows, that for this cause they were
given up to the most amazing blindness, and awful abominations that mortals
ever knew. Or,

3. Do thou allege the ill behavior of any that practice family prayer, as
an excuse for thine neglect, as I have known some to do? Methinks thou will be
ashamed, in open daily light, to stand in this one minute. Who ever acted more
abominably about prayer, than the Pharisees? Yet how far was that from
hindering the abundant practice of it by Christ and his followers?

4. Is this neglect caused by things being out of order in thy family? O then
rest not without having those disorders rectified: for a family that will not
admit of the worship of God in it, must be a dreadful place; and one may justly
say of it, as Jacob did of Simeon and Levi, O my soul, come not thou into their
secret: unto such a family, mine honor be not thou united. Joshua's resolution
with regard to himself and family, deserves our warmest regard. As for me and
my house we will serve the Lord. Josh. xxiv. 15. Nor is David's example less
worthy of notice. When he set up housekeeping, instead of letting in vanity
and iniquity as many do, he invites God home with him, saying, O when will thou
come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart: I will set no
wicked thing before mine eyes. Psalm. ci. 2, 3. But do thou say, I have no
gracious persons in my house to join with me? That is indeed a sorrowful case;
yet, as our warrant for social worship depends not on our certainly knowing
that we have gracious souls present with us, and as all are God's creatures,
who are under manifold obligations to acknowledge him, we may boldly come to
the throne of grace, where the general assembly of the first born, which are
written in heaven, all meet; and may there present our praises and requests.
Heb. iv. 16. and xii. 22 -- 24.

5. Do any excuse themselves because of the smallness of their gifts? I would
only ask such, whether that prevented them from coming in their childhood to
their earthly parents for what they wanted? if not, then why should it hinder
us from coming to him who knows what we have need of before we ask him? Mat.
vi. 8.

Before I take my leave of you who profess religion, and yet neglect the daily
practice of social worship. I would earnestly desire you to view the
inconsistency that there is between your profession and practice. It is
generally allowed, that a leading point in the profession of christianity, is
the ordinance of baptism, notwithstanding men's different judgments about the
time and manner of administering of it. And those who hold to infant baptism,
often bring this as a great argument therefore, viz. That their children will be
heathens if they are not baptized: while some others can hardly look upon any
to be christians that have not been baptized by immersion. Now, reader, art
thou of either of these sentiments, what consistency can there be between thy
profession and thy conduct? If of the former, then how can thou prove that
thy family are christians, when they have the very badge of heathenism that the
prophet distinguishes them by? And if thou art of the latter sentiment, how can
thy character be any better secured, while so important an article of christian
behavior is neglected. Baptism is a putting on Christ, and contains an
engagement to walk in newness of life. Romans vi. 4. But if we think that one
act, without living such a life, will answer, shall find ourselves greatly
mistaken. No doubt but thou will find that many outward difficulties, and
inward struggles will rise against prayer; as well as other duties: but if you
will neglect them because of that, I leave you to answer it to him, who has
said, Whosoever does not hear his cross, and come after me, CANNOT be my
disciple. Luke xiv. 27.

II. I would say a few words to them that practice family worship: and my
address to you shall be by way of advice and exhortation. And,

1. Rest not in the mere external performances of this duty. James tells us
that while many receive not, because they ask not; others ask, and receive not,
because they ask amiss, that they may consume it upon their lusts; and he says,
God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble. And among other
things which he advances on this subject, he brings in the example of Elias,
who though a man of like passions with us, yet he prayed earnestly, and he
repeatedly obtained his request. He prayed earnestly, or as it is in the
margin, He prayed in his prayer. Jam. iv. 2, 3, 6. and v. 17, 18. So, my
friends, if we pray in our prayers, we shall find it not to be in vain.

2. Take good heed to your walk. Obedient children will come to their parents,
not only for food, but for instruction about what they should do, and will be
as much concerned to obey their commands, as to obtain their help. So says our
apostle, As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the
former lusts in your ignorance: but as he which has called you is holy, so be
ye holy in all manner of conversation. And as many are ready to catch hold of
any evil behavior that they can discover in any who profess this, as well as
other duties of religion, that they neglect, as an excuse for them: So he tells
us, it is the will of God, that with well doing, ye put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. 1 Pet. i. 14, 15. and ii. 15.

3. Content not thy self with family prayer alone. We are to pray always with
all prayer, and watch thereunto with all perseverance. Therefore,

4. Beware of turning back from these ways; for if any man draw back, Christ's
soul will have no pleasure in him: which is set in a very striking light in the
81st Psalm, where God reminds his people of the wonders which he had done for
them, and says, Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee. -- Hear, O my
people, and I will testify unto thee: -- There shall no strange god be in thee;
I am the Lord thy God: -- open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. As if he had
said, Thou have found me to be a God hearing prayer, and I am ever the same;
therefore regard no others, but open thy mouth wide, enlarge thy desires to me
as much as thou will, and I will fill them. But instead of continuing their
regard to him, he goes on to say, my people would not hearken to my voice; and
Israel would none of me, so I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts; and
they walked in their own counsels. v. 7, 12. O tremendous case! to be given up
to one's hearts lusts is one of the greatest judgments on this side of hell.
What need have we then to cry daily, lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil! My

III. Address shall be to young persons. And what I have at present to say to
such is, learn the importance of setting out, as well as traveling through the
world with God. This was the way that the first man took who got to heaven
without seeing death. Genesis v, 24.
And this is the command of our divine Lord, Seek ye FIRST the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Matthew. vi.
33. To the same purpose is the language of David, to you; Come, says he, ye
children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is
he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good? Depart from
evil, etc. Psa. xxxiv. 11, 12. Take heed, dear youth! you are called upon from
two very different quarters: Satan promises you the kingdoms and glories of
this world, if you will take his ways of deceit, vanity, and iniquity: and on
the other hand, here are these calls from heaven to choose the way of truth and
holinese, and the promise thereupon of all blessings, both in this life, and
that which is to come: and which will thou believe? which will thou regard? As
surely as God speaks true, the way to enjoy good days here, is to walk in the
way of truth, peace, and holiness; and every soul which yields to the contrary
inticements, practically declares, that God is a liar, and that the Devil is to
be believed before him! -- Be astonished, O heavens, at this! -- What conduct
can be more absurd, than for a creature, who wants to enjoy the good things of
the Creator, to take a course of contrariety to him-to obtain them? And, in
particular, for one that wants an agreeable companion, and to get comfortably
settled in the world, to give himself up to vanity and iniquity then, even more
than at other times. Solomon says, A prudent wife is from the Lord. Prove. xix.
14. How then can any expect to obtain such an one in a way of disregard to him?
This matter is set in a clear and ingenious light, in a little tract, entitled,
The advantages and disadvantages of the marriage state, as entered into with
religious or irreligious persons; represented under the similitude of a dream.
By Mr. John Johnson. Which has been printed both at London and Boston.
Those who take such a course, do what they can, as it were, to constrain the
Divine Being to hedge up their way with thorns; and strip them of their
enjoyments, in order to bring them to a right sense of things. Hos. ii. 6 --
15. Or else to let them have the waters of a full cup, and an increase in
riches, for a little space, until they stip into destruction in a moment, and
are consumed with terrors. Psalm lxxiii. 10, 12, 18, 19. You would pity a slave,
or criminal, that was obliged to labor all day to collect a bed of thorns to
lie down upon it at night; or to gather a large quantity of fuel for his own
burning: Yet this is the sinner's own choice; whilst he hardens his heart
against God, and abuses his goodness, he is spending his life in treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath. Romans ii. 4, 5. O! how different from this, is
the case of an old grey-headed saint, who can appeal to God that he has been
his trust from his youth, and that he has gone in his strength, and trusted in
his righteousness only. Psalm. lxxi. 5, 16, 18. And can say, when the time of
his departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course. -- Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous judge shall give me in that day. 2 Timothy iv. 6 -- 8. This
is a happiness worth striving for indeed!

And as every soul is pursuing after happiness, though most of the children of
men take the way that leads directly from it; therefore take a brief
description of a truly happy man, in the following lines, with which I shall
conclude.

I.
THE happy man is born of God;
A penitent indeed:
His soul is washed in Jesus' blood,
And follows him with speed.
II.
His mind is taught by truth divine,
His will is ruled thereby;
And his affections therewith join
In sweetest harmony.
III.
Christ's yoke upon his neck he wears;
He yields his all to God:
This empty world, with all its cares,
Under his feet are trod.
IV.
His father's precepts he obeys,
Still with a ready mind;
And unto all his sovereign ways
Lies cheerfully resigned.
V.
His morning and his evening cries,
Come up before the throne,
Persum'd with Jesus' sacrifice,
In whom he trusts alone.
VI.
The great concern upon his mind
Is how to honor God;
And for to benefit mankind,
Upon this earthly clod.
VII.
This is the end for which he lives;
All other things look vain:
This is the prize for which he strives,
While life or breath remain.
VIII.
Humility his soul does cloth,
Contentment fills his mind;
And he within his heart does loath
All sin of every kind.
IX.
His tho'ts do often mount the sky,
And view the world above:
He sees the glorious bridegroom nigh,
Which fires his heart with love.
X.
God is his portion and his guide
Through this dark wilderness;
And when this flesh is laid aside,
His soul has endless rest.
XI.
And when the judge shall from his throne
Pass sentence upon all,
He Will rise to dwell with the HOLY ONE,
Free from all sin and thrall.
XII.
O Lord of hosts, unto my soul
Much of this pleasure grant!
This is the all; this is the whole;
What else then can I want!
FINIS.

