Dr. Chauncy's SERMON AT THE ORDINATION OF THE REVEREND Mr. PENUEL BOWEN.

The Duty of Ministers to "make known the Mystery of the Gospel"; and the Duty
of People to "pray for them", that they may do it "with Boldness", or
Fortitude. A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ORDINATION OF THE REVEREND Mr. PENUEL
BOWEN, A Colleague-Pastor of the New-South-Church in BOSTON, April 30, 1766.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. A Pastor of the First Church in BOSTON.

TO WHICH The CHARGE, and RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP, delivered upon the same
Occasion, are added. And all Printed at the unanimous Desire of said Church.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, 1766.

AN ORDINATION SERMON.
EPHESIANS. VI. 18, 19. "Praying always, with all Prayer, and Supplication in the
Spirit; -- and for me, -- that I may open my Mouth boldly to make known the
Mystery of the Gospel."
MY view, in the choice of this text, is, without the loss of time by a
prefatory introduction, to employ your thoughts upon the following important
points contained in it.

A summary description of the subject, it is proper ministers should preach
upon; "the mystery of the Gospel". Their duty to make this subject the main
scope of their preaching; "that I may make known the mystery of the Gospel".
The necessity of boldness, or fortitude, in order to their faithfully
discharging this part of the trust committed to them; "that I may open my mouth
boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel", Finally, the people's duty to
pray for their ministers, particularly, that they may preach the Gospel with
boldness and resolution; "praying always with all prayer; -- and for me, --
that I may open my mouth boldly". --

The first thing observable in the text is, the description it gives of the
subject ministers should preach upon; "the mystery of the Gospel". It is
elsewhere called "the mystery of God", "the mystery of Christ", "the mystery of
faith", "the wisdom of God in a mystery". These phrases, all of them, import
the same thing with what is more simply called, in the inspired books, "the
word of truth", "the word of faith", "the faith of Christ", "the faith once
delivered to the saints"; and they include in their meaning the whole christian
scheme of redemption: It Is occasion; the undone state of the lapsed sons of
Adam: It Is original rise; the free favor of the infinitely benevolent Deity:
and the method of its execution: the advent of God's only begotten Son into our
world, to take on him our nature, and accomplish the work laid out for him, as
expedient in order to the purchase and bestowment, not only of pardon,
justification, and a glorious immortality beyond the grave; but of that
"meetness" for these blessings, without which they could neither be dispensed
or enjoyed. These capital articles, with their various connections and
important deductions, especially as pointed out, and dilated on, in the sacred
scriptures, are all comprehended in that "mystery of the Gospel", the Apostle
would have ministers preach upon; and these they should accordingly make the
great scope, the main drift, of their preaching.

But you will ask, why is the Gospel, as containing these truths, called a
"mystery", when it has set them in so clear and strong a light, that they may
easily be understood by all who have eyes to see, and will make a due use of
them?

The answer, without multiplying words, is plainly this, it is thus spoken of,
because these truths were "hid in God" before the revelation of them,
especially the revelation of them by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles.

It may be worthy of special notice, the term "mystery", as used in the
scripture, does not mean a truth now remaining in the dark: but a truth that
has been brought out of its former concealment, and placed in open light. In
this sense it is evidently taken by the Apostle Paul, when he says to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 51.
"Behold, I show you a mystery: we shall not all sleep; but we shall all be
changed". It was, before the delivery of these words, an hidden truth, that the
saints, who may be alive on the earth at the second coming of Christ, shall not
die, but be at once changed into immortal creatures: and because the Apostle
revealed this secret, he expresses himself in that emphatical language,
"Behold, I show you a mystery". i. e. I declare to you a truth you had no
knowledge of before. Surely, he could not mean, that what he had thus "showed
them" was still a concealed thing. It would have been a strange sort of
revelation, if the thing revealed had remained in its former obscurity, if it
had been still left "a mystery"; meaning hereby an unknown something.

In this same sense, the grand corruption of christianity, under the Roman "son
of perdition", is spoken of in that language, "the mystery of iniquity". It Is
called "a mystery", not that it was now a concealed truth, but because it had
been hid among the other important secrets of providence, till pointed out, by
the spirit of prophesy, as an event it was now known would certainly take place
in its proper time.

In this same sense still the word "mystery" is to be understood, when our
Savior says to his disciples, "unto you it is given to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of Heaven". The truths they now knew, they had no idea of before it
pleased Christ to give them the knowledge of them; but after this, they could
not be hidden truths. How could they known them, if they were still secrets of
which they had no conception? Perhaps, the word "mystery" is most frequently
applied, in the writings of the New Testament, to the "preaching of the Gospel
to the Gentiles". And why is this event spoken of as a "mystery"? Not because
it was now an unknown truth, or an intricate perplexed one: but because it lay
hid from the knowledge of men before the Gospel revelation of it. It is indeed
acknowledged, the enlargement of God's kingdom, in the times of Christ, was
sometimes prophesied of in the writings of the ancient prophets: For which
reason, when it is called a "mystery" a thing "hid in God" and "kept secret",
as the expressions sometimes are, they must not be interpreted to mean, that
God had never given any intimations of this observable event: but only that the
intimations were comparatively dark and obscure: insomuch that it remained
notwithstanding, in a great measure a "secret", a "truth that was not known".
The Apostle Paul has set this matter in its just light, in those words of his
to the Gentile Ephesians, Chap. III. (...). 2 -- 6. "If ye have heard of the
dispensation of the grace of God, which is given me to you ward; how that by
revelation he has made known unto me the mystery -- which, IN OTHER AGES WAS
NOT MADE KNOWN UNTO THE SONS OF MEN AS IT IS NOW REVEALED UNTO HIS HOLY
APOSTLES BY THE SPIRIT, that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, -- and
partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel". And in this respect, "the
calling of the Gentiles" was properly a "mystery"; and might well be spoken of
in this style: Though, after its more clear and full revelation by Christ, and
his Apostles, it no longer continued an "hidden" truth; and could be called a
"mystery" no otherwise than as it was, before this revelation, a truth that was
not known AS it has been since.


In agreement with what has been offered, it is observable, what is called,
simply and nakedly, "a mystery", in my text, is, in other places, called "the
revelation of the mystery which had been kept secret"; "the mystery which had
been hid, but is now made manifest"; "the mystery that is to be made known", by
those who are entrusted with the dispensation of the Gospel. The mode of
diction, in these texts, is strictly proper, and easily intelligible, if by
"mystery" is understood, a formerly hidden truth, not one that is so at
present. To speak of that as "revealed" and "made manifest", which, after its
"manifestation", is still a secreted thing, is plainly absurd: Though this that
was a secret may be opened, and when it is so, it may, with all propriety, be
called "the revelation of a mystery", a thing "hidden made manifest".

It will be further evident, that we have given the true sense, in which the
"Gospel" is called "a mystery". if it be considered, that this sense of the
word exhibits a description of the Gospel that is exactly just, and the only
one that is so.

It exhibits an acurately just idea of the Gospel, whose peculiar and
distinguishing doctrines were secrets in the breast of God, which could not
have been disclosed by the utmost efforts of human reason. "Revelation" is the
way, in which they have been bro't to light. It is this, and this only, that
has opened the everlasting counsels of the Divine will, relative to the display
of saving mercy toward the sinful sons of men. The Heathen could, in the most
cultivated state of their understandings, know nothing of this all-wise
contrivance of Heaven. Nay, even the Jewish nation were left much in the dark
about it; it having pleased God to reserve the manifestation of it to the times
of Christ. And, in these days, it was fully made known. That which had been
"hid from ages and generations", and therefore called "a mystery", was now
stripped of its obscurity, and placed in a clear point of view. It is on this
account that Christ, who knew the secret will, the hidden wisdom of the Father,
and opened it to the world, is styled emphatically, "the light". And he is, in
this respect, as truly "the light" in the kingdom of grace, as the great
luminary in the heavens is in the kingdom of nature; and he shines with equal
brightness and glory. The light diffused from this "sun of righteousness" has
"revealed" that which was formerly "hid," and "made known" that which before
was "covered" with darkness.

And as the sense we have given of the word, "mystery", exactly answers to the
true character of the Gospel, so it is the only one that does so. It would be a
false and injurious representation of the Gospel, to speak of it as "a
mystery", meaning hereby, that it locked up its doctrines, hiding them from the
understandings of men: or that it contained only a dark, intricate, and
uncertain exhibition of the Divine will. Far from being mysterious in any such
sense as this, it is a clear, plain, and full manifestation of the whole mind
of God, so far as he though it it proper we should be acquainted with it. And it
would be a base reflection on the wisdom of the only good God to suggest, as
though he had revealed himself, by his son Jesus Christ, in a "mysterious way";
meaning thereby a dark, intricate, concealed way, so as not to be easily, if at
all, understood.

I shall only add, notwithstanding what has been offered, it is freely
acknowledged, that some of the most important truths of the Gospel are not to
be comprehended by such imperfect creatures as we are; yea, that, in some
respects, they fall not within the reach even of our highest conception. Nor is
there the least inconsistency between this acknowledgment, and any part of the
foregoing discourse. What though some revealed truths contain that in them,
which, in some respects, transcends all human understanding? May they not, at
the same time, in other respects, be so clearly manifested, as, without
difficulty to be perceived and clearly understood? This is what may be, because
thus it really is. Such indeed is the weakness of our faculties, that the
objects even of sense and reason, as well as revelation, in some respects,
exceed their utmost most reach; though, in other respects, they are readily
perceived, and clearly known. The wisdom of God has fixed the limits, beyond
which we cannot go in our knowledge of the objects either of sense or reason.
And the same wisdom has done the same as to our knowledge of the objects of
"revelation". God has opened them so far as it seemed good in his sight; and
thus far we may have a clear, just, and full understanding of them: But wherein
he has left them mysterious, that is, hid from human apprehension, they cannot,
in those respects, be the objects of faith, because they are not the objects of
revelation* What I mean may be illustrated by a scripture instance or two. That
"the dead shall be raised" is a "revealed mystery", that is, a secret that has
been plainly made known; though, before it is discovery by revelation, it lay
"hid" from the understandings of men. And thus far our ideas are clear and
distinct: we have an easy intelligible proposition for the object of our faith.
But as revelation does not proceed to declare, "how the dead are raised", this
still remains a "mystery", a truth secreted from our knowledge. Our ideas fail
here, and so must our faith; as it has no object in particular to employ its
exercise. -- Another "revealed mystery" is, the "incarnation of the Son of
God", his so taking upon him our nature as to be, in true propriety, "the son
of man", as well as "the son of God". And thus far we have a pla^^ determinate
truth for the object of our faith. But revelation does not go on, and describe
the "modus" of that union between these different natures which denominate them
one person. This therefore is still left a "mystery" a truth we know nothing
about. It cannot therefore (...) object of faith. -- The same may be said of
all other "revealed mysteries". So far as they are made known, they are the
objects of faith; but wherein they are left "mysterious", secreted from our
knowledge, they cease being so. We may, in general, believe, and ought to
believe, that they contain that in them which goes beyond all human conception;
but what this is in particular we know not. As we are wanting in ideas here, so
must we be in faith. For, according to the constitution of our minds, there
cannot be the latter without the former.
Nor should they be pried into, as though we could attain to an understanding of
them; for this is impossible, at least, in the present state of human faculties.

And happy would it have been for the christian world, if this had been duly
considered, and attended to. So many would not then, from a vain affectation of
being "wise above what is written", have taken upon them, to the great
disadvantage of the christian doctrine, to unfold that which God has not
revealed. If men will go about to explain the unknown modus of Gospel Truths;
venturing to say those things, with reference to them, which God has not seen
fit to manifest, and it is therefore impossible they should understand, darkness
and mystery must be the effect. But then, they should take care they don't
charge this mysterious darkness, which is the fruit of their own vanity or
weakness, upon the truths of God, revealed in the Gospel of his Son, as though
they were unintelligible. This would be to abuse the revelation by Jesus
Christ, which has set the doctrines of faith, those especially that are great
and important, in a perspicuous light; insomuch that they cannot easily be
misunderstood, wherein it has pleased God to reveal them, unless through pride,
prejudice, or an attachment to some base lust or other, either of the mind or
flesh: And wherein he has left them incomprehensible, we have only to admire in
words like those of the Apostle, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God"! But it is time to proceed,

The next thing observable in the text is, a representation of the proper work
and duty of Gospel Ministers; viz. "to make known the mystery of the Gospel".
In order to understand which, it may be proper to observe,

That the first ministers, under the Gospel-oeconomy, especially the Apostles,
were immediately instructed, by the Spirit of truth, in the knowledge of those
"mysteries", pertaining to the kingdom of God, and the salvation of man through
Jesus Christ, which had been "kept secret from former ages and generations".
And their great business, as persons entrusted with the dispensation of the
gospel, was "to make known these mysteries", not to those of their own
profession only, as was the way of the heathen priests; but to the world in
common. Being furnished, by the holy Ghost, with supernatural knowledge, as
well as other necessary gifts, they were sent by Christ, even as he was sent by
the Father, "to make known the mystery of the Gospel to all nations"; yea, to
preach it "to every creature under Heaven". i. e. to all the sons of men
without distinction, or discrimination: And it was the duty of all men, being
first rationally convinced of the divine mission of the Apostles, to receive
the Gospel from them as "infallible instructors", persons suitably qualified,
and fully authorized, to deliver to them the truths of God and religion.

But the case is quite different, with respect to the present ministers of the
Gospel. They are not immediately guided by the Spirit into the "mysteries" of
salvation. They come not to the knowledge of them by inspiration from above;
but in the common and ordinary way, by taking pains to acquaint themselves with
the sacred writings, those repositories of Gospel Truths which were left by the
Evangelists and Apostles. It is not therefore any part of the work of
ministers, in these days, to publish "new revelations". They have no secrets to
divulge, no "mysteries" peculiar to themselves to "make known". No; but their
proper work is, to explain "the mystery of the Gospel", as it has been
manifested by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, in the books of the
new testament. And this they should endeavor to do, with all the care and
exactness, with all the perspicuity and plainness, they are able.

And that they might be well furnished herefor, they should carefully study the
scriptures, especially the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles; taking
their sentiments of "revealed mysteries" from hence, and not from uninspired
compositions, whether by men considered as individuals, or as united in bodies,
whether greater or smaller, or however reputable for their capacity, integrity
or orthodoxy. "What says the scripture"? should be their grand enquiry. To
this sacred test they should constantly repair; receiving nothing, delivering
nothing, for revealed truth, but what they have found there. They are, by
office, "stewards of the mysteries of God"; and where should they go, but to
his written word, for the knowledge of them? They are no where infallibly
contained, but in this sacred book. The BIBLE therefore, the BIBLE, I say,
should be the guide of their thoughts, the only rule of their faith: And they
should make it evident by their preaching, that this has engrossed their time,
and chiefly engaged their labor in their studies.

I shall not think it improper to remark here, that it would be highly
incongruous, I may say justly offensive, if christian ministers should seem, in
their discourses to their hearers, as though they had little or no acquaintance
with the revelation God has made of himself to mankind, by his son Jesus
Christ. It may reasonably be expected of ministers, calling themselves
christian, that they should appear to be so, by their making known the
doctrines of christianity. These should be the grand subjects of their sermons,
the main scope of their preaching. Not but that a christian minister may, in
perfect consistency with his character, upon proper occasions, discourse upon
those truths, which are not peculiar to the Gospel. There never was a minister
that "made known the mystery of the Gospel" more clearly and faithfully, than
the great Apostle of the Gentiles, I mean the Apostle Paul: And yet, his
discourses did not always turn upon some special truth of christianity. He
esteemed it a point of wisdom to adapt his sermons to the circumstances of his
hearers: And for this reason, he chose, in some cases, to insist rather upon a
point of reason, than a doctrine of revelation. Thus, when he preached to the
idolatrous people at Lystra, his subject was, their "turning from vanities", or
idols, to "the living God": And he illustrated it, not from revelation, but a
rational representation of God, as having given to all nations sufficient
evidence of his being, providence, and right to be worshipped and served as
God; for that he "had done them good; and given them rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness"; as you may read
in the 14th chapter of the Acts. In like manner, when he perceived the
idolatrous superstitions of the men of Athens, he declared to them, in his
preaching, "the one true and living God"; representing him as the only suitable
object of religious worship, and proving him to be so, in opposition to "idols
made with silver, or gold, or stone graven by art, and man's device", from the
consideration of him as "the maker of all men who dwell on the face of the
earth": And in confirmation of this part of his argument, that "God is the
maker of men, and men the offspring of God", instead of recurring to scripture,
he cites even one of their own heathen writers; "as certain also of your own
poets have said, we are his offspring", Acts 17. from the 22. v. But this
notwithstanding, the main subjects of his discourses were the "mysteries of the
Gospel". And thus should it be said of all christian preachers, in these days.
They should not ordinarily entertain their hearers with philosophical
speculations; much less should they spend their breath in settling matters of
difficult dispute, "whereof comes envy, strife, railings and evil-surmisings".
These should not be the chief things to employ their ministerial labors: No;
but they should mainly insist upon the method of salvation by Jesus Christ, the
counsels of God that are unfolded to a miserable perishing world, in the
writings of the new testament. With Philip, they should "preach the things
concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Christ Jesus". With Paul, they
should "determine to know nothing" among their people, "but Jesus Christ, and
him crucified": Or, as it is expressed in my text, they should "make known the
mystery of the Gospel". And the more fully and clearly they open it to the
understandings of their hearers, the more will they deserve the character of
good and faithful ministers of Christ Jesus: Especially, if, together with the
clearness in which they express themselves upon the "mysteries" of
christianity, they join a becoming modesty; appearing sensible, that they know
no more of the truths of the Gospel than the people may know themselves, if
they have equal leisure and capacity, and will study the bible with equal care
and diligence. To be sure, they should not deliver their interpretations of
scripture as "infallible" instructors, and give them out as oracles not to be
disputed, or examined, but implicitly believed. They should rather own
themselves fallible men, of "like passions with others", and endanger of
mistakes and errors; commending to their people the example of the "noble
Beraeans", who "searched the scriptures daily", to see whether the thing taught
them were the truths of God, or not: yea, they should caution them against
receiving what they deliver, in their preaching, otherwise than as it brings
light with it, so as that they are helped to perceive it to be "the truth as it
is in Jesus". -- But I would not be tedious. -- To go on,

Another thing observable in the text is, the necessity of boldness, or
fortitude, in order to a faithful discharge of the ministerial office;
suggested in those words, "That I may open my mouth boldly to make known," etc.

And it was peculiarly necessary, in the first times of the Gospel, that
ministers should be bold and courageous; as they were then eminently exposed to
discouragements and hazards, which are the proper occasions for the exercise of
fortitude, and render it a useful and necessary virtue. The Apostle Paul was an
"Ambassador in bonds", when he wrote my text: Nor was it an uncommon thing, in
those days, for christian ministers to be hated, reviled, and persecuted, for
their freedom and honesty in "making known the mystery of the Gospel". And it is
easy to see the necessity of boldness in these ministers, who could not execute
their trust without hazarding the loss of every thing that was dear and
valuable to them.

But though fortitude was eminently necessary at first, it is not a useless
quality now; but highly requisite in all who would conscientiously "fulfill the
ministry they have received of the Lord". It Is true, christian ministers are
not now in danger, at least in protestant countries, of stripes, or
imprisonment, much less of the "fiery trial", for the Gospel's sake: But they
have notwithstanding difficulties to encounter, which will give opportunity to
the exercise of courage: And if they are not, for a good degree, possessed of
this virtue, they will shamefully fall short in the discharge of their duty.

Not that they will have any great need of fortitude, if they have nothing
higher in their view than to gain popular admiration and acceptance, with the
pleasing and profitable advantages that are usually the attendants on them.
They may easily avoid difficulties, if they can bring themselves sordidly to
study the humors of men; making it their great business to sooth them in their
prejudices, and flatter them in their false opinions, and vicious practices.
But if, instead of being "the servants of men", they would be "the servants of
Christ"; approving themselves faithful as "stewards of the mysteries of his
kingdom", they will certainly meet with discouragements that will try their
faith, and patience; yea, and their courage too. It cannot indeed be otherwise,
morally speaking, while there is, in the world, so much infidelity and
wickedness, on the one hand; and so much superstition, error, and bigottry, on
the other, accompanied with a spirit inclining men to "bitterness and wrath,
anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking". If a christian minister would faithfully
"make known the mystery of the Gospel". i. e. the pure and uncorrupted truths
of christianity, he must oppose not only the lusts of men, but their false
sentiments, however strongly they may be attached to them, whether from
ignorance, prejudice, or whatever other cause: And, in return for his honest
freedom, he may depend upon being loaded with hard names, and treated as one
that has bad designs. Thus it has been with many a faithful preacher of the
truth, in its purity and simplicity: Nor is this any other than we have been
forewarned of, by the spirit of prophecy. Hence that of the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 3. "The time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine; but
after their own lusts, shall heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears:
And they shall turn away their ears from the truth unto fables".

Not but that prudence is a necessary quality to be found in ministers, as well
as fortitude. They should wisely endeavor, as far as in them lies,
consistently with faithfulness to their trust, "to become all things to all
men"; needlessly "giving offense neither to Jew, nor Greek, nor the church of
God": But laboring to "please all men, in all things; not seeking their own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved"; as the Apostle Paul
tells us he did, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. But yet, they should not, under the
disguise of prudence, cowardly keep silence, when they are called of God to
speak the truth, whether in the way of "reproof", or "exhortation", or
"doctrine": Though even here, "wisdom is profitable to direct"; and, under the
guidance of it, ministers should take all due care to observe times and
seasons, and that manner of address with which, if any are offended, it must be
their own fault. And, under these limitations, they should honestly and frankly
speak the truth, though it should unhappily prove the occasion of prejudice and
hatred in people; though they should on this account, esteem them as "enemies",
and behave toward them with anger and clamor. And in order to their being
thus faithful, boldness is the virtue they must have in readiness to exercise:
Otherwise, they will soon sink under discouragement; or, what is worse, their
"exhortation will be in guile, as pleasing man, and not God, who tries the
heart". They will never be able, unless they are endowed with this grace, and
in a good measure too, meekly to endure obloquy and reproach, neglect and
contempt; committing their cause to God, and possessing their souls in
patience, even though the more they endeavor to promote the gospel, the more
they are vilified and abused. Fortitude is the grace, above all others, that is
peculiarly fitted, under such circumstances, to urge them on with life and
vigor in prosecution of their duty: And by the help of it, under the influence
of the divine Spirit, they will steadily maintain their station, and faithfully
persist in their course; being able to triumph in such language as that, "None
of these things move me, neither count I my life dear to myself, so that I
might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God." -- No wonder then the
apostle is so desirous of the prayer of good christians, that he might be thus
"bold to make known the mystery of the gospel." -- But this leads me

To the last thing observable in the text, which is, the propriety and fitness
of people's praying for ministers; especially that they may execute their trust
with resolution and fortitude. Says the apostle in my text, "praying for me
also, that I may open my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the gospel."
And such an opinion had he of the advantage of the prayers of good christians,
that he never forgot, upon proper occasions, to signify his desire of their
remembrance, not only of him, but of his fellow laborers also in the gospel,
before the throne of mercy. When he wrote his epistle to the Colossians,
exhorting them, among other things, "to continue in prayer", he could not help
adding, "withal praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of
utterance to speak the mystery of Christ". So, when he wrote to the
Thessalonians, he could not break off without inserting such a clause as that,
"Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified". And, in his epistle to the Romans, there is nothing he expresses
himself more solemnly and earnestly upon, than this of their praying for him.
"I beseech you, brethren," says he, "for the Lord Jesus Christ sake, and for
the love of the spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your prayers for
me".

And if "supplications, prayers and intercessions" are to be "made for all
men", as being "good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior"; -- much
more ought they to be made for those who are put in trust with the Gospel: For
their work, considered in this capacity, lies chiefly in promoting the cause of
truth and religion: So that to pray for them is, in reality of construction, to
pray for the flourishing of God's kingdom of truth, righteousness and holiness.
And it is certainly fit and reasonable, that this should be one of the principal
subjects of peoples prayers to almighty God.

And as ministers are exposed to peculiar difficulties and discouragements,
which call for proportionable degrees of holy resolution and christian
fortitude, they stand more in need of the prayers of all lovers of truth and
virtue, than other men: and they ought accordingly to be more particularly
mindful of them, in their applications to the throne of grace, that they may be
disposed and enabled to "make known the mystery of the Gospel", with a becoming
freedom, honesty and boldness.

And it is especially the duty of people to pray for their own ministers; as in
praying for them they virtually pray for themselves, i. e. their own spiritual
and eternal good. For, if through their prayers, their ministers are faithful,
diligent, and courageous in discharging the various duties of their office,
this good they will be under the best advantages to receive, by means of their
ministry. And if God shall be pleased to prosper their labors to the increase
of true knowledge and real virtue, they are the persons that will be profited
hereby: than which there cannot be a stronger enforcement, even upon the
principle of self-interest, to the duty of people's praying for their ministers.

I shall only add, that they should pray for them, "always, with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit". They should pray for them "always": Not strictly
and literally speaking; for this would be inconsistent with many other duties,
which they are equally obliged to perform, both with reference to them, and
others, as well as themselves: But the meaning is, that they should "always"
keep their minds in a disposition proper for prayer, and actually put it in
exercise as suitable occasions are offered therefore. And they should pray "with
all prayer and supplication", i. e. with all kinds of prayer, social and
solitary; stated and ejaculatory: and with all kinds of supplication, with
supplication for outward and spiritual mercies, but especially for assistance
and success in their work as ministers. And in fine, they should thus pray "in
the spirit". i. e. as excited, enlivened, and influenced by the Spirit of God:
Or the meaning may be, their hearts should be engaged in this duty of prayer
for ministers. They should not pray for them in a formal dead manner; but with
life and Spirit, as those that are in earnest, and sincerely and ardently
desire, that their prayers should be heard and accepted. -- But I may not
enlarge. --

I might now profitably take occasion, from what has been discoursed, to dilate
on the importance of the ministerial trust; -- the superior qualifications
requisite to be found in those, who may warrantably have it committed to them;
-- the insufficiency of the best qualified ministers, in their own single
strength, faithfully to discharge the duties of their office; -- the need they
stand in of the special assistances of divine grace, and the importunity with
which they should apply to God for the bestowment of them. -- And I might also
seasonably urge it upon people, as their interest and duty, "to strive with
ministers in their prayers to God for them". -- But these things, for want of
time, I must leave you to enlarge upon in your own private meditations, and
conclude by turning the discourse into a particular address to the person who
is now to be set apart to the work of the ministry, and to the people who are
to be his more special charge.

To you, Sir, I would briefly say; -- We trust, it is because "Christ has
counted you faithful", that he has so far, in his providence, prepared the way
for your being "put into the ministry": And it is because we are well satisfied
of your ministerial accomplishments, that we can cheerfully act, in Christ's
name, and according to his appointment, in entrusting you with the dispensation
of the Gospel. And it is our united ardent prayer to "the God who dwells on
high", that you may continually increase in all the gifts and graces that are
necessary in order to your being "perfect" as a "man of God", and "thoroughly
furnished" for the most advantageous discharge of all the duties of your
calling.

Your work, as a Gospel-minister, will principally lie in "making known the
mysteries of christianity". And as these are contained, originally and
infallibly, in the sacred writings only, these you will make your chief study;
consulting the writings of men only as an help in order to your understanding
the scripture, and regarding them no otherwise than as they agree with this
only unerring test of revealed truth. And having, from the pure word of God,
formed your sentiments of the divine mysteries, these you will make the grand
subjects of your preaching. To be sure, if you would acquit yourself with
honor, and fidelity, as a christian minister, you must not mainly insist upon
points of mere reason; or lay out your time and pains in settling disputes,
which tend to "strife", rather than "godly edifying"* But you must dwell on the
great and important truths of the christian religion, those "mysteries of God",
which were "kept hid from ages and generations", but have been manifested by
the Gospel revelation. And as it is by Jesus Christ, and him only, that "a new
and living way" has been opened for the entrance of sinners into the holy
heaven, HE should be the great subject of your discourses. Their main scope
should be to unfold the "mystery of Christ", to explain to your people the
gospel-method of salvation, by the interposition of the blessed Jesus, and the
several offices he has sustained, and executed, in order to effect our
everlasting good.

Nor is it eno', that you "speak the things which become sound doctrine"; but
you must "show yourself a pattern of good works"; being "an example of the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity". This was the direction of Paul to Timothy; nor could he have advised
to a more effectual expedient to give him influence as a preacher. There is a
strange virtue in exemplary goodness to gain upon the affections and
consciences of people: It will, beyond the greatest accomplishments of
learning, or the finest eloquence in speaking, render the "man of God" amiable
in the eyes of all that know him: And it will give a singular energy to his
discourses, whether in public or private. While he exhibits, in his behavior,
a just pattern of what he preaches, his doctrine will have a powerful tendency
to strike the minds of hearers with a divine force, and accomplish the saving
ends to which it is designed.

And let me further advise you, dear Sir, to endeavor to preserve in your
mind, as much as may be, a serious and awakened sense of eternal concerns. This
you will find an unspeakable advantage, through the whole course of your
ministry. It will enliven your meditations in your study; it will give a
pungency to your performances in the pulpit; and it will, more than almost any
thing, strengthen you under difficulties and discouragements, and enable you to
bear them with meekness and fortitude.

And these, let me add, you may depend upon meeting with, while you have to
oppose the passions, the errors, the prejudices and lusts of men. You cannot
faithfully do your duty, as a minister, and yet pass through the world without
difficulties of one kind or other, that will try your faith, your patience,
your courage, and all your graces. But you have no reason to be disheartened. --
You serve a good master; you are engaged in a good cause. "Be strong"
therefore, "my son, in the grace that is in Christ Jesus." "Do the work of an
evangelist", and be willing to "endure affliction"; yea, "endure hardness as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ": And if you are bold in standing up for God, and
the interest of true genuine christianity; continuing "faithful to the death",
you shall finally lose nothing by the trials you may be called to conflict
with: But the greater the difficulties you have resolutely and conscienciously
passed through, the greater shall be your reward in heaven. You shall "shine", in
the coming kingdom of God, "as the brightness of the firmament, and as the
stars for ever and ever."

I scarce need subjoin any thing to urge you to a becoming conduct toward the
venerable pastor of this church, in a great measure taken off from his labors,
by reason of the infirmities of age. Your christian good disposition will
prompt you to reverence his years, and treat him with the love and respect of a
son to a father; consulting him upon all proper occasions, paying a just regard
to his advice, and heartily concurring with him in all wise and suitable
methods for the advancement of the Redeemer's interest. And it is our fervent
prayer to the God of all grace, that you may be mutual helps and comforts to
one another, and blessings to this people; and that you may both have many of
them for "your crown of rejoicing" in the day of the appearing of Jesus Christ.

I now go on to direct a few words to the congregation usually meeting in this
place. "Beloved in the Lord", as it is not the design of the transactions of
this day to supercede the obligations you are under to him, who has been, for
more than forty years, "your servant for Christ's sake", we trust you will
still "highly esteem him in love" for his services that have tended, and may
yet tend, to promote the spiritual and eternal good of you, and you's: And we
think better of you, than to suspect that you will complain of him, if he
should not be able, with former frequency and vigor, to dispense the word and
ordinances of Christ to you. You will rather endeavor to render his life,
which, according to the course of nature, is drawing to a close, as easy and
comfortable to him as may be: Not forgetting to bear him on your hearts, when
before the throne of mercy; but earnestly imploring the God whose he is, and
whom, we trust, he has faithfully served in the gospel of his son, to make him
useful and faithful, even to the end; that, "when the time of his departure is
at hand", he may be able to say with triumph, "I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge shall give me
in that day".

And as to the person now to be introduced into the ministerial office, as a
"fellow-helper" to your other pastor upon his decline in life, we heartily
recommend him to your affectionate regards; rejoicing with you in the hopeful
prospect you have of a singular blessing in him. Do what you can to encourage
him in his work. -- Free him, as much as may be, from the cares of the world,
that he may "give himself wholly to reading, meditation and prayer". And let me
assure you, you will find your account in so doing* for, by this means, he will
be able to provide the better for your souls. -- Think it not strange, if you
should discern frailties and imperfections in him: for this is no other than
you ought to expect; as he is, in common with all ministers, "a man of like
passions with your selves". Don't be offended, if he should deal plainly and
faithfully with you; but value him the more highly for his honesty and
integrity. -- Cherish the affection you bear toward him, and don't needlessly
suffer it to grow cold. -- Be upon your guard, that no prejudices against him
enter into your minds: This will be, not only a disadvantage to him, but a
great damage to your selves. For should he preach and live like an angel, it
would not be likely, in such a case, that he should do you much good. -- And
let me particularly recommend it to you to be constant and earnest in your
prayers to God for him; "praying always, with all prayer and supplication in
the spirit, that he may open his mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the
gospel" to you. Make daily mention of him in your closets, and in your
families, that he may be a rich blessing to you, and to your children. And if,
upon proper occasions, you made it your special errand to the throne of mercy,
to ask the presence of Christ with him in his work, you would not find it
misspent time. -- Above all, take care that you reap spiritual profit under his
ministry. Think it not enough, that you hear the word as dispensed by him. This
alone will not be sufficient. It must have its proper influence both on your
hearts, and your lives. In order whereto, let your minds be open to
instruction. -- Be ready to embrace "the truth in the love of it". -- Receive
the word with "meekness and faith"; and be ever willing to yield obedience to
it: So will you be the "joy" of your pastor here, and "his crown" in the day of
the manifestation of Jesus Christ.

And now, may we all, both ministers and people, behave like christians in our
respective stations! remembering that we have but a day allowed us, and a short
one too. It Is probable, we shall never all of us be together again in any
assembly here on earth; but we shall 'ere long meet in a much larger assembly,
and upon a much more solemn and important occasion, that of giving up an
account of our "doings in the body" to the great "judge of quick and dead". The
good Lord solemnize this serious awful truth to each one of our hearts, that we
may be effectually engaged so to conduct ourselves in this time of our trial,
as that, when we meet again at the great and general judgment, we may be
pronounced "good and faithful servants", and be bid "to enter into the joy of
our Lord". AMEN and AMEN.

ERRATA.
PAGE 19. 4th l. from the bottom, instead of to, read for. Page ibid. l. 3. from
the bottom instead of for, read to. Page 22. 11th l. from the bottom read
prayers.

The CHARGE.
By the Rev. Mr. SAMUEL CHECKLEY.
WE the ministers of Christ, assembled on this occasion, do in his name, and by
prayer, and imposition of hands, solemnly ordain you a minister of Christ, and
a pastor of this his Church -- and we solemnly charge you before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead, at his appearing, and
kingdom; and also before this cloud of witnesses. --

Take heed to thy ministry, which thou have received of the Lord Jesus, that
thou fulfill it, performing with care, and diligence, every part thereof. --

Take heed to thyself, to thy doctrine, and to this flock of Christ, over which
the holy Ghost this day makes you an overseer. --

Take heed to thyself -- that thou be a man of God, furnished to every good
work -- be blameless, sober, vigilant, of good behavior, given to hospitality,
apt to teach, not given to wine, no stricker, not coveteous, not greedy of
filthy lucre, not a brawler, not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride,
thou fall into the condemnation of the Devil. --

Flee youthful lusts, and follow righteousness, faith, charity, and peace,
avoiding foolish and unlearned questions, which gender strife. --

Let no man despise thy youth, and be thou an example of believers, in word, in
conversation, in faith, in charity, in spirit, in purity, and give no offense
in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed --

Take heed to thy doctrine -- preach the word, be instant in season, and out of
season, rebuke, reprove with all long suffering and doctrine -- preach, not
yourself, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and determine to know nothing save him
crucified -- and let your preaching be, not with enticing words of man's
wisdom, nor corrupting the word of God, teaching for doctrine the commandments
of men, nor mixing their notions, with the institutions of Christ, but speaking
the things which become sound doctrine, showing uncorruptness, gravity,
sincerity, and sound speech, that cannot be condemned -- assert, explain and
defend the great doctrines of the Gospel, such as the trinity of persons in the
Godhead, the divinity of Christ, and also of the blessed spirit -- the
imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity, regeneration, and justification by
faith alone, as therein revealed; affirming also that such as believe in God
must be careful to maintain good works. Let your preaching be scriptural,
plain, and serious, and your addresses solemn and pathetic, -- your oil for the
sanctuary let be well beaten, give attendance therefore to reading, meditation
and prayer, that your profiting may appear to all men. --

Take heed also, to the whole flock, over which the holy Ghost now makes you an
overseer, to feed the church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.
-- The great shepherd and bishop of souls says to you this day, feed my sheep,
feed my lambs, do it then, with the sincere milk of the word, that they may
grow thereby; and let love to Christ constrain you thereto -- approve yourself
a workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, and
giving to every one their portion in due season.

You are this day set a watchman to this people, hear the word from your Lord's
mouth, and warn them from him; when he says to the sinner, O wicked man thou
shall surely die, if thou do not warn him, he shall die in his iniquity, but
his blood shall be required at your hands; nevertheless if thou warn the wicked
of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his
iniquity, but thou shall deliver thy soul -- Cry aloud and lift up thy voice in
the ears of sinners, that they may see their danger, and flee the wrath to
come, beseech them also in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, and travail
in birth for them to see Christ formed in them -- visit the flock, the poor as
well as the rich, not preferring one before another, and doing nothing by
partiality -- all souls are precious to Christ -- let them be so to you also,
and be ready to spend and be spent for them -- Deal tenderly with distressed
and awakened souls, leading them to Christ alone for rest, strengthen also,
comfort and edify believers; and to be sure declare to the flock the whole
counsel of God, that you may take them to record that you are pure from the
blood of all men -- and be thou a man of prayer, give your self to it, and let
your studies and holy ministrations be begun, and carried on with it -- pray
for your own soul, and the souls of others, more especially of this flock, for
us also your fathers and brethren in the ministry; and God forbid, that we
should cease to pray to the Lord for you -- expect many difficulties,
temptations and trials, but let none of these move you, nor count life itself
dear, so you may finish your course with joy, and the ministry you have
received of the Lord Jesus -- administer the sacraments of the new testament,
baptism and the Lord's supper, to the proper subjects thereof, ever putting a
difference between the holy and the profane -- and let the holy discipline
Christ has appointed in his church, be dispensed by you with courage and
boldness, with tenderness also and prudence -- and also bless the congregation
in the name of the Lord --

This is the solemn Charge, we now give you in the name of the Lord -- Think
seriously of it, and of the account you must one day give -- and are you ready
to say? Who, and what am I, that to me this grace should be given, that I
should preach to others the unsearchable riches of Christ? and how insufficient
am I herefor? Know it, your great head and Lord says to you, My grace is
sufficient for you -- Lo I am with you -- And if you keep this Charge, and
obtain mercy to be faithful, and also successful, so as to turn many to
righteousness, your work shall be rewarded, and when the chief shepherd shall
appear, you shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away, and hear from
his mouth that Euge, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord. AMEN -- So be it O LORD.

THE Right Hand of Fellowship;
By the Rev. Mr. COOPER.
WORDS are not the only medium of communicating our thoughts: Actions and
gestures have an emphatic meaning, and are capable of greatly heightning the
expression and force of our verbal declarations.

Giving the right hand is a natural indication, and has long been an
established pledge, of friendship and mutual assistance. This ceremony has not
only passed into our common forms of civility, but is used among us, as it was
among the ancients, upon some of the most important and solemn occasions. The
apostles of our Lord introduced it into the christian church; and by their
example we are allowed to use it, as a symbol of that peculiar affection, and
sacred fellowship, that ought forever to be maintained among the churches of
Christ, and especially the ministers of the gospel of peace. Thus James,
Cephas, and John, gave unto Paul and Barnabas the Right Hand of Fellowship.

The congregational churches in New England, ambitious of conforming to the
model of the truly primitive and apostolic church, have ever accompanied the
solemn ordination of a pastor with this significant rite.

Accordingly, by the appointment of the venerable council here present, and in
the name of my brethren in the ministry, I give unto you, my brother, this
Right Hand of Fellowship; as a token of the satisfaction we take in your
qualifications for the gospel ministry, and your regular induction into it, by
which you are become vested with all the authority that properly belongs to the
pastoral character.

You now hold a pledge of our esteem and love for you; of our fellowship with
you, and our readiness to afford you, as occasions may require, all those aids
and encouragements, which you have a right to expect, as a fellow labourer with
us in the work of the Lord, and our companion in the kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ.

Permit me at the same time to remind you, that this action, like the
obligations it expresses, is mutual; and that I have also received your right
hand, in confidence of a reciprocal affection, and that you will not fail to
return to us, what we promise unto you. The honor of our divine master, the
success of his service, the interest of the churches confided to our care, and
our own support under the temptations and discouragements that attend our
sacred employment -- all demand, that the ministers of Christ should thus be
knit together in love. May nothing dissolve, or weaken this happy union!

And now my Brother, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit!
And while you serve, as a son in the gospel, with your reverend colleague, and
enjoy the advantage of his experience and counsels, may the prudence, fidelity,
and success of your ministry, be a consolation to his age, and add to the peace
of his death.

God prolong your life, and render it precious to the people of your charge:
May the ear that hears you, bless you; and the eye that sees you bear witness
to you! -- May he, who holds the stars in his right hand, support and guide
you in a shining course of personal sanctity, and public usefulness; and grant
that you may both save yourself, and them that hear you!

United by the bonds of love to this christian society, we rejoice, brethren,
in your happy unanimity; we take part in the satisfaction which this day's
prospect affords you; and we salute you much in the Lord. May the spirit of
glory and of God rest upon you! May your affection to your pastors continue and
increase, and ever be accompanied with the most substantial evidences of the
success of their holy ministrations; that you and your children may be their
joy, and crown of rejoicing, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming.

The ministry which Christ has established, and the exercises of piety which
his gospel enjoins, are preparatory, under the influences of the holy Spirit,
to a state of immortality and joy: God grant, that by a lively faith in the
Redeemer of men, and a devout attendance upon his institutions, we may all be
prepared to pass from the inferior state of the church on earth, to the general
assembly on high, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.


