AN ADDRESS TO The COMMITTEE of CORRESPONDENCE IN BARBADOS. Occasioned by a
late letter from them TO Their Agent in LONDON.

BY A NORTH-AMERICAN.

This word REBELLION has froze them up Like Fish in a pond.

SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA. Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at his
Book-Store in MARKET-STREET, adjoining the LONDON COFFEE-HOUSE. M,DCC,LXVI.

PREFACE.
HAD the charge of REBELLION been made by a private person against the colonies
on this continent, for their opposition to the Stamp Act, I should not have
thought it worth answering. -- But when it was made by men vested with a public
character, by a committee of correspondence, representing two branches of
legislature in a considerable government, and the charge was not only approved,
as it is said, by those branches, but was actually published to the world in
newspapers, it seemed to me to deserve notice. I waited some time, in hopes of
seeing the cause espoused by an abler advocate, but being disappointed, I
resolved, "favente Deo," to snatch a little time from the hurry of business,
and to place, if I could, the letter of those gentlemen to their agent in a
proper light.

It is very evident from the generality of their accusation against their
"fellow subjects on the northern continent"; of the expressions they use in the
latter part of their letter, when they speak of the "violent spirit raised in
the North-American colonies", and from what follows, that they do not apply the
approbrious term they use, only to those few of the lower rank, who disturbed
us with two or three mobs in some of the provinces, nor to any other particular
class of people; but that the censure is designed for ALL the inhabitants of
these colonies who were any way concerned in the opposition that has been
given, and consequently that the modes of that opposition are thereby
condemned. Two considerations therefore have induced me to undertake their
defense. First, to vindicate the honor of my country, which I think grossly
and wantonly insulted. Secondly, to refute opinions, that in unfortunate times,
may, if adopted, be injurious to liberty.

Many good pieces, have been published in these colonies, to show their title
to the rights claimed by them; the invasion of those rights by the Stamp Act;
the other hardships imposed on them, and the bad consequences that probably
would follow these measures: but nothing has appeared, at least I have seen
nothing that I recollect, in defense of the principle on which the opposition
has been made, and of the manner in which it has been conducted. These are
points entirely new; and the consideration of them is now rendered necessary,
by the public reproach that has been thrown on the people of this continent.

A LETTER from the COMMITTEE of CORRESPONDENCE in BARBADOS, to their AGENT in
LONDON.
SIR,
IN compliance with the united resolution of the two branches of our
legislature, of which we have severally the honor to be members, and to compose
their committee of correspondence, We are now to desire you to lay our
complaints before his Majesty and the Parliament, on the hardships which this
community labors under by the imposition of the Stamp Duties, lately put in
force amongst us. We have, indeed, submitted, with all obedience, to the act of
Parliament, yet our submission has, by no means, arisen from any consciousness
of our ability to bear the burden of these taxes, or from the want of a due
sense of the oppressive weight of them in all its parts, but from a principle
of loyalty to our King and Mother Country, which has carried us above every
consideration of our own distresses: yet, if we have suffered without
resistance, we have learnt by it to complain with reason; and, since we have
raised no clamours from our own fears, we must surely have the better title to
remonstrate from our feelings. But, with respect to the manner in which our
grievances in this case, along with so good a proof of our obedience to the
laws of our mother country, are to be reported to his Majesty and the
parliament, we must refer ourselves to your good judgment and discretion; so
much better circumstanced as you are on that side of the water to judge for us,
than we can do at this distance for ourselves; and so perfectly assured as we
are also of your ability and zeal, in the conduct of every matter of importance
that can be entrusted to your agency for this country's service. To you, Sir,
therefore we give the power, in the name of our council and assembly, to
present such a memorial, or memorials, to his Majesty, and the two houses of
parliament (if to all be necessary) as to yourself shall seem most proper and
advisable; setting forth the anxiety and distresses of our country, under this
new and extraordinary burden of taxation, by which we not only find ourselves
loaded with a charge more than is proportioned to our circumstances, but
deprived also of a privilege, which renders the oppression beyond measure
grievous. We see two of the most important objects to such a colony as ours,
trade and justice crouching under the load of these new duties; and by the
manner in which the duties have been imposed, we find too the most valuable of
all our civil rights and liberties sinking along with them. The design of this
new and extraordinary charge upon our country is, toward defraying the
expenses of defending, protecting and securing, the colonies of AMERICA. But
what new and extraordinary expense has this colony put the nation to, for the
expense of maintaining of troops quartered in the several provinces of
NORTH AMERICA, for the protection and security of those parts of the British
dominions? This is just as reasonable, and just as merciful too, as it would be
to impose a heavy mulct on the inhabitants of this place, by way of a
punishment for the present REBELLIOUS opposition given to authority, by our
fellow subjects on the Northern continent. But if we are to be subject to the
power of the parliament of Great Britain in our internal taxes, we must be
always liable to impositions, that have nothing but the will of the imposers to
direct them in the measure, since we have there no representatives to inform
them of the true state of our circumstances, and of the degree of our strength
to bear the burdens that are imposed. How far, indeed, we are entitled, by the
constitution of ENGLAND, or our own peculiar charter, to an exemption from
every other internal tax, than such as may be laid upon us by the
representatives of our own people, in conjunction with the two other branches
of our legislative body, we cannot positively say; but this is certain, that we
have enjoyed that privilege, that seeming birthright of every BRITON, ever
since the first establishment of a civil government in this island to the
present time. And why we should at this period be condemned to the loss of so
inestimable a blessing of society, we can see no cause; since the present
period has afforded some instances of loyalty and affection to our King and
mother country, which might rather have entitled us to new favors from the
crown and nation, than have left us exposed to any deprivation of our old and
valuable rights. Yet, how far it may be prudent and necessary to press this
last consideration in your memorial to our superiors, must be referred to your
good judgment; for as we mean to obtain a redress of our grievances by a
dutiful representation only of our case, so would we have any thing avoided in
the style and substance of that representation, as might give offense to those
from whom only our redress can come, our appeal being to the very powers by
whom we think ourselves oppressed; though we may remonstrate to them with
justice, we cannot reproach them without danger; and the most effectual means
of giving ourselves all the merit we hope for, and intend, both with our
sovereign and the parliament, will be, we think, by giving our complaint on
this matter the complexion of our conduct, showing an humble submission to
authority, even under the most painful heart-burnings of our community, at its
severe decrees. But, great as our distresses are, upon account of this new
Taxation in its general course, we are yet fortunate enough not to have
suffered so much greater, as by the particular calamity you seem to have
apprehended for us, on the supposed seizure of the North-American traders; for
the masters of those vessels, producing certificates at our custom-house, that
no stamp papers were to be had at the ports they came from, have been admitted
to an entry of their several ships and cargoes, being supposed only liable to
the penalties inflicted by the Stamp Act, and of these no notice have been
taken; so that our danger from the circumstances you suggested to the ministers
is over. But we see another arising from the violent spirit raised in the
North-American colonies against this act, which threatens us with the same ill
consequences; we mean, from their avowed resentment at the people of this
island, for having so tamely submitted to the act, which they had been pleased
so resolutely to oppose. This having led them to some extraordinary attempts
(as we have been informed) to prevent any vessels coming hither with provisions
for our support, how far a combination of this kind, which has to struggle with
the private interests of so many individuals, can be formed amongst them, we
may at first be led to doubt; yet, on a second review of things, how far the
excesses of popular fury, which has no bounds, may hurry away all those
individuals, to their own, as well as our immediate prejudice, we may
reasonably fear; and we think it, at least, necessary to make mention of it to
you, that you may take this, amongst all the other unhappy consequences we may
feel from that injurious act, into your proper consideration.


N. B. The words in italick, are those animadverted upon in the following
address; and are printed in that manner, to be more easily distinguished and
referred to by the reader.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
I AM a North-American, and my intention is in addressing you at present, to
answer so much of a late letter from you to your agent in London, as casts
unmerited censure on my countrymen. After this declaration, as you entertain
such unfavorable sentiments of the "popular fury" on this continent, I presume
you expect to be treated with all the excess of passion natural to a rude
people. You are mistaken. I am of their opinion, who think it almost as
infamous, to disgrace a good cause by illiberal language, as to betray it by
unmanly timidity. Complaints may be made with dignity; insults retorted with
decency; and violated rights vindicated without violence of words.

YOU have nothing therefore to apprehend from me, gentlemen, but such
reflections on your conduct, as may tend to rouse that remorse in you, which
always arises in the minds of ingenuous persons, when they find that they have
wounded by their rash calumnies the honor of those, who merit their highest
esteem, -- their warmest praises.

I KNOW there are in the island of Barbados, many men of sense, spirit, and
virtue, and therefore I choose to consider you rather in the character of such,
whose understanding, resolution, and integrity, have been drugg'd by some
pernicious draught into a slumber, than of those, who with irretrievable
depravity, want all the qualities requisite to make them serviceable to their
countrymen, or just to others.

HAD I only heard, gentlemen, that you had called the behavior of these
colonies, a "REBELLIOUS OPPOSITION given to authority," I should have thought
it a vain attempt, to aim at convincing you, how unjustifiable an aspersion
that expression contained; because I should immediately have concluded, that
you were so ignorant of the rights of British subjects, and so insensible of
all concern on the invasion of those rights, that any man who should endeavor
to show you your error, would engage in as unpromising a project, as if he
should think to communicate an idea of sound to the deaf, or of color to the
blind.

WHEN I read your letter, however, with an agreeable surprise I observed, that
you, at the same time you have made the attack, have laid the foundation of a
defense for my countrymen. Permit me to erect the superstructure, though I had
much rather see it built by more skilful hands.

YOU acknowledge, the "burden of the taxes imposed by the Stamp Act, to be
OPPRESSIVE IN ALL ITS PARTS"; that you are thereby not only "loaded with a
charge more than is proportioned to your circumstances, but DEPRIVED ALSO OF A
PRIVILEGE, which renders the OPPRESSION BEYOND MEASURE GRIEVOUS:" that you "see
two of the most important objects, TRADE and JUSTICE CROUCHING under the load
of the new duties and by the manner in which these duties have been imposed,
find too the MOST VALUABLE OF ALL YOUR CIVIL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES SINKING ALONG
WITH THEM."

YOU say that if you "are to be subject to the power of the parliament of
Great Britain, in your internal taxes, you must always be liable to
impositions, that have nothing but the WILL OF THE IMPOSERS to direct them in
the measure." With what consistency you afterward hesitate, and "cannot say,"
whether the privilege of taxing yourselves, exclusively belongs to you, or talk
of a "SEEMING birthright," I will leave to be determined by yourselves, or the
agent to whose "good judgment and discretion," you with such strange, I had
almost said "humble submission" "refer" your most important affairs. However,
your sentiments soon veer about again, and you speak of "AN INESTIMABLE
BLESSING OF SOCIETY;" of "OLD AND VALUABLE RIGHTS, and even hazard the hardy
appellation of "SEVERE DECREES."

WHEN it is so evident, that all these assertions are equally true with regard
to yourselves, and "your fellow subjects on the northern continent," it affords
no slight cause of amazement, to see in the same letter that contains these
assertions, the opposition to those confessedly destructive measures, branded
as "REBELLIOUS". Wherefore this needless stroke against your "fellow subjects?"
Could not your "principle of loyalty" sink you to a satisfactory depth of
humiliation, unless you flung yourselves down with such a rage of prostration
as to spatter all around you? Was not your surrender of " the most valuable of
all rights and liberties" sufficiently completed by your declaration, that you
"COULD NOT POSITIVELY SAY you were entitled to them," without reproaching those
who have the misfortune of differing so widely from you in their sentiments,
that they had rather die than make such a declaration?

TO talk of your "charter" gentlemen, on this occasion, is but weakening the
cause by relying on false aids. Your opinion on this head seems to be borrowed
from the doctrine of the unhappy Stuarts. They thought, or pretended to think,
all the liberties of the subject were mere favors granted by charters from the
crown. Of consequence, all claims of liberties not expressly mentioned in those
charters, were regarded as invasions of the prerogative, which according to
them, was a power vested in the prince, they could not tell how, for no better
purpose, than to do as he pleased. But what said the nation? They asserted,
that the royal charters were declarations but not gifts of liberties, made as
occasions required, on those points in which they were most necessary, without
enumerating the rest; and that the prerogative was a power vested in one for
the benefit of all.

KINGS or parliaments could not give the rights essential to happiness, as you
confess those invaded by the Stamp Act to be. We claim them from a higher
source -- from the King of kings, and Lord of all the earth. They are not
annexed to us by parchments and seals. They are created in us by the decrees of
Providence, which establish the laws of our nature. They are born with us;
exist with us; and cannot be taken from us by any human power, without taking
our lives. In short, they are founded on the immutable maxims of reason and
justice. It would be an insult on the divine Majesty to say, that he has given
or allowed any man or body of men a right to make me miserable. If no man or
body of men has such a rights, I have a right to be happy. If there can be no
happiness without freedom, I have a right to be free. If I cannot enjoy freedom
without security of property, I have a right to be thus secured. If my property
cannot be secure, in case others over whom I have no kind of influence, may
take it from me by taxes, under pretense of the public good, and for enforcing
their demands, may subject me to arbitrary, expensive, and remote
jurisdictions, I have an exclusive right to lay taxes on my own property,
either by myself or those I can trust; of necessity to judge in such instances
of the public good; and to be exempt from such jurisdictions. -- But no man can
be secure in his property, who is "liable to impositions, that have NOTHING BUT
THE WILL OF THE IMPOSERS to direct them in the measure;" and that make "JUSTICE
TO CROUCH UNDER THEIR LOAD."

THUS you prove, gentlemen, that the fatal act you allude to in these
expressions, is destructive of our property, our freedom, our happiness: that
it is inconsistent with reason and justice; and subversive of those sacred
rights which GOD himself from the infinity of his benevolence has bestowed upon
mankind.

YET after these expressed or implied concessions, you term the opposition made
by my countrymen to the execution of this -- imagination cannot supply me with
an epithet equal to my meaning -- act, "REBELLIOUS."

PRAY, gentlemen, let me not mistake your notion of "humble submission to
authority." Do you maintain, that because the parliament may legally make some
laws to bind us, it therefore may legally make any laws to bind us? Do you
assert, that where power is constitutionally vested in particular persons for
certain purposes, the same obedience is due to the commands of those persons,
when they exceed the limits of that power, as when they are restrained within
them? Do you say, that all acts of authority are sanctified by the mere
pleasure of their authors, and that "humble submission" is due to them, however
injurious they may be to those over whom they are exercised -- or that the
oppressed ought to content themselves with "giving the COMPLEXION of your
CONDUCT" to PALE petitions -- and that all other opposition is "rebellious?"

GREATLY I am afraid, that you have published to the world too convincing
proofs, that you hold these sentiments: sentiments, which I solemnly profess
are so horrible to me, that I cannot wish the infection of them even to the
bitterest enemies of my country.

HAVE you considered, gentlemen, the importance of the points to which your
political creed may be applied? What is your opinion of the revolution, that
made the British liberty and British glory blaze out with their brightest
luster? Had you lived in those days of ignorance, with what lucky assistance
might you have propp'd up the tottering tyrant, by maxims of law to prove, that
kings can do no wrong; and texts of scripture to show, that submission is due
to the powers that be!

IT is as manifest, that the great and good men who then placed the throne in
the temple of liberty, disdained your sentiments, as it is, that if they had
approved them, you would not at present enjoy the satisfaction of being ruled
by a prince whose virtues do honor to his rank. All the happiness you possess,
you owe to the force of the principle, which you now reproach; and your
professing your resolution to persist in an "humble submission" to acts that
you expressly say, "make your oppression beyond measure grievous," and destroy
"the most valuable of your civil rights and liberties," is deserting and
betraying as much as you can, that principle, on which the constitution of
Great Britain is established -- A principle, that has operated differently
among these colonies, as became them, from what it did in that kingdom at the
memorable period abovementioned -- not in action, but negatively, in a refusal
to act, in a manner destructive to them.

LET me speak plainly. In such a cause to prevaricate or fear, is worse, if
possible, than falsehood or cowardice. Good breeding in private life, or good
behavior in public life, can never require a deviation from truth or virtue.
Our obligation to these, is coexistent with us, and unchangeable. No other
relation therefore can dissolve or diminish the primary, unalterable duty.

DO you believe, gentlemen, that parliaments never did, or never will do wrong?
Do you profess an infallibility in politics, which you ridicule in religion? If
any man should tell the present parliament, they are all-wise and all-perfect,
I am persuaded, it would be esteemed a wretched insult both on their
understanding and piety. Say they are the wisest and justest assembly on earth;
and you say right. But human wisdom and human justice partake of human
frailties. Such is the lot of our nature -- and to bestow the attributes of
heaven on mortals, who to day are, and tomorrow are not, is the wildness of
adulation.

SURELY, you cannot persevere in your error. If the stamp act, DETESTABLE as
you have described it, cannot wake you from dreams of submission, yet is there
no idea of danger or distress which your fancy can represent to you, that you
think would justify you in something else than petitioning? Have you no
"feelings" by which you might be tortured a little beyond "remonstrating?" I do
not know what is dreadful to YOU, nor can I form the least guess what would be
so: but suppose to yourselves an act of parliament commanding you to do or
suffer something the most dreadful in the world -- to YOU: something ten
thousand times more dreadful -- to YOU I mean -- than "oppression beyond
measure grievous"; "crushing justice under insupportable burdens;" or "sinking
the most valuable of all civil rights and liberties." Whatever that would be to
you, the stamp act is to my countrymen.

HERE permit me, gentlemen, to ask, whether in such a case you would "humbly
submit," tho it should be in your power effectually to refuse? To make your
conduct consistent with the sentiments avowed in your letter, you must. Would
you? Then, if what we are told of the ancient Cappadocians be true, you would
exhibit the second instance since the creation of mankind, of a people choosing
to be slaves. Would you refuse? What then becomes of your "principle of
loyalty," and your "obedience to the laws of your mother country?" If so, they
are only fine words, with which you intend to purchase some sort of reputation
with some sort of people; you are then loyal and obedient, as you call
yourselves, because you apprehend you cannot safely be otherwise; and the
pretended virtues you claim, like forced fruits, partake too strongly of the
manure that gave them growth, to afford any agreeable relish. Thus you reduce
yourselves to the miserable dilemma of making a choice between two of the
meanest characters -- of those who would be slaves from inclination, tho they
pretend to love liberty -- and of those who are dutiful from fear, tho they
pretend to love submission.

PARDON me, gentlemen, if I attribute to you the virtue, which your excessive
modesty disclaims. Since you were deterred from reproaching, by the cautious
consideration, that you could not " reproach WITHOUT DANGER;" I am almost
persuaded, that you would prefer refusal to slavery, if you were assured, that
you could " refuse WITHOUT DANGER."

YOU greatly injure me, gentlemen, if you imagine from what I have said, that I
am not a hearty friend to my king, his illustrious family, to Great Britain, or
to the connection between her and these colonies. In what I am now to say, I
shall speak not only my own, but the universal sentiments of my countrymen. I
am devoted to my gracious sovereign, and his truly royal house, by principle
and affection. They appear to me to have been called by providence to the
throne; not to have gained it by the least share of the guilt, or even of the
art, that has so often exalted the most unworthy to the most splendid stations.
They have risen with brightness upon the world, in due course, to shed
blessings over mankind; and all history cannot furnish an instance of a family,
whose virtues have had a more auspicious influence on the happiness of men,
particularly of their subjects. Their government does not afford only gleams of
joy, but cheers with a flowing uniformity, except when some evil spirit
interrupts our felicity -- But these interruptions have never lasted: can never
last, while princes of the line of Brunswick "chara deo soboles" preside over
us. Their amiable qualities are hereditary; these render, if I may be allowed
the expression, our happiness hereditary; and I might therefore be justly
deemed very deficient in sense or integrity, if it was not among my most ardent
prayers, that the scepter of his dominions may be held by our present monarch
and his family, till time shall be no more.

AS to Great Britain, I glory in my relation to her. Every drop of blood in my
heart is British; and that heart is animated with as warm wishes for her
prosperity, as her truest sons can form. As long as this globe continues
moving, may she reign over it is navigable part; and may she resemble the ocean
she commands, which recruits without wasting, and receives without exhausting,
its kindred streams in every climate. Are these the sentiments of disloyalty or
disaffection? Do these sentiments point at independency? Can you believe it?
Will you assert it? I detest the thought with inexpressible abhorrence, for
these reasons; first, because it would be undutiful to our sovereign; secondly,
because it would be unjust to our mother country; and thirdly, because it would
be destructive both to her and to us.

THE British nation is wise and generous. They can distinguish between a
disgust to government and to the administration of it; a distinction, which bad
ministers are continually striving to confound. They set up their passions for
the interests of their king and country; and then, whoever is offended with
their conduct, is convicted by a very plain deduction of ministerial logic, of
being an enemy to his king and country. No farmer dislikes the sun; but if it
collects such thick clouds as too much intercept its beams, surely the poor man
who sees all his hopes sickening and withering, may very innocently dislike the
gloom, and wish the reviving rays may be felt again. The British nation aims
not at empire over vassals. And must, I am convinced, be better pleased to hear
their children speaking the language of freemen, than muttering the timid
murmurs of slaves. Can you believe, gentlemen* that they will be better pleased
with the style and substance of your representation, than with the honest
transports of North-American breasts, so exactly like what they feel, when they
think themselves injured? If there is any people whose character it is, to
submit to wrongs, basely pretending to prefer the pleasure of those who offer
them, to their own welfare or honor, while cowardly hatred and malice lurk
rankling and " heart-burning" in their bosoms, watching, wishing opportunities
of dire revenge, it belongs not to Britons, or their true sons. They can
neither dissemble injuries, nor unreasonably resent them. These are vices of
little, cruel minds. Much better, much safer is it for all parties,
particularly when we contend with noble spirits, manfully to speak what we
think, and thereby put it in their power -- such will always have it in their
inclination -- to give us ample satisfaction. They know that those who are most
sensible of injuries, are most sensible of benefits. There can be no friendship
between freemen and slaves; and I have the strongest hopes that our mutual
affection will henceforward be more cemented than it hitherto has been -- on
their part, because we have proved ourselves worthy of their esteem; and on our
part, because their generosity will excuse the manner in which we have proved
it.

SUPPOSE all this continent had imitated your example, and had repeated your
doleful, doubtful notes, from one end of it to the other: had acknowledged upon
their knees, "that they COULD NOT POSITIVELY SAY whether they were entitled to
the exemption" they required, was there the least probability of their
obtaining it? I do not object to the probability, for want of justice or of
affection toward us in our mother country; but for want of proper attention,
which the artifices of our enemies in support of their own darling measures,
would always have prevented.

EVERY man must remember, how immediately after the tempest of the late war was
laid, another storm began to gather over North America. Every wind that blew
across the Atlantic, brought with it additional darkness. Every act of the
administration seemed calculated to produce distress, and to excite terror. We
were alarmed -- we were afflicted. Many of our colonies sent home petitions;
others ordered their agents to make proper applications on their behalf. What
was the effect? They were rejected without reading. They could not be
presented, "without breaking through a rule of the house." They insisted upon a
right, that, it "was previously determined, should not be admitted." The
language of the ministry was, "that they would teach the insolent
North-Americans, the respect due to the laws of their mother country." They
moved for a resolution "that the parliament could legally tax us." 'Twas made.
For a bill -- 'Twas framed. For its dispatch -- 'Twas past. The badges of our
shame were prepared -- too gross -- too odious -- even in the opinion of that
administration, to be fastened upon us by any but Americans. Strange delusion!
to imagine that treachery could reconcile us to slavery. They looked around:
they found Americans -- O Virtue! they found Americans, to whom the confidence
of their country had committed the guardianship of her rights, on whom her
bounty had bestowed all -- the wreck of her fortunes could afford, ready to
rivet on their native land, the nurse of their infancy, the protectrix of their
youth, the honorer of their manhood, the fatal fetters which their information
had helped to forge. They were to be gratifyed with part of the plunder in
oppressive offices for themselves and their creatures. By these, that they
might reap the rewards of their corruption, were we advised -- by these, that
they might return masters who went out servants, were we desired -- to put on
the chains, and then with shackled hands to drudge in the dark, as well as we
could, forgetting the light we had lost. "IF I FORGET THEE, LET MY RIGHT HAND
FORGET HER CUNNING -- IF I DO NOT REMEMBER THEE, MAY MY TONGUE CLEAVE TO THE
ROOF OF MY MOUTH."

WHEN the intelligence of these astonishing things reached America, "then
flamed her spirit high."

WHAT could she do? send home petitions again? The first had been treated with
contempt. What could be expected from a second trial? We knew, that the humble
petition of meek, pious, venerable bishops, supplicating for the laws and
religion of their country, had been called a false and seditious libel by a
daring administration who were resolved to have no law but their own pleasure.
We knew, that the liberty of our fellow subjects had been lately so boldly
invaded even in our mother country, in that spot where the dignity of the
empire may be said more peculiarly to reside, that their oppressors were hardly
stopped in their career, by the united voice of an injured and offended people.
We knew, that the men who designed to oppress us, held up to those whose
assistance they were obliged to use, specious pretenses of immediate advantage,
while every remoter mischief, every disagreeable truth was artfully concealed
from them. They were persuaded, that they were to promote their own interests,
the public interests, by adopting the new-invented policy proposed to them. In
short we knew, in what line every thought and act relating to us, ran. All was
arbitrary, rigid, threatening, dreadful. What resourse had we? We wondered and
wept -- At last imploring the divine protection, and appealing to the British
goodness, we were driven by apprehension and affliction into a conduct, that
might justly have rendered us to the humane rather objects of pity, than
resentment; but which you gentlemen, are pleased to call a "REBELLIOUS
opposition to authority."

HOW much farther these colonies might have gone; how much farther it would
have been proper for them to go, I will not pretend to say. I confine myself
entirely to your state of the case, and to their behavior in that case. My soul
sickens at the scenes that obtrude themselves on my imagination, while I
reflect on what might have happened. My attention turns with unspeakable
pleasure to those brighter prospects now * opening on my country, and the
approaching times, when through the mercy of ALMIGHTY GOD, to whom be ascribed
everlasting glory, the inhabitants of these colonies, animated with sentiments
of the most perfect gratitude, confidence, affection, and veneration, justly
heightened by the engaging clemency of our amiable sovereign, and the endearing
tenderness of our mother country, shall be diligently and delightfully employed
in demonstrating, that they are not unworthy of the blessings bestowed upon
them. Great Britain has been long distinguished -- she must be now perpetually
celebrated, for her moderation. This is her peculiar praise. Other states have
been as great in arms; as learned in arts; but none ever equalled her in
moderation -- a virtue, and the parent of virtues.

I AM very sorry that these colonies had any reason given them to think they
were right in going so far as they lately did: yet tho many things have been
done, that I sincerely wish had not been done, I should be glad to know what
particular part of their conduct has provoked you to issue, if I may use one of
your expressions, so "severe a decree" against them.

DID the resolutions made by their several assemblies in vindication of their
rights, deserve such a censure? You grant they were founded on truth and
justice. Can it be criminal to maintain these? Perhaps you think they were
guilty, in forming and persisting in their universal determination not to use
stamped papers, as they were commanded to do. No man can be blamed for doing
any thing, which if he had not done, he must have committed a worse action.
Remember the opinion you have expressed of the liberties for which these
colonies were struggling. Had they accepted the stamped papers, they would not
only have betrayed themselves, and you, whose prosperity they wish from a
generosity of temper, of which they hope you will hereafter give then more
agreeable proofs, than you have yet done, but they would also have basely
betrayed ages yet unborn, to a condition that would have rendered their birth a
curse. You think "a memorial or memorials" would have relieved them, if they
had "humbly submitted;" that is, that injuries that could not be prevented by a
regard to justice, liberty, and the happiness of millions, might be redressed
by well-penned petitions. No! The right would have been surrendered by our act
-- a precedent would have been established by our acquiescence, for perpetual
servility. Where would the demands of ministers, where would the miseries of
America have stopped?

I BELIEVE your island and its neighbors have been more fortunate in
"memorialising" than this continent. Had we any reason to expect relief from
the conduct proposed? Has any thing happened since, to show that we should have
succeeded by it? Let any person consider the speeches lately made in
parliament, and the resolutions said to be made there, notwithstanding the
convulsions occasioned through the British empire by the opposition of these
colonies to the stamp act, and he may easily judge what would have been their
situation, in case they had bent down and humbly taken up the burden prepared
for them. What would have been their fate, since they have opposed, if one man
the victor of his country's foreign and domestic foes, had not by his wisdom
and virtue checked the rage that deception might artfully have kind^ed in the
most honest and humane people upon earth, heaven alone can tell.

WHEN the exclusion bill was depending in the house of commons, Col. Titus made
this short speech -- "Mr. speaker, I hear a lion roaring in the lobby. Shall we
secure the door, and keep him there: or shall we let him in to try if we can
turn him out again."

CAN it be possible, gentlemen, that our stopping on this continent the
importation of goods from Great Britain, has brought your resentment upon us?
If it has, it is the first time that industry and frugality have met with such
hard judges.

THE only thing I can think of besides, which might induce you to treat my
countrymen as you have done, is the behavior of the mobs composed of the lower
ranks of people in some few of the colonies, to those who were favorers of the
stamp act -- But surely that could not produce so general an accusation of
"your fellow subjects on the northern continent." It was indeed a very improper
way of acting; but may not these agonies of minds not quite so polished as your
own, be in some measure excused? if as the absolute monarch of Judea said
"oppression makes a wise man mad;" and if as the loyal committee of
correspondence in Barbados says, "the subversion of justice" and "the most
valuable of all civil rights and liberties" is "oppression beyond measure
grievous." It is needless to dwell longer on this head; but if you choose to
enquire into the circumstances of every mob that has happened here, taking for
granted that the stamp act is constitutional, I believe even you, on cool
consideration, would not term any of them a rebellion.

UPON the whole, I acknowledge, that a regard to themselves, has influenced the
inhabitants of these colonies; but it was not a regard void of the truest
loyalty to their king, the warmest affection, the profoundest veneration, for
their parent country. If my father deceived and urged on by bad or weak men,
should offer me a draught of poison, and tell me it would be of service to me,
should I be undutiful, if, knowing what it is I refuse to drink it? or if
inflamed by passion, he should aim a dagger at my heart, should I be undutiful,
if I refuse to bare my breast for the blow? Should he complain, would it not be
the complaint of Cataline, that the senator he attempted to assassinate, was so
disrespectful to him, he WOULD NOT recieve the sword in his body? Or should I
act like a man in his senses, if I swallow the dose or receive the stroke, in
expectation that those who prompted or provoked my father to the action, would
afterward give me a certain antidote or balsam -- especially, if they would
probably get a large part of my estate? I will beg leave to trouble you,
gentlemen, with one more comparison. If a fortune of immense value comes into
my possession by being settled on me, as the lawful son of my father, which
till then had been held solely by him, and my enemies should persuade my
excellent parent to attempt to bastardize me, and take the whole into his hands
again, I not having the least prospect of happiness without it, and he not
having the least occasion for it -- should I be undutiful, if after endeavoring
by entreaties to prevent his proceedings, I carefully record all the proofs of
my being legitimate, stop the circulation of all false vouchers to the
contrary, decline the correspondence of those who join with him, and even break
the head of a man, who slanders my honor and my title, by spreading an opinion
that I am basely born? With how much less reason will the charge of
undutifulness be made against me, if I have regularly advanced for my father
all such sums as he has from time to time required, and have assured him by my
professions and behavior, that he shall have all the profits of the estate,
allowing me a comfortable maintenance, if he will suffer it to continue in my
possession -- and all the world knows, that by a condition annexed to this
estate, I cannot part with it, without acknowledging myself to be a bastard.

TO conclude -- gentlemen -- I know none of you; not even one of your names. I
mean no personal reflections in this address. I detest them. If you should take
any thing I have said, so much in that way, as to feel uneasiness from it, I
shall be very sorry. Neither do I intend any reflections on your country, tho
you represented her when you attacked mine. I always detested these loose
aspersions, that ever give most pain to bosoms that honor and delicacy have
rendered most sensible; and this detestation has been greatly increased, since,
within these few years, we have seen such loads of obloquy thrown upon a The
Scots.
nation, whose magnanimity in bearing them will be sufficient I hope, to
procure them the esteem of those, who have been so much blinded by passion, as
to deny it to their other numerous virtues and accomplishments. Your island is
respectable. Your private characters may be amiable: but in a public capacity,
you have cast a most high and unprovoked censure on a gallant, generous, loyal
people. You have propagated a set of sentiments, and have promoted a tenor of
conduct, that may be hurtful to the cause of freedom. I have engaged with too
unequal arms perhaps, to oppose you; but to fail in such a contest, will afford
me some kind of pleasure. I wish you every blessing that men can enjoy; and as
a foundation and security of all the rest, I wish you a true love of liberty.

A NORTH-AMERICAN.

FINIS

