THE CLAIM OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF NEWARK, IN VIRTUE OF The INDIAN
PURCHASE made by the first Settlers of NEWARK, in 1667.

STATED AND CONSIDERED.

WOODBRID^E, in New-Iersey: Printed by SAMUEL F. PARKER. M.DCC.LXVI.

The Claim of the Inhabitants of the Town of NEWARK, etc.
KING CHARLES the Second, being by Discovery and the actual Possession of the
Dutch by his License, entitled to the Lands now called NEW YORK and NEW JERSEY
did, by his Letters Patent dated the 12th Day of March, 1663-4, grant and
convey to his Brother JAMES Duke of York, all the Lands within the Colonies of
New York and New-Iersey, with the Powers of Government.

JAMES Duke of York, on the 2d Day of April, 1664, commissioned Richard
Nicholls to be Governor of his said Territories in America.

Richard Nicholls, on the 20th Day of August, 1664, arrived in America, and on
the 27th of the same Month, had the Possession of said Colonies of New York and
New-Iersey, delivered him by the Dutch.

It is said, that Governor Nicholls, soon after his Arrival in his said
Government, issued a Proclamation, containing the Conditions for new
Plantations in the Territories of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, among
which are these following, viz.

The Purchases are to be made from the Indian Sachems, and to be recorded
before the Governor.

The Purchasers are not to pay for their Liberty of purchasing, to the
Governor.

The Purchasers are to set out a Town, and inhabit together.

No Purchaser shall at any Time, contract for himself with any Sachem, without
Consent of his Associates, or Special Warrant from the Governor.

All Lands thus purchased, shall remain to the Purchasers and their Heirs, as
free Lands, to dispose of as they please.

The Lands which I intend shall be first planted, are those upon the West side
of Hudson's River, at or adjoining to Esopus; but if any Number of Men,
sufficient for two, three, or more Towns, shall desire to plant upon any other
Lands, they shall have all due Encouragement proportionable to their Quality
and Undertaking.

Note. No Proclamation has ever appeared; and all that has appeared, are Papers
without any Date, said to be Copies.

JAMES Duke of York, by his Letters Patent, dated the 24th Day of June, 1664,
(about two Months before Governor Nicholls arrived in America) granted and
conveyed the now Province of New-Iersey, to John Lord Berkeley, and Sir George
Carteres, in Fee.

The said Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret, on the 10th Day of February,
Recorded Lib. 3. p. 27.
1664-5, appointed Philip Carteret to be Governor of New-Iersey, Recorded Lib.
3. p. 28.
and on the same Day, by a separate Instrument under their Hands and Seals,
gave Power to the said Philip Carteret, with Advice of the major Part of his
Council, to grant Lands to all such Persons as should by their Concessions be
entitled thereto; but expressly therein declare, that they grant no Power but
according to the Concessions.

The said Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret, on the same 10th Day of
February, Recorded Lib. 3. from Pages 66 to 74.
1664-5, did, by another Instrument, under their Hands and Seals, grant their
Concessions, establishing thereby the Constitution of the said Province, to be
strictly observed by all inhabiting them; which Concessions direct and order,
that the Form of Government should be by a Governor, Council and an Assembly;
and fix the Powers of each and of all the Officers of Government; and declare,
that a Title to Lands was to be obtained by the Settlers, by having a Survey
made by the Surveyor General or his Deputy, duly recorded with the Register,
and a Grant or Patent, under the Seal of the Province, signed by the Governor
and the major Part of the Council, to the Person for whom said Survey was made;
and that by no other Method a Title to Lands could be obtained by the
Inhabitants of New-Iersey.

In or before the Month of August, 1665, Governor Carteret arrived in
New-Iersey, Lib. 1. p. ^.
and executed the Powers of Government agreeable to his Commission and said
Concessions. Lib. 3. p. 1.


In the Year 1665, This appears from Governor Carteret's Letter and Memorandum
Book.
Mr. Treat and others, from Connecticut, after treating with Governor Carteret
about settling in New-Iersey, after examining the Concessions, (which they saw
and considered) and after having some religious and other Privileges (not
contained in the Concessions) granted them, came into New-Iersey with an Intent
of settling on the River Delaware, near Burlington; but on viewing the Country,
they did not like it.

On their Return from Delaware, they called on Governor Carteret at
Elizabeth-Town; who persuaded them to settle on the Lands now called NEWARK,
and wrote a Letter to the Indian Sachem to sell the same to Captain Treat,
promising the Indian Sachem to satisfy him for the same.

In Consequence whereof the said Treat and Company purchased of the Indians all
the Lands within the Town of Newark; Samuel Edsell and Joseph Harrison's
Affidavit, and Indian Deed to Newark, in 1667.
and afterward in 1667, took a Bill of Sale from the Indians for those Lands,
paid the Consideration Sum to the Indians, and began in that Year to settle the
Town of NEWARK.

The said first Settlers of NEWARK, This appears from a List of the several
Patents taken from the public Records of New Jersey.
soon after their said Indian Purchase, and before the Year 1700, applied for
and obtained One Hundred and ten Patents from the Proprietor's Governors and
Council of New-Iersey, for 12439 Acres of Land, lying within the Bounds of said
Indian Purchase; 8134 Acres thereof, at the annual Rent of one Halfpenny per
Acre, agreeable to the said Concessions of the Lords Proprietors, amounting in
the whole to 16l. 18s. 11d. a Year; and the remaining 4305 Acres, at the yearly
Rent of six Pence per hundred Acres, according to an Agreement entered into
between the Town of Newark, and the General Proprietors of New-Iersey, herein
after mentioned.

In 1676, New-Iersey was divided into East and West-Iersey; and East-Iersey was
assigned for the Part and Share of Sir George Carteret; and by sundry mesne
Conveyances from him, the Eastern Division, whereof Newark is a Part, was in
and about 1681, vested in those called the twenty-four General Proprietors of
East New-Iersey; whose Heirs and Assigns, and the Patentees of Lord Berkeley
and Sir George Carteret, claim the same to this Day.

The first Settlers of Newark not having in and before the Year 1692, obtained
Patents for more than about 8000 Acres of Land, within their said Indian
Purchase, at one Halfpenny per Acre Quit-rent, but having paid the
Consideration Sum to the Indians for the whole Tract (containing upwards of
40000 Acres) and yet being unwilling to take Patents for all the remaining
Lands within their Bounds on the Terms of granting Patents at one Halfpenny
per Acre fixed by said Concessions, did by their Committee, John Curtice, and
others, chosen for that Purpose, on the 28th Day of February, 1692, meet and
propose to the General Proprietors of East New-Iersey, an amicable and friendly
Accommodation relating to the Lands held by the Inhabitants of Newark under the
Proprietors, and those which they possessed by Purchase from the Indians; and
after a long Conference had thereon, it was proposed, that the Inhabitants of
Newark (such of them as yet had not) should take out Patents for the Lands they
possessed, As appears on Record, in Lib. A. B. p. 118.
and pay their Arrears of Quit-Rents; and that all the old Settlers should have
one hundred Acres of Land, each at six Pence per Annum Quit-Rent: Which
Proposals were agreed to be referred by said Committee, to said Town of Newark,
for their Approbation.

Which Proposals were afterward mutually agreed to, and carried into Execution
by both Parties, Lib. A. B. 12^.
by the general Proprietors ratifying the same, and by the first Settlers of
Newark, signifying their Consent thereto, and obtaining in Virtue of said
Agreement, upwards of Forty Patents from the General Proprietors for 4305 Acres
of Land, at the annual Quit-rent of Six Pence per Hundred Acres; which several
Patents are recorded in Lib. E. and F.

Besides said several Patents granted in Virtue of said Agreement, about five
Hundred Acres of Land, have also, since the granting of Letters Patent in
New-Iersey ceased, been surveyed and returned to the Heirs of the first
Settlers of Newark, on said Agreement, who hold the same to this Day. And it is
conceived, that there are not more than two of the old Settlers of Newark, but
what have, either by themselves, their Heirs or Assigns, taken out Patents, or
had Surveys granted them, for said Hundred Acres agreed upon, for the
consideration Sum paid the Indians for the Lands they held by Purchase within
the Town of Newark.

It is alleged by some of the present Inhabitants of Newark, that Governor
Carteret granted a License to the first Purchasers of Newark, to make their
Purchase of the Indians; which is founded on the Affidavits of Joseph Harrison,
Esquire deceased, taken in 1742, and of Jonathan Pierson, taken in 1764. Mr.
Harrison swears, that he about forty Years, then last past, heard a Writing
read by one John Cooper, which he understood to be a License from Governor
Carteret, as Governor, John Ogden and others, of Elizabeth-Town, to purchase of
the Indians, the Lands now called Newark; does not remember that there were any
particular Boundaries mentioned in said License, but believes it was for the
Lands purchased by the People of Newark as aforesaid. Jonathan Pierson swears,
that when he was a Boy, his Father Theophilus Pierson, came Home from attending
a Proxy Meeting of the Proprietors, held at Elizabeth-Town or Perth-Amboy, and
said, that he had lost the Newark License, and believed it was taken out of his
Pocket; but does not remember ever to have heard his Father declare the
Contents thereof.

In the Year 1666, and afterward, several Licenses were granted by Governor
Carteret, to make Purchases of the Indians, and recorded in the public Records
at Perth-Amboy, all containing a Condition that the Persons to whom the
Licenses were granted should truly perform all such Acts and Things as are
contained in the Lords Proprietors Concessions; one of which dated the
Twenty-fourth Day of June, 1666, is recorded in Lib. 1. Page 9. and is in the
Words following, to wit.

Whereas Mr. Isaac Ienna, alias La Pierre, has requested my Leave, for the
purchasing a certain Tract of Land from the Indians, on the East Side of
Delaware River, within this Government, with an Intent to inhabit and plant the
same: These are therefore to permit and suffer the said Isaac, to purchase the
said Tract of Land from the Indians, upon Condition, that he truly perform all
such Acts and Things as are contained in the Lords Proprietors ^^^^^^sions, and
to be conformable and obedient to the Laws of this Province. Given under my
Hand, and the Seal of the Province, the 24th Day of June, 1666.

One other License in like Manner, granted to Eli^^^^ Wardel, and his
Associates, dated November the 4th, 1666, recorded in Lib. 3. fol. 10.

One other in like Manner, granted to Peter Abriske, dated November 15th, 1666,
recorded in Lib. 1. fol. 6. and several other like Licenses to five different
Persons, from the Year 1668, to 1671, recorded in said Lib. 1. from p. 21 to 33.

After the Surrender of the Government of New-Iersey, by the General
Proprietors to the Crown of England, in the Year 1702, Letters Patent ceased to
be granted for Land in East New-Iersey, and the Constitution instead thereof
was established, that the General Proprietors, or their Assigns, should have
Warrants of Survey granted them by the Council of Proprietors, for such Shares
of Land as they were entitled to, the Surveyor General making a Survey and
Return thereof, which being entered on Record, gave a Title to hold in
Severalty.

Agreeable to said last Constitution, several Thousand Acres of Land were
purchased, surveyed, and taken up on the Proprietors Title, within the Bounds
of Newark-Purchase, by the Inhabitants of Newark, and others; which are now
possessed by the People of Newark, under the Proprietors Title only; as the
Indian Purchase Right had long before been given up to the General Proprietors
of New-Iersey, by the first Settlers of Newark, as aforesaid. And it is
conceived, that there is not the Quantity of 500 Acres of Land, within the
Bounds of Newark Township, at this Day, but what are now in the actual
Possession of the Inhabitants of Newark, under the Title derived from the
General Proprietors.

That since the said Agreement made between the first Settlers of Newark, and
the General Proprietors of East New-Iersey, in 1694, there has been no Division
made of the unappropriated Lands within the Bounds of said Indian Purchase,
among the Heirs and Assigns of the first Settlers of Newark, according to their
ancient respective Claims; but all the Inhabitants were at Liberty to purchase
a Proprietor's Title, and take up such Parts of the unappropriated Lands in the
Township of Newark, as they from Time to Time saw fit: Some took up several
hundred Acres, some a less Quantity, and others none; wherewith, and with said
Agreement, made between the General Proprietors and the first Purchasers of
Newark, there has been a general Acquiescence, till very lately a few of the
Descendants (the third Generation) of the first Settlers of Newark, have set up
a Claim under the Newark Indian Purchase.

Quere. Have the present Inhabitants of Newark, any Right either in Law or
Equity, to claim Title to the Lands purchased by their Ancestors, of the
Indians, in 1667, in Virtue of said Indian Purchase?

To which I answer,

First, That although Governor Nicholis's Proclamation should be admitted
genuine, (which is disputed; as the Title to Lands within either New York or
New Jersey has never from the first Settlement thereof, been acquired by
Indian Purchases, agreeable to said Proclamation, but by Letters Patent under
the public Seal of the Colony, or Grants from the Crown of England) and should
it also be admitted, that the Proclamation did issue soon after Governor
Nicholls's Arrival in New York; yet the Descendants of the first Purchasers of
Newark, cannot have the least Pretense of claiming Title under said
Proclamation, for the following Reasons.

1. Because the Duke of York had, near two Months before Governor Nicholls's
said Arrival, sold New-Iersey to Lord Berkeley and Sir George Carteret;
therefore neither the Duke nor his Governor, could have any Right to declare
and fix the Terms of gaining a Title to Lands in New-Iersey.

2. Because the Newark Indian Purchase was made after Lord Berkeley and Sir
George Carteret had made and published in New-Iersey, certain Concessions as
and for the Constitution of the Province.

3. Because Philip Carteret, the Governor appointed by Lord Berkeley and Sir
George Carteret, arrived in New-Iersey, in 1665, and executed the Powers of
Government there, one Year before the Newark Purchase was made.

4. Because the first Purchasers of Newark were, before they made their
Purchase, acquainted with said Concessions, and purchased under the Terms and
Conditions thereof.

Wherefore it is clear, that the Proclamation of Governor Nicholis, if genuine,
cannot avail the Newark Purchasers, or their Heirs.

Secondly, With Respect to the formal License, said to be granted by Governor
Carteret, to the first Settlers of Newark, to purchase of the Indians, I am
induced to believe he never granted any, and that for the following Reasons.

1. Because Governor Carteret in his Letter to the Indian Sachem, sent by Mr.
Treat, when he went to make the Purchase, writes, that he had sent Mr. Treat to
finish the Purchase of the Lands he had before treated with him about; and that
he the Governor, would satisfy the Indians for the same Lands; which he could
not with Propriety have done, had Mr. Treat received a formal License for said
Purchase.

2. Because said Indian Purchase Deed, does not recite a License being given,
but that the Purchase was made by the Advice and Consent of Governor Carteret.

3. Because there is no License to make said Purchase of the Indians, entered
on the public Records of New-Iersey; which was the Practice before, and ever
since said Purchase.

4. Because there is great Reason to believe, that the Paper which Mr. Harrison
and Mr. Pierson mention, must have been the Letter wrote to said Indian Sachem,
as it might with some Propriety be called a License.

5. Because it is highly improbable, that Governor Carteret did grant any
formal License or other Writing, or make any Agreement with the Newark
Purchasers; contrary to the Concessions of the Lords Proprietors, which he by
his Commission and Instructions was bound to obey and observe: Had he even
acted otherwise with respect to Newark Purchase, the same would have been void
and of none Effect; as thereby he would have exceeded his Commission, and the
Powers granted him by the Lords Proprietors his Constituents.

If a written License was granted by Governor Carteret, to make Newark Indian
Purchase, the same must be presumed to have been in the same, or like Form,
with all the other Licenses on Record, granted before, and for some Years after
the Newark Indian Purchase was made, viz. with Condition of complying with the
Concessions; as thereby Governor Carteret would not only be performing the Duty
of his Office, and act consistent with his Treatment of others in the like
Cases, but also would be acting in Conformity to the Treaty between him and
Newark Purchasers, before the Indian Purchase was made.

From whence I think it evident, that the first Settlers of Newark had no legal
Title to the Lands within the Bounds of the Town, in Virtue of their Indian
Purchase: but all that they acquired thereby was the Equity of a Preference to
all others, of having the same Lands appropriated, surveyed, and patented to
them, in a reasonable Time after the Purchase, agreeable to the Constitution of
the Province; which Equity they had, and enjoyed uninterrupted, until the said
Agreement in 1694, made between the first Settlers of Newark, and the General
Proprietors of New-Iersey, was carried into Execution: And since said amicable
Agreement for the Lands held by Indian Purchase, expressly fixes and limits the
Quantity of One Hundred Acres for each old Settler of Newark to have, of the
unappropriated Land, within their Indian Purchase; and all the said first
Settlers, except two, did actually take out Patents and had Surveys for the
same, in Pursuance of said Agreement; I am clearly of Opinion, that all future
Pretense of claiming any Title, either in Law or Equity, to any Part of the
Lands within the Bounds of Newark, in Virtue of said Indian Purchase, must be
idle, and without the least Foundation to support it, unless it be an Equity,
which I conceive still due to the Heirs of the two old Settlers, who have not
had patented or surveyed to them, the One Hundred Acres agreed upon for each
old Settler to have.

Those who now set up said Indian Purchase Claim, in Opposition to the
Proprietors Title, they have to the Lands they possess, would do well to
consider these following Matters.

1. That the first Settlers of Newark, taking out soon after their first
Settlement, a great Number of Patents, agreeable to the Constitution of
New-Iersey, is an Evidence of their Submission to hold their Lands under the
General Proprietors.

2. That the Agreement in 1694, carried into Execution, is a further Evidence
of said Submission, and also of the first Settlers receiving ample Satisfaction
for what they paid the Indians for the Lands by them purchased.

3. That several of the Inhabitants of Newark, purchasing Proprietary Rights,
(after said Agreement, made in 1694, was carried into Execution) and laying the
same on the then unappropriated Lands, within the Bounds of Newark Purchase,
without any Regard to the Share they held within said Purchase; is a further
Evidence, that the Inhabitants of Newark did not pretend any Title under their
Indian Purchase, but under the General Proprietors altogether.

4. That the Pretense now set up by some of the Inhabitants of Newark, of
claiming under the Newark Indian Purchase, is a Violation of the Constitution
of New-Iersey, wherewith the first Purchasers were acquainted before they made
their Purchase, and contrary to the many solemn Acts and Agreements of their
Ancestors, which always have been countenanced in Courts of Law and Equity.

5. That if the Proprietors Title to the Lands in Newark should be held valid
and good, the general Peace of the Town would be preserved, and the many
ancient Possessions secured to the Possessors; but should the Indian Purchase
Claim be the legal Title to hold the Lands within the Bounds of Newark by, the
many Thousands of Acres surveyed and taken up after the Year 1694, will remain
without Title to the Possessors, and be subject to a new Division among the
Heirs and Assigns of the said first Purchasers.

Which several Matters being duly considered by the Inhabitants of NEWARK, I am
inclined to believe, that all those who have a due Regard to the general Peace
and real Interest of the Town, and would yield the proper Respect due to the
Memory of the Transactions of their deceased Forefathers, will join me, that
the Proprietors Title by Patent and Surveys, is the only just and equitable
Title to claim under within the Town of NEWARK.


