A Thanksgiving-Discourse, PREACHED At the Desire of the West Church IN BOSTON,
N. E. Friday May 23, 1766. OCCASIONED BY THE REPEAL OF THE Stamp Act.

BY JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of said Church.

-- Brethren, ye have been called unto LIBERTY; only use not LIBERTY for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Ap. PAUL. BOSTON:

Printed and Sold by R. and S. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street; EDES and GILL, in
Queen Street; and T. and J. FLEET, in Cornhill. 1766.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM PIT, Esquire ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE
PRIVY COUNCIL, AND AN ILLUSTRIOUS PATRON OF AMERICA.
SIR,
DID not a wide ocean intervene, the Author of the ensuing Discourse would not
presume to prefix so great a NAME to a little Performance of his, without first
humbly requesting the indulgence, and obtaining it. Nor would he trust to the
sufficiency of that apology for taking this liberty, did not some persons
persuade him to hope, it will be kindly and condescendingly taken as a
testimony of that sincere gratitude and high veneration, which not only he but
his country has for ONE, who has twice at least been a principal Instrument in
the hand of GOD, of saving GREAT BRITAIN and her Colonies from impending ruin:
Once, by magnanimously conducting a just and glorious war against foreign
nations; and once, by preserving peace in His own; -- by exerting Himself to
prevent a fatal rupture between BRITAIN and her Colonies, and to re-establish
such an harmony as essentially concerns the welfare of both.

AT the late most important CRISIS, You, SIR, whom no rewards could ever tempt,
no frowns of the Great ever dismay, no dangers disconcert; and to whom, so good
and great in Yourself, no titles, however high, could possibly add any new
dignity or luster; You, Great Sir, was not "ashamed of our chain", or reluctant
at standing forth to plead the cause of poor AMERICA; and to stem the mighty
torrent that was against her, which threatened to end in a deluge of blood!
When it was accounted criminal by many, even to lisp but a broken word or two
in Her favor, You, SIR, was not ashamed or afraid to pour forth all Your
unrivaled eloquence in a strenuous vindication of Her infringed Rights. And,
indeed her cause being supposed good, the more friendless She was, the more She
needed, and in some sort deserved, so powerful a patronage. For, surely, great
talents were given for great occasions; to be employed in defense of the
innocent and feeble. GOD made some men strong on purpose to "bear the
infirmities of the weak"; that they might be able to assist and support them in
their dangers and extremities; as You, SIR, have ever done, since You adorned
the BRITISH senate; and particularly in a late ever-memorable instance.

To You, Great SIR, under GOD and the KING, grateful AMERICA chiefly attributes
it, that She is now happily re-instated in the enjoyment of her former
liberties and privileges; though She has, at the same time, a very deep sense of
her obligations to other great and illustrious Personages.

IF, SIR, you could, at this distance, have an adequate conception of the
universal joy of AMERICA, preceeded by the most alarming apprehensions for Her
liberties: If You could be fully sensible how much we ascribe it to You, that
they are not lost; how, next to the KING, we bless You as our common FATHER,
and send up ardent vows to Heaven for You; this would, it must give You a
sublime, and truly Godlike pleasure. It might even suspend, for a while, the
severest pangs of that excruciating disorder, which has so often detained you
from the BRITISH Senate, to the great detriment of the public; particularly
when the late dreadful STAMP ACT was passed. Nay, it might, perhaps, without
any other miracle, give You such spirits and vigor, as to "take up Your bed and
walk," like those sick and lame persons instantly cured by the word of Him, who
came from Heaven to make us "free indeed."

So universal, so great is our joy; and so much, SIR, are we indebted for it to
your good offices! But, alas! what can poor AMERICA do in return? Nothing but
acknowledge the obligation with as much sincerity as a grateful country ever
acknowledged one: Nothing but call you, over and over again, her FATHER, her
FATHER; and endeavor to make good Your generous engagements for her prudent,
dutiful behavoiur toward her Mother Country: Nothing but erect a few marble,
brass or copper statues in honor to You; (for AMERICA has but little silver or
gold) statues that will be of no service to you, since they will go to decay
long before Your name and memory will need any such poor helps to preserve them.

Alas! AMERICA can do no more! -- Yes, SIR, there is one thing more: She will
pray that you may long live in health, happiness and honor, that if there
should be any occasion hereafter, as in time past, You may step in and prevent
Here Is and BRITAIN'S ruin, when no other man could; and that; when You must,
according to the common lot of men, however great and good (O may it be late!)
cease to plead the cause of LIBERTY on earth, You may in Heaven, as Your
reward, enjoy "the glorious LIBERTY of the sons of God"!

I AM, with the warmest gratitude, and highest veneration, Right Honorable and
Most Worthy

SIR, Your most obedient, Most Dutiful And Most Humble Servant, JONATHAN MAYHEW.

PSALM CXXIV. 7, 8. Our soul is escaped as a bird from the snare of the
fowlers; the snare is broken, and we are escaped.

Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.


THE late gracious appearance of divine providence for us, in the day of our
trouble, seemed so seasonable, so signal, so important; in a word, so
interesting to the present and future generations, that we of this Society
thought it expedient to agree among ourselves upon a day, in order to take a
particular, religious notice of it; and to praise the name of the Lord, in whom
is our help. If there had been any probability of our being called together for
this end by Proclamation, as upon some less memorable occasions, we should not
have been desirous to anticipate the day; which might have had the appearance
of oftentation. But of that, so far as I have heard, there was very little, if
any, prospect. By this perfectly voluntary, and free will offering, I hope we
shall render to God, in some poor measure, the glory due to his name; and that
he will graciously accept it, through our Lord Jesus Christ the righteous, our
mediator and advocate with the Father. At the same time it is supposed that, in
proceeding thus, we give no just ground of offense to Jew or Gentile, or to the
church of God; which we would by no means do. We only exercise that liberty,
wherewith Christ has made us free, being desirous that all other persons and
churches should do the same; and not choosing that either they or we should be
"entangled with any yoke of bondage."

Having rendered our devout thanks to God, whose kingdom rules over all, and
sung his high praises; permit me now, my friends and brethren, with unseigned
love to my country, to congratulate you on that interesting event, which is the
special occasion of this solemnity: An event, as I humbly conceive, of the
utmost importance to the whole British empire, whose peace and prosperity we
ought ardenly to desire; and one, very peculiarly affecting the welfare of
these colonies. Believe me, I lately took no inconsiderable part with you in
your grief, and gloomy apprehensions, on account of a certain PARLIAMENTARY
ACT, which you supposed ruinous in its tendency to the American plantations,
and, eventually, to Great Britain. I now partake no less in your common joy, on
account of the REPEAL of that act; whereby these colonies are emancipated from
a slavish, inglorious bondage; are re-instated in the enjoyment of their
ancient rights and privileges, and a foundation is laid for lasting harmony
between GreatBritain and them, to their mutual advantage.

But when you requested me to preach a sermon on this joyful occasion, I
conclude it was neither your expectation nor desire, that I should enter very
particularly into a political consideration of the affair. Had I conceived this
to have been your intention, I must, though with reluctance, have given you a
refusal; partly from a conviction of the impropriety of minutely discussing
points of this nature in the pulpit, and partly from a sense of my own
inability to do it as it ought to be done. I suppose I shall best answer your
expectation, as well as most gratify my own inclination, by waving political
controversy, and giving you such counsels and exhortations respecting your duty
to God and man, as are agreeable to the sacred oracles, to the dictates of
sober reason, and adapted to the occasion. This is therefore, what IN chiefly
propose to do in the ensuing discourse, as God shall enable me: And may the
Father of lights teach me to speak, and you to hear in such a manner, that our
assembling together at this time, out of the ordinary course, may be to his
honor, and to christian edification.

However, if my discourse is to be particularly adapted to this great occasion,
instead of being so general, as to be almost as suitable to any other, you are
sensible it is necessary that the occasion itself should be kept in view. I
shall therefore briefly premise a few things ralative thereto, by way of
introduction to the main design; such things, I mean, as shall now be taken for
granted. In mentioning which, my aim will be to express, in brief, what I take
to be the general sense of these colonies, rather than to explain my own. For
it is on such commonly-received opinions, that my exhortations and cautions
will be grounded; leaving the particular discussion of them to others, who are
better qualified for it, and to whom it more properly belongs. And if I should
be mistaken in any of these particulars, it is hoped candor will excuse it;
seeing these are matters out of the way of my profession.

In pursuance of this plan, it shall now be taken for granted, that as we were
freeborn, never made slaves by the right of conquest in war, if there be
indeed any such right, nor sold as slaves in any open lawful market, for money,
so we have a natural right to our own, till we have freely consented to part
with it, either in person, or by those whom WE have appointed to represent, and
to act for us.

It shall be taken for granted, that this natural right is declared, affirmed
and secured to us, as we are British subjects, by Magna Charta; all acts
contrary to which, are said to be ipso facto null and void: And, that this
natural, constitutional right has been further confirmed to most of the
plantations by particular subsequent royal charters, taken in their obvious
sense; the legality and authority of which charters was never once denied by
either House of Parliament; but implicitly at least acknowledged, ever since
they were respectively granted, till very lately.

It is taken for granted also, that the right of trial by juries, is a
constitutional one with respect to all British subjects in general,
particularly to the colonists; and that the plantations in which civil
government has been established, have all along, till of late, been in the
uninterrupted enjoyment of both the rights aforesaid, which are of the utmost
importance, being essential to liberty.

It shall, therefore, be taken for granted, that the colonies had great reason
to petition and remonstrate against a late act of Parliament, as being an
infraction of these rights, and tending didirectly to reduce us to a state of
slavery.

It is, moreover, taken for granted, whatever becomes of this question about
rights, that an act of that sort was very hard, and justly grievous, not to say
oppressive; as the colonies are poor, as most of them were originally settled
at the sole and great expense of the adventurers; the expense of their money,
their toil, their blood; as they have expended a great deal from time to time
in their wars with their French and Savage neighbors, and in the support of
his Majesty's government here; as they have, moreover, been ever ready to grant
such aids of men and money to the crown, for the common cause, as they were
able to give; by which means a great load of debt still lies on several of
them; and as Great Britain has drawn vast emolument from them in the way of
commerce, over and above all that she has ever expended for them, either in
peace or war: So that she is, beyond all comparison, richer, more powerful and
respectable now, than she would have been, if our fathers had never emigrated:
And both they and their posterity have, in effect, been laboring, from first
to last, for the aggrandizement of the mother country. In this light, that
share of common sense, which the colonists have, be it more or less, leads them
to consider things.

It is taken for granted, that as the surprising, unexampled growth of these
colonies, to the extension of his Majesty's dominion, and prodigious advantage
of Britain in many respects, has been chiefly owing, under God, to the liberty
enjoyed here; so the infraction thereof in two such capital points as those
before referred to, would undoubtedly discourage the trade, industry and
population of the colonies, by rendering property insecure and precarious;
would soon drain them of all their little circulating money; would put it
absolutely out of their power to purchase British commodities, force them into
manufactures of their own, and terminate, if not in the ruin, yet in the very
essential detriment of the mother country.

It shall, therefore also be taken for granted, that although the colonies could
not justly claim an exclusive right of taxing themselves, and the right of
being tried by juries; yet they had great reason to remonstrate against the act
aforesaid on the footing of inexpedience, the great hardship, and destructive
tendency of it; as a measure big with mischief to Britain, as well as to
themselves; and promoted at first, perhaps, only by persons who were real
friends to neither.

But as to any methods of opposition to that measure, on the part of the
colonies, besides those of humble petitioning, and other strictly legal ones,
it will not, I conclude, be supposed, that I appear in this place as an
advocate for them, whatever the general sense of the colonists may be
concerning this point. And I take for granted, that we are all perfectly agreed
in condemning the riotous and fellonious proceedings of certain men of Belial,
as they have been justly called, who had the effrontery to cloak their
rapacious violences with the pretext of zeal for liberty; which is so far from
being a new thing under the sun, that even Great Britain can furnish us with
many, and much more flagrant examples of it.

But, my Brethren, however unconstitutional, oppressive, grievous or ruinous
the aforesaid act was in its nature, and fatal in its tendency, his Majesty and
the Parliament have been pleased to hearken to the just complaints of the
colonies, seconded and enforced by the prudent, spirited conduct of our
merchants; by certain noble and ever-honored patriots in Great Britain,
espousing out cause with all the force of reason and eloquence, and by the
general voice of the nation: So that a total repeal of that dreadful act is now
obtained. His Majesty and the Parliament were far too wise, just and good to
persist in a measure, after they were convinced it was wrong; or to consider it
as any point of honor, to enforce an act so grievous to three million good
subjects, so contrary to the interest of the British merchants and
manufacturers, and to the general sense of the nation. They have been pleased,
in the act of repeal itself, greatly to their honor, implicitly to acknowledge
their fallibility and erroneous judgment in the other act, by saying, that the
continuance of the said act would be attended with many inconveniences, and
might be productive of consequences greatly detrimental to the commercial
interests of those kingdoms. These being the reasons assigned for the repeal,
we may justly conclude, that if those many inconveniences and detrimental
consequences could have been foreseen, the act complained of would never have
been passed. And as the same reasons will doubtless operate atleast as
strongly, probably much more strongly hereafter, in proportion to the growth of
the colonies, than they do at present, we may naturally conclude also, that an
act of the like nature will never again be heard of.

Thus "our soul is escaped as a bird from the snare of the fowlers; the snare
is broken, and we are escaped;" though not without much struggling in the snare,
before it gave way, and set us at liberty again. But when I speak of that
pernicious act as a snare, and those who prepared it for us as fowlers, greedy
of their prey, let it be particularly observed, that I intend not the least
reflection on our gracious Sovereign or the Parliament; who much not be supposed
to have any evil designs against the colonies, which are so necessary to Great
Britain, and by which so many thousands of her manufacturers are supported,
who, but for them, must actually starve, emigrate, or do what I choose to
forbear mentioning. No! I apply this, as I conclude you will, only to some
evil-minded individuals in Britain, who are true friends neither to her nor us;
and who accordingly spared no wicked arts, no deceitful, no dishonorable, no
dishonest means, to push on and obtain, as it were by surprise, an act so
prejudicial to both; and, in some sort, to the ensnaring of his Majesty and the
Parliament, as well as the good people of America: Being, not improbably, in
the interests of the Houses of Bourbon and the Pretender, whose cause they
meant to serve, by bringing about an open rupture between Great Britain and her
colonies! These, these men, my Brethren, are the cunning fowlers, these the
ensnarers, from whose teeth "our soul is escaped as a bird:" And such traitors
will, doubtless, ever long be caught in another snare, suitable for them, to
the satisfaction of the King's good subjects on both sides the Atlantic, if his
Majesty and the Parliament should judge it necessary for the vindication of
their own honor, or for the public good, to bring them to condign punishment.

Let me just add here, that according to our latest and best advices, the King,
his truly patriotic Ministry and the Parliament have the interest, particularly
the commercial interest of the colonies much at heart; being now disposed even
to enlarge, instead of curtailing their privileges, and to grant us every
indulgence, consistent with the common good of the British empire: More than
which we cannot reasonably, and, I am persuaded, do not desire.

These things being premised, let me now proceed to those reflections,
exhortations and cautions relative to them, which were the chief design of this
discourse. And the present occasion being a very peculiar one, such as never
before occurred in America, and, I hope in God, never will again; I shall crave
your indulgence if I am considerably longer than is customary on other
occasions, which are less out of the ordinary course.

In the first place then, it is evident from the preceding view of things, that
we have the greatest cause for thankfulness to Almighty God, who does his will
among the inhabitants of the earth, as well as in the armies of heaven. He, in
whose hands are the hearts of all men, not excepting those of Kings, so that he
turns them whithersoever he will, as the rivers of water, has inspired the
people of America with a noble spirit of liberty, and remarkably united them in
standing up for that invaluable blessing. He has raised us up friends of the
greatest eminence in Britain, in our perilous circumstances. He has united the
hearts of almost all wise and good men there, to plead our cause and their own
successfully. He has blessed the King with an upright Ministry, zealous for
the public good, and knowing wherein it consists. He has given the King wisdom
to discern, and integrity to pursue, the interests of his people, at the late
alarming CRISIS, when so much depended on the measures that were then speedily
to be taken! He has changed his royal purpose, and that of his Parliament, in
a matter which nearly and essentially concerned, at least our temporal
happiness; disposing them to take off from our necks that grievous and heavy
burden, which, to be sure, was not put upon us but with reluctance, and through
the dishonest artifices of certain wicked men who, perhaps, intended, if
possible, entirely to alienate the affections of the colonists from their
common Father the King, and from their Mother Country. O execrable design! to
the accomplishment of which, the pernicious measure aforesaid apparently
tended. But blessed be He, who governs among the nations, that he has
confounded the devices of such treacherous men. To allude to the psalm, a part
of which I mentioned as my text; "If it had not been the Lord who was on our
side, when men rose up against us," and if they could have had their wicked
will, then they had swallowed us up quick; -- then the waters had overwhelmed
us, the stream had gone over our soul; then the proud waters had gone over our
soul. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth; the
ravening teeth of those cunning fowlers, from whose treacherous snare we have
just escaped; our help being in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth. To Him, therefore, we justly owe the undissembled gratitude of our
hearts, as well as the joyful praises of our lips: For I take it for granted,
that you all firmly believe, that He who made the world, exercises a
providential government over it; so that the very hairs of our head "are all
numbered by," and that "a sparrow does not fall to the ground without" Him. How
much more then, is his providence to be acknowledged in the rise, in the
preservation, in the great events, the revolutions, or the fall of mighty
states and kingdoms?

To excite our gratitude to God the more effectually, let us consider the
greatness of our late danger and of our deliverance: Let us take a brief
retrospective view of the perplexed, wretched state, in which these colonies
were, a few months ago, compared with the joyful and happy condition, in which
they are at present, by the removal of their chief grievances.

We have never known so quick and general a transition from the depth of sorrow
to the height of joy, as on this occasion; nor, indeed, so great and universal
a flow of either, on any other occasion whatever. It is very true, we have
heretofore seen times of great adversity. We have known seasons of drought,
dearth, and spreading mortal diseases; the pestilence walking in darkness, and
the destruction wasting at noon day. We have seen wide devastations, made by
fire; and amazing tempests, the heavens on flame, the winds and the waves
roaring. We have known repeated earthquakes, threatening us with speedy
destruction. We have been under great apprehensions by reason of formidable
fleets of an enemy on our coasts, menacing fire and sword to all our maritime
towns. We have known times when the French and Savage armies made terrible
havoc on our frontiers, carrying all before them for a while; when we were not
without fear, that some capital towns in the colonies would fall into their
merciless hands. Such times as these we have known; at some of which almost
every "face gathered paleness," and the knees of all but the good and brave,
waxed feeble. But never have we known a season of such universal consternation
and anxiety among people of all ranks and ages, in these colonies, as was
occasioned by that parliamentary procedure, which threatened us and our
posterity with perpetual bondage and slavery. For They, as we generally
suppose, are really slaves to all intents and purposes, who are obliged to
labor and toil only for the benefit of others; or, which comes to the same
thing, the fruit of whose labor and industry may be lawfully taken from them
without their consent, and they justly punished if they refuse to surrender it
on demand, or apply it to other purposes than those, which their masters, of
their mere grace and pleasure, see fit to allow. Nor are there many American
understandings accute enough to distinguish any material difference between
this being done by a single person, under the title of an absolute Monarch, and
done by a far-distant legislature consisting of many persons, in which they are
not represented; and the members whereof, instead of feeling, and sharing
equally with them in the burden thus imposed, are eased of their own in
proportion to the greatness and weight of it. It may be questioned, whether the
ancient Greeks or Romans, or any other nation in which slavery was allowed,
carried their idea of it much further than this. So that our late
apprehensions, and universal consternation, on account of ourselves and
posterity, were far, very far indeed, from being groundless. For what is there
in this world more wretched, than for those who were born free, and have a
right to continue so, to be made slaves themselves, and to think of leaving a
race of slaves behind them; even though it be to masters confessedly the most
humane and generous in the world? Or what wonder is it, if after groaning with
a low voice for a while, to no purpose, we at length groaned so loudly, as to
be heard more than three thousand miles; and to be pitied throughout Europe,
wherever it is not hazardous to mention even the name of liberty, unless it be
to reproach it, as only another name for sedition, faction or rebellion?

On the other hand, never did the tide of joy swell so high, or roll so rapidly
through the bosoms and veins of the people in general, on any public occasion, as
on the news of THE REPEAL. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our
tongue with singing, when the Lord turned our captivity; this was received as
an emancipation indeed, from unmerited slavery. Nor were there ever before so
great external demonstrations of joy among the people of America; not even when
all Canada was reduced, or when it was secured to the crown of England by
treaty, and our apprehensions of coming under the yoke of France were vanished
away. And some there are, who suppose, that France would not have hesitated at
allowing such a number of flourishing colonies the exclusive right of taxing
themselves, for the sake of a free trade with them, could they have been
prevailed on, by violating their allegiance, to put themselves under her
protection; as I am fully persuaded these colonies would not do, for all that
France has to give. In my poor opinion, we never had so much real occasion for
joy, on any temporal account, as when we were thus emancipated, and our soul
escaped as a bird from the dreadful snare. And I am persuaded it would rejoice
the generous and royal heart of his Majesty, if he knew that by a single turn
of the scepter, when he assented to THE REPEAL, he had given more pleasure to
three million good subjects, than ever he and his royal Grandfather gave them
by all the triumphs of their arms, from Lake Superior Eastward to the Isles of
Manilla; though so numerous, so great, so illustrious; and though WE partook so
largely in the national joy on those occasions. A PEPPER-CORN See a certain
ever memorable Speech in an august assembly.
a year added to his Majesty's exchequer, would not surely --! But I forbear.

If you please, we will now descend to some farther particulars, relative to
our late unhappy and present joyful circumstances, in order to excite our
thankfulness to God, for so memorable a deliverance.

This continent, from Canada to Florida, and the West India Islands, most of
them at least, have exhibited a dismal mixed scene of murmuring, despondence,
tumult and outrage; courts of justice shut up, with custom-houses and ports;
private jealousies and animosities, evil surmisings, whisperings and
back-bitings, mutual reproaches, open railing, and many other evils, since the
time in which the grievous act aforesaid was to have taken place. Almost every
British American, as was before observed, considered it as an infraction of
their rights, or their dearly purchased privileges, call them which you will;
and the sad earnest of such a galling yoke to be laid on our necks, already
somewhat sore by preceding grievances, as neither we nor our Fathers were able
to bear; or rather, as being itself such a yoke, and likely to grow heavier by
length of time, without any increase, either of ability or patience to endure
it. The uneasiness was, therefore, justly great and universal, except, perhaps,
among a few individuals, who either did not attend to consequences, or who
expected to find their private account in the public calamity, by exercising
the gainful, though invidious, and not very reputable office of taskmasters over
their groaning countrymen and brethren; Even our bought Negro slaves apparently
shared in the common distress: For which one cannot easily account, except by
supposing that even some of them saw, that if the act took place, their masters
might soon be too poor to provide them suitable food and raiment; and thought
it would be more ignominious and wretched to be the servants of servants, than
of freemen.

But to return. The general discontent operated very differently upon the minds
of different people, according to the diversity of their natural tempers and
constitutions, their education, religious principles, or the prudential maxims
which they had espoused. Some at once grew melancholy, sitting down in a kind
of lethargic, dull desparation of relief, by any means whatever. Others were
thrown into a sort of consternation, not unlike to a phrenzy occasioned by a
raging fever; being ready to do any thing or every thing, to obtain relief; but
yet, unhappily, not knowing what, when, where, how; nor having any two rational
and consistent ideas about the matter; scarce more than a person in a delirium
has of the nature of, or proper method of curing the fever, which is the cause
of his madness. Some few were, I believe, upon the principles of Sibthorp,
Manwaring, Filmer, and that goodly tribe, determined to go no farther in order
to obtain redress, than in the way of petition and remonstrance; and this, even
though they had been sure of success in some hardy enterprise. Others, who had no
religious scruples of this kind, yet thought it extremely imprudent and
hazardous to oppose a superior power in such a manner as might, perhaps, draw
the whole weight of its resentment on the colonies, to their destruction. But
the greater part, as I conceive, though I may be mistaken in this, were firmly
united in a consistent, however imprudent or desperate a plan, to run all
risques, to tempt all hazards, to go all lengths, if things were driven to
extremity, rather than to submit; preferring death itself to what they esteemed
so wretched and inglorious a servitude. And even of devout women not a few
were, I imagine, so far metamorphosed into men on this sad occasion, that they
would have declined hardly any kind of manly exertions, rather than live to
propagate a race of slaves, or to be so themselves. In short, such was the
danger, and in their opinion, so great and glorious the cause, that the spirit
of the Roman matrons in the time of the commonwealth, seemed to be now equalled
by the fairer daughters of America. The uneasiness of some persons was much
increased by an imagination, that the money to be raised by the duty on stamps,
would partly be applied to pay certain civil officers salaries; whereby they
would become more entirely and absolutely dependent on the crown, less on the
people, and consequently, as was supposed, more arbitrary and insolent. Others
were anxious, because they imagined, with how much, or how little reason you
will best judge, that the money was to be chiefly applied toward maintaining a
standing army in America; not so much to defend and secure the colonies from
enemies, of whom they had none, except the aforesaid fowlers, as to awe the
colonies themselves into an implicit obedience to ministerial measures, however
unjust or execrable in their nature. There is no end, you know to peoples fears
and jealousies, when once they are thoroughly alarmed. And so some suspected,
that this money was partly intended to maintain a standing army of bishops, and
other ecclesiastics, to propagate the importance of certain rites and
ceremonies, to which they had an aversion; the divine right of diocesan
episcopacy and tithes, with many et caetara's of the like sacred and
interesting importance. These strange notions and fears prevailed very much
among certain odd people, who liked their old religion, and were not able to
see the reasonableness of their paying for the support of any other. I am not
accountable for other people's whimsical apprehensions: Iam here only
representing the perplexity, into which peoples minds were thrown by the novel
taxation, according to their different views of it; a taxation, which was
probably never thought of till a few years ago, when it was proposed to a great
and good Secretary of State, who was far too friendly to the colonies, as well
as too wise, to burn HIS fingers with an American STAMPACT.

This diversity of humors, sentiments and opinions among the colonists, of
which I have been speaking, naturally occasioned great animosities, mutual
censures and reproaches: Insomuch that it was hardly safe for any man to speak
his thoughts on the times, unless he could patiently bear to lie under the
imputation of being a coward, an incendiary, rebel, or enemy to his country; or
to have some other odium cast upon him. In the mean time most of the courts
were shut up, and almost all business brought to a stand; and, in some
colonies, wide breaches were made between their several Governors and Houses of
Assembly; those governors thinking it their duty to push the execution of the
stampact; and some of them trying to prevent the assemblies petitioning, in the
joint manner proposed. In this state of general disorder, approaching so near
to anarchy, some profligate people, in different parts of the continent, took
an opportunity to gratify their private resentments, and to get money in an
easier and more expeditious way than that of labor; committing abominable
excesses and outrages on the persons or property of others.

What a dreadful scene was this! Who can take a cursory review of it even now,
without horror, unless he is lost to all sense of religion, virtue and good
order? These were some of the bitter, and in a good measure, the natural fruits
of that unhappy measure which preceeded them. Nor were we wholly unapprehensive
of something still worse; of having a more dreadful scene, even a scene of
blood and slaughter opened! I will not be particular here; but ask you what you
think of British subjects making war upon British subjects on this continent!
What might this have terminated in? Perhaps in nothing less than the ruin of
the colonies, and the downfall of a certain great kingdom, which has long been
the support of other states, the terror of her enemies, and the envy and glory
of Europe! -- If I had myself, once, some apprehensions of this kind, as I
confess I had, I was very far from being singular therein. One of the best
judges of such matters, that any nation or age ever afforded, as well as one of
the best men, and most accomplished orators, speaking on this point in a
certain august assembly, is reported to have expressed himself thus. On a good,
on a found bottom, the force of this country can crush America to atoms. I know
the valor of your troops; I know the skill of your officers. -- But on this
ground, on the STAMP ACT, when so many here will think it a crying injustice, I
am one that will lift up my hand against it. In such a cause your success may
be hazardous. AMERICA, if SHE fell, would fall like a strong man, would embrace
the pillars of state, and pull down the constitution along with her. Thus the
great patron of America. The Right Hon. WILLIAM PIT, Esquire -- But the author
thinks it a piece of justice due to so great and respectable a name, to
acknowledge that he has no better authority for mentioning it on this
particular occasion, than that of the public prints, lately spread over
America; giving an account of some debates in the honorable House of Commons.
He also acknowledges, that this is all the authority he has for citing some
other passages afterward, as from he same illustrious patriot.
Even the remotest apprehensions of this kind, must give a very sensible pain
to any American, who at once sincerely loves his own country, and wishes that
the happy civil constitution, the strength and glory of Great Britain may be as
lasting as the world, and still increasing; as God is my witness, I both wish
and pray. If Britain, which has long been the principal support of liberty in
Europe, and is, at least was, the chief bulwark against that most execrable of
all tyrannies, Popery, should in destroying her colonies destroy herself;
(Heaven forbid it!) what would become of those few states which are now free?
what, of the protestant religion? The former might, not improbably, fall before
the Grand Monarch on this side the Alps; the latter before the Successor of the
apostle Judas, and Grand Vicar of Satan, beyond them; and so, at length, one
universal despotism swallow up all! Some of us had, lately, painful
apprehensions of this kind, when there was talk of a great military force
coming to stamp America into a particular kind of subjection, to which most
people here have an invincible aversion.

It would, doubtless, have been a noble effort of genius and humanity in the --
what shall I call them? fowlers or financiers? -- to extort a little money from
the poor colonies by force of arms, at the risque of so much mischief to
America, to Britain, to Europe, to the world. And the golden temptation, it is
said, took with too many, for a while. A Pandora's box, or Trojan horse, indeed!

-- O miseri, quae tanta infania cives!
Creditis avectos hosts? aut ulla putatis
Dona carere dolis Danaum? sic notus --?
But not to digress. I have now briefly reminded you of our late sad,
perplexed, alarming circumstances; not for the sake of reproaching those who
brought us into them, but to excite your gratitude to God, for our deliverance
out of them, and for our present happy condition.

The REPEAL, the REPEAL has at once, in a good measure, restored things to
order, and composed our minds, by removing the chief ground of our fears. The
course of justice between man and man is no longer obstructed; commerce lifts
up her head, adorned with golden tresses, pearls and precious stones. All
things that went on right before, are returning gradually to their former
course; those that did not, we have reason to hope, will go on better now;
almost every person you meet, wears the smiles of contentment and joy; and even
our slaves rejoice, as though they had received their manumission. Indeed, all
the lovers of liberty in Europe, in the world, have reason to rejoice; the
cause is in some measure common to them and us. Blessed revolution! glorious
change! How great are our obligations for it to the supreme Governor of the
world? He has given us beauty for ashes, and the oil of gladness for the
spirit of heaviness: He has turned our groans into songs, our mourning into
dancing: He has put off our sackcloth, and girded us with gladness, to the end
that our tongues, our glory may sing praises to him. Let us all then rejoice in
the Lord, and give honor to him; not forgetting to add the obedience of our
lives, as the best sacrifice that we can offer to Heaven; and which, if
neglected, will prove all our other sacrifices have been but ostentation and
hypocrisy, which are an abomination to the Lord.

The apostle Peter makes a natural transition from fearing God to honoring the
King. Let me, accordingly, in the next place, exhort you, my friends and
brethren, to a respectful, loyal and dutiful manner of speech and conduct,
respecting his Majesty and his government; thereby making a suitable return to
him for the redress of our late grievances. I am, indeed, well apprised of the
firm attachment of these colonies in general, and of our own province in
particular, to the King's person, and to the protestant succession in his
illustrious House; for the preservation of which, there is hardly a native of
New England, who would not, upon constitutional principles, which are those of
liberty, cheerfully hazard his life; or even more lives than one, if he had
them to lay down in so good a cause. I have not the least suspicion of any
disaffection in you to his Majesty: But yet the duty of subjects to Kings, and
to all that are in authority, is frequently to be inculcated by the ministers
of the gospel, if they will follow the example of the apostles in this respect.
And the present occasion seems particularly proper to remind you of that
important duty; since we have now before us a recent and memorable proof of his
Majesty's moderation, his attention to the welfare of his people, and
readiness, so far as in him lies according to the constitution, to redress
their grievances, on reasonable and humble complaint. If any persons among us
have taken it unkindly, that his Majesty should have given his royal assent to
an act, which they think was an infraction of those liberties and privileges,
to which they were justly entitled; and if the usual tide and fervor of their
loyal affection is in any degree abated on that account; yet, surely, the
readiness which his Majesty has shown to hear and redress his people's wrongs,
ought to give a new spring, an additional vigor to their loyalty and obedience.
Natural parents, through human frailty, and mistakes about facts and
circumstances, sometimes provoke their children to wrath, though they tenderly
love them, and sincerely desire their good. But what affectionate and dutiful
child ever harbored resentment on any such account; if the grievance was
removed, on a dutiful representation of it? Hardly any thing operates so
strongly on ingenuous minds, though perhaps of quick resentment, as the mild
condescension of a superior to the force of reason and right on the part of the
inferior. I shall make no application of this, any farther than to remind you,
that British kings are the political FATHERS of their people, and the people
their CHILDREN; the former are not tyrants, or even masters; the latter are not
slaves, or even servants.

Let me farther exhort you to pay due respect in all things to the British
Parliament; the Lords and Commons being two branches of the supreme legislative
over all his Majesty's dominions. The right of parliament to superintend the
general affairs of the colonies, to direct, check or control them, seems to be
supposed in their charters; all which, I think, while they grant the power of
legislation, limit the exercise of it to the enacting such laws as are not
contrary to the laws of England, or Great Britain; so that our several
legislatures are subordinate to that of the mother country, which extends to
and over all the King's dominions: At least, so far as to prevent any parts of
them from doing what would be either destructive to each other, or manifestly
to the ruin of Britain. It might be of the most dangerous consequence to the
mother country, to relinquish this supposed authority or right, which,
certainly, has all along been recognized by the colonies; or to leave them
dependent on the crown only, since, probably, within a century, the subjects in
them will be more than thrice as numerous as those of Great Britain and
Ireland. And, indeed, if the colonies are properly parts of the British empire,
as it is both their interest and honor to be, it seems absurd to deny, that
they are subject to the highest authority therein, or not bound to yield
obedience to it. I hope there are very few people, if any, in the colonies, who
have the least inclination to renounce the general jurisdiction of Parliament
over them, whatever we may think of the particular right of taxation. If, in
any particular cases, we should think our selves hardly treated, laid under
needless and unreasonable restrictions, or curtailed of any liberties or
privileges, which other our fellow subjects in common enjoy; we have an
undoubted right to complain, and, by humble and respectful, though not abject and
servile petitions, to seek the redress of such supposed grievances. The
colonists are men, and need not be afraid to assert the natural rights of men;
they are British subjects, and may justly claim the common rights, and all the
privileges of such, with plainness and freedom. And from what has lately
occurred, there is reason to hope, that the Parliament will ever hereafter be
willing to hear and grant our just requests; especially if any grievances
should take place, so great, so general and alarming, as to unite all the
colonies in petitioning for redress, as with one voice. The humble united
prayers of three or four million loyal subjects, so connected with Great
Britain, will not be thought unworthy of a serious attention; especially when
seconded by such spirited resolutions and conduct of the American Merchants, as
they have lately given an example of. Humble petitions, so enforced, always
carry great weight with them; and, if just and reasonable, will doubtless meet
with a suitable return, as in the late instance; since Great Britain can scarce
subsist without the trade of her colonies, which will be still increasing. And
an equitable, kind treatment of them, on her part, will firmly bind them to her
by the threefold cord of duty, interest and filial affection; such an an one as
the wise man says, is not easily broken: This would do more, far more to retain
the colonies in due subjection, than all the fleets or troops she would think
proper to send for that purpose.

But to return; we ought, in honor to ourselves, as well as duty to the King
and parliament, to frustrate the malicious prophecies, if not the hopes of some
persons in Britain, who have predicted the most ungrateful and indecent returns
from us to our mother country, for deliverance from the late grievances. It has
been foretold that, in consequence thereof, the colonies would grow insolent
and assuming; that they would affect a kind of triumph over the authority of
parliament; that they would little or nothing regard it hereafter, in other
cases; that they would give some broad intimations of their opinion, that it
was not for want of inclination, but of power, that the late grievous act was
not enforced; that they would treat their brethren in Britain in an unworthy,
disrespectful manner; and the like. Such things as these have been predicted,
and, probably, by those very fowlers who contrived the snare, from which, to
their great mortification, our soul is now escaped as a bird. Let us, my
brethren, (for it is in our power, and it is our duty) make such men false
prophets, by a contrary behavior; prophets of the deceit of their own hearts.
This might, probably, vex them sorely; since it is likely, their chief aim is,
to bring about a fixed, confirmed disaffection on our part, and a severe
resentment on the other, while the jealous enemies of the growing power of
Britain, wagg their ever-plotting and enterprising heads, saying, Aha! so we
would have it. Let us highly reverence the supreme authority of the British
empire, which to us is the highest, under that of heaven. -- Let us, as much as
in us lies, cultivate harmony and brotherly love between our fellow subjects in
Britain and ourselves. We shall doubtless find our account in this at last,
much more than in a contrary way of proceeding. There are no other people on
earth, that so "naturally care for us." We are connected with them by the
strongest ties; in some measure by blood; for look but a century or two back,
and you will find their ancestors and ours, in a great measure the same
persons, though their posterity is now so divided. We are strongly connected with
them by a great commercial intercourse, by our common language, by our common
religion as protestants, and by being subjects of the same King, whom God long
preserve and prosper, while his enemies are clothed with shame.

If we consider things properly, it is indeed our great felicity, our best
security, and highest glory in this world, to stand in such a relation as we
do, to so powerful an empire; one which rules the ocean, and wherein the
principles of liberty are in general predominant. It would be our misery, if
not our ruin, to be cast off by Great Britain, as unworthy her farther regards.
What then would it be, in any supposeable way, to draw upon ourselves the whole
weight of her just resentment! What are we in the hands of that nation, which
so lately triumphed over the united powers of France and Spain? Though it must,
indeed, be acknowledged, that she did this, in a great measure, by means of her
commercial intercourse with, and aids from the colonies: Without which she must
probably have made a more inglorious figure at the end, than she did at the
beginning of the last war; even though Mr. PIT himself had had the sole
direction of it under his Majesty. -- Consider how many millions of people
there are in other countries, groaning in vain under the iron scepter of
merciless despotism, who, if they were but imperfectly apprised of the
happiness we enjoy, would most ardently desire to be in our situation, and to
stand in the like relation to Great Britain. Let us not be insensible of our
own felicity in this respect; let us not entertain a thought of novelties or
innovations, or be "given to change." Let us not indulge to any groundless
jealousies of ill intentions toward us in our mother country, whatever there
may be in some designing individuals, who do the devil's work, by sowing
discord. It is for the interest of Britain, as she well knows, to retain the
affection of these growing colonies, and to treat them kindly to that end: And
this bond of interest on her part, is the strongest security to us, which we
can have in any political relation whatever. We are bound, in honor to the King
and Parliament, to suppose, that it was not for want of ability to enforce a
late act, and to crush us, that it was repealed; but from a conviction of the
inexpediency, the dangerous consequences, and many inconveniences of
continuing it. And the like reasons will probably operate forever against any
act of the same nature, and grow stronger and stronger.

It can answer no valuable end, for us to harbor grudges of secret resentment
on account of redressed and past grievances; no good end wantonly and grossly
to insult, and thereby to incense any particular powerful persons on the other
side of the water, as the supposed enemies of the colonies. To me this seems
impolitic at least; as it may perhaps make such persons our enemies, if they
were not so before; or, if they were, fix their enmity; and make them more
industrious than ever in seeking opportunities to do us mischief. Much less can
it answer any good end, to affect to triumph over the power of Parliament: This
would, in short, appear equally insolent, disloyal and ridiculous, in the eyes
of all sober, unprejudiced men. May God give us the wisdom to behave ourselves
with humility and moderation, on the happy success of our late remonstrances
and struggles! -- We are bound in honor so to behave, not only that we may
frustrate the malignant predictions before referred to, but that we may answer
the just expectation of our friends in Britain, who so nobly espoused our
cause, and, as it were, pawned their own honor, (how great and sacred a
pledge!) for our good conduct, if our grievances were removed. By such an
engagement they did us honor, as it manifested their candid and kind sentiments
concerning us. This lays us under an additional obligation, in point of
gratitude, to that good behavior, which would have been our duty without it. I
cannot but here remind you particularly of the words of that immortal patriot
in Parliament, who has now a second time, been the principal means of saving
Britain and her colonies from impending ruin Say, said he, the Americans have
not in all things acted with prudence and temper: They have been wronged; they
have been driven to madness by injustice. Will you now punish them for the
madness you have occasioned? Rather let prudence and temper come first from
this side; I WILL UNDERTAKE FOR AMERICA that she will follow the example. What
SON, either of AMERICA or of LIBERTY is there, that has the least spark of
ingenuity, who can help being touched and penetrated to the inmost recesses of
the heart, by such magnanimous and generous expressions in behalf of the
colonies? Who is there, that would not almost as willingly die, as that THAT
illustrious Patron of America should ever have occasion to be ashamed of
espousing its cause, and making himself answerable for us? We had other
advocates of distinguished eminence and worth, who generously came under
similar engagements for us. God forbid, my brethren, that any one of them
should ever have the least reason to blush for his ill placed confidence in us;
as all of them will, if we show any unworthy behavior toward the King, the
Parliament or our Mother Country, after this proof of their moderation, and
regard for us. And if They, our friends, should have cause to blush for us in
this respect, what must we do for ourselves! Where shall we find caverns far
enough removed from the light of day, in which to hide our heads! Or what
reason shall we have to expect friends, advocates and sponsors again, how much
soever we may need them, if we have no more regard for the honor of those who
appeared for us at the late alarming crisis; when it was accounted almost
criminal to say any thing in our behalf?

Let me subjoin, that as the good people of this province had the honor to lead
in a spirited, though decent and respectful application for the redress of our
late grievances; methinks they should now be ambitious to have the honor of
leading in a prudent, temperate, wise behavior, in consequence of the success;
and, if need be, as I hope there is not, ambitious of setting an example of
moderation and discretion to other colonies. This honor would be equal to the
first mentioned; and would probably recommend us greatly to those, whom it will
always be our interest and duty to please; so long, at least, as we can do it
without renouncing our birthright. It will contribute to remove any
impressions that may have been made of late, to our disadvantage. It will at
once gratify our best friends, and falsify the slanders of our enemies, who
delight in representing us as a seditious, factious and turbulent sort of
people, who cannot endure the wholesome and necessary restraints of government.
May God rebuke them for, and forgive them this wrong!

Let none suspect that, because I thus urge the duty of cultivating a close
harmony with our mother country, and a dutiful submission to the King and
Parliament, our chief grievances being redressed, I mean to dissuade people
from having a just concern for their own rights, or legal, constitutional
privileges. History, one may presume to say, affords no example of any nation,
country or people long free, who did not take some care of themselves; and
endeavor to guard and secure their own liberties. Power is of a grasping,
encroaching nature, in all beings, except in HIM, to whom it emphatically
"belongs"; and who is the only King that, in a religious or moral sense, "can
do no wrong." Power aims at extending itself, and operating according to mere
will, wherever it meets with no balance, check, control or opposition of
any kind. For which reason it will always be necessary, as was said before, for
those who would preserve and perpetuate their liberties, to guard them with a
wakeful attention; and in all righteous, just and prudent ways, to oppose the
first encroachments on them. "Obsta principiis." After a while it will be too
late. For in the states and kingdoms of this world, it happens as it does in
the field or church, according to the well-known parable, to this purpose; That
while men sleep, then the enemy comes and sows tares, which cannot be rooted
out again till the end of the world, without rooting out the wheat with them.

If I may be indulged here in saying a few words more, respecting my notions of
liberty in general, such as they are, it shall be as follows.

Having been initiated, in youth, in the doctrines of civil liberty, as they
were taught by such men as Plato, Demosthenes, Cicero and other renowned
persons among the ancients; and such as Sidney and Milton, Lock and Hoadley,
among the moderns; I liked them; they seemed rational. Having, earlier still
learnt from the holy scriptures, that wise, brave and virtuous men were always
friends to liberty; that God gave the Israelites a King [or absolute Monarch]
in his anger, because they had not sense and virtue enough to like a free
commonwealth, and to have himself for their King; that the Son of God came
down from heaven, to make us "free indeed"; and that "where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty"; this made me conclude, that freedom was a great
blessing. Having, also, from my childhood up, by the kind providence of my God,
and the tender care of a good parent now at rest with Him, been educated to the
love of liberty, though not of licentiousness; which chaste and virtuous passion
was still increased in me, as I advanced toward, and into, manhood; I would
not, I cannot now, though past middle age, relinquish the fair object of my
youthful affections, LIBERTY; whose charms, instead of decaying with time in my
eyes, have daily captivated me more and more. I was, accordingly, penetrated
with the most sensible grief, when, about the first of November last, that day
of darkness, a day hardly to be numbered with the other days of the year, SHE
seemed about to take her final departure from America, and to leave that ugly
Hag Slavery, the deformed child of Satan, in her room. I am now filled with a
proportionable degree of joy in God, on occasion of HER speedy return, with new
smiles on her face, with augmented beauty and splendour. -- Once more then,
Hail! celestial Maid, the daughter of God, and, excepting his Son, the
firstborn of heaven! Welcome to these shores again; welcome to every expanding
heart! Long may thou reside among us, the delight of the wise, good and
brave; the protectress of innocence from wrongs and oppression, the patroness
of learning, arts, eloquence, virtue, rational loyalty, religion! And if any
miserable people on the continent or isles of Europe, after being weakened by
luxury, debauchery, venality, intestine quarrels, or other vices, should, in
the rude collisions, or now-uncertain revolutions of kingdoms, be driven, in
their extremity, to seek a safe retreat from slavery in some fardistant
climate; let them find, O let them find one in America under thy brooding
sacred wings; where our oppressed fathers once found it, and we now enjoy it,
by the favor of Him, whose service is the most glorious freedom! Never, O never
may He permit thee to forsake us, for our unworthiness to enjoy thy enlivening
presence! By His high permission, attend us through life AND DEATH to the regions
of the blessed, thy original abode, there to enjoy forever the glorious liberty
of the sons of God! -- But I forget myself; whither have I been hurried by this
enthusiasm, or whatever else you will please to call it? I hope your candor
will forgive this odd excursion, for which I hardly know how to account myself.

-- There were two or three things more which I intended to say relative to
this joyful occasion.

To go on then, these colonies are better than ever apprised of their own
weight and consequence, when united in a legal opposition to any
unconstitutional, hard and grievous treatment; which may be an advantage to
them. God often brings good out of evil; or what is intended for evil by men,
is by him meant for good. So it was particularly in the memorable case of
Joseph, whom his hard-hearted, envious brethren sold as a slave into Egypt.
There he became great, and his Father and brethren were at length obliged to
have recourse to him, to keep them and their's from perishing. -- And thus, not
improbably, may good come out of our late troubles, as well as out of those
oppressions, which occasioned the flight of our forefathers into the deserts of
America. The great shock which was lately given to our liberties, may end in
the confirmation and enlargement of them: As it is said, the stately oaks of
the forest take the deeper root, extend their arms the farther, and exalt their
venerable heads the higher for being agitated by storms and tempests, provided
they are not actually torn up, rent in pieces, or quite blasted by the
lightning of heaven. And who knows, our liberties being thus established, but
that on some future occasion, when the kingdoms of the earth are moved, and
roughly dashed one against another, by Him that "takes up the isles as a very
little thing," we, or our posterity may even have the great felicity and honor
to "save much people alive," and keep Britain herself from ruin. I hope she
will never put it out of our power, by destroying us; or out of the inclination
of any, by attempting it.

It is to be hoped, the colonies will never abuse or misapply any influence
which they may have, when united as aforesaid; or discover a spirit of
murmuring, discontent or impatience under the government of Great Britain, so
long as they are justly and kindly treated. On the other hand, it is to be
hoped, they will never lose a just sense of liberty, or what they may
reasonably expect from the mother country. These things they will keep in mind,
if they are wise; and cultivate a firm friendship and union with each other
upon equal terms, as far as distance and other circumstances will allow. And if
ever there should be occasion, as I sincerely hope and pray there may not,
their late experience and success will teach them how to act, in order to
obtain the redress of grievances; I mean, by joint, manly and spirited, but yet
respectful and loyal petitioning. Setting aside some excesses and outrages,
which all sober men join in condemning, I believe history affords few examples
of a more general, generous and just sense of liberty in any country, than has
appeared in America within the year past: In which time the mercantile part in
particular have done themselves much honor, and had a great share in preserving
the liberties of the plantations, when in the most imminent danger: Though this
is not said with the least thought of reflecting on any other body or order of
men, as wanting in their endeavors to the same noble end. Had we patiently
received the yoke, no one can tell when, or whether ever it would have been
taken off. And if there be some animals, adapted by nature to bear heavy
burdens submissively, one of which, however, is said, on a certain occasion, to
have had the gift of speech, and expostulated with his master for unjustly
smiting him; I hope the Americans will never be reckoned as belonging to that
spiritless, slavish kind, though their "powers of speech" An abusive, superficial
pamphlet in favor of the measures of the late ministry.
should not, in the opinion of some nameless, heroic pamphleteer-scoffers in
Britain, exceed those of the other. However defective they may be in point of
"eloqence," An abusive, superficial pamphlet in favor of the measures of the
late ministry.
I thank God they can at least feel, and complain so as to be tolerably
understood.

If your patience will hold out, I will add a few words further, by way of
advice, and so conclude. While we endeavor to cultivate harmony and union with
our mother country and our sister-colonies, in all generous and manly ways, we
should not, surely, neglect to cultivate the same among ourselves.

There have, I am sorry to say it, but really there have lately been many
unwarrantable jealousies, and bitter mutual reproaches among the people of this
town and province, occasioned by that unhappy measure, which has been so often
referred to. Even wise and good men, though all equally against that measure,
could not, however, agree what was to be done, upon the maxims of prudence,
though alike concerned for the public welfare. Accordingly some were blamed as
too warm and sanguine, others as too phlegmatic and indifferent, in the common
and noble cause of liberty. Many were censured, and some, I am well assured,
very unjustly, as being friends to, and encouragers of, the fatal measure
aforesaid. But how far these accusations were just or unjust, on either side, I
will not take upon me particularly to determine. Be that as it may, is it not
best, my Brethren, to let these contentions subside, now the end is obtained,
and we have so fair a prospect before us? Are there any valuable ends to be
answered by perpetuating these disputes? I cannot readily conceive any: Perhaps
it is, because I have less penetration than most others. Be it as it will, I
know One, and One whom we all profess to reverence, who has said, Blessed are
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. And, Let us
study the things that make for peace, said he that was not behind the chief of
the apostles, and the things wherewith one may edify another. These sayings may
apologize for me, if I am wrong in "preaching peace" at this time. And if none
will be offended with me for speaking plainly as to this matter, To me it
really seems most prudent, most christian, to bury in oblivion what is past; to
begin our civil, political life anew as it were, from this joyful and glorious
era of restored and confirmed liberty; to be at union among ourselves; to
abstain from all party names and national reflections, respecting any of our
fellow subjects; and to exert ourselves, in our several stations, to promote
the common good, by love serving one another. Let us make allowances mutually
for human frailty, for our different views and conceptions of things, which may
be in a great measure unavoidable; for difference of natural constitution, an
unequal flow of animal spirits, or strength of nerves: Let no one censure
another more hardly, if at all, than the necessity of the case plainly
requires. I hope these counsels of peace will not be disrelished by any "Son of
peace," or any wise and good man, that does me the honor to be my auditor on
this occasion; for I mean not to give offense, but only to do good. Such
counsels as they are, I humbly commend them to the God of love and peace, to
whose holy will I believe them agreeable, for his blessing; that they may have
their just influence on all that hear them. And you will not forget, that we
must all one day give an account to Him; so that it nearly concerns us to have
our ways, motives, and all our doings approved by him. In fine,

Let us all apply ourselves with diligence, and in the fear of God, to the
duties of our respective stations. There has been a general dissipation among
us for a long time; a great neglect and stagnation of business. Even the poor,
and laboring part of the community, whom I am very far from despising, have
had so much to say about government and politics, in the late times of danger,
tumult and confusion, that many of them seemed to forget, they had any thing to
do. Methinks, it would now be expedient for them, and perhaps for most of us,
to do something more, and talk something less; every one "studying to be quiet,
and to do his own business;" letting things return peaceably into their old
channels, and natural courses, after so long an interruption. My immediate aim
in what I now say, being only to recommend industry, good order and harmony, I
will not meddle with the thorny question, whether, or how far, it may be
justifiable for private men, at certain extraordinary conjunctures, to take the
administration of government in some respects into their own hands.
Selfpreservation being a great and primary law of nature, and to be considered
as antecedent to all civil laws and institutions, which are subordinate and
subservient to the other; the right of so doing, in some circumstances, cannot
well be denied. But certainly, there is no plausible pretense for such a
conduct among us now. That which may be excuseable, and perhaps laudable, on
some very singular emergencies, would at other times be pragmatical, seditious,
and high-handed presumption. Let all therefore now join with heart and hand in
supporting the lawful, constitutional government over us in its just dignity
and vigor; in supporting his Majesty's Representative, the civil magistrates,
and all persons in authority, in the lawful exercise of their several offices.
No true friend of liberty can reasonably object against this; and if any
persons should, it would show that, while they speak great swelling words of
vanity, making liberty the pretext, they themselves are the servants of
corruption, the ignoble slaves of sin. Without this due regard to government
and laws, we shall still be miserable, my friends, notwithstanding all that God
and the King have done to make us happy. If one had wings like a dove, it were
better to fly far away, and remain alone in the wilderness, where he might be
at rest, than to live in a society where there is no order, no subordination;
but anarchy and confusion reign. Of these we have surely had enough already;
though at the same time I bless God, that there has not been much more,
considering the great danger in which we have been, with the general alarm and
consternation, by reason of that which is said to make "even a wise man mad,"
and much more the rash and indiscrete, of whom there is a great proportion in
all communities; considering also the absolute necessity there was, or at least
seemed to be, of some very uncommon struggles and exertions, in order to break
the snare, and the natural impetuosity of many people's tempers. So important a
change in the situation of public affairs, so great a deliverance, has,
perhaps, seldom been brought about in any country, with so little criminal
excess, unless it were done by God alone, without the instrumentality or agency
of men, by nature liable to so many errors and infirmities. But whatever there
has been of this kind, ought to be, and I hope is, lamented by all good men.
May that God, in whom our help has been, continue to protect us, our rights and
privileges! May he direct our paths through this uncertain life, and all the
changes of it; and, of his infinite mercy in Jesus Christ, finally bring us all
to those peaceful and glorious regions, where no evil spirits, no wicked
fowlers will come; where no snares will be spread for us; no proud waters to go
over our soul! And if we hope for admission into those eternal mansions of joy,
let every one of us, as the apostle Peter exhorts, honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear GOD, honor the KING.

AMEN!

