THE NECESSITY OF REPEALING THE American Stamp Act DEMONSTRATED: OR, A PROOF
that GREAT BRITAIN must be injured by that ACT. In a LETTER to a MEMBER of the
BRITISH HOUSE of COMMONS.

LONDON; Printed. BOSTON Reprinted, and Sold by EDES and GILL in Queen Street.
1766.

THE NECESSITY, etc.
SIR,
AS the tax which has lately been laid on our American colonies is like to come
under the review of parliament some time this session, and as I lately arrived
from North America, where I resided several years; I beg leave, with all
dutiful submission, to give you my sentiments on that subject. If I am so happy
as to cast any light upon a question of so much importance, I am certain of
your approbation, and shall have rendered the greatest service in my power to
the public.

From the assiduous care of our present ministry to restore commerce and
satisfaction to every branch of His Majesty's dominions, there is great reason
to believe they will recommend a repeal, or at least some considerable
alterations of the American Stamp Act; and as some weighty arguments now offer
against that Act, which could not have been foreseen when it was made, there is
the greatest reason to believe the parliament in general will come into one or
other of these measures.

It is a pity that any who treat of American affairs, should ever handle them
as if they had no desire to find out truth, nor any thing else in view, than to
irritate or stir up one part of His Majesty's dominions against another, by
affecting to espouse the cause of one, while they load the other with the most
opprobious language; as if it were possible, that the interest of Great Britain
and her colonies could be separated, much less opposite to one other: I have
ever considered their connection like that which subsists between the natural
body and its members; if the members suffer, the body must suffer also. For
this reason, we should not barely consider how the Stamp Act may affect our
American colonies, but how it must affect the future strength and prosperity of
His Majesty's dominions: And, pursuing this plan, I hope to prove even to a
demonstration, That

It is for the Interest of Great Britain, that the Stamp Act should be repealed.

In the course of this proof, it is hardly necessary for me to enquire what
Right the parliament of Great Britain may have to tax our American colonies;
especially as the parliament has, at any time, the Power of resolving that
question. Yet, as I shall have occasion to mention the present disposition of
our colonists toward the Stamp Act, it may not be improper to show, That they
have at least the Appearance of reason for their complaints.

I. It is said, The colonies are under great obligations to Britain for the
expense she has been at, in planting and supporting them; in particular, the
blood and treasure we spent, during the late war, on their account, has brought
them greatly in our debt. Hence it is proper they should be taxed, to refund
some part of those expenses.

II. That a standing army is necessary in the colonies, and it is proper they
should be taxed for its support.

III. That Great Britain being involved in debt, and loaded with taxes, it is
proper her colonies should support some share of the burden. I suppose one or
other of these reasons, (for I have not read the Preamble to the Stamp Act)
induced the parliament to tax our colonies. They shall be considered in order.
--

It is a general opinion, that our North American colonies are greatly indebted
to Britain for the expense of planting them, and for the blood and treasure we
have spent, during the late war, on their account.

Our colonists are certainly indebted to the most righteous prince that ever
swayed a scepter, together with his royal ancestors, for their enjoyment of
every liberty, civil and religious, that might conduce to the prosperity of any
people. -- And, in return, they have paid the most affectionate loyalty, and
have ever appeared ready to spend the last drop of their blood, whenever His
Majesty's honor, or the safety of his dominions, required their assistance: But
as to pecuniary obligations between them and Great Britain, I humbly presume,
the Balance is in their favor.

There was a time when their forefathers In this case, as well as when I speak
of the virtue, industry, or temperance of our colonists; of the blood they have
spent during the late war; of their country producing all the necessaries of
life; of the annual sum they may be supposed to pay by a Stamp Act, etc. in
general, when I speak of our colonists I mean those on the continent of America
and not those in our West Indian Islands, as the latter are a perfect contrast
to the former.
in Britain, being neither allowed to enjoy civil or religious liberty, rather
than resist the powers that were, requested that they might retreat into the
wilderness of America, and were graciously allowed to possess a tract of land,
which cost Great Britain nothing, and which was really the property and
possession of its native savages: Thither they went, and at the expense of
their own money and their own blood, subdued the natives, and converted a
wilderness into a fruitful country, which is now a valuable part of the British
empire. Our parliament ever since so conducted matters, by prohibitions and
restrictions on their trade, that these infant colonies alone have served the
purpose of increasing our subjects, maintaining our poor, strengthening our
navy, consuming our manufactures, and returning us the annual profit of immense
sums. Does it hence appear that they have contracted any debt with
Great Britain? While some of us were rolling in affluence and ease, others
wearing themselves out with dissipation and vice, and thousands making a prey
of one another; if their fathers, by a singular fortitude and virtue, braved
the fury of the seas, and danger or death in every form, from famine and the
sword, among wild beasts and savages; if they have, by the most arduous labor,
changed that wilderness into a source of endless wealth to Great Britain, does
it from thence follow, that they are under great obligations to us? I should
think the contrary. But the colonies are said to be greatly in our debt, for
the blood and treasure we have spent on their account, during the late war.
Perhaps even this account is pretty well settled; but that we may form a proper
judgment on this subject, which is so often mentioned, it will be necessary to
review the cause and event of that war: The facts are these; -- our British
North American colonies are extended along the shore near 2000 miles, and
backwards not 200 miles, upon an average: The limits of these colonies are
fixed by charter, and several of them are already full, though not very thick
settled. An immeasurable territory lies behind these colonies, which is not
theirs, nor did they ever claim it; their charter gave them no pretensions to
such a claim: It is the territory of Great Britain, never yet located, nor
granted to any particular subject. It was natural to suppose and expect, that
soon as the bounds of her present colonies were all peopled, she would also
divide this wilderness into other colonies, which might become a new source of
riches and power. But the French had perfidiously surrounded our present
colonies by a chain of forts, and thereby must have cut off all hopes of future
increase to our dominions: in this case it was the interest of Great Britain,
it was absolutely necessary for her to remove the French; and removed they
were, by a glorious and successful conflict; but did the Britons alone bleed
during that war, or did they alone bear the expense? No Sir, brave and generous
as the Britons were, the Colonists have not been a whit behind them.

A single colony which was planted about 90 years ago, paid near half a million
toward the general expense: the four New England colonies alone raised and
supported 20000 men per annum, and it appears from good evidence, that they
lost near 30000 men during the service. In general, this war has made such
havoc from one end to the other of our infant colonies, that the flower of
their youth are destroyed, and the survivors loaded with taxes, to pay the
debts which were then contracted. In return for this profusion of blood, our
colonists have obtained the security of their present estates; they have also
acquired perpetual honor to the British arms, and a vast addition of empire to
the kingdom, whose subjects they are. But all these acquisitions being chiefly
imaginary, can never help them to pay greater taxes than formerly; and I
confess, it does not appear that they have made any other acquisitions. It is
true, that several French and Spanish colonies are added to our dominions upon
the continent, together with a vast extent of wilderness, but that is nothing
to the present colonists: their land is decreased, and not increased in value
by these additions, and their trade is worse instead of better; for the more
land is to be purchased on the continent, so much the less will any purchaser
give for what is now occupied, the greater possessions we have on the continent
of North America, and the greater quantity of indigo, rice, tobacco, hemp,
flax, furr, and timber that are thence imported, so much less must each colony
gain by her trade in these articles, and these are the commodities with which
they pay their taxes. Who then have been gainers by our late war in America?
The answer is plain, Great Britain has gained exceedingly.

It is long since the neat balance of trade with our colonies was half a
million per annum in favor of Great Britain, and by our late acquisitions in
America, it must soon become a million, I apprehend this is more than we gain
by our trade in every other part of the world. Thus it appears that so much
blood and treasure was spent during the late war, on the account, almost the
sole account of Great Britain, and not of the colonies. And whoever considers
the colonists in a just point of view, will confess they have done more than
could have been expected, as they really have done more than was ever required
toward the support of the late war.

Every new acquisition on the continent, must be entirely subservient to the
purposes of Great Britain, as our American colonists always have been. These
people are in general hardy, temperate and industrious, hence they have already
opened an immense trade, the Profits of which, every shilling, centers in this
Island. As their country produces every thing in abundance that is necessary
for the preservation of life, they might carry on a profitable trade at any
foreign market. But this is not proper, nor is it permitted; our parliaments
have so hedged them in with laws, restrictions, and prohibitions, that by their
utmost industry, they can hardly pay their debts; furr is a valuable article,
and a trade in hats would have been highly profitable for them; to prevent
this, we have prohibited their sending hats even from one colony to another.
This is the case of wool, and other articles of like consequence. Copper mines
they have in abundance, but we have taken care, by proper regulations, to reap
the chief profits arising from them; their houses are universally covered with
wood, almost in the shape of flat tiles, hence they have an extraordinary
consumption of nails, but we do not indulge them in the use of slitting mills,
lest they should make nails for themselves, and thereby hurt our manufacture. I
need hardly mention that they are not allowed to use any foreign manufacture,
but as it comes through our hands, increased in price by public duties, and the
private gain of our merchants, by which means they pay us a pretty heavy tax.
Nor need I mention that there are numberless articles, the produce of their
country, which they are not allowed to send even to Great Britain, on any
account, lest they should hurt the price of like commodities in this island. It
would be tedious to mention the several restrictions we have laid on their
trade, restrictions nevertheless, which the Americans can easily bear, as they
are only negative, yet the trade of this island could not have flourished if
they had been neglected. Thus we have always been able to convert the industry
and trade of our colonists into the riches and strength of their mother
country. Now, Sir, as it is plain that our colonies in North America have
hitherto served us, or rather they have been taxed by us, to the value of half
a million per annum, that they have assisted us at the expense of much blood
and treasure to acquire new colonies, by which we alone are to be profited, it
seems cruel to make them suffer again for our advantage, by compelling them to
refund our expenses in the war.

II. It is further said, that a standing army should be stationed in our
colonies, and they should be taxed for its support. But I confess it does not
appear to me why we should tax our English colonies in North America, for the
support of a standing army; for this army is to be stationed there either on
account of the English colonies, or on account of the French and Spanish ones,
which we have lately conquered; it is evidently improper that our English
colonists should be taxed for the support of an army which is designed to keep
other colonies in subjection. I have heard an old maxim which seems founded on
justice, viz. He that reaps the profit should also bear the expense, or to this
purpose, and certainly this maxim may very properly be applied to the case in
hand. Why should the English North Americans support an army to be stationed in
Canada, or Pensacola and Mobille, any more than an army which is stationed in
our other new conquests on the coasts of Guinea? for by the latter they gain
more than by the former, and surely their having spent much blood and treasure
in conquering those colonies, and adding them to the British dominion, can
never be urged as a reason for their spending all the treasure they have, or
rather all they ever shall have, in preserving them. It appears equally
improper for us to tax our English North American colonies for the support of
an army to be stationed among themselves; because such an army is no way
necessary there, but, on the contrary, must prove very injurious. If a standing
force be necessary in these colonies, it must be for the purposes of the civil
magistrate, viz. preserving peace, and executing justice. But as our several
colonies have a complete legislature, subordinate to that of Great Britain,
which has a power of forming militias, raising troops, etc. and as they ought
to be the best judges of their own wants, it would seem natural to leave the
affair of regular troops to their own option, to be raised and paid as they
shall find most convenient, or not to be raised at all, unless it be requisite.
-- A few there have been, so little acquainted with the true state of our
American colonies, as to suppose that a standing army is necessary there, even
to preserve the obedience of our English subjects to the crown of
Great Britain; but nothing can argue greater ignorance, as our colonists have
hitherto appeared the most loyal of all his majesty's subjects, and no man can
be so wicked as to suppose that our ministry will ever premeditate such schemes
of oppression as may shake that loyalty, and enable him to foresee that troops
may be necessary. Whoever recollects that our colonies were in general planted
by people who fled from England and Scotland, to escape the civil and religious
persecution of a former family, which God in mercy to this nation has banished,
may see an obvious reason why these colonists should continue inviolably and
regularly attached to His present Majesty, and his illustrious family. -- But
we need not inquire into causes, while modern facts give ample testimony to
this truth posterity will hardly believe, concerning our colonists, that when
danger was far enough from their borders, and so many of their youth destroyed
in battle, that volunteers were not to be raised by any means; rather than the
progress of His Majesty's arms should be retarded, they made laws to impress
their sons and brethren by thousands into the service. This was always done
upon the first notice of His Majesty's pleasure, signified by some minister of
State: and if this people's loyalty may yet be suspected, there never can any
confidence be placed in subjects; since hitherto every appearance of loyalty
has certainly been in favor of the colonists. If a standing army should
unfortunately be quartered among our English colonies in North America, it will
prove the cause of a double tax, the most grievous of which has been little
attended to.

Our colonists can only flourish by industry, temperance, and frugality, the
moment they forsake these virtues, they must cease to be profitable either to
themselves or Great Britain; an ancient kingdom that has an established
commerce may sustain a little vanity, yet the most opulent kingdoms have at
length been crushed under this weight, and Britain herself is sensibly injured
by her dissipated sons; what must become of an infant colony that has no trade
but with Great Britain, and is obliged to pay the balance, which is always
against her, by an extraordinary share of diligence. If the inhabitants of this
colony should be corrupted in their morals, if they should learn dissipation
and idleness from an army that has nothing to do, if their sons and daughters
should become less frugal or less chaste by the conversation of men born to
affluence, accustomed to the vices of an old country and trained up in the
army, I fear, if such things should happen to an infant colony, must not
population be retarded, and the inhabitants soon become unable to pay their
debts, and thence useless subjects to Great Britain?

The third reason that I have heard given for the Stamp Act, shall now be
considered, viz. Great Britain being involved in debt, and loaded with taxes,
it is proper her colonies should support some share of the Burden. As this
reason has the greatest air of propriety, and doubtless had some influence on
our late ministry, I shall take the more notice of it, especially as an answer
to it brings me to the chief purpose of this letter, and what I proposed at the
first to demonstrate, which was this. It is for the interest of Great Britain
that the Stamp Act in North America be repealed. If I should be able to prove
this, every other argument would be immediately answered, for there might
chance to be a case in which it would be cruel and unjust for us to tax a
colony, even though we could be profited thereby, yet certainly, if that very tax
were injurious to ourselves, it would be on every account wrong to establish
it. And however our nation may be loaded with debt, if the Stamp Act should
prove injurious to Great Britain, it must increase and not diminish the burden.
Without looking forward to a great distance, and mentioning every probable
consequence of the American Stamp Act, it must immediately injure Great
Britain, by hurting her trade with the colonies: the extent of this injury we
shall presently consider. There are two ways by which our trade with the
colonies may be affected. The colonists may prove unwilling or unable to
support this trade; in either case, it must be ruined; and both are like to be
the consequence of a Stamp Act. It has never been counted either for the honor
or interest of any legislature to grieve the subject, it is generally hurtful,
and sometimes dangerous to grieve them universally, and probably no act ever
created such universal disquiet as the Stamp Act does in America. It is vain to
say that any danger can possibly arise at present from our colonists
endeavoring to resist the Stamp Act by force, they are neither able nor
desirous to contend with their mother country, they know that we have troops
enough on the continent to vex them, and could soon visit them with a fleet
that might blow them to atoms, nor does it appear that one person of note in
the colonies ever thought of resistance, though some people, ever pleased with
calumnly and mischief, would fondly construe some rude efforts of the common
people into premeditated rebellion, in order to exasperate our government
against the unfortunate colonists, with the pleasing prospect of seeing our
hands imbrued in the blood of our children. But it must prove fortunate for the
colonists that our government is too just and humane not to redress their
complaints, if this should seem for the general good, notwithstanding the
imprudent conduct of a few of their ignorant people. A nation which has lately
given laws to Europe will never make a point of honor to chastise a few
peasants. But to return from this digression, it is undoubtedly very easy for
us to force the Americans to comply with the Stamp Act.

But no fleet or army can make them willing; there is no argument so decisive
as that from the muzzle of a gun, and yet there is none less persuasive. The
Americans must always judge according to their own capacities, in spite of our
troops; and at present they certainly judge, that the parliament of
Great Britain has no right, natural or acquired, to tax her colonists: they may
be mistaken, but that very mistake must injure our trade, and must produce the
more fatal effects, the greater appearance of reason there is on their side.
They say, this act deprives them of their most valuable charter-privilege,
being taxed by their own representatives, that however trifling we may count
this circumstance, they have purchased their privileges at the expense or
risque of every thing that is dear to mankind: their fathers, in hopes of
enjoying them, endured every kind of danger and toil in that wilderness, where
thousands were destroyed with the sword, and the rest worn out with hardships
are gone to sleep; that if their children should now be deprived of those
privileges, posterity will be cautious how they encounter dangers to aggrandize
the British nation. -- Unhappy colonists! destined to misfortunes at all
events: if they are not vigorous and successful, they must perish by famine or
the sword; if they are successful and prosperous, they must be taxed beyond the
utmost farthing, by men in a distant part of the world. It may be replied, that
the colonies did not all obtain by charter the exclusive privilege of taxing
themselves: but they say, it would not follow that the parliament of
Great Britain had a right to tax them; on the contrary, though their charters
did not secure this privilege to them, it would be improper for the parliament
to take that advantage. The matter should only be determined by the laws and
spirit of the British constitution. -- Their charters were granted by Kings,
and it is universally known, that a British King may not, that he cannot
deprive his subjects of their liberties. We have certain constitutional Magna
Charta privileges so inviolable and sacred, that every endeavor of the
sovereign to diminish them would be void and null. Britons are taught to
believe so on this side the Atlantic; they would be miserable if this truth
should be called in question. Why should British Americans have different
sensations and judgment?

Caelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. Doubtless, any attempts
appearing from any American charter to deprive the subject of constitutional
privileges, will ever be deemed unjust by a British parliament: perhaps no such
attempts have been made. I am not perfectly acquainted with all the charters;
but it was proper to mention the circumstance, as some of these charters were
granted by a family that was apt to despise the privileges of the subject. I
believe that a British King may dispense with some obligations in the subjects,
but cannot enjoin any that are repugnant to our Magna Charta -- however that
be, the colonists say, they desire no dispensations, nor any liberties greater
than their fellow subjects in Great Britain, to be taxed by their own
representatives, and only by them, a privilege which nature, or rather God and
nature has granted them, though they had no Charter; that depriving them of
this privilege would be a cruel precedent; and by the way, it may have
troublesome consequences. To elucidate this matter, let us suppose it a settled
rule, that the British parliament is ever to tax our American plantations, let
us carry this rule forward a few years, and see how it must apply.

At present the British subjects in North America, are at least two millions.
It is evident from accurate calculations, that they double their number once
every eighteen years, The writer saw these Calculations in the Hand of a very
accurate Gentleman in Rhode Island, they included the four New England
Governments, where there are the smallest addition of Foreigners though People
increase rather faster than those in the most Southern Provinces, where the
Inhabitants are more luxurious, less healthful and have not such popular forms
of Government.
without including the additions they receive from other counties. Let us
suppose them only to double in twenty years, then in so short a time as forty
years they must be eight millions, and twenty years more, perhaps twenty five
years will make them sixteen millions. The inhabitants of Great Britain are
hardly seven millions, and we don't increase, except that our commerce with
North America has lately increased our numbers. Now I should be pleased to hear
by what face of justice the smaller part of the British empire shall tax the
greater; how the representatives of seven millions shall undertake to tax
sixteen millions, whom they do not represent. The very attempt must produce
such events as no good subject can anticipate without horror. It is dangerous
now to establish a law which must soon be changed out of prudence, else it will
in a little time, fall by its own weight, and perhaps involve the British
empire in its ruin. Two Millions of men, are not to be convinced, they may be
forced, but it may prove hard either to force or convince even thrice that
number. Some difficulties there are which grow easy by custom, and some
apparent injuries which time obliterates, but the injuries received by subjects
in general, or by subject depending states from their superiors, are not of
this nature, like an unwieldy Burden they grow more irksome the longer they
are supported or like a barbed arrow, they stick deeper and hurt more by
continuance. The history of nations will inform us how many provinces and
subordinate states have been lost by oppression which they found intolerable
after they had been long accustomed to it. I don't mean to insinuate that a
British parliament has, or ever will deliberately oppress our colonies; but in
the mean time it must be granted, that our colonists are to comfort themselves
with hope alone, for they have no security of moderate taxes, while they are
not their own taxers. The maxim in Great Britain, that a subject should only be
taxed by his own representatives, is evidently founded on justice, for when we
are taxed by our representatives, in other words, when we are taxed by
ourselves, we can have no temptation to go beyond what is reasonable or
necessary, we know our own wants, and feel our own Burden, and these must ever
be the rule of taxation; but a British parliament will hardly be allowed to
feel for the Inhabitants of North America, we are ignorant of their abilities,
or the small knowledge we have, is founded on very superficial accounts, often
false ones. It is not improbable that some future parliaments might lay
oppressive taxes on the colonists imagining that we may ease our own burden by
loading them. I hope to prove this impossible, but if it should happen, the
temptation would be dangerous. The subject of our daily Prayer is, or should
be, Lead us not into temptation. And the wisest earthly prince has taught us,
that a bribe blinds the understanding: Hence I should be sorry to see any
number of His Majesty's subjects tempted to oppress their fellow subjects, at
the distance of 3000 miles.

Did not the brave inhabitants of this island complain with a voice that shook
the basis of our government, when they where taxed at the sole pleasure of
their sovereign, and can the thing be right in America, which was wrong in
Great Britain? Or can that be right on one side the Atlantic which was wrong on
the other? The Americans indeed are not taxed by the royal prerogative, but
they are taxed by a p -- t which they have not chosen, nor have they consented
to be taxed by them; and if they are taxed without and against their own
consent, they do not see where the difference is, whether that tax be laid by
the K -- or by the p -- t.

Whether the colonists reason well or ill upon this subject, is not my business
to determine; I have only to mention facts. Their reasons are at least
plausible, this discontent is universal, and may continue so while the
Stamp Act continues, and consequently must infallibly injure our trade. They
will never consent to enrich us, while they think we oppress them; they will
never treat us with the respect due to a parent, while they think we treat them
as slaves; nor will they carry on a friendly and profitable trade with us,
while they think we treat them as aliens, and load them with chains. For these
reasons, I think it is our interest to repeal the Stamp Act, rather that grieve
so many good subjects, and cut off the source of our own wealth. But if any
person should think the foregoing reasons are not conclusive, or that the bad
effects of this act upon trade will be trifling and presently forgotten, there
is another reason, which I hope will appear demonstrable: though the Americans
should be willing, they will not be able to support their trade as formerly
with Great Britain, while the Stamp Act continues in force. Various are the
accounts of how much the act may produce yearly from our English colonies on
the continent of America; perhaps it may bring us 200,000 l. per annum; but it
does not by any means follow, that Great Britain shall reap the neat profit of
200,000 l. per annum more than she formerly gained by her colonies; on the
contrary, I apprehend she may be a loser of pretty near that sum. To ascertain
this matter, it is proper to examine all the necessary consequences of the
Stamp Act, and we find the weight of the act conspiring with the disposition of
the people to injure our trade. The weight of the tax gives it a stroke which
the Americans themselves cannot prevent. It is expressly provided, that the
money to be raised by the Stamp Act, shall be all remitted to Great Britain in
Gold or Silver only: now as the sum to be raised yearly is more than all the
money now in the colonies; and as it will be difficult for them to find money
enough the next year even to pay their taxes; it is impossible they should be
able, at the same time, to send over large sums to our merchants for English
goods.

The taxes that are paid in this island soon amount to more than the sum of our
current money, yet we don't feel any inconveniences in getting money to pay
new Taxes, because the money being paid in the island, stays here and
circulates tomorrow into the hands that paid it today, but this Rule does not
apply to the colonists, for the money to be paid by taxes, is to be sent out of
their country never to return, and the balance of trade being always in our
Favor, they are obliged to send us cash even on that account; a precarious
trade with the Spaniards being their principal source of money, and that not
sufficient, even when our cutters are removed, to pay their debts with our
merchants for British manufactures, much less to pay both for our stamps and
manufactures. But as the stamps must be paid for, our manufactures must fail of
course, since they cannot be paid for. This Misfortune seems greater, as it is
perhaps the only accident that could have prevented our trade with the
colonists from continuing and increasing for many ages. The colonies produce
all the necessaries of life, and would produce all its luxuries with a little
care, the inhabitants have hitherto neglected all sorts of manufacture, turning
their chief Attention to husbandry. Thus, with wheat, rice, indigo, tobacco,
hemp, timber, etc. they paid most of their debts. While they consumed our
manufactures, their way of living was perfectly suited to our interest, who
live by trade and manufactures, it was also suited to their convenience, hence
they would have continued in this tract, for as they are accustomed to
Husbandry, and from our New acquisitions may sustain land enough for that
purpose, and as husbandry is the natural employment of all infant countries,
nothing but the present violent necessity, could have turned their attention to
manufactures, thus in a few years they would have required more English Goods
than all we make at present in this island. The dream is pleasing, but it is
like to be more than a dream, for the Stamp Act with the addition of a few
Cutters, have done more in one year to promote American manufactures, than the
natural progress of arts with all the additional arguments of frugality would
have produced in an hundred years; not that our colonists have already felt the
iron hand of necessity, but they see a Stamp Act coming from a quarter whence
they thought it could not come, perhaps another act may come close at its
heels, at this rate it is time for them to make those articles that they shall
never be able to purchase. This, at least, Sir, is more than Theory, whoever
takes the trouble of enquiring, will find that our commissions from North
America the last year have been almost a million short of what they usually
have been; another year must deduct another million, unless the act be
repealed; but suppose the act should continue, let us see what we shall get in
return for this damage of trade, not to mention the universal uneasiness we
continue to give to our fellow subjects.

The balance of trade, as was already observed, between us and our American
colonies (excluding our conquests) is computed to be more than half a milion
per ann. in our favor; by this means alone we used to get all the money that
our colonists had, and if they should ever get more money, we were sure to get
that also; for proof of this I appeal to facts. The Americans always owed our
merchants greater sums than all the current money in their country would pay;
and though, during the late war, several millions were sent thither to pay the
expenses of our troops, the colonists did not retain that money, for as money
increased their commissions increased, so that toward the end of the war they
consumed eight or nine hundred thousand pounds worth of English goods more than
at the beginning, and at the peace they were three times as much in our debt as
they had been ten years before that, nor had they money enough then to pay the
third part of that debt. As it is evident that the profits of our trade alone
must have continued to bring us all the money our colonists should ever
possess, I don't see how the Stamp Act can possibly bring us more, since the
Americans are not able to coin money as our demands increase, nor are they like
a certain tree which is said to grow stronger by heavy burdens; the
consequence is plain, the more we receive for stamps, the less we shall receive
for other manufactures. Let us now examine whether it be more profitable for
Great Britain to receive two hundred and even three hundred thousand pounds
annually by way of tax, or to receive it as the neat profit of trade with a
distant country. I conceive the latter is most profitable, and this follows a
fortiori if the riches of a nation consist in the industry and number of its
inhabitants; for the case trade supposes that we obtain as much cash with the
addition of industry and numbers. When Great Britain gains 300,000 l. per ann.
by her manufactures, it must be allowed that she sells to the amount of
1,500,000 We compute that the trade and manufactures of Great Britain have
added at least two millions to the number of its inhabitants, then supposing
that only 200,000 people are maintained by manufacturing, vending, etc. goods
to the amount of 1,500 000 l. it follows that where two millions of additional
subjects are maintained, the exports of manufactures, etc. should be fifteen
millions, which we suppose is much above the truth. Hence it follows that we
must lose more than two hundred thousand subjects by the loss of trade, which
annually brings us 300,000 l. per Ann. especially if that sum be gained by
manufactures.
. How many people may be employed in making, vending and exporting goods to the
value of a million and a half, also in receiving and selling the several
species of returns for these goods, and in providing victuals for all those
manufacturers, porters, merchant-ship carpenters, and sailors? By comparing the
increase of our nation with that of our manufactures, I suppose it may employ
two hundred thousand people at least. On which supposition the account is thus
stated:

Continue the Stamp Act and we shall receive 300,000 l. per ann. into our
treasury, but we must injure our trade, and lose two hundred thousand subjects,
who being industrious people, are now the bulwark, support and riches of this
nation.

Repeal the Stamp Act, and we shall also receive 300,000 l. per ann. not all in
our treasury, but in the hands of the traders and industrious people in this
island, and we shall save two hundred thousand of our best subjects from
inevitable perdition.



To the above account may be added, what all the subjects we save by the
encouragement of trade must pay in this Island, and the Loss of them would make
a considerable deduction from the annual sum paid to the government. But the
loss of subjects we shall sustain by this act is not to be confined to Great
Britain; our colonies must suffer also; they have hitherto received great
additions from Germany and other kingdoms; Pensylvania alone is said to contain
thirty thousand Germans, who are, without exception, the most frugal,
temperate, and industrious people in North America; they fled thither from
oppression, in hopes of becoming freemen, and having some hand in legislature,
and the disposal of their own estates; but strangers may think the times are
now changed, and may incline to stay at home and be taxed by their own princes,
instead of going to America to be taxed by a distant Parliament. Nor is this
the only loss our colonies may sustain; the diligence and industry of the
present inhabitants are also in danger of failing, in consequence of the
Stamp Act, for while nothing tends to promote the happiness, industry, wealth
and numbers of any people so much as perfect freedom, nothing produces the
contrary effects so much as giving them reason to think they have lost their
freedom, and that all their possessions depend on a precarious footing.

Although some of our fellow subjects have treated the Americans with great
freedom and contempt, yet it should be remembered that Britain owes her present
importance and power to them alone; witness the vast cities along the coast of
England and Scotland, which are sprung from contemptible villages only by the
American trade, and should that trade unfortunately be ruined, they must return
to their former contemptible state, and this may be the consequence of a Stamp
Act, instead of that additional treasure which was at first expected.

As dark scenes are always disagreable, I should not desire you to anticipate
the light in which Great Britain may appear fifty years hence, if our trade
with the colonies should not even continue to increase instead of decreasing;
but I would just observe that we have at this instant no other trade in the
world that can be depended on; the French have rivalled and undersold us in
every port of Europe; the kingdom of Portugal, the last and best market where
we could trade to advantage, is just now giving us presages of what we may soon
expect from that quarter; we may complain of these misfortunes, though perhaps
it may not be in our power to prevent them. But the loss of our American trade
may be prevented, and by this trade alone, if properly encouraged, Great
Britain may continue the mistress of the world, but if that should accidentally
be injured, or cut off, by our present administration, Great Britain must
receive a wound that can never be healed.

In fine, Sir, I have endeavored to prove that our English subjects on the
continent of America are very little in our debt. -- That if the debt were much
greater, we should recover no part of it by the late Stamp Act, on the
contrary, -- That we shall lose, instead of gaining by that tax, because the
colonists being universally discontent, not without some appearance of reason,
will no longer consume our manufactures, and even though they were desirous of
consuming them as formerly, they cannot possibly pay for them under so heavy a
tax, but whatever sums we receive in the way of tax, we shall lose at least as
much in the way of trade, and with this immense loss of trade we shall sustain
a similar loss of our best subjects. Therefore Repealing the Stamp Act is the
most probable way of securing the strength, increase and riches of Great
Britain and America. If I have succeeded in this proof a longer letter is not
requisite, if otherwise it would be improper.

I am, etc.


