Mr. Lee's Election Sermon, May 8th, 1766.

A SERMON, DELIVERED before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY Of the COLONY of CONNECTICUT;
At HARTFORD; On the Day of the Anniversary ELECTION, MAY 8th, 1766.

By Jonathan Lee Minister of the Gospel in SALISBURY.

BUT GODLINESS WITH CONTENTMENT, IS GREAT GAIN.

NEW LONDON: Printed by Timothy Green, Printer to the Governor and Company. M,
DCC, LXVI.

AT a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the Colony of
Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May, A. D. 1766.
ORDERED, That Elisha Sheldon, and John Williams, Esq's return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Rev'd Mr. Jonathan Lee, for his SERMON delivered before
this Assembly on the Eighth Instant; and desire a Copy thereof, that it may be
Printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr'y.

An Election SERMON.
PROVERBS VIII.xix. My Fruit is better than Gold, yea than fine Gold, and my
Revenue than choice Silver.
ALTHOUGH unhappy man, while under the prevalency of his native taste and
disposition, is contrary to God, and disaffected to his character and
government; yet to well-disposed mind, there appears the greatest beauty,
wisdom and excellency in the divine conduct. The consummate work of providence,
and the moral government of the world, are the ways in which the divine
character is made manifest. But how little soever, the calm, uniform course of
providence, may affect the careless and inattentive; yet a series of such
alarming events, as we see in these years, (the divine patronage of rights and
liberty, together with the surprising steps by which this noble cause has been
rescued, even to this day,) stand as a convincing proof of the wisdom and
goodness of the divine government; which may well serve to fix the resolution
of every sober mind, to trust in the Lord of Hosts; -- well might David say,
The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice. A sacred regard to the Deity, with such
religious sentiments, as reason aided by revelation will approve, cannot fail
of producing the happiest fruits in life, and laying a solid foundation for
blessedness in the future world. -- How great is the folly of such as say unto
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? Whether we
consider ourselves as members of civil or religious societies -- religion, in
its happy fruits, will effect harmony, good order and loyalty. Since we are
called to act our part, in various characters and capacities in life; and pure
benevolence (in which true virtue consists) must be the leading principle; what
can better become us, or form a more lasting foundation for usefulness, than a
diligent and faithful attendance on the duties of our calling? -- Wherein a man
is called, therein let him abide faithfully with God. A due attendance on
personal duties, must render men zealous worshippers of God, and followers of
the lamb; however dignified or depressed among men. And the like attention to
relative duties, must exemplify justice, temperance, chastity, benevolence, and
every social virtue: -- How would such a lovely conduct, garnish the body
politic, adorn every society, and happify the humane race? The apostle directs
to the like conduct, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having gifts differing according to the
grace that is given to us, whether prophesy, let us prophesy according to the
proportion of faith, or ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or he that
teaches, on teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation; he that gives,
let him do it with simplicity; he that rules, with diligence; he that shows
mercy, with cheerfulness. And since no gifts are granted, no talents betrusted
with us, but what are designed for improvement, to good and valuable purposes;
care must be exercised, that none be neglected or basely perverted. -- In order
to which, it seems needful that men well understand the duty of their
respective relations, -- the nature and extent of the offices and capacities
they sustain, -- least some precious talent be neglected, or fair opportunity
of doing good be left unimproved; or our brother's province be trespassed upon.
Irregular and inordinate self-love, and private interest, have so much the
dominion in the heart, and so various is the taste and tempers of men, that
unless true benevolence, and public spirit prevent, there is eminent danger
that private interest will be pursued, at the expense, or built on the ruins of
the public weal. It well becomes members of communities to remember, that then
do they best serve their own interest, when in proper ways they befriend the
public good. But among proud, depraved, apostate creatures, what happy
expedient can be found, to bring this to pass? We enjoy all the glorious
privileges of the gospel of Christ; and all imaginable civil privileges; the
freest state, and happiest constitution; (which heaven grant to the last
posterity:) Yet all prove ineffectual to those glorious purposes. -- Alas! how
is the gospel abused! the civil sword despised; our liberties and privileges
perverted; our public weal ma^red, and God provoked to jealousy? Hence public
calamities, and wasting judgments are threatened. Can there be a safe refuge, a
sovereign remedy prescribed? I presume, men who will act the most friendly part
to themselves or the public, will gladly embrace it.

Now this is presented in the words to be considered.

IN which the pious prince personates wisdom. -- By which (he being his own
expositor) we are to understand the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of
wisdom.

WISDOM here may be taken for Christ, who is the wisdom of God, and the power
of God, crying aloud to man, by the prophets, and apostles, his word, and
providence. Or it may be taken for the benefits of his purchase applied: which
in a word, implies the being, and happy fruits of true religion. Now this is
recommended to us, by its precious qualities, enriching tendency, and
happifying fruits. For by me kings reign, and princes decree justice. By me
princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the Earth. Riches and honor
are with me, yea durable riches and righteousness: My fruit is better than
gold, and my revenue than choice silver. Worthy of the highest esteem, of the
most honorable, while the meanest peasant is bid welcome to intimacy with it.

HENCE agreeable to the words of Solomon, and this solemn occasion; I shall
attempt to exhibit to view, the excellent nature, the happy tendency, and
lovely fruits, of true religion.

EVERY cause is best known by its effects: the tree by its fruits; and the
excellent nature and tendency of true religion, by its revenues. Now these are
more precious than gold; yea than much fine gold. True wisdom must be most
excellent and enriching, which produces such fruits, and entitles to such
revenues. It betrays a degenerate soul, ignorant both of the scripture and the
power of God, to place it in the products of nature, or empty imagination, dry
jejune external morality, or in an empty profession, crying Lord, Lord, or yet
in a firm persuasion, and self-exalting confidence, that heaven is our own. The
efforts of nature (depraved as it is) can never produce this pearl of great
price. Shall we (while we can exercise reason, or see by the light of
revelation) ever be induced to believe, that the heaven-born soul, who is
taught of God, and formed after the divine image, and made an heir of God, and
joint-heir with Jesus Christ, shall in no respects excel Seneca, or surpass the
grovelling low-lifed pharisee? God forbid that the glorious gospel of grace
should be perverted, and prostituted to the vilest purposes! even to elate the
pride of the heart, magnify self-sufficiency, and dishonor the divine Redeemer.

THE religion of the gospel, the wisdom which is true and genuine, shall be
recommended; not by the needless use of panegyricks and high encomiums; but
merely by exposing its native beauties, and attractive charms. It is well
known, by all acquainted with it, to be of a divine nature, and original,
consisting in a real efflux, and communication from God; forming a new and
divine nature and principle of life, in the soul; conforming the mind, as to
its temper, ends and interest, to the moral image of God. It consists in
undefiling and purifying the heart: undoing what sin has done: so that we come
to have the same mind in us which was also in Jesus Christ. In the truly
gracious soul, the divine Spirit not only acts upon, or in an ineffable manner
influences, but communicates of his own nature, to the soul; so that we are
made partakers of his holiness. -- Which summarily consists in benevolence: --
a new spiritual sense and taste is formed in the soul, which lays a happy
foundation for real delight, true and substantial pleasure; in pleasing God,
and communing with him. Pride, lusts, and impure desires, are all mortified;
the soul commenceth new life, acts from a new nature, from new motives, and to
new ends. In a word, the soul is (to use the apostle's words) created a new in
Christ Jesus: all old things are done away; all things are become new. The same
faculties physically considered remain, but are morally changed. By which means
the right object of full contentment, is found: in which the soul centers, the
will fixes, and the affections terminate; for which I appeal to the sacred
volume, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon the
earth I desire beside thee. -- Except ye are led by the Spirit of Christ, ye
are none of his. Hereby the soul is raised to its proper dignity, employed in
its proper exercise, and satisfied with its proper object. So Christ intimates
to the woman of Samaria. He that drinks of the water I shall give him, shall
never thirst.

BUT peradventure it would be more agreeable, to dwell upon the blessed
tendency, and happy fruits of real grace. But however pleasing the attempt may
be, it opens so large a field, I may take but a partial survey. Here it maybe
observed; that if divine grace conforms the soul to God, and subdues whatever
is contrary to the divine will, the consequence will be, whatever the soul
finds to be the divine pleasure, (so far as it is of a gracious taste) it
stands ready, in a free, voluntary manner, to comport with, in practice; from
the tendency of a divine principle. No longer is it led by a servile mercenary
spirit: neither by slavish fears of penal evil, or hopes of honor among men:
not the force of law, so much as divine love, inclines the heart to obedience.
True religion effects a lovely harmony, between disposition and duty. If ye
love me keep my commandments.

MEN may abound in external duty, and remain utter strangers to the spirit of
true obedience. If there be no divine principle there can be no divine fruits.
But to the happy men, who are replenished with true wisdom; the ways of wisdom
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. This lays a happy
foundation for undisturbed peace; it calms every rising storm. Great peace have
those who love thy law: it administers soul-supporting cordials in days of
adversity. -- When we are fed with its bread, and the waters of affliction are
wrung out to us: do we see dark and threatening storms arise; are we threatened
with the loss of liberty, with servitude, vassallage and slavery? is the rod of
oppression ready to fall upon us, and are we alarmed with fears of evil, more
to be dreaded than death? are our best days placed behind us, that we must look
back to behold them? ah, lamentable state! the bitter fruit of our own folly.

BUT is there no soothing consideration? is there no balm in Gilead? -- The
holy soul, directed by heavenly wisdom, may take sanctuary in God; abide under
the shadow of the Almighty. Yea dwell in the secret place of the most high;
where no storms can approach us, or sorrows over-whelm us: -- Or while the holy
soul surveys Zion's troubles, and beholds her whom he can never forget, all
clad in sable attire, as wounded, prostrate on the earth, complaining that
iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold: that the body of Christ is
rent, the church divided and disturbed, and the ministration of the word and
ordinances of God blasted; the dues of heaven witholden, and profanity
abounding; yea the awful declension and apostasy of the times; what an
astonishing change in the state of religious affairs within a quarter of a
century? Here indeed the good man will drop a tear, and sigh bitterly. But yet
it comforts his heart that the Lord reigns, who is his rock and fortress; that
he pursues the wisest plan, and will yet comfort Zion, and bring light out of
darkness, and direct every event to accomplish the benevolent purposes of his
heart.

DIVINE grace makes the soul patient in tribulation, humble in prosperity, and
fruitful in every good work; prepares it for death, and brings it finally to
glory.

How happy a man is the sincere christian, whose character implies every
personal, social, and religious worth? For whatsoever things are pure, lovely,
or of good report, all are included in that grand and noble aggregate, The real
christian! Let us all learn to make a sacrifice of every wish, when it RUNS
COUNTER TO THE DIVINE PLEASURE.

BUT we may further pursue the pleasing prospect, while we consider the happy
tendency of vital piety, to heal the maladies, and rectify the disorders of the
church of Christ, in its present militant state.

As religious societies, bound in covenant to worship and walk with God, our
first and prime concern is with religion: that we pay our vows, and carefully
imitate the example of Christ: that we love God, in a disinterested and
superlative manner, and our neighbor as our selves: and thus to do, is but to
yield to, and follow the dictates of true wisdom.

BROTHERLY love is so essential to the character of a real disciple of Christ,
that the apostle says, it was needless for him to write to the church about
it; for ye are taught of God to love one another. How would this beautify the
church; heal all our divisions; cool the heats, and calm the tempers of
bigoted zealots; whose zeal is heat, without light; a flow of passions,
without the light of reason or revelation to direct them? Had wisdom its proper
ascendency, how would controversies cease, and professors appear more
solicitous to see that they are sound in the faith, than to prove their brother
heterodox, or blast their neighbor's character.

AGAIN, let us attend to the fruit of wisdom, as it tends to happify the civil
state. I am far from believing that dominion is founded in grace, that the fear
of the Lord intitles men to right, and authority to rule: though its fruits are
more precious than gold, and its revenues than choice silver, civil power over
the bodies and properties of men is never to be reckoned among them.

DOMINION, or right to rule, is evidently founded neither in nature or grace,
but compact, and confederation: antecedent whereto, one has no better right to
rule than another. He that is born of God, is become subject to the King of
kings: but has never the more power over his fellow creatures. Christ tells us,
his kingdom is not of this world. Though divine grace is an excellent
qualification in him that rules, it is not that in which right to rule is
founded. Property is founded in nature: what is my property can never be the
property of another man, so long as it remains mine. None can have right to
take possession of another's property, but by merit or compact, and when in
either of these methods, what was one man's property becomes another's due, it
cease to be his, and becomes the property of another. When we consider our
selve as confederate society, so much of personal property as is necessary for
the good* of the community, becomes due to the public, and such as are
interested with the public weal, have right to demand the public dues; and no
man is impoverished or injured by it: but then this must be done agreeable to
the general rules by which the society or community is constituted, and its
convenience and real good is secured: otherwise the constitution is violated.

-- But who shall judge in the case, or whether persons are holden to obey,
when the case is apparent, I refer to state politicians to determine. But thus
far I may venture to say, That no man ought to consider himself holden by
confederation, to disburst property to the known injury of the public, or the
subversion of the constitution: and whenever demands are made under such
circumstances, (which God grant may never be, till the sun become black as
sackcloth, and the moon as blood) let such as love slavery, hate the
constitution, and delight in public ruin, plead for the doctrine of passive
obedience, and non-resistance. What are the rules and maxims of the English
free government, the contents of magna charta, the special grants in colony
charters, together with what measures of administration are inconsistent and
subversive, has been repeatedly discussed in a public way.

MEN are naturally inclined to form themselves into society, and very great are
the benefits of so doing: without which, neither life or property would be
safe. He who shares in the benefits of civil society and government, is
confederate, and bound to obey authority. And the authority of God takes place,
and good conscience require us to keep the peace, and submit to proper
authority, so long as the design of government is inviolate. Rulers are
ministers of God, for good: He that resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God. And thus viewing the case, religion has much to do with the civil
state; and is necessary to its well being. And accordingly the gospel injoins
upon us obedience to the civil magistrate, and exhibits the true motives
thereto. History informs us, that heathen states have found a necessity to use
the religious doctrine of a future state of rewards and punishment: though they
(as modern free-thinkers suggest of the christian magistrate) used it only as
state policy. Perhaps there never was a state managed with decorum without it;
unless a mere theocracy: and perhaps this exception is needless: such dominion
has sin in the heart; and such is the power of pride, and the impetuosity of
lusts, and so are men in love with supremacy, that had they nothing to fear but
whips, fines, and imprisonment, they would not by these be restrained from
atrocious and horrid outrage: of this we can no longer doubt, who see what
blackened, inhumane deeds are committed among us, who enjoy both the gospel of
Christ, a christian magistracy, and the greatest civil privileges, and the best
body of laws. If there be not something internal, all external measures will
prove ineffectual.

BUT may I hope for your patience, while we further view the blessed tendency
of vital piety to happify the civil state? in that it would directly tend to
curtail and moderate the abounding extravagancy of the present age. Whatever is
expended, not for decency, health, or duty, but to gratify pride, and a modish
taste, serves to impoverish the state, to beggar families, and multiply
bankrupts, and numberless needless lawsuits, with all the train of evils that
follow. Now had men the same mind which was in Christ, all those evils would
subside, and virtue, industry, frugality, and temperance take place. Godliness
with contentment is the greatest gain. But to proceed to matters or awful
importance; true wisdom in its fruits, and happy tendency, would either prevent
all occasion of complaints, or compose the minds, and calm the tempers of
murmuring complainers, and malcontents, in the state.

As there is lamentable evidence, by facts, and observation, that in the best
regulations and mildest government, unreasonable men will take occasion to
complain without cause; so it had been happy had there never been real
occasion, and moving cause of complaint, and bitter grievance. But whether with
or without cause, there has been almost incessant complaints in succession. I
will go no further back than the times of general complaints, of a sinking,
depreciating medium of trade; which are too recent to be forgotten. And no
sooner were these abated, but the calamities of a bloody scene took place;
whereby our treasures were exhausted, taxes run high, and numberless lives
lost, and the morals of the youth sorely corrupted. And when this storm abated,
we were ready to promise our selves a golden era; when peace, plenty, and
tranquillity would succeed. And considering the glorious success of the British
and American arms, how the enemy were vanquished by sea and land; and what
advantages providence placed in the hands of Great Britain, to disenable an
invidious so to afford future trouble, with at least a color of reason, we
promised our selves that our land should yet be Emanuel's; and remain an asylum
for the oppressed; a land of peace and tranquillity. But alas! the uncertainty of
humane affairs, the weakness of humane prospects! the event has proved the
reverse. When our expectations were, raised to the highest pitch; the British
and American glory at the summit: What is become of the advantages, so lately
in the nation's hands? Ah, where is our peace and tranquillity? a sinking medium
was never more loudly complained of, than its scarcity is now. And to add to
our distress, trade, the only resource in such case, incumbered, and in great
measure ruined. And unpayable duties enacted: and liberty, darling liberty, and
inestimable privileges, which these self-settled colonies, (it is said)
referved, as a condition of submitting to the British crown, and hold as
sacred, and for which our pious ancestors left their native foil, and to
transmit which to posterity, suffered hardship, poverty and death; liberty, for
which we have warred, and suffered the loss of blood and treasure. Hope in
these days, appeared on the wing, ready to bid adieu, and leave us in thraldom,
poverty and bondage. Hitherto in fix troubles and seven, we have been
delivered; but now, good God! whither shall we turn? to whom shall we look? Can
we stand as disinterested spectators, and see the ruin of our country? without
a tear, without a dying struggle: If I am I unable to govern the tender
passion, let the nature of the case apologize. Can any born among us, nourished
and caressed in a free air, put to an impious hand to urge on ruin? and can
such be owned a friend to his country, or to filthy lucre only? with whom
justice permits me to rank, such as cross the atlantic, to import episcopal
tyranny, and such superstition, as our predecessors fled hither to escape.

Now in all our complaints and remonstrances (I am sorry to have occasion to
say it) I am fearful we have not been directed by wisdom, nor attended to the
true cause: but rather overlooked the main point. There has been very grievous
complaints, of oppression, tyranny, and corrupt and designing ministry: And of
home bred abettors of tyranny, and well wishers to the late regulations. But
however just this may be, are we not reproved as Job was, in those words. They
cry out by reason of oppression, but none says, where is God my maker who
gives songs in the night. Though we have seen much, have we seen enough in the
case? Who is the moral governor of the world? Is there not a cause? Is there
any evil in the city, which the Lord has not done? Have we been suitably humble
under frowns, deeply sensible of our sin, and contempt of gospel grace, and
kissed the son lest he be angry, and put on sackcloth? judged, and condemned
ourselves? -- for verily it is our iniquities, which have separated us from
God, and the smiles of his providence. Methinks at least we might have as good
a degree of sensibility, as Saul had, after God had rejected him, who could
say, I have sinned, and done foolishly. -- When the king of Babylon plundered
the city and temple of Jerusalem, and captivated the people of God, God used
him as his rod, to punish the sins of Israel. Now how pitiful had been the
case, if Israel had attended to nothing in their troubles, but the pride and
tyranny of their conqueror? and how lamentable is our state, if we see not the
rod, nor the hand that has appointed it. -- Now had we been wise, we had either
never provoked God to such use of severity: or have conducted quite differently
under it: and learnt more sensibly, how evil and bitter a thing it is to sin
against God. Yea we might take sanctuary in God. Such people are prepared for
every event. All shall work for the good of such. Whatever difficulties attend
church or state, people of this character may rejoice that God reigns, and will
defend Zion, and plead her cause.

BUT having tried your patience so long already, I will mention that one more
of the glorious fruits of true wisdom, viz. It will spirit rulers to
faithfulness, not only in making good and wholesome laws, but also in nominating
faithful men to execute them. The most elaborate, salutary body of laws, will
never avail to the health and welfare of the state, unless they are properly
executed. And there is little hope of this, unless it be committed to faithful
men. GOOD rulers, who fear God, will attempt to effect God's design in their
preferment: which the divine oracle informs us, is the good of the people: They
are ministers of God for good. And from the same principle people will lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Where people are
voluntary in doing well, coercive measures are needless. True religion will
give rulers pleasure in gently holding the reins of government: and dispose
people to practice holiness in the fear of God, Godliness with contentment, is
great gain.

THUS we have taken a summary imperfect account of the excellent nature, and
enriching revenues, of true wisdom. And omitting all practical inferences, I
may add nothing more, but only in few words to address myself, with all
humility, to his honor the governor, the deputy governor, and the honorable
general assembly.

MAY it please your honors, and you honorable gentlemen, in ordinary
circumstances, to dictate or prescribe to your sagacious minds, might excite
conciousness of too great a degree of assurance: But since in present
circumstances, an attempt of such a nature is an act obedience; I have the more
reason to hope you will suffer me to intimate a few things.

IT is with the utmost propriety, that the important affairs of this day be
opened with a solemn act of divine worship. From whence can the politician go,
to the arduous affairs of government, which besure in the present day of tumult
requires coolness, deliberation, and sacred regard to the deity, better than
from the house of God, where we have not only supplicated for mercy, but had
the nature of true religion opened, and the fruits of wisdom exhibited to view?
How happy for the soul replenished with it, and how blessed in its tendency
relative to the church and state.

SINCE it has pleased the wise governor of the world, in the course of
providence, to raise you to eminent honor, dignity, and influence, and
committed to you the public weal, no doubt but in ordinary circumstances of
affairs, and peculiarly in present situation, wisdom will be of excellent
service to you. I need not intimate your mortality, that you must die like
other men: that your honor and dignity will prove no security to you: The time
is approaching, when your honor must be covered in dust, and your situation be
on a level with the meanest peasant. The severe and awful frown of heaven upon
the nation and land, in the removal of the duke of Cumberland, an amiable
prince; a father to the poor; auspicious to English liberty, and a fast friend
to the good of the colonies: together with the death of prince Frederick
William, a lovely member of the royal family, of late has clothed multitudes
in sable attire; and may well remind all, what will be the state of the fabric
when the pillars are removed. These, together with a recent instance of
mortality, in one of your number, a useful member of the honorable council, no
doubt has sensibly reminded your honors of your own mortality.

SUFFER me then to recommend it to your honors, and you honorable gentlemen,
to maintain an intimate acquaintance with true wisdom, as what will not only
qualify for, and assist in government, but also administer peace in the
important hour of death. And as far as possible, patronise and countenance
wisdom and virtue in the people governed by your laws, as nursing fathers to
the church of Christ. Though civil laws are not means calculated to make men
gracious, yet religion may be owned and encouraged by the civil magistrate;
both by your example, and the proper exertion of authority.

I SHALL not trouble your honors, by urging any alteration of, or addition to
the religious constitution of the colony. We have not a wish, that men may be
compelled by law, to support a religion from which they soberly dissent. The
act of toleration is to the honor of the nation. If dissenters here would
impose such taxes on such as soberly dissent from us, they forget their
brethren at home; and the apostle's just remark -- Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man, for thou who judges do the same things. --

BUT though I have not the vanity to prescribe laws, or teach your honors the
art of ruling, yet we earnestly entreat the utmost exertion of your wisdom, to
protect and prolong our tranquillity; our civil and religious liberties,
privileges and constitution: And that the seminary of learning, so much the
glory of the colony, may be supported, and continue the subject of your
patriotick care. -- That peculiar care may be exercised in the appointment of
executive authority: in order that we may be governed by your laws. And we hope
that in this day of trial and exercise, the usual chambering and wantonness, in
the view of the honorable assembly, may no more give countenance to, or
patronize the like misuse of time and treasures, in any part of the colony.

FINALLY, may heaven grant, whoever shall fill the chair, or assist in council,
may have an heart truly wise, be cordial friends to Christ and his church, and
patriots to the republic.

WILL modesty permit me to attempt a brief address to my fathers and brethren
in the ministry?

REVEREND fathers, and dear brethren;

THE imperfect account we have heard of the genuine nature and happy fruits of
wisdom, may serve to bring to mind, in a sensible and affecting manner, the
great honor which the glorious head of the church has conferred upon us, in
the blessed office and employment he has assigned to us; even to open to view
the nature of religion, and by every proper motive, to persuade men to be wise;
knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. The design of our sacred
office is of such vast importance, and so directly tends to do honor to
Christ, to happify men, to build up Zion, and do good to the civil state;
wherein we have so glorious an opportunity to do good in an extensive way, that
we may think our selves happy in the utmost exertion of our powers, and
improvement of our talents in so noble a cause, whatever we suffer therein.

WHILE with a just and becoming sense of the worth of immortal souls, the
importance of eternal life, the glorious fullness and sufficiency of Christ, and
the perilous state of the irregenerate; we account not even our life dear to
us, but willingly spend, and be spent, in imitation of the great apostle of the
Gentiles, who labored, striving according to the power of God, which wrought
in him mightily.

I CAN sensibly sympathise with you, in the trials which are common to our
calling and character: but the memorable words of Christ, may well quiet every
impatient frame, it is sufficient for the disciple to be as his lord.

PERHAPS we never saw the day in which there was a louder call to painful
exertion, to be prudent, wise, steady, resolute, and zealous, in preaching (not
ourselves, but) Christ Jesus the Lord. The enemies of religion abound, and the
love of many waxes cold. May the Lord direct us, and divine grace support us,
for we are sent as sheep among wolves. But lo, says Christ, I am with you to
the end of the world. -- If we may be so happy as to confront and confute the
prevailing heresy of the day; and make a noble stand against error; convince
gainsayers, alarm the secure, edify, comfort, and feed the sheep of Christ's
fold, we shall have the pleasure and honor to please God, advance the
Redeemer's kingdom, and of doing the most important service to the civil state.
And I imagine we shall act but a decent part, in leading our respective
congregations, in ascribing glory to God, that our civil and religious
liberties and privileges have been so long continued; and that there is any
grounds to hope for future enjoyment: for as cold water is to the thirsty soul,
so is good news from a far country. As we have had general intelligence, by
private letters from merchants in London, of a new turn of affairs in
parliament, in favor to the colonies, through the influence of merchant^* and
especially the unanswerable and cogent reasonings of Mr. PIT, of immortal
memory in America.


BUT it is more than time that I conclude with a brief address to this numerous
congregation.

GENTLEMEN and BRETHREN,

SUFFER me to take this opportunity, from pure benevolence, and an heart
mastered with a tender concern for the good of my fellow men, -- to recommend
to you an ardent, painful pursuit after true wisdom. You have heard something
of its nature, and glorious fruits, more precious than gold, yea than much fine
gold: it is a blessing of great importance in such a day as this; men greedy of
gain, will do wisely to seek it in this way: never was wisdom more needed than
in our day, whether it be understood in a theological, philosophical, or
political sense: -- this will enable us either to escape calamities, or to be
patient under them, and make the best improvement of them.

PEOPLE who have no other pilot but interest, fancy, and humor, while they are
crossed in their designs, and pressed with perplexing difficulties; while all
their attention is engaged to escape Scilla, are in danger of falling into
Charibdis. Suffer me then to urge it upon every age, sex, and denomination to
make religion your first and great care. -- There are many moving things which
urge it upon us: The honor of the Deity; the soul's peace and safety; the
harmony and good order of the church; the honor, peace and harmony of the
civil community; all call upon us to search for wisdom as for hidden treasure.
That we improve a golden season, while our liberty and privileges are enjoyed,
and divine patience is exercised, least (while with Agag we promise our selves
that the bitterness of death is past) we so abuse our liberties, and the divine
benignity, as to occasion distresses which we can neither escape nor endure:
and we mourn at last, when our flesh and our body are consumed, and say, How
have we hated instruction. Remember it is written, The ways of a man, are
before the eyes of the lord, and he pondereth all his goings: His own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords
of his sins. He shall die without instruction, and in the greatness of his
folly he shall go astray.

BUT the singular circumstances of the present day will justify me in observing
to you, that the honor and authority of the King, Lords, and Commons, must be
upheld by all lawful means. Let our possession of property and privileges be
all improved to the same glorious purpose, for which our ancestors took
possession here, by purchase or conquest: and if our liberties may be enjoyed,
let no man abuse them; if they should be threatened, may heavenly wisdom direct
us to the most justifiable methods to vindicate them.

FINALLY, may we walk in wisdom's ways, for they are pleasant, and all her
paths are peace.

FINIS.

