THE IMPORTANCE OF THE COLONIES of NORTH AMERICA, And the INTEREST of GREAT
BRITAIN with Regard to them, CONSIDERED.

[Price One Shilling.]

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE COLONIES of NORTH AMERICA, And the INTEREST of GREAT
BRITAIN with regard to them, CONSIDERED. Together with REMARKS on the
STAMP-DUTY.

Lo! swarming over the new discovered World,
Gay Colonies extend; the calm Retreat
Of undeserved Distress. --
-- Bound by sacred Freedom, firm they rise;
Of Britain's Empire the Support and Strength.
THOMSON. By NICHOLAS RAY, now of LONDON; a Native, and formerly a Citizen of
NEW YORK.

LONDON, printed: NEW YORK, reprinted, 1766.

By JOHN HOLT at the EXCHANGE; At the Cost of the Author, and by his Desire to
be sold for the Benefit of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts,
Manufactures and Agriculture, in NEW YORK.

THE IMPORTANCE, etc.
WITHIN these few Years frequent have been the Alarms that the State was in
Danger, nor would I venture to affirm that they have always been without
Foundation. We have had powerful Enemies abroad, distressed Allies to support,
Rebellion at home, Faction and Discontent among the People, which has risen to
an enormous Height, and has even extended itself to our Colonies in North
America, where the Spirit of Riot has broke out at Boston, and with the utmost
Violence attacked several of the Kings's Officers, plundered their Houses, and
robbed them of their Effects, and set Government at Defiance. Encouraged by
this Example, the Multitude at Rhode Island were proceeding to the same
Violences, so that some of the principal Inhabitants, it is said, were obliged
to betake themselves to Ships to avoid their Rage. How alarming are such Acts
of Violence in a civilized Country, and subversive of all Order and good
Government, which every good and loyal Subject ought to support to the utmost
of his Power? But although the other Colonies, much to their Honor, have not
proceeded to such Violence, yet we are well assured that great Uneasiness and
Discontent prevails in all of them, on account of an Act of Parliament,
imposing a Stamp-Duty, to which, they say, if they submit, it will be an
Introduction to all the Variety of Taxes which are paid in England, besides the
numerous Taxes imposed on them by their own Representatives.

To justify themselves in this Disobedience to the Act, they presume to call
the Right of the House of Commons over them in question. This is a Matter of
such Importance, that it cannot fail of being one of the first Things
considered by that august House, when their own Dignity, and Justice to the
Colonies, I hope, will both be defended and supported; and in the mean Time I
wish to see the Ministry act with Spirit on this most important Occasion, but
should be sorry to see their Actions were mere Deeds of Power; for it should
always be remembered, that the Colonies are our Brethren and Fellow Subjects,
freeborn Britons equally as we are, and entitled equally with us to every
Right and Privilege of Britons. We should inquire, therefore, whether we have
behaved to them as Brethren? and whether we have not exacted from them what we
should have judged extremely hard to have suffered ourselves? The first Right
of a Briton is, that he cannot be tried but by his Peers; the next, that he
cannot be taxed but by a Parliament, in which he is represented, or by
Gentlemen who pay a Share of the Tax they impose on him; for the Law, not
trusting too much to Virtue, wisely proceeds on this Supposition, that however
inattentive a Man may be to the Concerns of others, he will probably pay some
Regard to his own Interest; and it is in this View that the Law requires a Man
to be possessed of a certain Estate, to entitle him to represent others. Are
the Colonies then in this Manner represented in the Parliament of
Great Britain? Do those who impose Taxes on them pay also a Share of those
Taxes? If this is not the Case, what have the Colonies done that they should be
stripped of one of the most valuable Privileges of Britons? Have the Parliament
a Right to take from the lowest of the Subjects the smallest Privilege which he
inherits, unless forfeited by Law? Do not misunderstand me. I do not by any
Means call the Power of Parliament in question; I know they are in many Cases
omnipotent; they may, of Power, pass a Law by which any Colony should be
deprived the Privilege of being tried by Jury; but I ask, could they of Right
do it? for between Power and Right is a very great Difference.

It is said, and I believe truly, that, in 1763, when the Sugar-Act passed,
that the Stamp-Duty was then under Consideration; but the evil Consequence
being represented, it was resolved by the then Ministry to put it off, in order
to have the Sense of the Colonies on it; they, therefore, last Sessions would
have applied by Petition to Parliament against the Manner of imposing the
Stamp Act; but I am informed no Member would present their Petitions, for it
seems it was against the Forms of the House. That honorable House ought to
know best whether Forms ought to stand in the Way of Right, especially when so
great a Part of this Empire desired to be heard: If a Charter of Magna Charta
had been the Impediment, it should be removed, it should be annulled.

This Rejection to be heard, has caused all the Colonies to resolve to send
Deputies from their Assemblies to meet at New York; from whence, it is
probable, they will again attempt to petition Parliament. If their Demands are
reasonable, Justice requires that so vast a Part of this Empire should be
heard; and I am well convinced that they will demand nothing that is
unreasonable, or inconsistent with the Laws.

The utmost Wisdom of Parliament will be wanted on this most important
Occasion; and no Member, it is hoped, will advise an improper Exertion of
Power. It is the true Interest of Britain to acquire and retain, not to
alienate the Affections of her Colonies, which surpass most Kingdoms of Europe
in Power and Number of People; and this can only be done by kind Usage, and
always considering them, as they most certainly are in all Respects, on the
same Footing with ourselves, and of Right entitled to every Privilege that we
in England enjoy.

The Colonies are so many distant Provinces of the British Empire, and which
add great Dignity and Power to it, and will continue to do so infinitely more;
but if, instead of improving this vast Accession of Dominion to our mutual
Advantage, we make Enemies of our Friends and Fellow Subjects, and thereby
convert this Blessing of Heaven into a Curse, then, indeed, we may have Cause
to weep, and to mourn over our late Conquests, whilst every Power in Europe
would rejoice in our Divisions and Distractions, which they already do, and
will not fail to encourage.

Never, therefore, did the Welfare, and even Independence, of this Kingdom call
more for the utmost Wisdom and united Counsels of the Government, than on this
most important Occasion; for it should be remembered, that the British Empire
on the Continent of North America extends more than 2000 Miles, in which is
every Kind of Soil and Climate, and therefore yields, in great Plenty, near all
the Productions of Europe, and is certainly capable of producing every Kind of
Fruits that any Part of the World is known to afford.

Besides these Blessings of Life, they have all the Sinews of Power. The Earth
is known to contain innumerable Iron Mines, endless Forests of Oak and other
Timber, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax; vast Banks, Rivers, Bays, Harbors, abounding
with the greatest Fisheries on the Globe; so that not a Doubt can be
entertained that this vast Country will, in Time, become the greatest Empire
that the World has ever seen; and this Opinion is confirmed by the rapid
Progress they have made since 1621, when a few persecuted People first went
thither, and who are now become near three Millions; these, in a Country where
Land is so easily had, and which occasions early Marriages, cannot fail, in
twenty-five Years, of becoming six Millions, which is about equal to the People
of England; and this Increase will continue in a Country, whose Bounds westward
are unknown.

This is such a striking Prospect of increasing Population in those Regions, as
should induce us to desert the Idea of being long able to subject them to our
Power. They have already often aided us in our American Wars, and they will
soon be able to do so in Europe; we ought therefore to adopt true Policy,
which, is, to rule them with Lenity, for that only can continue for Ages, what
an Exertion of Power might fail to secure for a few Years.

The great Uneasiness and Discontent of the Colonies, having taken its Rise
from the Stamp Duty laid on them; this, we see, has set them upon estimating
for themselves, and of their Utility to us; and accordingly they set a Value
upon themselves, and we ought to be aware how very strongly the Estimation of
their own Utility will on all Occasions operate on their Minds. The
North-Americans say, they have been toiling for the Mother Country; that the
Fruits of all their Labor centers here; that therefore, if they are not
considered as Children, their Treatment is that of Slaves, and therefore, if
oppressed, they must unite. They accordingly cry out for Union, which has
produced a Congress of all the Colonies, whose Deputies are now assembled at
New York, which is first proposed for Representation only; but should they not
succeed, we should be aware of what they may next proceed to consult on; as
also what may prove the Consequence of rooted Hatred and Desperation.

I therefore cannot help censuring those to be tyrannic Principles, which are
for dragooning, and an Exertion of Power and Authority, because I am well
convinced that true Policy often dictates to Authority to yield upon critical
Exigencies; the highest Authority has often done it with true Wisdom, in this
Kingdom, as in the proposed Excise on Wine and Tobacco in 1733, and in 1755
repealing the Jew Bill. We ought always to give Applause to those who, by
restoring Harmony, prevent Desperation.

True Principles of Policy and Commerce, abhor Restrictions that tend to
prevent our Colonies of North America from enriching themselves by other
States, for such are a Prejudice to the Mother Country; because all the Riches
which they acquire, must, in some Shape or other, center here; and to prove
this, you can have no better Authority than the Course of Exchange; and how
immensely that is against the Colonies, must be known to all Men. Whatever
therefore they get, they only subsist themselves, being always kept in a State
of deep Debt to us. What can we desire more? And whom can we injure more by
Restrictions and severe Laws than ourselves?

Restraints on their Trade then certainly is very impolitic; for whatver Trade
they carry on, if they get but a Balance in their Favor, it must turn to our
Advantage; and surely, of all Instruments for ruining and suppressing Trade,
Military and Marine are the most detestable; their arbitrary Principles are
incompatible with Commerce, which can never flourish but with Mildness and
Encouragement; nor ought Vice Admiralty Courts to be entrusted with Power over
Commerce.

As to the Stamp and other Taxes, if they have not Money enough even to pay for
our Manufactures, nothing can be gained by attempting to tax them; because if
you take their Money for Taxes, you lose it in Commerce, which must end in the
Ruin of your Merchants, and numerous Manufacturers; for what is gained by Taxes
is so much Loss to Trade; the draining therefore from them every Farthing of
their Money by Trade, and then demanding from them more by Taxes, is absolutely
reducing them to Egyptian Slavery, of making Bricks without Straw.

In short, the great Object with Regard to North America is vending our
Manufactures, which, the more they are enabled to buy, so much the better it
must be for us in the Employment of our People at home, and the Returns we
receive; and the less we study to perplex ourselves, by attempting to tax them,
the more it will be to our Advantage, and contribute to the Peace and
Prosperity of both Countries.

The ruling Policy of every State is unquestionably Self-Interest; the Policy
therefore of every State of Europe, and particularly our inveterate Enemies,
must induce them to wish a Revolt of our Colonies on the Continent of
North America; and they would not fail of supporting them, either openly or
secretly, in doing it, whereby that whole Continent would be thrown open to
them in Point of Trade, which this Kingdom now alone enjoys. The Part which
both England and France took when Holland revolted from Spain, proves that my
Apprehensions are not ill grounded; if therefore Severity is used, to enforce
an unpopular Act, and that Desperation should ensue, it would not only be
Matter of great Joy to our inveterate Enemies, but they would second such
Disobedience with all their Power, in order to confirm it, and thereby hope to
reduce the Dignity and Power of Great Britain; and in such dreadful Situation,
which (God forbid) the Evil would not stop in North America, for the West
Indies would most probably follow the Fortune of the Continent. It should
always be remembered, that Spain lost both Portugal and Holland by her Acts of
Severity; and in those famous Revolutions every Power of Europe rejoiced. We
ought therefore to be very careful in our Conduct toward the Americans, whom,
in all Probability, every Power in Europe would encourage to Rebellion, whereby
they would greatly weaken this Kingdom, and advance their own Interest.

Such Considerations as these should point out to this Kingdom the right Rule
of Policy to be pursued with regard to our Colonies, which contain near three
Millions of People; and this Rule is, to acquire and retain by Acts of Lenity
and Mildness, the Affections of our Colonies, and not to alienate them by
Severity; for the Time will approach, in which it will become extremely
dangerous to attempt ruling so vast a Continent, already abounding with
Millions, by the Iron Rod of Power, the Sway of which will only make them the
sooner refractory; and when the Fire of Resistance is once kindled, there is no
foreseeing how far it may spread. The Desire of Independence is inherent in all
Men, and few will long bear even imaginary Grievances, with the Means in their
Hands, however desperate, of shaking them off. This has been seen in Rome,
which was once the Mistress of the World, the Seat of Arts, Empire, and Glory;
but who, by her Oppression of a Part of Asia, Africa, and the greatest Part of
Europe, which could no longer bear the Severity of her Government, forced them
to renounce her Jurisdiction, and set up for themselves; in consequence of
which, great Kingdoms arose; and this Country, ( Britain) anciently the Jest of
the polite Romans, became the happy Seat of Liberty, Plenty, and Power, whilst
her former Sovereign ( Rome) lies sunk into Slavery, Ignorance, and Poverty.
Let this be a Warning to us how we conduct ourselves to our Colonies, who, for
the first Time, are now united in a Congress at New York; from this Union of
their Councils, we cannot tell what they will resolve, but, from all Accounts,
many of the People seem ripe for Desperation, because they think themselves
oppressed. We should remember that they are Englishmen, and many of them
inherit from their Ancestors republican Principles, which they carried thither
during the civil Wars; being persecuted here, they fled to the Forests of
America for the Sake of Liberty; their Sons are all of them actuated by the
same Principles of Liberty, which Spirit perhaps is more prevalent there than
in this Kingdom.

For these reasons great Care ought to be taken in our Conduct toward the
Americans. To attract willing Obedience from them must always be more safe than
to exact it by Compulsion; and it can never deserve Reproach to correct human
Policy and Error. The Rulers of Kingdoms, no more than other Men, are always
wise; and when they are not so, it is happy if they see their Errors before it
is too late, and not persevere in them through Obstinacy, rather than discover
to the World that they have been wrong, as has frequently been the Case, even
to the producing the very worst Effects; but we are at present exposed to no
such Hazard from the Measures that have embroiled our Colonies, because our
present Ministers cannot be interested in the covering or supporting the Errors
of the last. I hope in these Thoughts to be rightly understood; my Meaning is,
to point out the true Policy that I think this Kingdom ought to pursue; for the
single Object of Union between us and the Colonies, is undoubtedly Convenience
and Self-interest; for if we had no Views of reaping Profit, or an Accession of
Power from North America, we should not concern ourselves farther about them,
than to prevent their falling into other Hands, to the endangering us: And the
Affection of the North-Americans to this Nation, from which they sprung,
together with the Protection which they received in their infant State, secures
their Duty and Loyalty.

But in all Debates at this Time, too much Stress is laid on that Protection,
since whatever we did for them was with a View to serve ourselves; and, to
speak the Truth, our persecuting the Dissenters in the Times of James and
Charles I. by Commission and Spiritual Courts, compelled the Ancestors of the
People of New England to fly thither from Ecclesiastical Tyranny.

The same Spirit of Persecution prevailed against the Quakers in the latter End
of the Reign of Charles II. and, being made very uneasy through Popish Bigotry,
Mr. Penn, that modern Lycurgus, solicited and obtained a Grant of Pennsylvania.
Thither he took great Numbers of Quakers at his own Expense, which were
followed by many others, in order there to enjoy their innocent and
conscientious Opinions.

Thus it appears that the four Colonies of New England and Pennsylvania were
peopled by our Persecution, and without receiving any other Aid than that of
Protection only, and for which they have not been ungrateful; for it should be
remembered, that, in consequence of our Wars in Europe, whenever we sent an
Expedition to America, we have always been assisted by our Colonies, to the
utmost of their Power; for in 1690, when Sir William Phipps was sent against
Canada, New England alone sent 3000 Men and forty Transports; and in the
Expedition under General Hill, in the Reign of Queen Anne, against the same
Country, the Colonies sent 6000 Men. In 1739, at the Request of the Government,
4000 men were instantly raised in the Colonies, and sent, at their own Expense,
to Jamaica, the Place of Rendezous, from whence they were conveyed to
Carthagena, and there used. In the Course of that War, when our Affairs looked
deplorable enough in Europe, New England, even without our Knowledge, or a
single Soldier from Britain, undertook the Conquest of Cape-Breton; they
succeeded in it, and thereby gave Peace to this Kingdom. During the late War
they had 20,000 Men in Arms against the Enemy in North America, and when the
French were totally conquered there, they seconded our Designs in South-America
against the Havannah, which important Place, it is said, would not have been
taken, but by the seasonable Arrival of the Troops from New York, when our own
were swept away by a raging Distemper: For these, and many more of their
Services, Duty, and Loyalty, they claim the Liberty of British Subjects, and to
which they affirm they have an hereditary Right.

They have now no European Power that they can dread in their Neighborhood,
and their own internal Power is very considerable, and this will increase very
fast, which a just and gentle Sway may for Ages connect to this Kingdom; they
will be held to it by the Ties of Consanguinity, Religion, Language, Manners,
Customs, and Laws; these, with good Usage, will long secure them to us; for
they will always consider us as their safest and best Friend in Europe.

But our greatest Security and Power over them, must consist in their Disunion
as Colonies; but unhappily the Stamp Act has absolutely driven them to cry out
for Union, and accordingly their Councils are now united in a Congress at
New York. They will now feel their Power, and become sensible of the Dutch
Motto, that Unity gives Strength.

The Advantages which we seek from the Colonies are in a commercial Way, and as
they add to our Power, we should therefore, by Plans of mild Government,
attract them as Colonies respectively; and we should rather make them Rivals
for our Favor, than united Friends in opposing us. We must not think that the
North-Americans, who have a watchful Eye over our Proceedings, and are greatly
jealous of their Liberty, will suffer their Properties and Interests to be
misapplied. America is every Year growing more inviting, and Great Britain
perhaps more disgusting; in which Case her Strength will increase, whilst our's
will decrease, for we daily see many of our Manufacturers and useful People
getting on that Side of the Water. In short, the Means most apparently solid
for securing our Colonies to us, must be, to favor their Industry in every Way
but manufacturing, and securing to ourselves the Fruits thereof, by furnishing
them with our Manufactures on cheaper Terms than they can procure them
elsewhere; this will tend to promote mutual Harmony and Prosperity, and a
lasting Union with our Colonies respectively, without weakening their natural
Rivalries, which, though we need not foment, we should not wish to lessen, nor by
any Means by unpopular Acts drive them to Union; but this unfortunately has
been done by the Stamp Act, since the passing which, and the Sugar-Act of 1763,
great Numbers of our Manufacturers have been invited and are gone to settle in
North America, the Effects of which are already, and will soon be much more
severely felt in this Kingdom.

It is a mistaken Policy to attempt making the North-Americans Slaves to our
Interest or Power, for they are too knowing to be made the former, and too high
spirited to become the latter; the only Way to keep them dependent on this
Kingdom, must proceed from the Wisdom and Rectitude of the Government; no
distinct Interest must be pursued, and, above all, the landed Interest must not
be favored at the Expense of the commercial; for the landed Interest can only
be supported by the Prosperity of Commerce, in which we should indulge the
Americans as much as in our Power, and thereby take off their Attention from
becoming Manufacturers. This only is true Policy, and on such Principles we
should begin with preventing them from being harrassed by Vice Admiralty
Courts, and remove every existing Cause of just Complaint, and we should
consider their Prosperity as the Source of our Riches; by this Conduct we
should restore Content and Harmony both here, there, and between us. This is
the true System which I think ought to be observed, and those who fail in
pursuing it, will be the just Abhorrence both of Britons and Americans.

But to return to the Stamp Act, in the Preamble of which it is said to be just
and necessary that Provision be made for raising a further Revenue toward
defraying the Expenses of defending, protecting, and securing the Colonies in
America.

It would not only be imprudent, but ill become me to attack the Wisdom of that
House, of which I always desire to think and speak with Respect; but I cannot
help remarking, that for a Century past, whilst Canada and Louisiana were in
the Hands of France, the Colonies wanted no such Defense or Security from
England, for they defended themselves; but now, when Louisiana, Cape-Breton,
and Canada are all reduced to the Obedience of, and possessed by the Crown of
England, now that there is not a French Subject left on that Continent, it is
though it necessary to keep a considerable Army in the Colonies, for the Support of
which this grievous and unpopular Act is imposed; but it has been said, they
are necessary to reduce the Indians; this, though a very idle one, I know was the
Pretext. The Colonies have defended themselves a hundred Years since against
the Indians, and are they now all of a sudden become unable, with the Addition
of several hundred thousand Men? This is extraordinary indeed! But if the
Indians were not inclined to live in Peace, it would be very hard if the
Colonies could not bring them to Subjection without the Crown keeping a
numerous Body of Troops in a Country where Soldiers are so very disagreeable;
and not only so, but to lay heavy Duties on Merchandise and even a Stamp-Tax,
for the Support of such Troops, and in a Country where every Man by Beat of
Drum is obliged to appear under Arms; for all the Colonies are formed in a
regular and well-disciplined Militia; and they are so sensible of their
Numbers, that they would be extremely glad to see every Soldier embark for
England, since they are are of no Use, but a Burden to the Colonies, whose
real Defense and Protection is received from the Valor of their own native
Militia; nor have they an Enemy worth Notice within 3000 of them.

With the recalling therefore of those Troops from among them, the Cause of the
Stamp Tax will be removed; the Colonies would then resume their Trade, which is
now ruined; and their Heads, which are at present full of manufacturing, would
be employed on Schemes of Commerce and Navigation; the Fruits of all their
Labor would continue to center in Great Britain; and the Language which they
now hold, that they are treated not as Englishmen, but as Aliens and Slaves,
would immediately subside; their Affections and Labors would be united in
promoting the Trade and Interest of this Kingdom, and all Things would return
to their late happy and prosperous State.

But it may perhaps be said, that admitting the Parliament were convinced of
the Inability of the Colonies paying the Stamp-Duty, and that they were
inclined to repeal the Act, but that the Americans, by denying the Authority of
that august House to impose internal Taxes on them, has, as it were, put it out
of the Power of Parliament to repeal the Act, because their Dignity is
concerned.

To which I answer, that as to the Authority of Parliament, that august House
can resolve, that their legislative Power is not confined to Great Britain, but
does extend over the whole British Empire; that it is hereditary and inherent
in them; and that they will defend and support such their Authority and Dignity
whenever Occasion shall require.

After this, if they are convinced of the Impropriety of the Act, they can, I
humbly conceive, consistently with their Honor, suspend its Execution for
twelve Months, or any other Period of Time, till a new Parliament, when some
small commercial Tax may be laid on them, and this abrogated.

FINIS.

