THE NEW CREATURE DELINEATED.

IN A SERMON, DELIVERED in Philadelphia, February 26, 1767, By JOHN BLAIR, A.
M. MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL at Fag's Manor.

PUBLISHED at the Request of a Number of the HEARERS.

EPHESIANS. ii. 10. For we are his Workmanship, created in CHRIST JESUS unto good
Works, which GOD has before ordained that we should walk in them.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM and THOMAS BRADFORD, at the London
Coffee-House. M,DCC,LXVII.

PREFACE.
Candid READER,
I OFFER no other apology for the appearance of this plain unadorned Discourse
from the Press, than, that it is in Compliance with the desire of a number of
friends, who were pleased to solicit a copy, in order to its publication. As I
had no thoughts of any such thing as the printing of the Sermon, when I
prepared it for the Pulpit, I took very imperfect notes of only the doctrinal
part; it cannot therefore be expected, that it now appears verbatim, as it was
delivered. However, the thoughts are substantially the same, though, perhaps,
sometimes a little transposed, and in some parts a little enlargement of
argument. Such thoughts as seemed to be properly new, i. e. did not occur in
the delivery, I have chiefly thrown into marginal notes. -- The reader will,
indeed, find in this discourse, neither novelty of thought to gratify his
curiosity, nor elegance of composition, to raise in him a kind of superficial
pleasure. But let the vast importance of the subject, with respect to his
eternal interest, recommend it to his solemn and serious Attention. If it shall
please GOD to bless it, to the edification of his people, and the conversion of
sinners, therein will be fulfiled the highest wishes of,

Courteous Reader, Thy Soul's Servant for Christ's sake, JOHN BLAIR.
Fag's Manor, March 14, 1767.
A SERMON, etc.
II CORINTHIANS v. 17. Therefore if any man be in CHRIST, he is a new creature:
old things are past away, behold all things are become new.


IT is no uncommon thing for the men of this world to look upon the people of
GOD as beside themselves. They account their fervency and spirituality in
Religion enthusiasm. This imputation the Apostle obviates in the 13th verse of
our Context; and vindicates himself and brethren by considering the greatness
of the object, and importance of the matter of their exercise. If you reckon us
besides ourselves, it is, (as though the Apostle had said) to GOD, who is worthy
of the warmest devotion; though, sometimes, for your sakes we suppress the
emotion of our affections, that we may address you with sober solemn arguments.
-- It is impossible to have any proper sense of the love of CHRIST, expressed
by his dying for us, and not feel a mighty energy from it upon the heart. He
died in order to deliver such as were in a legal and spiritual sense dead, from
their wretched and woeful condition, and restore them to life. -- A life devoted
to his honor and service. -- He died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him who died for them, and rose again.

HENCE they are raised above the government of carnal principles, nor do they
live according to the course of this world: they know no man after the flesh,
so as to accommodate themselves to his carnal relish and principles. True
Christians live under the impression of divine and spiritual truths, and though
they know not CHRIST, nor converse with him in that manner in which the
Disciples did in the days of his flesh here below, yet they have a spiritual
acquaintance and intercourse with him. Their life must, therefore, be such as
the maxims and principles are, upon which it is formed; and consequently, very
different from that course, in which the men of this world live. The illative
particle therefore, shows that the words of my text are a native inference from
the forementioned considerations. The words are an hypothetical proposition, in
the antecedent of which, we have the state and condition of true Christians
expressed. They are in CHRIST. That is, they are united to him by faith, have
an interest in his person, righteousness, and all the benefits of his purchase,
and have his Spirit dwelling in them. -- The consequent gives us their
character. They are new creatures. If any man be in CHRIST, he is a new
creature. The word might be rendered a new creation. It signifies that blessed
change wrought in the hearts of sinners by the Holy Spirit, whereby they become
dead to sin, and alive to GOD through CHRIST JESUS. Thus the Apostle adds by way
of explication, old things are passed away, behold all things are become new.
-- What I intend from this passage, at present, is, I. To explain the nature of
this change, here called the new creature, or new creation. II. To show that
this is the certain character of all those, who are in CHRIST JESUS.


I RETURN to the first proposed, viz. To explain the nature of this change
here, called the new creature.

IT consists in a new temper and disposition of the soul toward GOD and divine
things, formed by the Holy Spirit's infusing a principle of spiritual life,
whereby the heart of a sinner is turned from the love and service of sin to GOD
and holiness; the necessary consequence of which, is an happy change in the
prevailing course of his practice.

IN this description, you may observe, 1st. that the author of this change, or
the agent by whom it is effected, is the Holy Spirit. It is expressly ascribed
to him by the Apostle, Tit. iii. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. A serious and attentive consideration of the
scripture-account of man's fallen state, will plainly show, that none, less
than such a divine Almighty Agent, can bring a creature, so entirely revolted
from GOD, to a right temper toward him. -- He is dead in tresspasses and sins,
Ephesians. ii. 1. his carnal mind is enmity against GOD, for it is not subject to
the law of GOD, neither indeed can be. Romans viii. 7. From these representations
it appears, that there is not any power or principle in a sinner, while in his
natural state, in the least degree, tending to a return to GOD. Where there is
no love to GOD, there is, certainly, no principle of life, no tendency to
choose and cleave to GOD. For love is the fulfilling of the law. Upon the love
of GOD and our neighbor, hang all the Law and the Prophets. Mat. xxii. 40. Now
where enmity against GOD reigns, there love to him is altogether wanting. -- To
suppose, therefore, an unregenerate person may love GOD and holiness, would be,
to suppose him possessed of a principle of spiritual life, and that love and
enmity are not contradictory, but quite consistent, which is absurd.
But on the contrary, principles of strongest opposition to any such change
govern him. He is under the power of sin and in love with it. His relishes and
inclinations are all earthly and carnal; and enmity denotes the most fixed
unyeilding opposition of the will to GOD; the greatest disgust and aversion.
This temper, therefore, must be broken and removed, before the soul can submit
to the divine government. The metaphors made use of, in the sacred Scripture,
to represent this change, give us the same idea of the matter, viz. a
resurrection, or passing from death to life. Ephesians. v. 14. John v. 24. a new
birth; John iii. 3. and a new creation, as in the text, and Ephesians ii. 10. all
which, denote the utter absence of any principle or power, whereby the sinner
can dispose, or determine his own heart to turn to GOD. Nor can any mere moral
suasion prevail with him.

2d. The effect produced, by the agency of the holy Spirit, is a principle of
spiritual life. You has he quickened (says the Apostle) who were dead in
trespasses and sins. Ephesians. ii. 1. The implantation of this divine principle, in
which the soul is passive, is what is strictly called Regeneration; and the
exercise thereof, in sinners actually turning from the power of sin to GOD, is
what divines mean by Conversion. -- This principle of life, perhaps, consists
in spiritual knowledge of GOD and divine things, whereby their nature and
excellency are truly apprehended, in some measure, as they are. -- Such
knowledge as gives a proper impression and relish of things to the heart. The
nature of true grace seems to be thus expressed, Jer. xxxi. 34. -- They shall
all know me, from the least to the greatest. vide 1 John ii. 20. -- 27. The
spread of true Religion in the world, is signified by the prevalence of
knowledge; the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters
cover the sea. Isa. xi. 9. And the increase of true Religion is expressed, by
the metaphor of increasing light. Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light
of seven days, in the day that the LORD binds up the breach of his people,
and heals the stroke of their wound. Isa. xxx. 26.

THE reality, and true nature of this divine principle of life, can only be
known to us by its effects. These are briefly pointed out in the latter part of
my text; old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. -- These
words are not to be taken in an absolute sense, as though the work of grace was
complete and perfect in degree and no remainders of corruption were left in
that heart, in which this blessed change is wrought. This would be contrary to
both scripture and experience. The saints, in scripture, bitterly complain of
indwelling corruption. Says holy David. Who can understand his errors? Psalm
xix. 12. He laments, that his iniquities were gone over his head, as an heavy
burden, they were too heavy for him. He acknowledges his transgressions, and
his sin was ever before him. Psa. xxxviii. 4. and li. 3. The Apostle bewails
his carnality; that he did what he allowed not, what he hated; that when he
would do good, evil was present with him; that indwelling sin, as a law in his
members, warred against the law of his mind; and cries out, O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans vii. 14. and seq.
To suppose, as some do, that the Apostle here speaks of his unconverted state,
is very absurd. For that is to suppose an unregenerate person to delight in the
law of GOD after the inward man; to have a law in his mind different from, and
opposite to the law of sin in his members, so that he can truly say, it is no
more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me; to long for deliverance from
sin, and rejoice in the prospect of it through CHRIST JESUS his Lord; and, with
his mind, he serves the law of GOD. And that is to suppose the most flat
contradictions. Such a supposition destroys all distinctions between a
regenerate and an unregenerate state.
-- If in regeneration, no indwelling sin, no remainders of corruption were
left in the heart, then the true Christian would love GOD with the utmost
intenseness his nature would be capable of, and that, without the least
abatement or intermission, any moment of his life. For coldness of love to GOD,
or not to love him to the highest degree we are, in the nature of things,
capable of, is corruption; and some sinful distemper in the heart, must be the
reason why we love him no better. Now, how arrogant would that man be, who
would say, that he loved GOD in so high a degree, and with so much intenseness,
that he could not wish to love him better, or more constantly than he does!
would any one look upon such a person to be a true Christian, or, to know any
thing about true love to GOD at all?

UPON this supposition too, there would, at no time, be any motion of sin in
the heart of a Christian; nor any the least tendency to evil. Consequently, he
would be perfect as soon as regenerated, and could never commit any sin in his
practice. -- It will not avail any thing here, to say that a Christian may be
drawn into sin by external temptation, as Adam was, when he eat the forbidden
fruit. For external temptation can never entangle a person in sin, but by first
defiling the heart. While that is untainted, he is proof against temptation.
Thus, it first gained Adam's heart, and then he committed the outward
transgression, and so apostatized from GOD. -- In like manner, according to
this notion, when a Christian is by temptation drawn into sin, his heart is
defiled, and then he has corruption dwelling in him. Consequently, he
apostatizes from his regenerate state, and relapses into his former natural
condition, which is absurd.

IT is plain, therefore, that the language of my text is not to be taken in an
absolute, but a qualified sense. Yet, it certainly denotes a very great change
in the whole man. The whole temper of the heart, and state of things are quite
altered, so that the man is not in a moral sense the same sort of a creature
that he was. He is, indeed, physically the same, yet morally a new creature. In
whom there is a perfection of parts, though not of degrees. i. e. The whole man
is renewed, though he be but in part renewed. This matter, I would endeavor
more fully to illustrate in the few following particulars. -- This happy change,

1st. SUPPOSES the removal of the sinner's old security. His natural state is
represented, in the word of GOD, by the metaphors of sleep and death, which
denote great insensibility. He is the vassal of satan; who works in the
children of disobedience. Ephesians. ii. 2. And while satan, as a strong man armed,
keeps the house, his goods are in peace. -- The sinner's heart is compared to
fallow ground, which lies still, spontaneously yiedling weeds and thorns, and
not broke up, to prepare it for seed, in order to a crop. The first work of the
Holy Spirit, in order to bring about this change, is to arouse the sinner out
of this deep security. This he does, by the application of the divine law to
the conscience. Perhaps, the threatening of the law for some particular
transgression, first alarms the sinner, and brings him to serious
consideration. Brings him to think what he has been doing all his life. Upon
this he finds he has been living in careless neglect of GOD, and his own
eternal interest. He begins to see this course will never do, there is a
necessity of turning to GOD. But alas! he finds an indisposed disinclined
heart. The Holy Spirit opens, by light let into the understanding, the
spirituality and strictness of the law, and thereby discovers the exceeding
corruption and wickedness of the heart. When the commandment comes with power,
corruption is irritated, and rises up in opposition. Sin, taking occasion by
the commandment, works in him all manner of concupiscence. -- His sins revive,
and he dies. Romans vii. 8, 9. Hence, the conscience is impressed with a sense of
divine wrath. The poor sinner becomes deeply sensible of his misery, and
exceeding anxious about a way of escape. All his attempts to relieve himself,
and mend his own heart, only discover more and more, his exceeding sinfulness
and wretchedness. He now sees his absolute necessity of mercy, and the grace of
GOD to change his heart; without which, he must be undone forever. This
conviction of sin and misery is not, indeed, an ingredient in the change
itself, of which my text speaks, but only discovers the necessity of it, and
awakens the sinner to seek after it. Many are deeply convinced, who never
become new creatures. But, such as the Holy Spirit has never awakened out of a
deep sleep of carnal security, have, certainly, never been the subjects of his
gracious operations. But,

2. WHEN the saving change takes place, the old darkness and blindness of the
mind passes away, and the understanding is divinely enlightened. He, who was
sometimes darkness, is made light in the LORD. Ephesians. v. 8. The sinner is, in his
natural state, alienated from the life of GOD through the ignorance that is in
him, because of the blindness of his heart. Ephesians. iv. 18. The mind is, by
nature, so greatly estranged from GOD and divine things, that it is called
darkness in the abstract. But the Spirit of GOD dispels this darkness, and
enlightens the mind in the knowledge of CHRIST, and the scheme of salvation
through him, as revealed in the gospel. GOD who commanded the light, in
creating the natural world, to shine out of darkness, shines in the heart; to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of GOD, in the face of JESUS
CHRIST. 11 Cor. iv. 6. JEHOVAH appears transcendently excellent. The law of GOD
appears then to be, indeed, spiritual, and holy, and just, and good. The mind
beholds the beauty and excellency of spiritual things; and of that internal
purity and holiness, which the law of GOD requires. Now, the abominable
vileness of sin is clearly apprehended. In a word, all things appear in a new
and very different point of light. The understanding beholds them in their true
nature. Hence,

3. THE person's old estimate of things passes away. By nature, he was filled
with a high esteem of the world, sin, and sensual pleasures. This world, in one
point of view or another, he accounted his chief good. He accounted it
pleasure, to riot in the day time. 11 Pet. ii. 13. He thought the service of
sin pleasant, and judged it liberty, to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof. -- He accounted the service of GOD a grieveous burden, and
the law of GOD, especially as it respected the inward man, a disagreeable
restraint. He exceedingly disrelished the sovereignty, and freeness of the
grace of GOD. -- He could not think of renouncing all his own righteousness as
filthy rags, and coming poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked to the
righteousness of CHRIST, as his only refuge. -- But now, how changed his
judgment of matters! He accounts all things but loss, for the excellency of
the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST his Lord, for whom he suffers the loss of all
things, and counts them but dung, that he may win CHRIST. Phil. iii. 8. JESUS
CHRIST is altogether lovely and precious; and he highly prizes, and greatly
admires the grace of GOD. He esteems the favor and friendship of GOD his life.
He exceedingly values the divine law, and sees the beauty of holiness. -- He
apprehends the emptiness, and vanity of this world. He looks upon sin as very
vile and abominable, and groans under it, as a heavy load. -- In consequence of
all this,

4. THE choice and inclination of the will is quite changed. In the sinner's
natural state, his will freely chooses, fully consents to sin. -- It is in such
a state of fixed opposition to GOD, that it is enmity against him; for it is
not subject to the law of GOD, neither, indeed, can be. Romans viii. 7. It does
not submit to the righteousness of CHRIST, or the scheme of salvation exhibited
in the gospel. -- But upon such a new view of things as has been suggested,
this enmity and opposition is subdued. A rational creature cannot choose evil as
evil, and therefore, the will must needs follow this practical judgment of the
understanding. -- It cheerfully chooses the righteousness of CHRIST, and
submits to the terms of reconciliation with GOD, which the gospel proposes. It
sweetly rests in GOD as a chief good, submits to him as a most rightful
Sovereign, and esteems it as a great privilege to be under his government.
Holiness is chosen with much complacency; and the ways of sin are rejected with
abhorrence. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Psa. cx. 3.
See also Psa. cxix. 30, -- 127, 128.

5. THE affections take a new course. Their old current was earthly and carnal.
They were impetuous and overbearing in their tendency toward forbidden
objects, or inordinate toward such as are, in themselves, lawful. They had the
government, and led the poor soul captive: they blinded the understanding,
perverted the judgment, stupefied the conscience, and entangled the will; and
thus, things were in disorder and confusion. -- But now, divine light having
represented things in their true nature and importance to the understanding,
rectified the judgment, and gained the will; the affections naturally follow
and become subject. In respect of their objects and exercise, they are, indeed,
new. They terminate on spiritual objects, and so become spiritual. Now love,
desire, delight, joy, zeal, hope, embrace GOD and spiritual communications from
him, which the heart before disrelished; and evangelical sorrow and hatred have
sin (in which the soul was wont to delight) for their object.

AS this alteration does not respect the passions or affections only, but takes
place, primarily, in the understanding, judgment and will, it will, therefore,
not be a transient flash, or short lived zeal, like the stony ground hearers;
but is habitual and fixed. The graces of the Holy Spirit are not always in
exercise, but there is always such a sense of things as makes the soul restless
and uneasy in such a case. There is always a disposition to seek the lively
exercise of grace, a tendency toward it. This shows, that a principle of life
abides in the soul; which, from time to time, is drawn forth into some sensible
exercise. From such a change in the soul's temper and sense of things, it
follows,

6. THAT the old course of practice is changed. Old courses of sin are forsaken
and abandoned. The duties of religion, formerly neglected, are now performed
with conscientious strictness. The subject of this happy change, immediately,
withdraws from the company of the loose and ungodly; and chooses the society of
God's people. But it is not only in the openly vicious and irreligious, that a
change of conduct appears. Such as have supported an externally regular and
religious character, upon this new view and sense of things, behave in a very
different manner. By the influences of the Holy Spirit, they are, frequently,
enabled to perform holy duties with much solemnity and spiritual life: nor can
they rest easy with a cold formality in the service of GOD. They seek communion
with him. They hear the word of GOD with another kind of attention. They often
hang upon the lips of the preacher. -- Their conversation often savours of
Heaven, and things divine. They cannot make light of sin, and indulge
indwelling corruption as heretofore. They are jealous of their own hearts, and
watch against the motions of sin there. They mourn over, and maintain a
prevailing opposition to it. They that are CHRIST'S have crucified the flesh,
with its affections and lusts. Gal. v. 24. Through the Spirit they mortify the
deeds of the body, and so live. Romans vii. 13. Hence their conflict and
spiritual warfare: for the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other. Gal. v. 17.

BUT it is time to proceed to the second thing proposed, viz.

II. To show, that it is the certain character of those, who are in CHRIST
JESUS, that they are new creatures.

AS I have already exceeded the limits I designed, I shall not enlarge here;
and shall only very briefly suggest two considerations, whereby this truth will
appear.

1st. IT was the great end of our blessed Redeemer's mediatory undertaking, to
deliver his people, in due time, from the whole ruin of their fallen state. Now
a principal part of this ruin consists in their spiritual death, and bondage to
sin: consequently, his design is to restore them to life and liberty; and to
make them free indeed. John viii. 36. This design, therefore, he carries into
execution, by the agency of the Holy Spirit. He saves, not only from the guilt,
but also from the power of sin. He (...) called JESUS, for he shall save his
people from their sins. Mat. i. 21. -- For this purpose was the SON of GOD
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. 1 John iii. 8. In
accomplishing this purpose, they who are his, are born of GOD, and do not
commit sin, for his seed remains in them, and they cannot sin, for they are
born of GOD. ver. 9. i e. they do not commit sin, they cannot sin habitually,
with free consent, and delight: and so, do not continue in the practice of any
known sin. In any other sense, the Apostle would contradict himself. For he
tells us, if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not
in us. 1 John i. 8. And in this sense, his observation is sufficient to show,
that such are new creatures.

2. THEY who are in CHRIST, have his Spirit dwelling in them. If any man have
not the Spirit of CHRIST, he is none of his. Romans viii. 9. -- Now the
indwelling of the Spirit must denote his presence, grace, and influence in the
heart, as a sanctifier. He is a holy Spirit, and cannot endure the power and
dominion of sin where he dwells. They who are joined to the LORD are one
spirit. 1 Cor. vi. 17. Hence, they are temples of the HOLY GHOST; and made holy.

IT remains now to make some Reflections upon this subject by way of
Improvement.

Reflection I. WHAT has been said serves to correct a fatal mistake of those
who imagine, they do not stand in need of such a change as has been described,
because they have been born in the visible church; have been early devoted to
GOD in baptism; have had a religious education; and especially when their lives
are externally religious and regular. They acknowledge, that heathens and
infidels, or the grossly wicked and profligate must be regenerated, and become
new creatures. But as for them, they have been brought up in a religious
manner, and therefore, it cannot be necessary they should experience so great
and remarkable a change. Thus Paul once thought, he was circumcised the eighth
day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, as touching the law, a Pharisee (the strictest sect among the Jews)
concerning zeal, persecuting the Church; touching the righteousness of the law
blameless. These things he counted his gain. Phil. iii. 5, 6, 7. He imagined,
he was in a fair way to heaven. He was alive in his own apprehension, until the
commandment came, and then sin revived, and he died. Romans vii. 8, 9. -- But
alas! all mankind are born the subjects of spiritual death, and destitute of
principles of spiritual life and holiness. By our first apostasy from GOD, we
have all lost his moral image, and have a carnal mind, which is enmity against
GOD. Hence how orthodox soever our profession may be, and how strict soever our
practice, yet all will be dead and spiritless, while that inward state of the
mind continues. All our religious services will be but dead works, and cannot
be acceptable in the sight of GOD. There will be no sense or relish of the
beauty and excellency of GOD, and divine things. And such a life, cannot be
said to be truly holy. The heart is such as its governing principles are. It
is, therefore, indispensibly necessary, that the soul be delivered from the
governing power of carnal principles, and restored to life, in order to serve
GOD in a spiritual manner. But such a change of governing principles, will
infer a very great alteration in the state and temper of the heart; as great,
as the difference between life and death. Such a person will, consequently,
feel a very different frame of mind, and sense of things; and be engaged in the
ways of religion, in a very different manner: and with a very different zeal
and integrity of heart. He is not the same sort of person as he was, he becomes
indeed a new creature. He serves GOD upon principles truly spiritual, and his
practice of religious duties partakes of the spirituality of these principles.
Such a change as this, all must experience, or perish.

Reflection II. SEEING all mankind are, by nature, in such a state, as that
they must become new creatures, and experience so great a change as I have
represented, in order to their becoming capable of truly serving GOD, and
happiness in the enjoyment of him; it is of the last importance, my hearers,
that you examine whether you are the subjects of such a change. Recollect the
particulars included in it, which I have mentioned in this discourse, compare
yourselves with them, and see whether they are descriptive of your case. As to
such of you as are strangers to any thing like such a change, as I have been
endeavoring to explain to you; who live in the neglect of GOD and Religion,
and indulge yourselves in the practice of sin; you may conclude, without any
further debate upon the matter, that you are yet in your natural state, a state
of death and ruin. -- But with respect to such of you as have experienced
something like such a change, there is need of closer scrutiny. You have need
to examine the matter, with much seriousness and impartiality, and to seek the
aid of the Holy Spirit in the search. For there are common operations of the
Spirit, as well as special; common grace, as well as saving: i. e. There are
operations of the Spirit, whereby solemn impressions of the word of GOD are
made upon the heart, and a considerable alteration is effected, which, yet,
come short of a saving change: or, in other words, they do not make the subject
of them truly holy. Hence, deep convictions, illumination of the mind, and
great emotions of the affections. This, our LORD teaches by the Parable of the
stony ground hearers. Luke viii. 13. The Apostle supposes persons to be
enlightened, to taste of the heavenly gift, be made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, to taste the good word of GOD, and the powers of the world to come, who
yet may fall away so, as that it is impossible to renew them to repentance.
Heb. vi. 4, 5. Hence, great external reformation, and zeal in the practice of
religious duties for a season; like Herod, who heard John the Baptist gladly,
and did many things. Mark vi. 20. Here are effects resembling true grace, yet
come short of it. Many too who have had (as the event at last shows) only
common grace, have high confidences, and (as they apprehend) strong assurance
of their justified, converted state; stronger confidence, than many exercised
since Christians. -- That you have been the subjects of very deep impressions
of the word of GOD, and have experienced a great alteration, you can not doubt;
but whether they have gone further than common grace; whether it is a thorough
and saving change, is the question. Nor will your strongest confidence of your
gracious state, of itself, prove the matter to be so, unless it is founded on
scriptural evidence of a work of saving grace in the heart, answering to the
characters of grace in the word of GOD, it is a sign of presumption rather than
grace. -- The reality and truth of grace is not immediately self-evident, but
must be discerned by comparing the experiences of the heart, and their
influence on the life, with the unerring rule of God's Word -- indeed, when the
soul embraces CHRIST by faith, from the very nature of that exercise, it will
have some sweet sense of the mercy and grace of GOD appearing in that way of
salvation, such as will introduce a refreshing calm and peace into the
distressed conscience: and that, in proportion to the strength of faith, and
the clearness of its views. -- I would not say that there may not be a real
saving closure with CHRIST, when yet there may be such obscurity in faith's
views, and so much weakness in its exercise, as not to afford sensible comfort,
but only relieve the soul from sinking, though the soul cannot rest there. I
believe, there are instances of this. But for the most part, I apprehend, at
the soul's closure with CHRIST, such astonishing scenes of mercy and grace open
to view, and such discoveries of the glory of GOD, and excellency of divine
things, as make the soul exceedingly to rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full
of glory. While the believer is taken up with these views, and feels his soul
resting upon the righteousness of CHRIST, he cannot but have a lively hope of
the mercy of GOD, yea, for the present, does not doubt of it. But this is very
different from a fixed assurance of his gracious state. For when these views
are abated, the divine presence is withdrawn, and corruptions (which the
Christian was ready to flatter himself, he should never feel any more) are
again felt in the heart, it is natural to suppose, that the young Christian
(who had very different expectations) will call all in question again. Renewed
light, and exercises of faith again relieve him: yet succeeding darkness
temptation and exercise with the indwelling corruptions of his heart may from
time to time fill him with fear and jealousies of himself. I make no doubt, but
there are instances of such, who, at their first closure with CHRIST, are
favored with a scriptural fixed assurance of their gracious state. But this is
not a common case. Such assurance is, usually, the consequence of a course of
experience, after many conflicts and repeated self-examination. To suppose that
the very essence or nature of regeneration, and the very first act of faith
includes a full assurance, by an immediate witness of the Spirit, testifying
the person's justification, and gracious state as some do, is to suppose, that
faith and regeneration cannot exist without this assurance; that without this
immediate witness of the Spirit, faith and grace are not. And that is to
suppose, that regeneration is before it is. For the matter testified is the
person's renegeration, which pre-supposes its existence, and that it is
something distinct from this witness concerning it. And yet, according to this
notion, it is not previous to this witness, nor distinct from it; which is a
contradiction. It is also to suppose, that in assuring Christians, the Holy
Spirit does not witness together with their spirits, as the Scriptures declare,
Romans viii. 16. but by an immediate witness, independent on any witness of their
own spirit. For the witness of their spirit consists in a consciousness of what
they have experienced, and must suppose the thing witnessed, to be before this
witness about it, in the order of time as well as the order of nature. And if
so, how long, or how short the time may be, before the Holy Spirit adds his
witness to the witness of their own spirits. I think, none can determine.
Many exercised christians, too, have their attention so taken up with the
corruptions and wickedness of their hearts, and so distressed, with a sense
thereof, as to overlook their opposition, and the principles of that
opposition. And this is a great source of their doubts and fears; from which, a
careful examination of the reasons of their distress, and the principles, and
manner of their opposition would tend to relieve them. Now from all these
considerations, it appears, how highly necessary a very strict examination of
yourselves is, upon this interesting matter; on the one hand, to prevent your
settling upon a false foundation; on the other, in order to discover the
evidence of true grace where it does exist, and so remove groundless fears of
sincere Christians.

THAT you may examine this matter with advantage, it will be necessary, that
you attentively consider the dictinction between common and saving grace. --
For your assistance herein, I would just suggest, 1st. that whatever light may
be let into the mind by the common influence of the spirit, its only effects
seem to be the commotion of the passions, and some temporary reformation, and
zeal in the external practice of Religion. But the will is not sweetly bowed,
and brought to submit to the Gospel. The sinner does not come out of himself to
CHRIST'S righteousness, as his only refuge: he does not renounce his own
righteousness as filthy rags. If he seems to trust in CHRIST, his primary
encouragement is from some apprehended goodness in himself, or some good
affection, and not alone from a view of the glorious fullness in CHRIST, and the
freeness of the grace of GOD in him, to the most wretched and unworthy of
sinners. Hence, there is no truly spiritual temper and disposition formed in
the heart. -- 2. The effects of common grace are transient, and the zeal and
engagedness in religion, thence arising, soon passes away. It may continue for
a while, but in time of temptation, such persons fall away; for they have no
root in themselves. Luke viii. 13. They have no abiding principle of life.
Their religion subsides into a lifeless form. Their hearts return to their
former habitual coldness and carnality. They have no such habitual tendency
toward GOD, such frequent breathings and pantings after him, such restless
uneasiness in his absence; such opposition to, and victory over temptation and
sin; such frequent exercises of repentance, and quickening of grace into life
and exercise, as true Christians have. -- Bring these matters close home to
yourselves, I pray you; search and see how the case stands with you. A mistake
here is highly dangerous, and will be fatal, unless GOD, of his tender mercy,
discover it.

Reflection III. SUCH of you, as, upon impartial examination, have reason to
hope, you have experienced this gracious change: (and conscience bears you
witness, you are afraid of deceiving yourselves) you, I say, are under peculiar
obligations to stand distinguished from the men of this world, by the
strictness, spirituality, and holiness of your lives. Let it appear, by a
prevailing heavenliness of conversation, that you are indeed new creatures. Ye
are the salt of the earth, and light of the world. Math. v. 13, 14. These are
arguments, by which, our LORD urges holiness upon his people. If we live in the
spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. Gal. v. 25. And herein is your Heavenly
Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; and so shall you be, i. e. appear to
be CHRIST'S disciples. Nothing so much dishonours GOD, and wounds the credit of
Religion, as the backsliding and untender walk of such, as have made an eminent
profession. How base and unbecoming is it to see such acting beneath their
character. O sirs, seek to be perfecting holiness in the fear of GOD: to be a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Let your conversation be as it becomes
the gospel of CHRIST. Phil. i. 27.

Reflection IV. How importunate should such be, who are awakened to any solemn
sense of their miserable degenerate state, in seeking the grace of GOD, to
effect a saving change in them! If there are any such in my audience, let me
beseech you to consider, how impossible it is, you should ever enter into
heaven with such hearts as you find, by sad experience, you have. Without a new
temper and relish of things, you can never enjoy the blessed GOD as your
happiness. How dreadful is the thought, that ye should fall asleep again, and
become careless in so exceedingly dangerous and ruinous a condition! -- Here,
permit me, to offer you a few directions. 1. Cherish your convictions, and
beware of stifling them. We naturally love ease, and are fond of relief from
distress. Your hearts are deceitful, and apt to snatch at comfort at any rate.
You are surrounded with various allurements and snares from the world. And the
devil will employ his sophistical arts to lull you asleep, or settle on some
false foundation. You are, therefore, in a critical dangerous situation. O
consider the danger of your miscarrying; and how awful it will be to settle on
your lees again. -- 2. Labor to get as clear apprehensions as ye can, from the
word of GOD, of the nature of that change ye are to seek. It is very true,
experience only can give you a thorough clear idea of it, yet ye can, at least,
so far take up the representation of the matter in the word of GOD, as to learn
from it, that it must be a very great change in the whole man, and that a
temper, directly contrary to that, which you now feel, must obtain in you. --
For want of attending to this, many take up with superficial appearances,
apparent good desires, flashes of affections, and some external reformation as
evidences of regeneration, though they have no universal change in the whole
soul, nor any abiding new principles and temper. -- Others again imagine, that
if ever this blessed change shall take place in them, they will have some
extraordinary witness of the Holy Spirit, assuring them of their justification
and regeneration; and that faith contains an assurance of a personal interest
in CHRIST, in its very nature. Hence, they are altogether taken up in desiring
and praying for this, and neglect every other consideration. -- But this is not
the first thing to be obtained. Such assurance is the fruit of faith, and the
result of experience. -- The first thing you are to seek for, is to be so
enlightened in the knowledge of the all sufficient fullness of CHRIST'S
righteousness, and the glory of that way of salvation, as that your wills may
be persuaded to acquiesce in it with sweet complacency and to yield yourselves
to GOD. That ye may be brought to choose GOD himself as your portion; to
delight in holiness and hate sin. -- 3. At the footstool of sovereign grace.
Resolve to continue crying to GOD, and cease not till you obtain. Wicked and
corrupt as you are, and though you are unable to change your own hearts, yet
GOD, who created the natural world, can create your depraved souls anew. And
he is infinitely gracious; he has compassion on whom he will have compassion,
and mercy on whom he will have mercy; so that it is not of him that wills nor
of him that runs, but of GOD that shows mercy. Romans ix. 15, 16. -- But
while you cry unto GOD, consider yourselves as objects of mere mercy and grace,
who are utterly unworthy of any favor. Nor can you do any to merit the divine
grace. If he visit you with mercy, it will be according to the good pleasure of
his own will. Yet it is in the use of means that GOD is pleased to meet with
sinners: he has made it your duty to wait upon him, and has told you, that for
this will he be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 37.

Reflection V. THIS subject loudly calls upon careless sinners to awake out of
their carnal security, and lay to heart their great danger, and absolute
necessity of a supernatural work of divine grace, to make them new creatures in
CHRIST JESUS. -- Without holiness, no man shall see the LORD. Heb. xii. 14. The
happiness of rational creatures depends upon the favors and friendship of GOD.
The enjoyment of GOD must be by way of friendly intercourse and communion. Now
all friendship is mutual between the parties, and arises from a conformity or
agreeableness of the parties each to the other. But sinners, in their natural
state, are altogether opposed to GOD and holiness. Their relishes and pleasures
are earthly and carnal. The tendency of their hearts, their inclinations are to
sin; their delight is in it, in one way or other, and that continually. And
consequently, they have a fixed aversion to the divine government, and enmity
against GOD. Therefore, they must be equally the objects of the divine aversion
and abhorrence. Hence it follows, that the nature of one or the other of the
parties must be changed, before they can come together, or have any fellowship.
Therefore, this change must take place in sinners, and the moral image of GOD,
to which they are by nature, quite opposed, must be restored; or, they must be
cut off from his gracious presence, and fall under his dread resentments
forever. -- Poor sinners, is it fit you should be easy and at rest in such a
case as this? Must you not be forever miserable and undone, if you die in your
present condition? Do but observe the prevailing temper and pleasures of your
own hearts; the course of your practice, and tendency of your lives. Can you
persuade yourselves, that you are spiritual, and relish the things of GOD? and
that the frame and temper of your hearts suits the state and entertainments of
Heaven? Are you not earthly, and such as mind the things of the flesh?
therefore, you are posting, as fast as time can carry you, to everlasting ruin.
I beseech you, to enter upon some serious solemn consideration of your case. --
Do not harden your hearts, by giving loose reins to your lusts and sinful
practices. Do not give yourselves up to dissipation and sensual pleasures. Keep
at a distance from temptations to sin. One cannot take fire into his bosom, and
not be burned. Whosoever will throw himself into the way of temptation, may
expect to be entangled. Avoid the present public snare in this city, I mean the
entertainments of the Theater. Whatever pretensions to the exposing of vice are
alleged in its favor, yet, surely, the vicious characters are, in the first
place, acted. When, by these exhibitions, the vicious passions of the corrupt
heart are enflamed, the alleged moral is either not at all observed, or, if it
is set in view, it has not any influence. GOD has not appointed the stage as a
mean of the reformation of mankind, and therefore, we have no reason to expect
his blessing upon it, without which nothing will be effectual for that purpose:
nor is it attended upon with any such view. Yea, it has been the complaint of
every age, that it has promoted immorality and impiety. And certainly, facts
must expose the vanity of every specious pretense to the contrary. Many, by
attending the stage, have learned arts of intrigue, and methods of
accomplishing wicked designs, which, otherwise, probably, they would never have
known. What though it may have fared ill with the person, whose vicious
character is acted? Will this deter a sinner, unawed by the divine
threatenings, from pursuing the same course? No; he hopes it will succeed
better with him; and thus, prompted by lust enflamed, he rushes into an
imitation, whenever he has a proper opportunity. I would solemnly warn you not
to run the risk of such dangerous consequences. I will not undertake to
determine, whether a public stage might be so contrived and regulated, as to
render it, at least, innocent, i. e. not dangerous to the morals, or in some
respects even useful. But, I believe, such a stage would not answer the
purposes of our comedians. He, who appears as an advocate for the theater,
should consider it as in fact it is; and not attempt to impose upon the public,
by plausible suppositions of a well regulated Stage, without settling the idea
of it, and which, the writer knows, does not any where exist. -- He must also
know, that our comedians seem greatly afraid of any such effects, as are most
plausibly alleged, in favor of the stage's usefulness, and very careful to
prevent them. Therefore, least tragedy should too deeply affect, a force must
succeed, in order, if possible, to eraze every serious impression.
O sirs, I pray you, attend the means of grace with conscientious diligence,
study carefully, and with application to yourselves, the important doctrines of
religion, consider your latter end, commune with your own hearts, and examine
whither you are tending; be much in earnest prayer to GOD: O prostrate
yourselves at the throne of grace. -- Though there be no certain necessary
connection between all this, and your obtaining the special grace of GOD. (For
GOD is a sovereign in the dispensation of his mercy to sinners, and can never
be brought under obligations to any) yet, none ever obtained grace in a state
of carnal security. In this way of earnestly seeking GOD, all who ever have
obtained mercy, found it. Without being solemnly engaged in such a course, as I
have here hinted at, you cannot be said to wait upon GOD, or to be seeking
salvation. Yea, by your careless neglect, you are justly chargeable with
choosing your own death. -- Surely, you cannot rationally imagine, that your
present course tends to eternal life. For can you think, a carnal mind is life
and peace? -- Your precious immortal souls are or greater value than the whole
world: and will you be content to loose them for trifles, and a thing of
naught? What will it profit a man, if he should gain the whole world, and loose
his own soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Mat. xvi. 26.
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation; today, if you will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts. Time is posting on, and when it shall come
to a close with you, all opportunity of obtaining grace will be over forever.
What profit will ye then have of your sensual pleasures, sinful indulgences,
and carnal security, of which you will indeed be ashamed? Take no rest, I pray
you, in your present condition. Seek ye the LORD, while he may be found, call
upon him, while he is near. For which purpose, may GOD, of infinite mercy, give
you his HOLY SPIRIT, for CHRIST'S sake. Amen.

FINIS.

