AN ESSAY ON FEVERS; MORE PARTICULARLY THOSE OF THE COMMON CONTINUED AND
INFLAMMATORY SORTS: WHEREIN A NEW AND SUCCESSFUL METHOD IS PROPOSED FOR
REMOVING THEM SPEEDILY. TO WHICH IS ADDED, An ESSAY on the CRISES of those
DISORDERS.

By LIONEL CHALMERS, M.D.

-- Fungar vice cotis. --

HOR. CHARLESTOWN: Printed by ROBERT WELLS, and sold at his Shop on the BAY.
MDCCLXVII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
DR. JOHN LINING having prosecuted a course of statical experiments, for the
space of one year at Charlestown, the author of the following ESSAY, became,
afterward, so closely connected with him, both by mutual interest and
friendship, as gave him an opportunity to be fully informed of all he desired
to know, relating to the perspiration and other natural discharges in each
season. By those means, he has been led to judge otherwise than Sanctorius
did; and it is difficult to conceive on what grounds the latter founded his
notions, with respect to the numerous ill consequences he imputes to an
abatement of the perspiration alone; nor is it less surprising, that so many
great men, should have so implicitly adopted his mistakes.

The author has supposed, that a spasmodical contraction of the arteries and
other musculous membranes, is the immediate cause of severish disorders, in
whatever way this may be brought on; but should that term displease, another of
the same meaning may be used in its stead; for all the symptoms in acute
diseases show something of this sort, the severity or mildness of those
distempers, for the most part keeping pace with the degree of that
constriction, and the number of vessels it affects.

Having oftentimes been disappointed in his practice, though he followed the
methods recommended by the best writers, so far as they were understood by him,
he undertook a journal of the weather and the diseases also that accompanied
its changes, in the several seasons, and kept the same for many years in hopes
of improvement. For however necessary it may be, to examine our patients with
great exactness at all times, it is more particularly so during a pursuit of
this sort, as well as to note every favorable and unfavourable circumstance.
This soon discovered, that when certain symptoms occurred at the beginning of a
fever, the complaint, generally, was mild and of short continuance; nor would
the patient be seized with any inflammatory disease, though such did not fail
to attack others, who sickened at the same time, but without the like
propitious incidents. After carefully attending to this, in great numbers of
cases, the hint was not slighted, for what happened of its own accord, and
prevented such distempers, was brought on by art to remove them, after they
were fixed.

Nothing was more wanted, than a safe, speedy, and, as far as the nature of
things will permit, a certain method to remove fevers, within the first or
second day: This surely would well deserve the name of a cure; but when they
are allowed to run through the several stages, into which they would pass, were
they left to their own courses, and the patients recover at last, all the merit
that then can be pleaded is, that nothing improper had been done; and happy
would it be, could this be said on all occasions, for indeed there is much
merit in it.

Were it granted, that inflammatory and other common fevers, may probably yield
to the following treatment, in warm but not in cold countries, the insinuation
is more specious than true; for the human body is of the same construction
every where, differing only in being more braced in one climate, and laxer in
another. And, truly, the inhabitants of South Carolina, vary as much in those
respects, during the winter and summer, as if they dwelt in climates the most
opposite in temperature. Besides, the same distemper will be much alike in its
symptoms and events, and, therefore, must require the same management, or
nearly so, in all places.

The author has practiced in the way hereafter laid down, for many years, and
with such success, that he is under no apprehensions of its failing often,
provided his directions be but duly followed. And having dealt heartily in
publishing it, in hopes it may be of some use to the people of this province,
candor requires that it should not be judged of, by the fallacious rules
either of prepossession or prejudice, but fair experiments only. He warns the
reader however, that neither this nor any other method will at all times cure;
for every one of the profession, must have found in the course of his practice,
that somewhat of a hidden nature now and then occurs, even in the complaints he
thought himself best acquainted with, which, in spite of his boasted sagacity,
disappointed him. Whether this depended on certain singularities in the
constitutions of individual persons, the nature of the distemper itself, or his
own oversights, it might not be possible for him to discover; or even if he
could, it might not then be in his power to remedy it.

It was deemed sufficient to point out the method, and mention the medicines to
be used, without determining their proportions, or when it may be proper,
either to omit, or prefer any one of them to another; for every practitioner
ought to know, how they should be adjusted to the different ages and
constitutions of his patients.

At the end of this is another ESSAY on the Crises of Fevers, which is intended
to confirm the reasoning contained in the former; by showing that a crisis
could not happen, unless the fluids had first been too much accumulated, in or
near the places, whence the discharges called critical proceed, in consequence
of some hinderance to a free circulation in other parts.

THE candid reader will, it is hoped, pardon literal escapes, or mistakes in
pointing, and is requested to make the following corrections: -- Page 12, line
4, read will, l. 5, r. may. p. 13, l. 6, r. rarefied, p. 14, l. 15. r. till
noon. p. 16, l. 3 from the bottom. r. as to make. p. 19, l. 11, dele (when he
sweated profusely) p. 22, note l. ult. r. urine. p. 34, l. 11, r. probably. p.
37, note l. 3, r. (...) p. 57, l. 26, r. became immediately insensible, and
could not move. p. 59, l. 17, for much r. greatly. p. 65, l. 3 from the bottom,
for it r. this. p. p. 74, l. 15, after may add with safety. p. 75, l. 11, for
remain r. continue.

CONTENTS.
ESSAY I.
CHAP. I. In which we propose to enquire, Whether an abatement of the
perspiration be, indeed, the cause of so many distempers as are commonly
imputed to it? Page 9 CHAP. II. Of the immediate cause of fevers. Page 27 CHAP.
III. Of the cure of common continued and inflammatory fevers. Page 41 A caution
concerning bleeding and vomiting. Page 71
ESSAY II.
Of the crises of common continued and inflammatory fevers. Page 77
ESSAY I.
CHAP. I. In which we propose to enquire, whether an abatement of the
perspiration be, indeed, the cause of so many distempers as are commonly
imputed to it.
THOUGH Sanctorius proved that our bodies perspire freely, he seemed to have no
knowledge of their imbibing any thing from without, excepting air, and
therefore was not aware, that his experiments discovered no more, than the
difference between the perspiration, and moisture we absorb through the pores
of the skin and lungs; but exhalation and absorption so confound each other, as
makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain the true sum of
either. We may be assured, however, that the discharges from the lungs and
outer surface, are greater than such trials show them to be; since no allowance
is made for whatever we imbibe, which, past all doubts, must be very
considerable A negro man who had eaten or drank but little for some days before
he was gibbetted at Charlestown in March 1759, and had nothing given him
afterward, regularly voided a large quantity of urine early every morning; but
he discharged no more till about the same hour next day. The reason undoubtedly
was, that so long as the sun was above the horizon and warmed the air,
perspiration was freer, because the fluids were more determined toward the
skin thereby; but as it became colder and more damp withal in the night, the
outward surface was then constricted, and the humors, consequently, being
repelled toward the viscera, urine was increased, the moisture absorbed
furnishing matter for it.
. When, therefore, that author found his weight increased, he always charged
it to so much of the perspiration being detained; and ascribed to such
accidents almost every disease to which mankind is liable. But this could only
be a supposititious inference, for it cannot be thought that he experienced all
those ill consequences in himself; and to apply the result of experiments,
which concerned him alone, to whatever happened to others, in whom that, as
well as all the other discharges, might have proceeded in a very different
manner, was stretching the conclusion rather too far. Indeed, we owe much to
Sanctorius, but, still, there is no need to admit his mistakes; for it is in
part owing to this condescension, that I know not what attenuants and
sudorificks have been introduced into the practice, in order to dissolve some
notional viscidness of the fluids, and promote sweats in fevers; for on those
two effects, the removal of most acute diseases is thought chiefly to depend,
though one of them acts in direct contradiction to the other.

Some men of great reputation have likewise adopted Sanctorius's assertion,
that five-eighths of all our food and drink ought to pass by perspiration; but
this rule cannot hold in any country, where cold and warm seasons succeed each
other, whatever may happen at times during the summer. Nor is it less an error
to maintain, that the daily sum of all the discharges, should equal the
quantity of our diet and drink, to keep up the same weight of body, that we may
enjoy health. For to answer that great end, those excretions must vary at
different times of the year; and therefore, no fixed weight can be assigned for
the standard of health; because that which would be most proper at one season,
might be dangerous in the highest degree at another, as will appear in the
course of this essay. It seems, indeed, that this great perspiration was meant
as necessary, only, in the summer; for from the autumnal equinox to the winter
solstice, himself informs us, that it scarcely exceeded one pound, or was
about, one-fifth part of what it had been at another time: yet he does not
complain of any disorders from so remarkable a difference therein, for
certainly this abatement happened by degrees; and in all likelihood it might
have continued thus small throughout the month of January and for a good part
of February. In general, as the weather is cooler and more changeable in the
spring and autumn than in summer, perspiration not only must be less then, but
more variable also. How dangerous therefore, or at least troublesome and
difficult must it be, to follow his rule for the preservation of health, by
reducing the body in the spring to the weight it should be of in summer, and
keeping it to that poise. But this reasoning would equally hold, for preserving
the like weight of body in winter, as during a warm season, by promoting
perspiration to the same quantity in the former period, that it ought to be in
the latter. He, moreover, says, that they would enjoy the best health, and
might attain extreme age, who keep their bodies from varying much in weight.
Under what limitations much is to be understood here, I know not; but we are
well assured, that the perspiration ought to increase with the heat of the air;
else, we could not live, much less enjoy health, during very warm weather Dr.
Lining began to fall away in March, and by the end of September lost seventeen
pounds weight, but he regained that and more, before the end of February
following.
. For as the fiery particles enter our bodies along with the watery ones, and,
perhaps, some portion of the air itself, unless the fluids were at the same
time constantly venting, according to the expansions they are made to undergo,
and also to free us of this unnatural heat, such a general overfulness must
soon ensue, as would distend the vessels, past all power of contracting
themselves; instances of which happen almost every summer to some people in
Carolina. This profuse perspiration is therefore absolutely necessary, during a
sultry season, to preserve a balance, between the much relaxed vessels, and
highly rarefied fluids. Hence it appears, that our bodies are constantly
discharging the heat they absorb from without; and so languid do the vital
actions become, that whilst we sweat freely as we ought to do, our natural heat
is really less after the summer is far advanced, than in winter. In January
1752, when the mercury fell to the 18th division, it rose in a small
thermometer placed under my arm, to the 97th; but in July that same year, when
the heat of the shaded air was marked by the 101st degree, it did not rise in
the same situation, above the 95th. It was just now said, that we could not
live when the weather is very warm, unless the perspiration increased in
proportion as the fluids were ratified. Accordingly, I sometimes have been sent
for to people who were expiring, in a manner, from being too long exposed to
the intense heat of the sun, and others were already dead before I could reach
them, though but a few doors from me. The first symptoms perceived on these
occasions, are an universal languidness and a faintish sort of drowsiness;
presently such a tightness is felt round the breast as if it were strongly
girded, so that the person can scarcely breathe; and then but slowly. Soon
after he falls, as it were, into a profound sleep; from which if he cannot be
speedily roused, death quickly follows. In such cases, I commonly found the
skin rather dry and very hot; the countenance full and flushed; all the outward
veins very much distended; and on the breast, and other places, inflammations
might be perceived, as in the scarlet fever, or a slight erysipelas, the whole
body appearing enlarged and fuller than in health; but the redness we speak of
in the skin, only happened a little while before the patient's death. The
putrefaction in those who die after this manner, is always sudden and great;
which makes it necessary to bury them in a few hours; nor does the heat their
bodies acquired, abate so much after death as in other carcasses, for the time
they lie uninterred. But these things by the bye --

Dr. Lining (who was very exact) sometimes found himself heavier by several
ounces, than he was a few hours before, though he perspired sensibly all the
while, from several parts of his body, besides what passed from the lungs;
hence it seems, that perspiration and absorption may both go on freely
together: But he often times abated the perspiration designedly, without any
perceiveable injury, so that the matter detained, either was not so pernicious
as is commonly thought, or his body must have been quickly freed of it by some
other discharge. So earnest was he to know what might be the consequence of
checking this suddenly that he some times exposed himself at once to the wind,
when sweating profusely. But this curiosity was not always gratified without
disagreeable effects. In particular, at the beginning of July, having only an
open thin linen waistcoat over his shirt, he sat from eleven to noon in a close
room where the heat was marked by the 87th degree of Fahrenheit's thermometer;
and in that one hour perspiring eleven and an half ounces, he instantly removed
into an open passage through which the wind blew briskly, the mercury falling
there to 82; and in one hour and a quarter gained six and an half ounces,
though he still sweated from some parts. The whole of this must surely be
charged to absorption, and consisted either of the perspiration with which his
linen was damped, or elementary water imbibed from the air, not more than 13 or
14 degrees colder than his blood, which of itself, was not likely to do much
harm. However, let us even grant that some of the perspiration was detained
here, yet the quantity thereof, together with whatever else was absorbed, did
not occasion any great fullness or plethora; nor could a putrescence ensue
immediately. But such experiments were unsafe on another seere; and this we
speak of, was presently followed by gripings, and a painful weariness chiefly
affecting the legs, knees and thighs; however those symptoms went off on his
having some plentiful stools. Were not those effects owing to the sudden strong
constrictions which the outward vessels and membranes were made to undergo, by
the cooler air; the hinderance thence arising to the motion of the blood
through those parts, from which it was repelled and made to accumulate in the
abdominal viscera; where, happily, for him, the secretions were soon increased
so as to vent off the redundant humors? Let those who can judge of the laws
that obtain in the animal economy determine this question. --

Perspiration can never be stopped in a living body; and the reasons assigned
for diseases from an abatement of it are, that not only a plethora is thereby
brought on, but the humor itself is supposed so putrescent, as makes it in the
highest degree dangerous, to have any part thereof detained, even for a short
time. Were it, indeed, true, that five-eighths of our food and drink ought to
pass that way, and were it possible that this discharge could be suppressed for
a number of days together, the appetite continuing good all the while, alarming
overfulnesses undoubtedly would ensue, unless the other excretions increased
according as the perspiration diminished. But we are well assured, that for
much the greatest part of the year, the common quantity of this discharge falls
far short of the above proportion in Carolina, where the climate is warmer than
in Italy; Sanctorius himself found it so for three months, and he might have
extended the time still farther, as already has been said.

That there ought to be somewhat of a regular proceeding in this discharge as
requisite to health, no one can doubt; and we may say the same of all the other
excretions, which should have certain proportions, to free the body in
different ways, of such things as were acrid when first taken in; became so
afterward; or having served the ends for which they were admitted, ought then
to be expelled, to make way for fresh supplies. As to the quality of that
humor which passes the pores of the skin, those who confide in the doctrine of
Sanctorius, would do well to distinguish the notion of putrefaction from
putrescence; for, some part of the milk only excepted, all animal fluids are
putrescent under certain circumstances, though a tendency thereto can never
happen, so long as they circulate regularly; for this implies a good condition
of the whole system. But, why this subtilest of all should be the most so, and
of course disposed to infect the rest of the fluids immediately, more
especially in a constitution, that, perhaps but an hour before, was in the best
state, does not clearly appear. We know that the thin excrements may be again
absorbed, without ill consequences, though they had been mixed with things that
were nearly putrid in the intestines. Nor can it be with reason conceived, why
the perspiration should be more liable to putrefaction than the urine, which
though it consists rather of grosser and perhaps more corruptible parts than
the insensible discharge, yet produces no bad effects when refunded into the
blood. Of this any person may be presently convinced, by exercising so briskly,
as make himself sweat for an hour or two; when little urine will remain to be
voided, though the bladder had been so full before, as occasioned a strong
desire to empty it When the urine is analized, it yields a tartarous salt,
composed of an alkaline earth, and a small quantity of oil and an acid, which
is found adhering to chamber-pots, that are not duly cleansed. 2dly, An
ammoniacal salt, which is generated from a mixture of volatile with acid salts;
so that, if a little alkaline salt or quicklime, be added to inspissated urine,
a volatile urinous smell will immediately ensue; as when those ingredients are
mixed with crude salt ammoniac, 3dly, A fixed salt, which is partly alkaline,
and in part neutral, as common salt is. Vide opera Hoffmanni in folio, page 69.

We shall by and by enquire, whether the perspiration and urine be not nearly,
if not quite the same, with this difference, however, that the insensible
perspiration may not contain such gross saline, sulphurous and earthy parts as
pass by urine. Whence then does the latter derive so deleterious a disposition,
for all those contents existed before in the fluids when the person was in
health; and the like principles are also found in the other excretions, of the
best regulated constitutions? Neither will the supposal avail, that, as being a
humor of the last connection, it, for that reason, must be the most
putrescent, for, even in this respect, it is only on a foot with the other
natural discharges; which being severally secreted and excreted in the due
order of time, must therefore be perfectly concocted. It ought, however, to be
observed, that those contents of the urine only appeared in the above manner
after they were concentrated, and perhaps heightened by the great heat used in
such processes; but were much less active, when diffused throughout the
circulating fluids.

I would further take notice, that perspiration is, perhaps, the only discharge
that cannot be wholly stopped, as the urine and stools often times are for
several days together, without very dangerous consequences; and both may be
taken up again by the vessels, and circulate a new with the fluids, as already
has been said. In dropsies, be the patient's drink ever so plentiful, little
urine will be excreted in proportion; so that whatever ought to have passed
that way, must in such cases be lodged in the cellular membrane, or cavities of
the body, together with the serous parts of the blood, where they may continue
stagnated, for some months, without fatal effects. When, therefore, a patient
recovers from a dropsy, nothing seems more plain, than that the humors which
had lain so long in a state of rest, must first be absorbed, before they can
either be expelled through any of the excreting organs, or assimilated again in
the course of circulation, as the vessels recover strength. It is needless to
say much of those extravasations that happen from contusions, in which the
blood that had for many days been deprived of motion, is again dissolved and
absorbed, without any injury, though the contrary might be expected; for here
as well as in a dropsy, some degree of putrefaction might be looked for. But as
there are small and often times no evidences at all thereof on those and many
other occasions, I have thought that term was frequently (...) with in speaking
of (...)


. Surely no man in his senses, will believe that the perspiration can possibly
be so acrid or caustical, as the matter which gives the smallpox; but though
inoculation informs us of the instant of time the fluids are infected, yet it
commonly requires six or seven days, before they are so generally tainted
thereby to produce a fever, in order to expel the morbifick cause: And the
same, probably, may be said of other contagious diseases, though we cannot
always ascertain the exact time, when the patients received the first seeds of
these disorders. But if a person in health, happens to sicken presently after
going out of a warm room into the open air, the mode is to impute the distemper
to a check of the perspiration; whereas in truth, we ought to look for another
cause for such sudden violent effects.

But were the matter we perspire really so disposed to putrefaction, it might
with reason be expected, that having brought on a fever of many days, it would
in that time become so putrid, (from the many circumstances which then
concurred to make it so) that it would give better proofs thereof, than it
commonly does. Yet we are seldom sensible of much acrimony in the fluids, as
they pass so many fine irritable canals in their way to the skin, either before
or during the critical sweat, though that is supposed to free the body of the
morbifick cause, which, according to the Sanctorian doctrine, consists of
somewhat very acrid, or destructive of health. To me it seems, that were the
perspiration really so vicious in its own nature, as immediately to dispose the
fluids to putrefaction, its acrimony, or whatever else such mischievous
properties are derived from, would be so heightened by a fever, that the
sweats, so much wished for at those times, could not happen, because of the
constrictions it might occasion on the fine exhaling vessels by irritation. Nor
would the urinary organs be exempt from the like effects, so that the expultion
of the febrifick matter would be prevented either way.

The advantages arising from poultices and fomentations, and the spreading of
contagious diseases, among other things, plainly prove, that we receive the
steams which exhale from other bodies. It is also true that each individual
person in a large company, may, without any present or future inconveniency,
imbibe some of the perspiration which was discharged from a great number of
people, of very different constitutions, even after it had been diffused in the
most promiscuous manner, through the heated air of a room. But when any person
sickens, after being in so crowded an assembly (where he sweated profusely),
the reason commonly given is this plain, and not less true one, that he was
injured by going out of a warm apartment into the cool damp air, heated as he
then was.

But, there are fevers which attack, when no sensible abatement of the
perspiration can be impeached; on the contrary, it proceeded freely, sometimes
too profusely, before they came on, and continued plentiful, or with short
interruptions only, throughout those diseases. And we likewise know, that this
discharge is small, for several months together, at some seasons, with great
advantage to many. On the whole, we have good grounds to believe, that neither
this nor any of the other natural excretions, are limited to exact or stated
rules, but vary not only in different people at the same time, but even in the
same men daily, who yet enjoy health.

Dr. Lining's tables show, that when the urine was greatest, perspiration was
always least, and the contrary. Hence it seems, that in countries where hot and
cold weather succeed each other, the fluids are determined in a fuller stream
toward the skin at one season, and are again more repelled into the viscera at
another. For this reason, the discharges from within or through the outward
pores, must increase or diminish by turns, according as the humors are more or
less directed one way or the other. The difference therefore between the urine
and perspiration, might not be great at the year's end, as Dr. Lining
discovered, though the excess was in favor of the former, because the weather
was uncommonly cool, during the twelve months he made his experiments.

As such a conformity appears in the quantity of those two discharges, the
augmentation of one seems intended to make up for any defect in the other,
which must of course happen on a change in the weather. They also are the best
suited to answer the great end of becoming substitutes for each other, as being
the most considerable of all the excretions. And though one may not increase
exactly, in the same proportion as the other lessens, yet they seem to act
reciprocally as counterpoises, when the weight of the fluids and strength of
the vessels are pretty well adjusted.

To show the truth of what has been said, of the difference in those two
discharges during hot and cold weather, let us take the medium of the
perspiration for twenty-four hours in July, and compare this with its mean
quantity for the same space of time in February, they will then respectively be
as eighty-seven to thirty-seven: A plain proof how greatly the perspiring
vessels were dilated, and how much more plentiful was the flow of the fluids
toward the outward arteries in the summer than in winter. Again, if the mean
quantity of the urine for twenty-four hours in February, be compared with its
medium also for the same time in July, they will be as seventy-eight to
forty-four nearly. The difference therefore between the greatest perspiration
in summer, and most urine in the winter, does not exceed nine ounces in
twenty-four hours: But the difference between the smallest perspiration, and
least urine in the most opposite seasons, was no more that seven ounces; an
amazing correspondence! though to the unthinking part of mankind, those things
pass unheeded, as if they bore no sort of proportion.

But a greater agreement still appears between those two secretions than
results merely from such a conformity in their quantities, by which they seem
intended to supply each others defects at different times of the year. And if
they really do so, as is likely beyond a bare probability, it ought to follow,
that the matter which passes both ways, should be nearly, if not quite the
same; and that it is, an easy experiment will show. For, if a small quantity of
the perspiration from the lungs, be collected by blowing in a clean wine glass,
and some urine is made in another, (both being taken fasting, or before the
humors have been diluted with fresh chyle), any person having an acute taste
and smell, will at once pronounce that both are urine. Should a little salt of
tartar be added to each, a slightly volatile, but not disagreeable, smell will
arise from both; and if they be permitted to stand for a day, without having
any thing mingled with them, a more acrid taste and scent will then be
perceived; the urine, however, being still most pungent Besides the general
perspiration from the greatest part of the outer surface and the lunes,
particular drains seem appointed to free the neighboring parts, of some more
highly saline and sulphurous matter. For what perspires from behind the ears,
from the gums, armpits, groins and between the toes, has a raneid offensive
smell, which differs in each place. So that could the whole perspiration be
collected together, there is no room to doubt, it would make a mixture, full as
acrimonious as the urine is.
. Moreover, nothing seems more plain, than that those salts which pass with the
urine in temperate seasons, are discharged through the skin when the weather is
very warm; for black gloves which have been worn, in such a season, till they
were wet with sweat, will be covered with a crust of white salt when dry; and
our sweat also has the same saltish taste. What we then perspire, smells at
first as fresh blood; but after some hours, it communicates a urinous scent and
yellow color to our linen: So that if those things do not amount to a full
proof, they make it extremely probable, that the perspiration and urine, free
the body in different ways of much the same sort of matter; and that what
perspires from the outward surface and lungs, is the same as urine in the
kidneys. The pores of the skin are so many channels, intended to clear the
external parts of whatever has become useless and unfit to be detained there;
the lungs and passages leading to them, perform the same office for the breast
and neighboring parts; the kidneys and intestines doing the like for the lower
viscera; so that, according to their various situations, they severally
contribute to the same great ends. And, though the chief excretions seem to go
on without any established rules, in various climates, and in the inhabitants
of the same country, at different seasons, or even in the same persons from day
to day; some making more urine, whilst less passes by perspiration, the
contrary being the habit of another, yet all of them may enjoy health, so the
requisites of their several constitutions be but answered either way.

Were it indeed true, that a pletbora from an abatement of the perspiration
must of course happen, before inflammatory fevers can attack, it might be
expected, that such disorders would be most common in the summer, because a
much greater quantity thereof may be detained in a short time, that discharge
being then greatest, and the fibers very lax and irritable, which renders them
susceptible of strong spasmodick contractions from slighter causes. It,
however, falls out quite otherwise, for such diseases seldom appear with us at
that season, but mostly in the winter and spring, when perspiration is little,
and, consequently, less likely to produce the overfulness so much contended
for. But at no time can such an addition be made to the circulating fluids
thereby, in any equal number of hours, as by eating and drinking plentifully,
and even intemperately, according to the daily custom of many, without much
inconveniency, at least, for the present, though several pounds of fresh chyle,
the produce, perhaps, of an ill judged mixture of meats and drinks, pass into
their vessels oftener than once in the day. It may probably be said here, that
the excretions are still going on, and therefore, whatever overfulness may
happen from such excesses, are abateing every moment. But is not this equally
true on a diminution of the perspiration? for though the outward pores may be
occasionally straitened, yet that discharge is still proceeding from the lungs,
and it may be more plentifully, because a greater quantity of blood must
circulate through that organ in all fevers, supposeing no hemorrhage or any
excessive increase of the abdominal secretions happens in the mean time;
besides that urine also is commonly augmented at such times; so that
perspiration is the only discharge whose defects can be compensated by another
channel. It has been said, that no great plethora can happen from an
interception of the perspiration; yet, for the sake of argument, let us even
grant, that somewhat of an overfulness may at times ensue from that cause; but
then might we not expect this would be removed, and that the fever it
occasioned ought to cease, after repeated bleedings, sweatings and the like
evacuations so commonly made in such cases; more especially as the appetite
fails for every thing, except drink or thin nourishment, which soon passes off.
Nevertheless the disease too often continues, though the patient is so emptied,
that he can scarcely be known. Besides, nothing is so notorious, as that the
body sometimes is exceedingly wasted by a fever of a few days, though no
artificial evacuations had been made, and little passed by any of the sensible
discharges; the patient also having all this while been well supplied with
suitable diet. No way then remains to account for this great loss of substance,
but by supposing the perspiration to have been vastly increased, from the lungs
mostly, for the skin, tongue and throat, are at times dry and parched on those
occasions.

Whether those things will be considered in the same light by others, I know
not; but to me it seems, that whatever plethora may ensue, from a temporary and
partial check of the perspiration (for partial it must be), cannot of itself so
often bring on a fever, as already has been said, if it can at all. For
according to Sanctorius himself, were the whole of it detained, it would only
make an addition of one pound to the fluids in twenty-four hours, from the
autumnal equinox to the winter solstice; or of thirty-seven ounces in the space
of one day and night in February, according to Dr. Lining; and supposing still,
which yet can scarcely be, that the whole of this were matter that ought to
have perspired, without any addition being made to it, by the moisture absorbed
from the air. However, this is only mentioned in order to give the argument its
full scope, but without admitting that an entire stop can possibly be put to
the perspiration, so long as the humors circulate at all.

If a dangerous overfulness cannot well arise from a detention of the
perspiration, in the common course of things, as little is its supposed
proneness to putrefaction likely to bring on a violent disease so suddenly, as
oftentimes happens to people who, but a few hours before, were healthy and
strong; for surely it is difficult to conceive, how either the quantity or
quality of that fluid which might occasionally be intercepted, could excite
such distressing and hazardous effects in so small a time. I would ask those
who maintain the doctrine we have been censuring, Whether it can fairly be
imputed to an abatement of the perspiration, that a person on going out of a
warm room into the cool moist air, or that the man who drinks cold water, or
sits down on the damp ground when he is much heated with exercise, shall
immediately shiver, and have a fever, pleurisy, or quinsy? That one who plunges
himself into the water whilst he is sweating freely, shall instantly become
rigid, insensible and die in a few hours? or that those who are exposed to rain
in the summer, or sleep only for a little while out of doors at night during
that season, shall presently be cramped al over, and have a tetanus, or some
other dangerous disease? Many instances in all those ways have I known, and
such effects ought undoubtedly to be ascribed to some other cause, than a
diminution of the perspiration alone: We also know for certain, that this
discharge undergoes remarkable checks, for many hours together, without much
inconveniency, as almost every man can recollect to have happened to himself on
various occasions.

CHAP. II. Of the immediate cause of Fevers.
THOUGH it be not the lot of man to enjoy constant health, many persons however
are happily endowed with such well constructed constitutions, that, for a
number of years together, the vessels every where have proper strength, and
continue so flexible withal, that the fluids they contain, can pass freely from
the heart to all parts of the body, and return without any hinderance to that
organ. Under circumstances like these, every part receives only its natural
proportion of the blood; the several secretions and excretions will be made in
regular order; and as no redundance can happen, so nothing will fall short,
till the equality of action and re-action that subsisted between the solids and
fluids is interrupted; and then the natural, vital and animal functions must be
disordered in proportion. It therefore seems plain that when any man is
attacked with a fever, in whom the constitution was so well disposed
immediately before, the fault could not have been in the fluids; for they
neither exceeded in quantity, nor erred in quality, but in the vessels alone,
owing to some change in the condition of their coats; for, past all doubts,
they are not now in the same state as before; and according to the alteration
they have undergone, so must more or less of disorder ensue in the distribution
of the blood, and consequently in all things that depend on its regular
circulation.

I know but two ways, in which the equality of mutual action between the solids
and fluids can be broken in upon, or, in other words, that a disease can
happen; namely, when the vessels are so distended by an unnatural rarefaction
of the humors, that they cannot circulate freely; but such an expansion seldom
occasions a distemper in temperate climates; and must then be owing to too much
heat, a close confined air, or such as does not gravitate sufficiently, whence
sudden death sometimes ensues. Nor does any thing prevent the blood from being
expanded by the natural heat of our bodies, so as to destroy us, but that this
is checked and kept within bounds by the superior spring of the vessels.
Disorders of this sort, however, not being the subject of our present inquiry,
we shall pass to the other, which is by far the most common cause of diseases.

It is very singular, that almost every fever should be preceeded by a sense of
coldness in some degree; and the greater this, and longer its continuance, the
more dangerous for the most part is the disorder. This chilliness may come on
suddenly; but, more frequently, the patient has successive chills and
flushings, perhaps, for some days; and in the mean time, an irksome sort of
weariness is perceived, chiefly about the legs, knees and thighs, together with
a listlessness of the other parts, and of the mind also; yet, all this while,
the pulse, though somewhat hard, may not be much quickened. Those sensations of
coldness, return oftener and continue longer, more especially if the person
exposes himself to the wind; and the other symptoms likewise increase, till at
last a strong shivering or horror comes on. At this time the hands and feet are
cold, the veins which lie immediately under the skin disappear, and the face
together with all the other outward parts are pale, and, as it were, shrunk or
contracted. An insatiable thirst attends; a painful stiffness is felt in the
joints and all the external muscles; but still most severely from the hips
downwards. And as the fluids are now made to accumulate in the internal and
superior parts, a sickness at the stomach, anxiety, quick-breathing, and
headache ensue, with great heat about the epigastrium, breast and forehead,
which, after some time, diffusses itself over the body and limbs, so proper
care be taken. The pulse is confused, small, hard and very quick during the
horror; but it becomes somewhat fuller, more soft and slow when the cold fit
ceases: Yet it is common for the sick to be more or less chilly at times,
throughout every acute disease, at all seasons, more especially on turning in
bed, or when the clothes are lifted up, so as to admit the cool air to the skin.

If I judge rightly, the above symptoms clearly show, that the motion of the
fluids is in some measure intercepted in most, if not all, the outward vessels
and muscles; the small contracted pulse, points out some fault in the coats of
the arteries, which are too much braced to permit the blood either to enter or
pass them freely; and the paleness of the face and shrinking of all the outward
parts likewise make it evident, that the skin together with the contiguous
membranes are spasmodically affected. It is no less worthy of observation, that
this constriction took place in some degree, before any perceivable quickness
happened in the pulse, and, likewise, that from the time it came on, even in
the slightest manner, health was impaired in proportion. But the bad effects of
it appeared still more clearly in time of the shivering; for the contraction
having then not only become stronger but also more general, by communicating
itself to a great number of vessels, and other membranous parts, whatever of
order subsisted before, in the natural, vital, and animal economy, was thereby
confounded. If those things be true, as they certainly are, may we not safely
conclude, that the immediate cause of feverish complaints, is an unnatural
constriction of the arteries in particular; and that the stronger this, and the
greater number of vessels it affects, the more severe must be the distemper.

The outward branches of the descending aorta, are probably, most exposed to
accidents of this sort, from cold or moist air, as being distributed through
much the greatest part of the body, and conveying the blood to places most
distant from the Heart, where its velocity and momentum are small; for which
reason such constrictions may the easier be brought on them. And we accordingly
find, that the heat fails first and most in the legs and feet; and the painful
stiffness is also more perceivable there than in other parts.

Whatever can give much pain or stimulate the nerves, so as to cause them to
excite such constrictions, may bring on a fever. But we do not suppose all the
arteries must be thus affected, to produce the disease, it being fully
sufficient for this purpose, that so many of them should be so disordered, as
will occasion an irregular distribution of the blood; and that they be kept in
this state to continue the distemper. Nothing is more known, than that there
are plain signs of great laxness in some vessels, whilst at the same time,
others are apparently too much braced; witness the small hard pulse, and brown
parched tongue in choleras and fevers with vomitings, purgings, profuse sweats,
etc.

It will probably be admitted, that some degree of spasm, does, indeed, take
place in time of the horror, but that this must be removed, before a general
warmth can return, more especially ere the patient can sweat, or the urine
become thick. But we are well assured, that distressing spasms of particular
parts oftentimes happen, and yet only a hardness, without much quickness, will
be perceived in the pulse, as is found in nervous and other colicks; the
headaches, choakings, and some other complaints, common to hysterical and
hypochondriacal people, in the biliary ducts during a jaundice, and even in the
Tetanus itself, except during the general temporary contractions which are
common to that cruel disease. So, in endeavoring to establish the above
theory, it was no where insinuated, that the arteries must be so constricted,
as wholly to prevent the fluids from passing; though this seems nearly the case
sometimes in those of the extreme parts, during the severe horrors of quartan
and tertian intermittents. But that is a state of such violence, as no
constitutions can support for many hours together; and we accordingly find,
that they who die of those diseases, never recover a proper warmth after the
horrors attacked; either a mortal anxiety, lethargy, convulsions, or an
apoplexy soon ensuing: Till the fatal stage of a fever, or probably just at the
instant of death, this spasm may be strongest in time of the cold fit; but
notwithstanding the force of it does abate (for abate it must) before the body
can every where become warm, the action of the heart being now weakened, and
its motions much hurried, by the precipitous return of the venous blood Our
most gracious Sovereign King GEORGE II. in all likelihood, could not have died
so suddenly, from the bursting of the right ventricle of the heart, (thin as
all the vessels were said to be) unless a general forcible spasm of the coats
of the arteries and other muscular membranes had preceeded, though no person
happened to be present when the horror attacked. The cause of his Royal
Highness the Duke of Cumberland's death, was more palpable; for he underwent
two or three successive strong rigors or shiverings, whereby the fluids were so
impetuously urged into the internal and superior parts, that the vessels of
the brain were made to give way to the violent irruption of the blood, that was
thus forced upon them.
, it neither can receive nor throw out such a quantity of that fluid, nor
communicate such an impetus to it, as is necessary to dilate the constricted
arteries fully; and they, in their turn, not only refuse a ready admittance,
but a free passage also to the blood, as already has been said. Besides, the
coats of the arteries being rendered more elastick from the time the spasm came
on, and still more so by the horror, they will maintain, the superiority they
have already acquired over the feeble action of the heart, and the little
resistance the fluids can make: The disease therefore will not only continue,
but may even increase, if the cause be not removed.

The same reasoning will hold exactly in those spasmodical contractions, that
arise from the irritation of some sort of acrimony lying in the stomach or
intestines; and they also will continue till that be either corrected or
expelled. As to the occasional sweats, and thick urine in fevers, it has been
said, that the spasm needs not be very general to bring on and keep up those
diseases; for a person may be dangerously ill, though only part of the system
is thus affected; and even in the opisthotonos itself, some muscles commonly
are capable of voluntary motions, whilst others are detained in an unvaried
state of violent contraction. Nothing farther can be inferred from those sweats
in fevers, than that the outward vessels are not so strongly constricted, as
wholly to intercept the fluids from passing to the exhaling canals; or that the
spasm was at such times somewhat abated; the thick urine showing the same of
the small emulgent arteries. But, though those unnatural contractions may abate
in part, they cannot be said to have ceased, so long as the pulse is not soft,
be it strong or weak, quick or slow, this hardness being a proof of too great
springiness in the arteries.

Having offered some reasons, which, at least, seem to favor my opinion of the
immediate cause of fevers, it may not be amiss to point out a few of its most
obvious effects; and those, with others not here mentioned, would be better
understood, if the notion of some anatomists were true, that the several
different orders of vessels, consist only of various arrangements of one and
the same continued canal, which is every where full of fluids. Nay farther, all
the flexible parts of our bodies, are, also included in the above supposal; of
which were we assured it might then be easy to account for the sympathy, that
evidently takes place between one part of our bodies and another.

First, We observed, that from the time the spasm began, and whilst it was
gaining on the vessels, the equality of reciprocal action, which subsisted
before between them and the fluids, was interrupted, and health also declined
in proportion to the force and extent of that contraction.

Secondly, As the blood was tumultuously pushed forwards in the viens at the
time of the horror, because of the strong pressure that was then made on them,
by the constriction of the skin and other muscular membranes, the coats of
those vessels being likewise rendered more springy thereby, it is plain, that
the heart ought either to have admitted and expelled more blood in the same
time than it does in health, or performed its motions quicker. But the former
not being possible, nor probable could it even receive so much, because its
muscular fibers might be spasmodically affected in some degree, the latter
unavoidably happened.

Thirdly, Because the capacities of all the arteries, on which this spasm acts
(1.), must be lessened in proportion, so they can neither receive nor transmit
their natural quantities of the fluids, so long as they continue in that state:
An overplus must therefore be admitted by others, over and above what they
ought to contain, were the circulation every where free. And the stronger this
check in any considerable number of vessels, the more must the blood be
collected, and the greater its impetus in those that are more open and
passable, as being but little or not at all affected with the spasm; unless
where such overfulnesses happen, as disable the arteries from contracting
themselves properly.

Fourthly, From this obstruction (1. 2. 3.) to the free and equal distribution
of the fluids, some stop must be put to the succeeding blood; this again will
be communicated to that which follows, and so on, till so much as cannot pass
the consticted vessels, is made to recoil, by an inverted sort of circulation,
on those that have not undergone any unnatural contractions, or on these that
are least able to resist its weight and impulse. The overplus will, therefore,
fall chiefly on such vessels as are naturally weak, or on those that are not
supported by surrounding muscles: And we accordingly find, that those of the
viscera and brain, are always overcharged in fevers, if nothing happens to
vent the redundance, which else must ensue in them.

Fifthly, Under circumstances like those (4.) the the vessels that are thus too
much distended, cannot clear themselves of this additional quantity of the
blood, partly, because they are so stretched thereby, that they have not the
power to complete their systoles; but chiefly, for that the vessels in other
parts, are not at present in condition to receive their full proportions of the
fluids.

Sixthly, When things have come to that pass (5.), supposing the spasm still
gaining, and urging the fluids yet more into the internal and superior parts,
the patients strength being at the same time greatly spent, the blood will then
be compelled to retire within a narrow compass; and, at last, being mostly
collected in the brain, lungs, and large vessels near the heart, the small
arteries in the outward and extreme parts shut themselves up; the arms and legs
lose their heat, and the musculous flesh feels hard. The aortas no longer
receive the blood freely from the heart; this organ can admit but little from
the vena cava and pulmonaris; the lungs also being already overfilled, receive
only a small quantity from the heart. But here let us stop! for to those who
are much weakened, the last hour cannot now be far off. Nay, when the like
symptoms happen to them, who enjoyed a good share of strength but an hour
before, death must soon ensue, if they cannot be speedily relieved. They
therefore who are cut off by acute diseases, may with truth be said to die a
violent death; for the actions of those organs on which life depends, are
stopped and as it were overwhelmed by this excessive accumulation of the fluids
in them, the vessels in other parts, being very generally closed at such times;
so that the patients yield as victims to the vehemence of the symptoms, rather
than because their bodies are drained of the resources of life. For in those
distempers that prove mortal in a few days, enough of fluids oftentimes remains
to the last gasp to continue life, were the vessels but in condition to
circulate them regularly. On the other hand, when any person sinks under a
hemorrhage, cholera, purging, spitting, or other sudden or slow discharges, the
body is in the end so deprived of its juices, that a sufficiency of them is not
left to fill the remote small vessels; which, for want of the usual resistance
to their contractibleness, and because the projectile force of the heart is
then very small, shut themselves up to their axes.

It is needless to recount more effects of this supposed unnatural
constriction, for any others that can happen in the course of feverish
diseases, may easily be understood from the same manner of reasoning. And
though, happily, this spasm does not always produce fatal consequences, yet,
what we have related will appear in some degree in every fever, unless the
symptoms be abated by some discharge or other, to prevent the overfulnesses
that else must ensue, in the internal and superior vessels.

Should those things be true, may not many symptoms which are daily seen in
fevers, be easily accounted for, from the irregular distribution of the fluids,
that happens in consequence of this spasmodick constriction of the arteries,
whereby the blood is strongly repressed from some parts, and made to
accummulate in others Hippocrates seemed clearly to be of the same opinion;
for, in his chapter (...), he expressly says, Efficient [horr^r^e] ut in a^ia
loca parcior, in alia jus^o copiosior sanguis ^e^a^ur; ex quo stas^s,
stagnationes, in partibus imbecillioribus productre, graves et multas producunt
aegritudines -- Prohibetur sanguinis cursus, atque alio quidem loco consistit,
alio lentius penetrat, qua sane inaequalitate transitus sanguinis per corpus
facta, omni^enae ir ^qualitates per omne corpus contingunt. -- Sanguis
[praesentem horrorem metuens] ab extremis corporis partibus, quae exsangues, et
propter frigus palpitant, decidit, et concurrit ad locos maxim calido^; et ob
sanguinis ibi collecti abundant am, suscitari calorem, ad extrema demum
exeuntem.
? or, whether before a spasm attacks, the solids must have been over springy,
and the blood too compact, else a pleurisy, inflammatory peripneumony, or a
quinsy could not come on.

It will probably be objected, that in those complaints the blood is evidently
inflamed, as appears from the yellow or pale tough skin, with which its surface
is covered; the red part or grume being likewise larger and the serum commonly
less in quantity than in health. But setting aside the consideration, of the
effect cold air may have in contributing to those appearances, when that fluid
is exposed to it in a state of rest, we will even allow the blood to be really
more dense in inflammatory fevers; yet it is not less true, that it was by no
means so, before its velocity had been unnaturally augmented, and it sustained
a continued strong compression, from the great force the arteries acquired,
together with other consequences of those causes. But, let the constrictions be
removed, so that a regular circulation may follow, the fever with its painful
symptoms will then cease, and, in a little time, no such viscidness will be
seen, because the blood soon recovers its proper consistence, after regaining a
free and equal distribution throughout the system, and is no longer under the
like restraints in passing the vessels.

It is commonly thought, that persons of strong full habits, are most liable to
inflammatory distempers; but the effects of this spasm will be the same in
weakly people, though no plethora took place before, provided the weather
favors those disorders; and the like tough skin will also be seen on their
blood, but not in so great a degree. I have often times known women seized with
severe pleurisies, peripneumonies, or quinsies, after being much weakened by an
abortion, or a flooding. The same complaints have likewise been brought on
tender subjects by a colic; for the constrictions, that in this case arose at
first in the stomach, from the irritation of an acid acrimony, being
communicated by sympathy to the outward small vessels, a horror thence ensued;
and whenever that happens, be the cause what it will, more or less of fever
must ensue; the disease, most commonly being of that sort which then prevails,
no matter of whatever age or constitution the patient may be. Accordingly, we
see the strongest men have intermittents, or fevers of the depressed kind in
July and August; and on the other hand, puny persons and infants also, are
liable to inflammatory disorders in the winter.

I will further observe, that acute distempers seldom continue with the same
violence and intenseness of heat; for very commonly the patients have either
sensible or obscure chillinesses at times; and then it may be justly concluded,
that the spasm is still gaining and the disease increasing in consequence. At
the time of those chillinesses, the pulse is more quick, hard and small, and
all the former symptoms are heightened; for such shiverings truly are horrors,
which not only aggravate the spasm that acted before, but make it extend to a
greater number of vessels, whereby the disorder will at least be prolonged.
Such occasional shiverings should therefore be prevented if possible, by
keeping the patients properly covered, according to the weather, for every time
the cold air has access to their bodies, those horrors will more certainly
come on, especially in the winter.

If I have not explained myself clearly on the nature of the spasm I meant to
establish, let us suppose it were possible, to have all the vessels of the
human body laid open to view; the heart at the same time propelling the blood
throughout the system, and receiving it back again from the veins, as is
regularly done in health, here, were a pressure made on any considerable number
of arteries, so as to straiten them in an equal degree with the morbifick
constriction we suppose, the vessels in other places would be seen to swell;
and the more numerous those that are pressed, and greater the weight applied,
the more would the fluids be made to retire thence and accumulate in others,
where overfulnesses must ensue, in proportion to the check given to the
progress of the blood through the confined vessels. All this is plain enough,
and somewhat of the same sort as certainly happens, whenever the coats of the
arteries are spasmodically affected.

CHAP. III. Of the cure of common, continued, and inflammatory fevers.
I HAVE for a long time thought, that, among the variety of distempers to which
we are liable, fevers, in particular, have been divided in too many classes;
nor are the ways of treating them less diversified. It might have been meant by
this show of exactness, to leave us as little room as possible, to mistake one
disease for another; but, in my opinion, that end had been better answered by
fewer principles, so they were well defined. For experience has convinced me,
that it matters not much, under what forms several acute disorders appear, or
whatever may be the ages or constitutions of the patients (when no particular
acrimony prevails), provided the complaints agree in some circumstances with
others, that are commonly believed to be of very different natures; and for no
reason that I can perceive, but because some symptoms fall more on one part
than another. Hence the disease has some name, which suits well enough in
conversation; but it should not be thence inferred, that any material
difference ought always to be made in the manner of curing it, more especially
at its first onset. For if it be granted, that a spasmodick contraction of the
arteries is the immediate cause of fevers, and that the symptoms which happen
in the courses of those distempers, are owing as it were to an inverted or
irregular circulation of the blood, what has just now been said, will not
appear so chimerical; more especially when it is applied to such feverish
complaints as attack those, who but a few hours before were in health.

It would be needless, to give many instances of a method I have for many years
used with success, to remove common continued, or inflammatory fevers, within
the first or second day, when they were not attended with a purging, which
happens but seldom in the latter sort. But for an example, let us suppose a
strong man to be attacked with a pleurisy; yet, though this be as dangerous and
distressing a malady, as almost any we are liable to, it will be removed in a
few hours by purging and sweating, so the discharges be but plentiful, and the
patient is properly taken care of. Nor will the reason, why this management
should have so good effects, be a secret to those, who recollect what has been
said on the constrictions of the external vessels, and the overfulnesses they
occasion within; which being only effects of the former, are more directly
abated by purging, than any other evacuation that can be made; and therefore,
whatever inflammation or obstruction might have ensued from the present
distended condition of the internal vessels, will be prevented by those means.
For great repeated revulsions being thus made, as it were immediately from
those parts, they will be relieved in proportion, of the overcharges they
sustained, by every loose stool. And as the like effects extend to all those
vessels, in which any degree of plethora took place, and even to the heart and
lungs, each must then act with more power, so as not only to clear themselves
of whatever plenitude might still remain in them, but also by communicating a
brisker impulse to the blood itself the small contracted arteries will thereby
be dilated by degrees. Farther to insure the patient's sweating, hot bricks
ought to be laid at a convenient distance from the feet and legs, to assist in
taking off the unnatural contractions, that we supposed were strongest
thereabouts, by the kindly warmth they give those parts. The effect of this
treatment is such, that, after the person has had some large stools, and
sweated plentifully at the same time, the pulse, which began to soften and
fill, on the secretions being freely promoted in the abdominal viscera, will
soon become slow and natural, as a proof that the spasm is removed, and the
blood circulated regularly; all that was required for the cure.

This is my common way of reasoning, on the good effects of purging and
sweating, in the early stages of fevers, but whether I judge rightly or not,
the advantages of such treatment, have been confirmed to me by thousands of
instances. To be diligent in observing, what the same disease constantly
requires to remove it, in the most speedy and effectual manner, and perfect our
judgments therein, with all the certainty that experience and the nature of
things will allow, is, in my opinion, the only true way, to establish a
rational theory and successful practice; as both would then depend on such
fixed principles as must abide the test. Whether I have succeeded either way,
is left to others; but this I may be allowed, that the above theory seems to
justify the practice as this does the former. For, past all doubts, had not the
vessels within been too much filled, to increase the excretions directly from
them, and promote so many plentiful stools, must have had consequences of the
most dangerous nature; and, on the other hand, had not the outward parts been
too much braced or constricted, then, surely, to bring on profuse sweats by
relaxing them still more, had been equally pernicious.

When I first began to use this method, some disappointments happened, from my
not attending to that material circumstance of raising and keeping up a proper
heat in the legs and feet, and guarding the other parts of the body from cold
air, more especially during the winter; the necessity for which did not then
occur, though it was altogether consistent with the notion of a spasmodick
constriction: But, after care was taken that way, few patients missed of
relief, unless they themselves or their attendants, thought it unnecessary to
comply with such seemingly trisling injunctions.

That the patients may not be obliged to get up, a warm bed-pan must always be
carefully conveyed to them under the bed-clothes; and their drink and
nourishment should be given either with a child's feeding-boat, or through the
spout of a tea-pot, as they lie covered; besides, when the bricks cool, those
should be removed and hot ones put in their places, so long as may be
necessary. Though the fever, together with the painful symptoms, will
undoubtedly be abated by those means, yet they may not cease on this first
trial. In that case, the medicine must be repeated, and the discharges promoted
more briskly, unless the patient be already very weak; but he must be so, in an
extreme degree, to deter us from attempting his relief at once by purging and
sweating, rather than suffer an expectoration to come on in a pleurisy or
peripneumony; for at best, that gives only a chance to recover.

I ought to observe, that it is not always necessary to repeat the laxative,
though the symptoms be not wholly removed, so the most accute are abated; for
it may then be sufficient, to make a decoction of poppy-heads and anniseeds
with water; and when the liquor is pressed out, some essence of antimony and a
little sugar being added, one common spoonful of this mixture must be given
every half hour, or seldomer, according to the case, till the patient sweats
freely, and the fever and pain cease. A dry tickling cough is sometimes
troublesome for a few days after, the disease is pretty well over; to allay
which, I add the inspissated juice of liquorice to the decoction of poppies,
and a little of the best olive-oil dissolved with extract of gum arabic, is
afterward mixed with the liquor, to be given as above.

It is evident, that the earlier this method is pursued, so much the better
will it succeed; for if the breathing had been much obstructed for some days,
by a severe pain in the side or breast, this, together with the spasm which
then acts on the outward vessels, will cause the fluids to accummulate in the
lungs; hence a dry cough must ensue from anxiety, at the beginning of those
complaints; but the secretions in that part being afterward increased by
degrees, the phlegm that then lies extravasated in the bronchial vesicles, will
also excite a cough, by its irritation, to expel itself; and thus both the
cough and spitting must continue till the overfulnesses that took place in the
pulmonary vessels be removed, and the profuse secretions there cease in
consequence. But those things would not have happened, had the complaint been
abated within the first or second day; at least they could not be either
dangerous or troublesome; and, in general, the same treatment answers very well
at any time before the expectoration becomes free.

The patient's chamber ought not to be too close or warm, nor his bed stand
very near a fire, that the air he breathes may not be hot and dry. His head and
breast must be raised high; and though he should be carefully covered, the
bed-clothes need not be more than he used in health, except from the waist
downwards, for the sweat we would bring on, will be sufficiently promoted by
the hot bricks, and warm drink and nourishment, which should be given often,
but in small quantities. For those purposes, weak sage tea sweetened a little
with honey, meager broth made with lean meat of any sort, and thin strained
gruel, will serve in lieu of every thing else.

This hint for purging, I borrowed from nature; for observing when inflammatory
diseases were most common, that those patients who had loosenesses at the
beginning of fevers, seldom were liable to complaints of the sides, breast or
parts above; and also, that the distempers were generally mild and short, even
in the winter; or, if a pleurisy, peripneumony or quinsy came on during the
present illness, this did not happen till the purging ceased; and likewise,
that if the belly became freely loose, on the first days of pleurisies or
peripneumonies, they commonly were abated thereby: It, therefore, seemed
reasonable, that a diarrhea, promoted by art, would have good effects in such
cases; which accordingly fell out, and with greater advantages than were
expected; but, to confess a truth, at my first setting out in this way, I
underwent some serious reflections, on straying so much from the common forms
of practicing. Repeated purging is recommended in inflammatory quinsies; but
why so carefully forbidden in the first days of pleurisies and peripneumonies,
I see no reason. If this caution proceeded from fear, either to delay or
prevent the expectoration that of course is expected in those disorders, one
with equal probability would apprehend the same, from the large repeated
bleedings that are generally made.

What Boerhaave says in his 830th and 888th Aphorism, is remarkably to the
point; for speaking of a peripneumony and pleurisy, he tells us, 'that a great
discharge of bile by stool,' is one of the ways in which a crisis happens in
those disorders; and his reserve 'if the patient be relieved thereby,' is as
applicable to the other concoctions and excretions, by which he says those
distempers are removed before the 4th day. How a suitable increase of the
abdominal secretions, may relieve the vessels in the thorax of their present
overfulnesses, and thereby prevent an obstruction, which might end in an
inflammation, I easily perceive, but cannot so readily comprehend the meaning
of the word concoction, so commonly used in speaking of fevers, without any
erruption or tendency to a suppuration By concoction, I suppose authors mean
such a change wrought on the morbifick cause, as renders it either inactive and
inert, or prepares it for being expelled the body by some outlet. But in simple
continued, inflammatory, or other common fevers, to speak of morbifick matter
and concoction, is more likely to lead us into a labyrinth, than satisfy our
judgments, more especially at the beginning of those diseases, when they
attack them, who just before were in health. Indeed it is quite reasonable, to
apply those terms to contagious disorders, and also to fevers that arise from
inflammations tending to suppuration, for there a morbifick matter is evident;
but I have known the greatest part of a large company sicken in the spring or
autumn, after spending several days together, on a ^arty of pleasure as it was
called. Yet though they all were alike exposed to the same weather by day as
well as in the night, and partook of the same intemperate exercises and
irregularities, one person however was presently after confined by the gout or
rheumatism; another had the quinsy; a third a dysentery, ague, purging,
toothache, and so on. Here then it is plain, that the same general remote
causes acted equally on them all; but it is no less true, they had as various
effects on their different constitutions; yet according to the common mode of
speaking, each complaint here had a morbifick cause proper to itself, the
nature of which let those explain, who, on all occasions, adopt such reasoning,
We say with propriety, that the eruption, when complete and benign, is a crisis
to the first fever in the measles and small pox; whereas in some other acute
disorders, there are certain exanthematous appearances, which never fail to
portend death to the patients. Can any thinking man assert, that in pleurisies,
peripneumonies, catarrhal fevers, or pituitous asthmas, the body is really
discharged of the morbifick matter by spitting, which only empties the vessels
that were over charged? or when a fever, quinsy, toothache, headache, or even
the distempers just now mentioned, are removed by purging and sweating
dexterously used at their beginnings, that this happened by our thus expelling
their morbifick causes; or when the constitution is much relaxed, both as to
the solids and fluids, by an intermitting fever; can it be said, that the bark
(which cures merely by its bracing qualities, without promoting any one
sensible excretion) then acts by expelling a morbifick matter of any sort? I
would be understood, that no distemperature existed in the fluids, preceding
the attacks of simple acute diseases, on those who just before were in health;
though it cannot be denied that fevers may bring on somewhat of this sort, and
then it is to be esteemed an effect rather that the cause of the disorder,
notwithstanding to may require our attention to remove it.
. Farther, if purging be disapproved at the beginning of the fevers we speak
of, because a plentiful diarrhea lessens and even stops the spittings in the
second stages of them, the effect complained of, is a direct proof of the
advantages of brisk purging, at the time we recommend. For nothing shows more
clearly, how sudden and great a revulsion is thereby made from the parts
affected, by the humors being so hastily carried off another way; whereas,
when those complaints are thus far advanced, such a waste of the fluids should
by no means be made; for they ought rather to be detained then, to assist in
disc^ssing or dissolving whatever obstruction or inflammation has happened in
the lungs or elsewhere. The objections, therefore, to purging on the first days
of those complaints, are so far from having any weight, that, on the contrary,
they really serve to establish the usefulness of it, when the vessels within
are only overcharged or obstructed in part, and before an inflammation has
come on.

I follow the same method at the beginning of every common fever, when the
belly is not already loose enough; for at such times, it is by no means
sufficient, that the patients have stools as in health (which yet happens but
seldom in the first days of inflammatory diseases), because, however well this
might suit, when all the natural discharges proceed in due order and
proportion, something more will be necessary, now, that this harmony is broken
in upon. Nor will clysters fulfill the intention, as much experience has
convinced me; not to mention, that, according to the foregoing theory, there
are good reasons against the use of them.

The advantages of removing all fevers speedily, and in particular those of the
sides and lungs, are too many and great to need many words. And it is needless
to show, how preferable the above method is, to the common way of bleeding the
patients not only largely at once, but also repeatedly, which yet often fails
to remove those complaints, probably, because some rules above laid down, are
not observed, I mean, as to promoting sweats after such evacuations; for, let
the patients lose ever so much blood, enough of that fluid will still remain to
renew the pain, so the spasm of the arteries be permitted to continue. Nay, it
may even become stronger, and communicate itself to a greater number of
vessels, the more the fluids are diminished, unless care be taken to prevent
this; for the latter being the only antagonists, to the strong disposition the
arteries have to contraction, when this is not properly resisted, they will
close themselves in proportion. Granting, however, the disease to be cured by a
great loss of blood, this happens precisely by emptying the vessels, though in
a less direct manner than we propose, considering the nature and seat of the
complaint, but with this difference, that it weakens the patient much more than
purging and sweating. Supposing after all, that the distemper is not removed by
bleeding, weakened as the patient already is, his recovery will then depend on
expectoration alone, which must not only be plentiful, but of a good quality
also. A dangerous condition surely! for however well suited this discharge may
be, we have too many fatal instances to prove, that it may be easily suppressed
by various accidents; besides many ill consequence oftentimes ensue, from this
manner of terminating those diseases. For those reasons, an expectoration
should not be suffered to come on at all, if by any means they can be cured
without it. But it is worthy of remark, that when recovery is effected even
that way, it is really completed at last, in the manner we propose at first,
by emptying the internal vessels at once, which is gradually done by the
spitting; but with much more hazard to the patient. One the whole, be the
severity of those distempers abated by whatever means, a sweat will
nevertheless come on sooner or latter; when, and not before, the pulse becomes
slow and natural, in evidence that the spasmodick constrictions of the arteries
are then removed, as already has been said.

In some countries, bleeding may perhaps be more necessary in inflammatory
fevers, than I have generally found it in South Carolina; yet, be this
operation so needful or not here, it is no where more practiced. Those who are
of opinion, that they ought not to depart from a rule, which has so long been
as it were universally established, may order some blood to be taken away if
they please, so the patient be strong; but I seldom do, unless the disorder had
been of some days continuance, or the pain in the side so acute, to obstruct
breathing greatly, and thus occasion the fluids to accumulate in a high degree
in the lungs, because, for the most part, much bleeding weakens the sick rather
than gives lasting relief. For though the pain abates sometimes, during the
flow of blood from the vein, and may be easier for a small time after, it will
surely return, so the spasm continues, when every thing remains still to be
done, as if no blood had been lost. I therefore depend on purging and sweating,
being morally certain of success that way, provided the discharges be
plentiful, and things are properly conducted in other respects.

By this method, women have been cured of pleurisies and peripneumonies in
every stage of pregnancy, though inflammatory diseases are known to be full of
danger to such subjects. One, in particular, being seized with an acute
pleurisy in the eighth month after conception, was effectually relieved in less
than twelve hours; and she was as speedily recovered of a relapse, brought on
by her going into a wet room, on the third day after the first illness, though
the latter attack was equally severe with the former; and in the space of seven
weeks she was delivered of a healthy child. Another of a middling constitution,
who relapsed twice into the same distemper in the space of three weeks, was at
each time so soon freed of it, that her strength was but little impaired, after
having been thrice seized with the pleurisy within so short a time. But in
truth, the patients seldom are more weakened by that distemper, when treated in
the above manner at the beginning of it, than commonly happens from any other
smart fever, of equal continuance. May I be allowed to observe, that had those
two women been managed in the most approved usual way, the chance to recover,
would have been much against them. I do not confine this practice to our
natives alone, but apply it to the strongest Europeans, when attacked with
those diseases, on their first landing here in the winter, and the success is
alike in both.

I am not over anxious about the choice of medicines; but avoiding such as are
very irritating, and as there still is a preference, I chiefly use manna, Epsom
salt, elixir salutis, Kermes mineral rightly prepared, essence of antimony,
salt of tartar, magnesia, etc. which being variously combined, are made either
in mixtures with water, or in powders, together with some drops of chemical
oil, either of mint, or some other aromatic plant. But in whatever form they
be administered, the ingredients ought to be so proportioned, that by giving a
small dose of the composition every hour, the expected operation may be brought
on, by the time the patient has taken it four or five times; and whenever he
begins to purge, the medicine ought to be discontinued, for more stools will
follow, which, together with the sweat that soon comes on, often remove the
disease at once, or leave us little more to do. Every thing however ought to be
given warm for some days; and the patient should lie in bed at least
forty-eight hours, having hot bricks near his feet, more especially during the
winter, to prevent his catching cold, which would surely bring on a relapse;
for the solids being still very irritable, a spasmodick constriction will now
be more easily brought on, than if they had not so lately been affected that
way. And for the like reason, he must afterward expose himself by degrees to
the open air; in the middle of the day for some time, and then only, when the
weather is fair and warm; but if it be cold, he ought to be confined some days
longer to bed, with hot bricks to his feet, in case he perceives himself
chilly, or those parts have not a good warmth.

Though a tedious or dangerous spitting will be prevented by those means, it
must yet be confessed, that a small cough and pain in the side sometimes
remain; but without any other marks of a fever, than some degree of hardness in
the pulse; and this will more certainly happen, if the disease continued some
days, before relief was sought: Those symptoms, however, very commonly yield to
such a decoction of poppies, as already has been mentioned; but the person
ought still to be carefully guarded against cold, and have all things given him
warm. The side, likewise, should be cautiously bathed with a mixture of brandy,
spirit of sal am moniac and laudanum (or opium had better be dissolved in the
brandy), the part being afterward covered with a flannel squeezed hot out of
the same spirit, and a warm tile laid over all. Or a plaster of galbanum,
mixed with a litile opium and camphor, may be applied to the place.

I would remark here, how improbable the common opinion is, that too braced a
state of the solids, and great compactness in the blood, should be such
necessary circumstances to dispose us to inflammatory diseases, as we are told.
For supposing a pleurisy removed, within the first twenty four hours from its
attacking a strong man, nothing more frequently happens in this country, than
to see it followed, in a day or two, by a quotidian or tertian intermittent;
though diseases of this sort, do not require such a constitution to favor
their appearing, as those of a contrary character are thought to do. Nor do I
scruple to give the bark to such patients, without regarding their having been
so lately ill of an inflammatory distemper; but then I begin with the
decoction, and add laxatives and diaphoreticks to it, for the first two three
days.

Every physician of the smallest attention, must have observed a remarkable
difference in the forms of diseases, owing to the temporary changes our
constitutions undergo from the weather, in the several seasons of the year; and
accordingly, the spasm we speak of must have various effects. Thus we see, that
some of the excretions are at times much abated thereby, whilst others are not
increased in proportion; and again, it promotes excessive discharges, either by
stool, urine, uterine or other hemorrhages, according as the vessels in
different places are disposed to vent the fluids, with which they happen to be
overcharged. And when the resistance to their flowing toward any one part,
has once been lessened, by an increased discharge made from it, they will rush
that way in a freer stream, so long as any degree of spasm continues on the
arteries elsewhere. On somewhat of this nature, depends the difficulty we find
in checking profuse sweats, diarrheas, catarrhal spittings, and other irregular
excretions of long standing, though no remarkable fever attends; because the
vessels whence they proceed, have become so dilated and weak, that their powers
of contraction are lost; and therefore they cannot detain their contents.

When the secretions within become unnaturally profuse in fevers, the same
regard is due to the spasmodical condition of the outward vessels, as in the
diseases we have more fully spoken of; by keeping the body duly covered, and
laying hot bricks near the knees, legs and feet, whilst the proper medicines
are given to check those precipitous evacuations. But here, as well as in all
other disorders, special regard should be had, to whatever acrimony may have
taken place in the first passages, or passed thence to the blood; whether it
were an acid alone, or a mixture thereof with the bile, which, perhaps, might
have brought on the disease, or continued it afterward. In general, the
diaphoretick regimen ought to be used here; and of the cordial braceing kind
too, when the patient is much weakened and emptied by a catarrhal spitting,
cholera, bilious or serous purgings or vomitings. But as too bound a belly, is
oftentimes the cause of the latter disorder, so it will not cease, till the
guts are freed of all hard excrements; for whilst one pellet remains within,
their peristatick motions will, as it were, be inverted from the part it lodges
in, and of course the vomitings must continue. But maladies of this sort, not
being the subject of our present enquiry, we shall dismiss all farther
considerations of them.

Should any one still doubt, that such spasmodical constrictions are in truth
the cause of fevers, let him but observe what happens to the most weakened
persons, when the fatal stages of diseases commence, and it will then clearly
appear, how the same effects that arose (though in a smaller degree, because
the patients were strong) at the time this spasm first attacked, do indeed
introduce the scene, that concludes the tragedy in all persons who die of any
distemper. The certain approach of this mortal period, is announced in many of
those who are carried off by acute disorders, by more or less of a horror or
rigor. But, notwithstanding the same happens sometimes to them who have been
worn out slowly by consumptions, purgings, or some other discharges of long
continuance; and in those also who are suddenly exhausted by choleras,
hemorrhages, or otherwise, it for the most part manifests itself with equal
assurance, by a gradual abatement of heat in the hands and feet. And as the
vessels there shut themselves up still more, this gains on the limbs in
proportion, so that they become cold and sometimes livid, the circulation being
then at an end in those parts. And thus the progress of death on the body may
be traced; the extreme parts being insensible and inanimated, for many hours,
perhaps, before life is extinguished in the brain and near the heart. On the
other hand, the death of those is more sudden, in whom a strong horror or rigor
happened, because of the general and violent contractions of the vessels, which
repel the blood tumultuously, and as it were at once, into the internal and
superior parts. And as the vessels within, have not strength to resist so
impetuous a torrent of the fluids, as is then made on them; and seeing the
spasm is likewise gaining fast on the arteries and other muscular membranes,
the brain, lungs and heart are so quickly deluged and overwhelmed, that an end
is soon put to the circulation of the blood. In the course of my practice, I
have sometimes been present when this rigor attacked, and always observed, that
according to the degree of it, death ensued sooner or later. Though some become
immediately insensible, and cannot move any part from the moment the horror
came on; others retained both their reason and speech for a short while, and
complained either of a painful stiffness as if they were cramped, or a numbness
of all the fleshy parts and joints, more especially of the arms, thighs and
legs, in so much that they could not move them afterward. On the contrary,
some cannot lie still at all, but toss themselves about in the most restless
manner, so long as they are able, from the dreadful stifling, which is caused
by the fluids being excessively accumulated in the lungs and large vessels near
the heart: Breathing is then very short, redoubled and suspirious; and the
patient perceives an intolerable heat about the breast, which seems to diffuse
itself all over his body, so that he will not endure any covering, and calls
out to be fanned, and to have every window set open, be the weather ever so
rigorous, though at the same time, he is bathed with clammy sweats, and his
legs and arms are cold as marble. The anxious restlessness we just now
mentioned, was said to continue so long as the patient could move, or, as would
seem, till the vessels of the brain became so distended and full, that they
compress the origins of the nerves, and then an end is at once put to all
further sensations. The brain being thus effectually surcharged, and the blood
still continuing to be propelled that way, the like overfulnesses begin in the
vessels of the cerebellum; and from that instant of time, breathing, which
before was exceeding short, becomes very slow; and the person moves no more,
but dies in the posture he lay when that happened. Inspiration is every moment
performed at longer intervals now, and ceases as the last act of life, when
those vessels are stretched and filled, beyond the power of exerting any
farther contractions. Such rigors are indeed more common at the end of acute
than chronical diseases; but I have sometimes seen people recover of fevers,
more especially from choleras, though the restlessness and anxiety we spoke of,
seemed to indicate that death was near. Yet, whether a distinguishable horror
came on or not, no one ever survived this slow breathing, under the
circumstances above described; it being a proof, that the organ whence the
vital actions derive all their energy, is overpowered past a possibility of
relief. For before that sort of breathing happened, such an overfulness must
have been in the vessels of the brain, that they could receive no more; the
whole of the fluids being at those times confined to few vessels.

In proportion to the progress of this fatal spasm on the arteries and other
muscular membranes, and the retreat of the blood it occasions, from the outward
into the internal and superior parts, How speedily do the signs of death
advance? How anxious is breathing, and how fluttering and small the pulse; and
when it scarcely can, or, perhaps, cannot at all, be felt in the wrist, what a
strong throbbing may be perceived in the carotids and about the epigastrium?
How much are the vessels in the eyes distended (though they do not appear in
health), which gives us reason to believe those of the brain are likewise in
the same condition; and consequently this is ever a bad sign in acute diseases?
Whence proceeds that pale ghastly countenance, called a Hippocratick face; and
why does it portend death to those who are much weakened? And lastly, how it
comes that the outward flesh should be hard and rigid at such times, if no
unnatural bracedness took place in the fibers, even of the muscles themselves;
general convulsions destroy some; others have only convulsive twitchings all
over; some again have been watchful or outrageously delirious; whilst those
whose bodies have been drained of the vital fluids by degrees, are oftentimes
sensible almost to the last gasp. However, a peripneumony closes the scene in
all who die of any disease.

I shall end this essay with some queries, which, in my opinion, cannot be so
well explained in any other way, as by supposing the spasmodical constrictions
we mentioned, to be the immediate cause of fevers, owing, probably, to some
sort of irritation affecting the nerves in their courses toward, or after they
are inserted in the blood vessels and other muscular membranes. And it is not
unlikely, When a person has been injured by cold or moist air, or a high wind
acting on the lungs and outer surface of the body, that they produce the same
effects by stimulating too much, as a sharp humor is known to do, whilst it
lies in the bowels or passes thence to the blood.

Q. Whether an abatement of the perspiration, be of itself so certain and
common a cause of fevers, as is thought, seeing the most dangerous often times
attack those suddenly; who were in health but an hour or two before; so that,
neither the quantity nor quality of that humor which might then be detained,
can, with reason, be accused of such distressing effects in so small a time?

Whether, before a fever can come on, the fluids must necessarily have
contracted some sort of acrimony or viscidness, and of course, that the solids
were either too much braced or relaxed? I would be understood, that according
to the common way of speaking, one or the other of those conditions must have
existed, before the morbifick cause began to act; or that those of themselves
were sufficient to produce those effects? but those two questions have been
already answered.

Why, in general, the more severe the horror and longer its continuance, so
much the more dangerous is the succeeding disease? At first sight one would
expect, that the stronger the rigor, the more powerful must be the cause that
brought it on, and therefore, the greater would be the difficulty to remove the
disorder that follows. Yet, though this rule most commonly holds, we have an
exception to it in the violent shiverings, which sometimes precede tertian and
quartan intermittents, the fits, in either case, often terminating in five or
six hours; perhaps, because the solids are lax rather than very springy, and
the blood not very compact, before those sorts of fevers can be formed at all;
and therefore, the fibers relax sooner after a good warmth is regained; the
plentiful sweat which follows putting an end to the fever for that time.

What is the reason why those who commonly have cold feet, are in a particular
manner liable to disorders of the hypogastrium and parts above? This want of
heat must be owing to a lurking spasm acting on the vessels there, which
prevents the free motion of the blood; so much of it therefore as cannot
circulate freely in those parts, must be received by others, over and above
what they ought to contain, if a regular distribution of the fluids took place.
This surplus will be admitted wherever any local weaknesses happen, so that
the effects are extremely various. I never knew any person who was habitually
liable to such a coldness of the legs and feet, in whom an acid acrimony did
not abound, at least in the first passages, which by its irritation there, or
having passed thence to the blood, may indeed be the cause of the partial spasm
we speak of.

Why are vomitings and purgings so common in fevers during the summer and
autumn, and choleras, serous or bilious diarrheas also should then be frequent?
Because the solids are very lax at those times, and the blood much dissolved.
The former therefore are exceedingly irritable and susceptible of spasms from
slight causes; and, seeing every unnatural constriction of the outward parts,
repels the fluids in some degree, they will now be immediately admitted by the
vessels within; in which overfulnesses ensuing, their contents will be as
readily allowed to escape, by an increase of some secretion or other. The
quantity of returning blood through the vena portarum to the liver, being
augmented by a spasm, a profuse separation of the bile follows; which, passing
into the duodenum, occasions vomitings, purgings, or both; for the gall is of
so pungent and saponaceous a nature, that it will stimulate the stomach and
guts strongly to expel itself; and those discharges will continue till the
spasm ceases. However, this redundance of the bile is oftentimes prevented, by
increased secretions made from other organs, as the stomach, pancreas or
intestines; and we accordingly find, that the vomitings sometimes are
tasteless, and the stools pale and purely lymphatick or serous, smelling more
like fresh blood than excrements.

May not the surprisingly profuse discharges of urine, which hysterical and
hypochondriacal persons sometimes void, immediately on the attacks of spasms,
be easily accounted for, from the answer to the preceding query? And also, how
those extraordinary secretions in the kidneys may divert greater evils, in the
same manner, as if the overfulnesses of the vessels within, were abated by
vomitings and purgings, as oftentimes happens, to such subjects; when spasms
are brought on by sudden surprises or frights.

Does it not plainly appear from the foregoing theory, why, when the urine
becomes clear in fevers, after having been thick or high colored, or it had
been limpid from the first, a delirium, stupor, convulsions, stifling
anxieties, or an obstinaie watchfulness, may with reason be expected? For such
urine shows, that the spasmodical constrictions have become more forcible, as
well as general, or that they were very strong from the beginning, and amongst
others reached the emulgent arteries themselves. Therefore, as this sort of
urine is generally made in small quantities during fevers, the fluids, for
those and other reasons, must soon be dangerously collected in the internal and
superior parts, if this cannot be prevented.

How comes it to pass, that either too great a flow or stoppage of the lochia
and menses may happen from a spasm? Answer, because of the present local
laxness or constriction of the uterine and hypogastrick vessels, whilst the
external ones are at the same time more or less spasmodically affected.

Whence is it, that, at the approach of death, some persons have better spirits
and are stronger for a little while, the pulse also being then fuller? It
probably happens, from an increased and more general constriction of the
arteries, wnich urges the fluids in a fuller stream toward the internal and
superior parts; whereby a momentary greater secretion of the animal spirits is
made, as their last effort to maintain life. This is commonly called a
lightening before death.

May not the painful stiffness that is perceived in the joints and musculous
parts, more especially about the thighs and legs, before a fever, be more
reasonably explained by supposing a spasmodical constriction of the arteries
and other muscular membranes, perhaps of the fleshy fibers of the muscles
themselves; the hinderance thence arising to the free motion of the blood, and
it may be of the animal spirits also, rather than because the fluids are too
viscid to allow a proper secretion of the spirits to be made, as some authors
suppose? A plentiful sweat seldom fails to abate those symptoms, and sometimes
removes them at once; whereas, they ought indeed to be increased thereby, had
they been owing to too thick a consistence in the blood.

Do not the paleness and contraction of the face and all the outward parts,
together with every other appearance in time of the horror, clearly show that
the skin and the several parts having any immediate connection with it, are then
strongly constricted? And does not the small hard pulse make it equally plain,
that the coats of the arteries likewise suffer in the same way; and that they
continue thus disordered throughout the disease, so long as the pulse is hard,
no matter whether it be small and quick, or strong and slow, as in comas,
apoplexies, and some other disorders? And seeing so large a vessel as the
carpal artery, undergoes so forcible a constriction at the first onset of a
fever, may not the large trunks and even the muscular fibers of the heart
itself, suffer likewise in the same manner at times, more especially when
diseases draw near their mortal periods? This tightness in the pulse, is
imputed by some, to too great a denseness of the blood, which cannot be, for
the same happens in some degree during the fevers of infants, anasarcous and
other much relaxed or weakly people, in whom, surely, the fluids cannot with
reason be accused of that fault.

Does not the great thirst that comes on before a horror attacks, and continues
unquenchable in it, the dry hard crust likewise which presently covers the
tongue, the mouth, throat and nostrils also being parched, make it very plain,
that the excreting ducts of the salivary and mucous glands, are then strongly
contracted; and the thin parts of those humors exhaling, what remains stopped
in the extremities of the ducts thickens, and together with the epithelium,
forms the above dry skin? Some authors inform us, that this thick crust arises
from a general dissipation of the thin parts of the blood, or I know not what
septick matter; but neither of those can be impeached for its cause, so early
as it oftentimes is seen. And it is also true, that the thicker and drier it
is, so much the greater commonly is the danger, that being a sign of general
strong spasms. But whenever those unnatural constrictions are removed, this
will soon disappear.

Are not the nausea, the distention and throbbing about the epigastrium, the
pain in the loins and costiveness so common in fevers, owing to an overcharge
in the internal vessels, and a spasm that then acts on them, which prevents
such an increase of the secretions there, as might abate this fullness, rather
than to any acrimony, (though now and then somewhat of that sort takes place in
the first passages); a simple dryness of the intestines, which term has no
precise meaning; or lastly, to the want of excrementitious matter in them,
(though they frequently are much loaded therewith)? The pain in the loins, may
in part arise from the mesenterick nerves being over-stretched, by the
surcharged blood vessels, many of which are closely surrounded by twigs of
those nerves Vide Vieussen: Willis: Winslow: passim.
.

Are not the precipitous purgings which sometimes happen toward the end of
fevers, most commonly owing to an aggravation of the spasm that acted before,
whereby the fluids are still more repelled toward the internal parts. And
because the spring of the vessels there was weakened, by the continued
overfulnesses they already suffered, they will now yield the easier to this
additional weight of the fluids, and permit their contents to escape. Such
purgings are commonly imputed to some unknown acrimony or putrefaction of the
humors.

Do not sudden surprises and frights, act immediately as spasms? The coldness,
trembling, pale contracted countenance and shrinking of all the outward parts;
the palpitations of the heart, anxiety, quick breathing, sobbing, weeping, and
small confused frequent pulse; the involuntary passing of the urine and
excrements, and rising of the hair on end, plainly prove, that the external
surface is strongly constricted, and the fluids impetuously repelled thence by
a spasm, or somewhat of this nature, call it what you will.

Whence are clammy sweats, and why do they presage so much danger, when the
patient's strength is already spent? And the reason also, why a paleness of the
face and shrinking of the features, should at such times, so certainly forebode
death? Answer, because those are signs of very general and strong spasmodick
contractions, not only of the arteries, but of the skin and other muscular
membranes likewise, whereby, whatever was contained in the outward excreting
canals is pressed out. The nose is now pinched; the lips, ears, temples and
face are shriveled, cold and pale; all the outward parts being so forcibly
braced, that even the flesh itself feels stiff and hard, as having lost its
pliancy.

I may be thought tedious in mentioning those things, but the design was to
show, how easily many symptoms which happen in diseases may be explained; and
how a tolerable judgment may be formed, either of the patient's recovery or
death, by comparing what has been said here, together with the second and
third chapters of this essay; in which a spasm was assigned for the immediate
cause of acute distempers; that a very general communication of this
constriction must happen, before they can prove mortal to the sick, and also
that it must be removed, ere the patient can recover. I have already observed
that Hippocrates had such a notion of fevers and their symptoms; but, though
some moderns reasoned well on the effects of such unnatural contractions, yet,
in my opinion, they did rot alter the method of cure so much for the better as
might have been expected from their great abilities and long experience.

It has been said, that when the patient is costive, I loosen the belly at the
beginning of almost every fever, and do not suffer it to be long bound
afterward in any one acute disease, provided the nature of the complaint and
condition of the sick, will at all permit his having two or three stools daily;
experience having convinced me, that the present painful or dangerous symptoms
may be mitigated, and others prevented thereby, so proper care be taken in
other respects. In short I am bold enough to say, that whoever pursues this
method of emptying the abdominal vessels sufficiently, and, in consequence,
those of the other internal and superior parts, in the first days of
inflammatory and common continued fevers, under the management above laid down,
will remove them sooner, and with less loss of strength to the patients, than
by any other treatment hitherto proposed. For, in few words, to recover those
who are ill of such disorders, nothing more seems wanting, than to abate
whatever overfulnesses may have happened within, from an inverted circulation
of the blood, caused by the spasmodical constrictions, that seem to act chiefly
and most strongly on the external vessels; and those contractions must also be
removed, else the other end will not be answered.

I frequently mentioned the necessity, for laying hot bricks at a convenient
distance from the feet and legs, in fevers; and truly I have found them of so
great service, that I think they can scarcely be dispensed with, in very many
acute and chronical complaints, more especially during the winter, unless those
parts are inflamed. And I here declare, that they, alone, have given more
immediate relief in hysterical and hypochondriacal spasms, than could have been
reaped from the whole materia medica of antispasmodicks without them; the
suffocations or convulsions oftentimes abating presently, without the
assistance of any thing else The justly celebrated Baron Van Savieten quotes
from Trillerus, the case of a young man who had been twice plentifully bled in
a pleurisy, and with advantage as was thought. But on the fifth day the
symptoms were so violent, that the patient's life was in a manner despaired of.
His feet being put in warm water, a vein was opened in each, with a large
orifice, but no blood issued, so cold were those parts. Scalding water, as
would seem, was then poured on them, which made the veins bleed freely, and
with so good effect, that the half dead patient was not only relieved, but
recovered. -- Vide Van Savieten comment, in Boerhaave Aph. Tom. III, page 39.

This noble and excellent physician speaking here of the advantages of bleeding
in a pleurisy, imputes the recovery of this patient to the quantity of blood
that was then taken away; though the two former large bleedings, did not
prevent his growing worse. And even here it is most probable, that the lasting
good effects ascribed to that operation, were more owing to the hot water,
which removed the spasmodick constriction that acted on those parts. This
instance is exactly to the point; and clearly shows how necessary it is to keep
up a good warmth in the feet and legs in some acute diseases.


. Putting the legs in warm water, is frequently practiced on such and other
occasions; but the good effects thereof generally cease with the immersion; for
before those parts can be wiped dry, they may be again chilled, and the spasm
renewed in consequence. Besides, without great care the patient's linen and bed
clothes will be damped by the steams of the hot water; which, as things now
are, must have bad effects. It is usual also, to wrap up the legs and feet in
hot flannels; but those soon cool and require shifting often. Bottles filled
with hot water have likewise been tecommended; but I have known them break or
leak at the corks in the bed, much to the detriment of the patient; neither
does the covering lie so close as over the bricks, which may be had almost
every where, are soon made ready, and easily changed when they cool. They also
are much to be preferred to stones, which are apt to split and fly in the fire;
and I have seen this happen even after they were put in the bed.

Thus have I given my opinion on this subject, which if founded in reason, did
not need the ornaments of eloquence, to recommend it to the ingenuous. But, if
the theory be not rational, or what I reckon upon more, should not the practice
stand the test, no flourishes of style could protect them from that contempt,
which whimsical propositions justly deserve, whatever specious arguments
introduce them to the public. Being conscious how little I can serve mankind,
I ought by all means to be careful how I propagated a doctrine, which, if
wrong, might be destructive in the highest degree; more especially as daily
opportunities offer for trying it, and, of course, exposing me to censure, were
it found fallacious.

The newness of the practice in pleurisies, peripneumonies, and some other
acute diseases, may cause it to appear in a suspicious light to those, who do
not comprehend the principles on which it is established; or to those who are
not accustomed to reason in the same way on the immediate cause of fevers, and
the several symptoms that happen in consequence thereof. But whatever may be
their sentiments on this head, I hope the method proposed above, will neither
be condemned by implication nor prejudice, before it has undergone some fair
trials in the way I have directed; when, provided the medicines operate
properly, and due care be otherwise taken, I have no doubts of its succeeding
in general, the numberless instances of which, or rather its failing but
seldom, unless from mismanagement have emboldened me to say any thing at all of
it. I do not however pretend, to the knowledge of any method or remedy, which
will remove any one distemper with absolute certainty, being very sensible that
the virtues of all medicines are only conditional or relative. Accordingly we
now and then are mortified, by disappointments in the cure of those diseases,
which we vainly believed were best understood by us, owing, perhaps, to
somewhat of a hidden nature, a certain (...) that sets bounds to our
presumption: But whether the difficulties arose from my own oversights, some
peculiarities either in the constitutions of individuals, or the disorders
themselves, which I could not discover, so it was, that I failed in some cases,
when I thought myself almost sure of success.

A caution concerning bleeding, and giving vomits.
Scarcely any thing deserves more reprehension, than the rash, undistinguished,
and repeated free use of the lancet; fot however necessary it may be to take
away blood on particular occasions, past all doubts, this is frequently done
when it ought to be omitted. Nor does any disease require such a waste of the
vital fluids, as is too often made; by which means the patient is left to
struggle with the double danger of the distemper and extreme weakness.

Were it duly considered, that the strongest persons who eat and drink
moderately, and use necessary exercises, have no more blood than is requisite
in health; and that the plethora or overfulness so much contended for, at the
beginning of acute and inflammatory fevers, is for the most part more imaginary
than real, and local rather than general; the pretense for taking away so much
blood at once, or by repeating the operation again and again, cannot be founded
in reason. What then shall we say of those who practice this on them who fall
short of so vigorous a constitution?

The arteries are naturally so disposed to contraction, from the strength of
their orbicular fibers, that were it not for the resistance made by our fluids,
they would shut themselves up to their axes. A certain quantity of blood must
therefore be necessary to keep those vessels duly dilated, and excite a proper
diastole; but when too much of that fluid is lost, and the opposition to their
contractibleness is thus lessened, they will close themselves in proportion;
and the more, because the force of the heart is weakened both by this great
loss of blood and the disease. We have a plain proof of this, from the fainting
that happens when the vessels have been suddenly emptied by a large orifice;
for the quantity of returning blood to the heart being now so diminished, that
enough thereof does not arrive at that organ, to promote a proper diastole that
a forcible systole may follow. In this case, the feet and hands become cold,
and the countenance pale and contracted; all the outward parts shrink; and
clammy sweats appear as the arteries collapse, for want of a suitable quantity
and due impulse in the blood, to keep them fully distended; so that the skin,
together with its contiguous vessels and membranes, plainly undergoes
spasmodical constrictions at such times.

On some occasions, we are directed to take away blood ad animi deliquium; but
to say the least, this is a very uncertain rule, for supposing bleeding to be
necessary, some persons may faint before a sufficient quantity has been lost,
and others may bleed too much, ere they fall into a syncope. But when a
fainting happens, the vein ought to be bound up immediately, however small the
discharge might be, and the patient laid down, if he had been bled sitting up.

Repeated bleeding is also enjoined in some cases, till the blood appears
florid and free of all siziness; but whatever show of reason may be in this,
the injunction seems not much better founded, than the common expression of
taking away all the bad blood, and leaving only what is good behind. For it may
be truly asserted, that this point will not be attained, so the fever
continues, before the vessels have been too much emptied, and the vital actions
depressed in proportion.

The weakness brought on by an excessive loss of blood, is sudden and great,
and its effects may be traced for a long time, by a paleness of the face,
trembling, chilliness, and want of heat in the extreme parts, great languidness
of the vital and natural actions, and a slow recovery. On the whole, though the
loss of some blood may be, occasionally, needful, or taking away a moderate
quantity may do little harm in some cases, the abuse of that operation is
certainly very hurtful for the present, as well as the time to come. Eight or
ten ounces of blood, are as much as any man ought to lose in most disorders;
for if farther evacuation be necessary, he that understands the foregoing
theory, cannot be at a loss as to the way it should be made; the method above
proposed having this great advantage, that though a patient may be much more
emptied thereby than by bleeding, this, however, is done by degrees, and his
strength is all the while supported with proper nourishment. The judicious
Sydenham, seriously laments the necessity he thought there was, for bleeding so
often in the rheumatism, because of the great weakness it brought on. He
therefore changed that practice, and, after the third bleeding, depended on
purging and anodynes, which answered equally as to the disease, far better
surely for the patient; and the effects would have been as good after bleeding
only once, or, perhaps, not at all, as much experience has convinced me; more
especially had he added sudorificks and alkalies to his other medicines.

Vomits are thought by many, to be, as it were, indispensibly needful, more
especially in remitting and intermitting fevers; but, as might be expected,
those who make this a rule, oftentimes do much mischief; which is not charged
as it ought to be, to their own temerity and want of judgment. All the bad
effects of this headlong sort of practice, cannot be recounted here; but let us
give a very common instance, in the cases of those who are stupid and drowsy in
fevers, from too great a fullness in the vessels of the brain, the belly being
at the same time bound. -- Now, though the fevers may abate, according to the
usual courses of those diseases, yet a hard and too quick pulse, headache,
sickness at the stomach, and general disorder, frequently remain, as evidences,
not only of a lurking spasm, but likewise of too great an overcharge still
remaining, in the internal and superior vessels. To give an emetick,
therefore, under circumstances like these, can scarcely fail in having
pernicious effects; even convulsions, a dilirium or stupor sometimes ensuing
immediately, or at the next return or increase of the fever. How those things
should be, is so evident as not to need any explanation: Nevertheless when a
patient discharges much mucus, acidity, green or yellow bile, in the fever, we
ought to promote the vomitings with warm water drank plentifully, and thrown up
again, till it returns clear and tasteless. Carduus or camomile tea is often
used for this purpose, from a notion that they strengthen the stomach; but they
lie so little a while there, that any effect they may have this way, does not
deserve our regard at such times; besides, the bitterness of those infusions
conceals other tastes, so that we cannot so well know when all the offending
matter is discharged, as if water alone were used.

ESSAY II. Of the Crises of Common Continued, and Inflammatory Fevers.
IT will plainly appear from the foregoing Essay, how ill qualified the author
is for medical disputation, more especially, when the design was to oppose some
notions, that have been long admitted for truths. But if there be reason to
suspect, that certain opinions have been adopted, which were liable to
objection, it can have no bad consequences to examine them, seeing those things
will still remain as before, if they be not disproved.

Various are the ways in which crises are said to be brought about; but however
the symptoms might be moderated in fevers by a hemorrhage, or an increase of
some excretion or other, I never saw an acute disease go clearly off, before a
general sweat happened. This sort of perspiration, sometimes, is of so rank a
nature, as to be offensive to the sick themselves, and their attendants also,
owing, perhaps, to the great heat and rapid motion the fluids sustained,
whereby their saline and sulphurous parts were not only multiplied, but
rendered more volatile also; the urine and stools, likewise, acquiring a more
nauseous scent from the same causes.

When this sweat is coming on, the pulse becomes fuller and more soft, and the
tongue moister, as signs of some abatement in the spasmodick condition of the
solids, and that the hindrance to a more regular distribution of the fluids, is
now giving way. And, as the perspiration advances more, the pulse still
softens, fills and becomes slower; whatever overfulnesses happened in the
internal and superior parts, together with the several symptoms which depended
thereon, abating also by degrees. For as the outward vessels relax yet more,
and continue to discharge themselves plentifully, those within, being eased of
their overload, by the humors now taking another course, recover their
systole, and by little and little clear themselves of the surcharges they
suffered; so that, provided things be but well managed now, a free circulation
will soon ensue; or, in other words, the disease will cease, all the unnatural
constrictions being then abated.

Before the pulse becomes softer and more full, it will be vain to look for the
sedimentum album leve and aequale, so much wished for in the urine during an
acute disease; because the morbifick matter is thought to be discharged that
way. But this sort of sediment, among others, is only a sign, that the vessels
within are recovering their natural diameters, whether they had been too much
dilated or contracted before; for more or less of such a settling, will always
be seen in the urine of people in health: And why it should be more plentiful
at the end of fevers, may be understood from the greater laxness of the solids,
and dissolution of the fluids, of which both the full soft pulse and critical
sweat are proofs. Besides, from the vehemence of the circulation during a
fever, more particles may be rubbed off the coats of the vessels than in
health, and help to increase this sediment. Here I would be understood to mean,
what happens at the termination of acute diseases; for though the blood be ever
so sizy, when the compressing force of the vessels was exerted with its
greatest power, yet, if the patient be bled some hours after the fever ceased,
the serum will then be more in quantity than it was during the distemper, and
the red part less. Indeed, the paleness and weakness which are seen after every
fever, plainly enough show, that the solids are much relaxed and the blood
thinned.

It must not be inferred from those loose hints, that I consider the inspection
of the urine as unnecessary; on the contrary, I do not know any one of the
internal secretions, whence so good a judgment may be formed, of the condition
of the parts within during fevers, as from that discharge. The urine is clear
in acute diseases with convulsions, stupors, or delirium, more especially if
the latter be of the outrageous sort; in manias, apoplexies, epilepsies, during
the horrors of all fevers, as well as in hysterical, hypochondriacal and
asthmatick attacks, particularly when the belly is bound, in consequence of a
spasmodick constriction of the muscular fibers of the intestines, which
prevents the secretions being made in them. But, when purgings happen in
fevers, the urine is, commonly, thick or high colored, and has either a large
sediment or cloud; for the urinary organs, then partake of the same laxness
with the other internal parts.

Limpid urine, is justly esteemed an unfavourable sign in fevers, for it shows
a very extensive strong spasm. But the mischief this portends, ought not to be
imputed to the detention of any morbifick matter that should have passed that
way, seeing the disease continued whilst the urine was very thick, but to the
spasm having communicated itself to a greater number of vessels, and becoming
stronger also, on those it possessed before, whereby the fluids are repelled
into fewer vessels and a smaller compass. In this case, the most alarming
consequences are to be dreaded, from the overfulnesses and stagnations that
must soon ensue in the internal and superior parts. And we accordingly see,
that either a dilirium, convulsions, comatous or lethargick stupors, mortal
anxieties, etc. infallibly succeed when such a change happens in the urine,
unless they can be prevented; but this is seldom in our power, when patients,
are much weakened.

Symptoms like those we have just now mentioned* are said to happen per
metastasm, or from a translation of the morbifick matter to the brain or
elsewhere. But that sort of reasoning explains nothing to me, who have some
doubts of such matter existing in the fluids, more especially at the beginning
of common continued, inflammatory or even intermitting fevers, when such
symptoms are frequently seen. However, I can easily comprehend how they may be
brought on, by an aggravation of the spasm; which, as it must take place before
a fever can attack, so must it be removed ere the patient will recover, or
become very general before a disease can prove mortal, as already has been
said.

When the urine is clear in fevers, it is commonly secreted in small
quantities; but hysterical and some other people, whose nerves are very
sensible, oftentimes discharge aprofusion of urine, immediately after the
attack of a spasm; which, past all doubts, prevents ill consequences in another
way, that else would ensue, when the fluids are thus precipitously and
impetuously repelled toward the viscera and brain. Again, it for the most part
holds, that when the belly is loose in fevers, more especially during warm
weather, the urine will be high colored, or full of sediment; and so long as
it continues so, there is not much danger either of stupors or convulsions,
unless the patients sit up too long when they are very weak. At the time
therefore, that the urine is clear in the first days of fevers, it is a rule
with me to remove the stricture of the vessels within, and abate whatever
overfulnesses have happened there, by promoting loose stools and sweatings
likewise, in order to obviate the danger that would quickly follow, from the
fluids being accumulated in the internal and superior vessels. This, indeed,
cannot be done, when the patient's strength is already spent by a lingering
disease; but it may and ought to be attempted, at the beginning of common
continued and inflammatory fevers, which oftentimes prove mortal on the third,
fifth, or seventh day; for in such cases, enough of fluids generally remain to
the last breath to support life, were the vessels but in condition to circulate
them. They therefore who fall by disorders of that sort, truly die a violent
death, as we have already said. On the whole, though the examination of the
urine be useful, as thence both the approach and completing of the crisis may
be pretty well known, yet in my opinion, it cannot be affirmed with any degree
of propriety, that the body is so commonly freed of the febrifick cause that
way as is thought, if it be at all, unless the distemper arose from gravel in
the passages; but we do not speak of such complaints.

A crisis is said to be brought about, by bleedings from the nose, uterus and
hemorrhoidal veins; and likewise by a diarrhea, an expectoration, etc. It
cannot indeed be denied, that a well-timed suitable discharge made in either of
those ways, will much abate the painful symptoms, by venting some part of the
fluids, that were too much collected in the vessels within, and more so in some
than others, which being thus eased of their over-fulnesses, will now contract
themselves with greater power. And because the same effects extend to others,
in some degree, and also to the heart and lungs, the blood must then he
propelled with a greater impetus toward the constricted vessels, and so dilate
them gradually. Yet after all, the sweat we mentioned must still ensue, before
a complete crisis can happen, no matter by whatever natural or artificial
discharges, the overload, which took place in the vessels within, might be
lessened. Does not what we have said of the humors being too much repelled
from the outward to the internal parts at such times, plainly appear among
other things, from what happens to the strongest man at the first onset of an
inflammatory fever? for the pulse is then so small, the patient likewise being
in all respects so exceedingly weak and helpless, because the vital actions are
as it were overpowered, that they who know not the reason, believe no blood
ought to be taken away; but after that has been done, the sick person
perceives himself stronger, and the pulse also inlarges.

Fevers are said to cease, when the morbifick cause happen to be thrown on the
glandulous or other parts; but, though it be easy to conceive how obstructions
of this sort may be formed, yet in what manner they prove truly critical, those
must declare to whom such instances have occurred. For myself, I always
observed that some degree of feverishness still remained, till those tumors
were either discussed or suppurated; and even then the patient sweated at last
before he recovered.

As to a critical diarrhea, it is just what we proposed to bring on early in
the disease; and if the patient has the good fortune to sweat, when that
happens of its own own accord, the same salutary effects may probably ensue, as
we find by promoting those discharges at the beginning, in order to relieve the
vessels within of the surcharges they sustained, and perhaps clearing the first
passages of some sort of acrimony, that might either bring on or continue the
spasm. But, whether this purging come on naturally, or was promoted by art, a
general sweat must nevertheless follow, before the patient will be free of
fever.

Whether fevers can be removed in cold climates, without the sweat we mean, I
will not dispute; but in South Carolina they never have a crisis any other way;
and how it can be otherwise elsewhere, does not appear from the laws of mutual
action between the solids and fluids, or according to the foregoing theory. The
discharge may not, indeed, be so plentiful in cold countries as with us, in
whom a laxer constitution commonly prevails, for the greatest part of the year.

My opinion of those things is confirmed, by what authors have said of the
different sorts of crises; for such increased excretions could not have been
made, unless the fluids were either too much collected in, or too plentifully
determined toward the places whence they proceed. For it is plain, that had
they circulated freely and equally throughout the system as in health, nothing
of that nature could have happened, because the secretions would not have
exceeded any where, every part then receiving only its proper quantity of the
fluids. Much less could a hemorrhage break out, except the vessels had first
been so over-stretched, that their coats were made to give way to the
additional weight and impulse of the blood. Neither could this have been, if
the progress of the fluids had not been intercepted, in some degree, by some
change made in the condition of the arteries in other parts. It then seems
clear, that so much of the blood as could neither be received nor circulated by
the vessels, which were spasmodically affected, must have been admitted by
others, over and above what they ought to contain, had a regular distribution
of it taken place, as we have already mentioned. An expectoration could no more
happen in a peripneumony than from a diarrhea, unless the fluids had first been
unnaturally accumulated in the lungs, to augment the secretions there; and the
extravasated humors acting as a stimulus, they excite a cough to expel
themselves. Have we not evident proofs of too great distention in the vessels,
at or near the place, whence a future hemorrhage or an augmented secretion is
to proceed, for some time before this happens? Is not a bleeding from the nose,
preceeded by a fullness and flushing of the face, throbbing of the carotid and
temporal arteries, buzzing or ringing in the ears, and a heaviness or pain in
the eyes and forehead? How difficult is breathing, and what heat and oppression
are perceived about the breast in peripneumonies, and in the peripneumonick
stages of pleurisies, owing to the great weight of fluids, with which the lungs
are charged? In the mortal stages of all diseases, how anxiously do the
patients toss themselves about, and gasp in the quickest manner, because of the
stifling from the fluids being mostly accumulated in the lungs and large
vessels near the heart; the circulation being already at an end in the extreme
parts? May it not be foretold that the menses will soon flow, when a heat,
throbbing, heaviness and pain are perceived about the loins, hips and
hypogastrium? And, not to mention other things of the same sort, when the
circulation begins to recover itself in the external small arteries, the
critical sweat may be announced, by a more equal heat, a plumpness of all the
outward parts, and softness of the skin, together with a fuller and less hard
pulse, a moister tongue, and an abatement of the sickness, anxiety, etc. all
plain proofs of what has been repeatedly alleged, of a spasmodick
constriction being the immediate cause of fevers, which the several symptoms we
have last recounted, show is then giving way,

THE END.

