THOUGHTS ON THE NATURE OF WAR, AND ITS REPUGNANCY TO THE CHRISTIAN LIFE.
Extracted from a SERMON, on the 29th November, 1759; Being the Day of PUBLIC
THANKSGIVING for the SUCCESSES obtained in the LATE WAR.

WITH SOME EXTRACTS From the WRITINGS of WILL. LAW and TH. HARLEY, both
Clergymen of the Church of England, on the NECESSITY of SELF-DENIAL, and
bearing the Daily Cross, in order to be TRUE FOLLOWERS of CHRIST.

LUKE ix. 23. And he said to them all, If any Man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever will
save his Life, shall lose it; but whosoever will lose his Life for my sake, the
same shall save it.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by HENRY MILLER, in Second-Street. MDCCLXVI.

THOUGHTS ON THE NATURE OF WAR, etc.
THE two general views in which the subject of this day's thanksgiving can only
be considered, are

First, As an event that, in its cause and consequences, is connected only with
the present life; and being visibly produced by the efforts of human wisdom and
human strength, is the ground of human exultation and triumph. And,

Secondly, As the sole and immediate work of "THE LORD THAT REIGNS" -- a part
of the administration of that Merciful Providence, which, through all the
revolutions of disordered nature and disordered life, pursues but one
invariable purpose, the Redemption and Salvation of man.

It would be needless to propose the subject, in the first view, to the
consideration of true Christians; who know, with the same certainty as they
know their own existence, that human nature, left to itself, has no power but
that of producing mere evil; and that every thing within it and without it that
is either great or good, is the free gift of Grace, the unmerited bounty of
Redeeming Love. But the true Christian Spirit being almost departed from the
earth, true Christian knowledge, as its inseparable companion, is departed with
it, and men seem to be gone back again to their old animal life: and though, in
speculation and idea, they profess an assent to the truths of Revelation; yet,
in heart and practice, they are to apt to consider the course of all things as
connected only with temporal good and evil, and themselves as the center and
circumference, the first cause and the last end of all; ascribing to human
understanding designs which only Infinite Wisdom can form, and to human power
events which Omnipotence only can produce.

Lest, therefore, this leaven of darkness, pride, and vanity, should have taken
possession and altered the frame and habit of our spirits, it may not be
improper to consider the success of War in the first general view, as the
visible effect of human power, in which even the professed Christian is so apt
to glory as his own work.

If the Christian, however, recollects himself, he will find War to be a sad
consequence of the apostasy and fall of man; when he was abandoned to the fury
of his own lusts and passions, as the natural and penal effect of breaking
loose from the Divine Government, the fundamental law of which is LOVE -- Thou
shall love the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
mind, and with all thy strength; and thy FELLOW CREATURE, as thyself.

St. James has answered the question with respect to the cause of War, in so
precise and determinate a manner, as to preclude all difficulty and doubt about
it: From whence come wars and fightings among you, says he? Come they not
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members. Ye kill, and desire to
have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war; yet ye have not, because ye ask not,
-- because ye have no respect to the will of "THE LORD THAT REIGNS;" but,
forsaking the SUPREME GOOD, in whom alone your happiness consists, ye follow an
earthly and deceitful good, and think only of procuring it by your own power.
Ye ask, and receive not; because ye ask amiss -- from a pretended respect to
"THE LORD THAT REIGNS," but solely for animal and sensual enjoyment, "that ye
may consume it upon your lusts."

In this very explicit and true account, War, like all other evils, is
described as centering in itself; and the end of it, is declared to be the
gratification of those very appetites and passions, from which it derives its
birth. And thus it ever was, and ever will be -- for in his unhappy circle,
which is, indeed, the great circle of the history of man, the fatal mischief
proceeds: War is the offspring of the inseparable union between the sensual and
malignant passions; War protracted to a certain period, necessarily compels
peace; peace revives and extends trade and commerce; trade and commerce give
new life, vigor and scope, to the sensual and malignant passions; and these
naturally tend to generate another War.

But War, considered in itself, is the premeditated and determined destruction
of human beings; of creatures originally "formed after the image of God," and
whose preservation, for that reason, is secured by Heaven itself within the
fences of this righteous law, that "at the hand of every man's brother, the
life of man shall be required." And though this created image of the Holy Triune
God must be owned to have been so wretchedly defaced, as to retain but a very
faint resemblance of its Divine original; yet, as the highest inforc^^ent of
that heavenly law, which was published for the security of life, it is most
graciously renewed by the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the Indwelling of
the Holy Ghost.

Further: the consequences of War, when impartially examined, will be found
big, not only with outward and temporal distress, but with an evil that extends
where in the darkness and tumult of human passions it is neither expected nor
conceive to reach. That property is confounded, scattered, and destroyed; that
laws are trampled under foot, government despised, and the ties of all civil
and domestic order broken into pieces; that fruitful countries are made
deserts, and stately cities a heap of ruins; that matrons and virgins are
violated; and neither the innocence of unoffending infancy, nor the impotence
of decrepit age, a protection from the rage and thirst for blood -- is but the
mortal progeny of this teeming womb of mischief. The worst is still behind --
and though remote from those senses and passions that are exercised only by
present good and evil, and, therefore, not the object of common concern; must
yet, upon the least recollection, impress with horrer every mind that believes
there is a Righteous God, and a state of retribution that is to last for ever.
But what must the Christian feel? -- he, who knows that the fall of man is a
fall from meekness, purity, and love, into sensuality, pride, and wrath; that
the Son of God became incarnate, and suffered, and died, to restore that first
life of meekness, purity, and love; and that for those, in whom the restoration
of that life is not begun in the present state, the Son of God incarnate has,
it is to be dreaded, suffered and died in vain -- what, I say, must he feel for
those immortal spirits, that, in the earliest dawn of their day of
purification, are by hundreds and thousands driven into eternity, in the
bitterness of enmity and wrath -- some inflamed with drunkenness; some fired
with lust; and all stained with blood? In those direful conflicts, which are
maintained with so much rage, that when the Vanquished at last retreats with
the loss of TWENTY-THOUSAND HUMAN BEINGS, the Victor finds he has purchased
some little advantage at the expense of MORE THAN HALF THAT NUMBER SMOLLETT, in
his Continuation of the History of England, speaking of the battle of
Cunersdorf, where the Prussians attacked the Muscovites in the year 1759, says,
The carnage was truly horrible; above twenty thousand Prussians lay dead on the
field. The loss of the Russians amounted to ten thousand. It must be owned,
that if the King was prodigal of his own person, he was likewise very free with
the lives of his subjects. He adds: That at no time since the days of ignorance
and barbarity, have the lives of men been squandered away with such profusion
as in the course of this German war. They have not only been unnecessarily
sacrificed in various exploits of no consequence, but they have been lavishly
exposed to all the rigor and distemper of winter-campains, -- in despite of
nature, and in contempt of humanity.
-- Heaven and earth! what a possibility is here of a sacrifice made to the
prince of darkness, the first and chief apostate! who rejoices in beholding
men, through the abuse of those benefits which undeserved Mercy has* conferred
upon them, transformed into enmity and hatred of God and their brethren;
forsaken by God, and destroying one another: and thus hastening once more into
his horrid society; that having been accomplices in his rebellion: they may
become partakers of his misery and torment.

Now, if the man of valor, whom consenting nations have dignified with the
title of HERO, and the man devoted to the world, are asked, from whence this
immortal mischief, that may thus extend its influence into the regions of
eternity, can proceed; what must they answer? -- indeed, what can they answer,
but that it is engendered by the love of human glory -- as vain a phantom as*
ever played before a madman's eye! by the lust of dominion; the avarice of
wealth; and the infamous ambition of being dreaded as the conquerors and
tyrants of mankind? Heaven preserve Britain from these, "earthly, sensual,
devilish" motives -- so repugnant to the generous, compassionate, and forgiving
temper, with which Redeeming Mercy has blessed it, in union with the purer beams
of heavenly light; that light which is intended to remove all the darkness of
human corruption, and transform selfish, sensual, proud, and malignant spirits,
into Angels of patience, humility, meekness, purity, and love; the "children
and heirs of God, the brethren and joint heirs of Christ!"

But Britain, in the midst of those outward advantages in which she is so apt
to place her confidence, must not forget, that there is no possibility of being
preserved from such principles, dreadful and detestable as they are, but by the
most humble, affectionate, and constant application to and dependence upon "THE
LORD THAT REIGNS," that Gracious Power which first plucked them from her
breast. It is, indeed, a standing observation among the prattlers of human
philosophy, "that the mind must be very weak, that cannot bear a prosperous
condition:" but where is the mind strong enough to bear it, that is not blessed
from ABOVE with something better than prosperity itself? That is not
blessedness, which is something that can be separated from the mind; much less
that, which may leave it miserable to all eternity; and least of all that,
which may tend to make it thus miserable, by degenerating into a curse. And
this is the case of all external things that are called blessings; which, in
their own nature, are temporary and changeable, and in their use and
application may be perverted to the most dangerous and lasting evils: If ye
will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of Hosts;
I will even sent a curse upon you, and I will CURSE YOUR BLSSINGS. All external
blessings, whether national or personal, are curses, when they become the fuel
of the sensual and malignant fire in corrupt nature; when they not only
alienate the mind from "THE LORD THAT REIGNS," but madden it to impious
rebellion and defiance against him.

From this view of war, begun from human passions, and carried on for human
purposes, for honor, dominion, trade, or some other end that centers in the
present life; it is evident, that the Christian can have no interest in it: he
cannot derive blessing from its success, nor triumph and exult when to the
short-sighted view of the human mind the appearance of success presents itself;
he knows, that the means are infinitely disproportionate to the end; and his
Redeemer himself has declared, that "all they that take the sword," inflamed by
malignity, and seeking some earthly and temporal good, "shall perish with the
sword." But, without any circumstances of limitation, the same Redeemer, in the
Revelation of his future judgments upon a fallen and obstinately evil world,
has further declared, that he that leads into captivity, shall go into
captivity; and he that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword:
Here is the trial of the faith and patience of the saints, who, being called to
a state of suffering, and treading in the footsteps of their great Examplar,
when they are reviled, revile not again; when they suffer, threaten not; but
commit themselves to THE LORD THAT REIGNS, to him that judges righteously.
And to this solemn declaration of righteous judgment, the penman of that awful
book calls upon all mankind to attend, and says, "If any man have an ear," an
ear that is not totally deafened by the tumultuous passions of nature,
separated from God, and turned wholly to itself, "let him now hear;" let him
now repent, and forsaking his own sensual and malignant will, seek after the
GOD of PEACE and LOVE, and live.

We will, therefore, turn our attention to the only light in which Succcess in
War can properly be considered by us, namely, As the sole work of "THE LORD
THAT REIGNS" -- a part of the administration of that Merciful Providence,
which, through all the revolutions of disordered nature and disordered life,
pursues but one invariable purpose, the Redemption and Salvation of man.

The disorders of nature and of life are wholly the effects of sin; of a
voluntary aversion and alienation from the life, light, and love of God, in
perfect union with which, perfect purity, peace, and happineness are only to be
found. Hence that discordancy of the outward elements, which brings forth
pestilence, famine, inundations, earthquakes, storms, and tempests: hence, in
the corporal part of the human frame, pain, sickness, and death; in the mental,
sensuality, pride, and malignity, including all the selfish and wrathful
passions, that, between individuals, engender envy, hatred, injury, resentment
and revenge, and between nations a peculiar kind of enmity and wrong that
issues in war. In the elements strife and evil will subsist, 'till they are
purified and united by the last renovating fire; in man, 'till all the designs
of Grace are fully accomplished: but surrounded with evil as men are, and full
of evil themselves, what would become of the whole wretched race at any given
instant of time, at this very moment for example, if the effects of that evil
were not continually suspended and directed by Infinite Power, so as to become
continually subservient to the purposes of Infinite Wisdom, Righteousness and
Love, in Universal Redemption.

The nature of that Redemption it would be needless to mention, if in this age
of levity we were not so apt to forget it. It is, in general, a full
restoration of the life of God in the soul; that Life of Father Son and Holy
Spirit, which was once the life and perfection of fallen angels and fallen man;
which is and only can be the life and perfection of all holy angels; and which
the Son of God has been restoring to human nature from the time in which Adam
fell.

When the Son of God became incarnate, what was implied in this Redemption as
the effect of its influence upon man, was fully evident from His doctrine and
His life; namely, the conquest and renunciation of the world, and the death of
the will and all the appetites and passions of fallen animal nature, through
faith in HIS NAME -- not an historical and speculative faith, a mere rational
assent to the truth of a well-attested history of facts and doctrines; but a
full, ardent, continual desire of the LIFE OF CHRIST, as begotten and formed in
the soul by the continual operation of the Holy Ghost. Thus, what was at first
the Personal duties of single Christians, when they were scattered over the
face of the earth, and were only parts of different nations; became afterward
National duties, when whole nations became Christians. If, therefore, to love
an enemy, to forgive him, do him good, and pray for him -- if to "overcome the
world", whose power consists in the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life -- are Christian Personal duties; if, to love the Lord our
God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, and with all our
strength, and our fellow creatures as ourselves, -- is the purity and
perfection of the Christian Personal life; the same must also be true of
Christian National life and duty: for a Christian nation differs no otherwise
from a Christian person, than as the whole differs from one of the parts of
which it essentially consists; and is only the aggregated body of those single
persons, on whom universally such duties are enjoined, from whom universally
such perfection is required.

But, to this perfect and heavenly life and duty, War is repugnant, in its
cause, in itself, and in its consequences: it can be but comparatively
irrepugnant, with respect to the degrees of its own evil; and the more or less
it partakes of the malignity of animal passions, and the sensuality of animal
views, the more or less obnoxious must it render a people to the severe
judgments of "THE LORD THAT REIGNS."

EXTRACTS from the WRITINGS OF WILLIAM LAW, M. A.
THAT grand enemy of mankind, the devil, is very justly called in scripture the
prince and god of this world, for indeed he has great power in it, many of its
rules, and principles being invented by this evil spirit, the father of all
lies and falsehood, to separate us from God, and prevent our return to
happiness: For, according to the spirit and vogue of this world, whose corrupt
air we have all breathed, there are many things that pass for great and
honorable, and most desirable, which yet are so far from being so, that the
true greatness and honor of our nature consists in the not desiring them. To
abound in wealth, to have fine houses and rich clothes, to be attended with
splendour and equipage, to be beautiful in our persons, to have titles of
dignity, to be above our fellow creatures, to be looked on with admiration, to
overcome our enemies with power, to heap up treasures upon earth, to add house
to house and field to field, and delight ourselves in the most costly manner,
these are the great, the honorable, the desirable things, to which the spirit
of the world turns the eyes of most people. And many a man is afraid of
standing still, and not engaging in the pursuit of these things, lest the same
world should take him for a fool.

Yet the history of the gospel, is chiefly the history of Christ's conquest
over this spirit of the world, and the number of true Christians, is only the
number of those, who following the spirit of Christ, have lived contrary to
this spirit of the world.

This is the mark of Christianity, Whosoever is born of God overccometh the
world. 1 John v. 4. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on
earth, for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Col. iii. 2.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the world, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life is not of the Father; but is
of the world. 1 John ii. 15. Know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God, whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy
of God. James iv. 4. Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by
the renewing of your mind. Romans xii. 2.

This is the language of the whole New Testament. You are to be dead to the
world, and to live a new life in Christ Jesus our Lord. But notwithstanding the
clearness and plainness of these doctrines by which believers in Christ are
required thus to renounce the world, yet great part of the Christians live and
die slaves to the customs and tempers of the world. Learn of me, says our
blessed Savior, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to
your souls. Matthew. xi. 29. Now this meek, this lowly state, that constitutes
the true rest of the soul, cnnnot subsist in any mind, but so far as it is thus
dead to the world, and has parted with all desires of enjoying all its riches,
pleasures and honors. So that in order to be truly humble, you must unlearn
all these notions, which you have been all your life learning, from this
corrupt spirit of the world. You can make no stand against the assaults of
pride, the meek affections of humility can have no place in your souls, till
you stop the power of the world over you, and resolve against a blind obedience
to its laws. And when you are once advanced thus far, as to be able to stand
still in the torrent of worldly fashions, and opinions, and examine the worth
and value of things, which are most admired and valued in the world, you have
gone a great way in the gaining of your freedom, and have laid a good
foundation for the amendment of your heart. Think upon the rich, the great, and
the learned persons, that have made great figures, and been high in the esteem
of the world; many of them died in your time, and yet they are sunk, and lost,
and gone, and as much disregarded by the world, as if they had been only so
many bubles of water. And is it worth your while to lose the smallest degree of
virtue, for the sake of pleasing so bad a master, and so false a friend, as the
world is. Is it worth your while to bow the knee to such an idol, as this, that
so soon will have neither eyes, nor ears, nor a heart to regard you; instead of
serving that great, and holy, and mighty God, that will make all his servants
partakers of his own eternity.

Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might
deliver us from this present evil world. Gal. i. 4. Christianity therefore
implies a deliverance from this world; and he that professes it, professes
to live contrary to every thing, and every temper, that is peculiar to this
evil world. The Apostle John declares this opposition to the world in this
manner: They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them: We are of God, etc. 1 John iv. 5. This is the description of the
followers of Christ; and it is proof enough, that no people are to be reckoned
Christians in reality, who in their hearts and tempers belong to this world. We
know, says the same Apostle, that we are of God, and the whole world lies in
wickedness. Chap. v. 19. Christians therefore can no farther know that they are
of God, than so far as they know they are not of the world, that is, that they
don't live according to the ways and spirit of the world. And he is only of
God, or born of God, in Christ Jesus, who has overcome this world, that is, who
has chosen to live by faith, and govern his actions by the principles of a
wisdom revealed from God, by Christ Jesus. They are not of this world, as I am
not of this world, says our blessed Savior. This is the state of Christianity
with regard to this world, the profession of Christians requiring them to live
as citizens of the new Jerusalem, and to have their conversation in heaven. If
you are not thus out of, and contrary to the world, you want the distinguishing
mark of Christianity; you don't belong to Christ, but by being out of the
world, as he was out of it. We may deceive ourselves; if we please, with vain,
and softning comments upon these words; but they are, and will be understood in
their first simplicity, and plainness, by every one that reads them in the same
spirit, that our blessed Lord spoke them. And to understand them in any lower,
less significant meaning, is to let carnal wisdom explain away that doctrine,
by which itself was to be destroyed.

Our blessed Savior suffered, and was a sacrifice, to make our suffering, and
sacrifice of ourselves fit to be received by God. And we are to suffer, to be
crucified, to die, and to rise with Christ; or else his crucifixion, death, and
resurrection will profit us nothing. The necessity of this conformity to all
that Christ did, and suffered upon our account is very plain from the whole
tenor of scripture. First, As to his sufferings, this is the only condition of
our being saved by them. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. 2 Timothy ii. 11. Secondly, As to his crucifixion, Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him. Romans vi. 6. Here you see Christ is not crucified in our
stead; but unless our old man be really crucified with him, the cross of Christ
will profit us nothing. Thirdly, As to the death of Christ, the condition is
this: If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him,
verse 8. If therefore Christ be dead alone, if we are not dead with him, we are
as sure from this scripture, that we shall not live with him. Lastly, As to the
resurrection of Christ, the scripture shows us, how we are to partake of the
benefit of it: If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Col. iii. 1. It was for this
reason, that the holy Jesus said of his disciples, and in them of all true
believers, They are not of this world, as I am not of this world. Because all
true believers conforming to the sufferings, crucifixion, death, and
resurrection of Christ, live no longer after the spirit and temper of this
world, but their life is hid with Christ in God. This is the state of
separation from the world, to which all orders of Christians are called. They
must so far renounce all wordly tempers, be so far governed by the things of
another life, as to show, that they are truly and really crucified, dead, and
risen with Christ. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, old things are
passed away, behold all things are become new. 2 Cor. v. 17.

The ancient Philosophers began all their virtue in a total renunciation of the
spirit of this world; they saw with the eyes of heaven, that darkness was not
more contrary to light, than the spirit and wisdom of this world was contrary
to divine wisdom: Therefore they allowed of no progress in virtue, but so far
as a man had overcome himself, and the spirit of this world. This gave a divine
solidity to all their instructions, and proved them to be masters of true
wisdom. But the doctrine of the cross of Christ, the last, the highest, the
most finishing stroke given to the spirit of this world, that speaks more in
one word, than all the philosophy of voluminous writers, is yet professed by
those, who are in more friendship with the world, than was allowed to the
disciples of Pithagoras, Socrates, Plato or Epictetus. Nay, if those ancient
Sages were to start up amongst us with their divine wisdom, they would bid fair
to be treated by the sons of the gospel, if not by some Fathers of the church,
as dreaming Enthusiasts. But, this is a standing truth, the world can only love
its own, and wisdom can only be justified of her children. The heaven-born
Epictetus told one of his scholars, That then he might first look upon himself
as having made some true proficiency in virtue, when the world took him for a
fool; an oracle* like that, which said, the wisdom of this world is foolishness
with God.

If you ask what is the apostasy of these last times, or whence is all the
degeneracy of the present Christian church, it must be placed to a worldly
spirit. If here you see open wickedness, there only form of godliness, if here
superficial holiness, political piety, there haughty sanctity, partial zeal, if
almost every where, you see a Jewish blindness, and hardness of heart, and the
church trading with the gospel, as visibly, as the old Jews bought and sold
beasts in their temple, all this is only so many forms, and proper fruits of
the worldly spirit. This is the great net, with which the devil becomes a
fisher of men; and be assured of this, that every son of man is in this net,
till through, and by the Spirit of Christ he breaks out of it. I say the Spirit
of Christ, for nothing else can deliver him from it. If you trust to any kind
or form of religious observances, to any kind of learning, or effort of human
prudence, and then I will tell you what your case will be, you will overcome
one temper of the world, only and merely by cleaving to another: For nothing
can overcome or renounce the world, but singly and solely the Spirit of Christ.
Hence it is, that many learned men with all the rich furniture of their brain
live and die slaves to the spirit of this world, the Spirit of Christ is not
the only thing that is the desire of their hearts, and therefore their learning
only works in and with the spirit of this world, and becomes itself no small
parts of the vanity of vanities.

Would you know the evil nature and effect of a spirit given up to the world,
and not subjected to the Spirit of Grace: you need only look at the blessed
effect of a continual state of watching, a continual humble application to God
in the true spirit of prayer, for the one goes downwards with the same
strength, as the other goes upward, the one betroths, and weds to an earthly
nature, with the same certainty, as the other espouses, and unites to Christ.
The spirit of continual watchings and prayer, is a pressing forth of the soul
out of this earthly life, it is a stretching with all its desire after the life
of God, it is a leaving as far as it can, all its own spirit, to receive a
spirit from above, to be one life, one love, one spirit with Christ in God.
This prayer, which is an emptying itself of all its own lusts and natural
tempers, and an opening itself for the light and love of God to enter into it,
is the prayer in the Name of Christ, to which nothing is denied; for the love
which God bears to the soul, is an eternal never ceasing desire to open the
birth of his holy word and spirit in it, and stays no longer till the door of
the heart open for Him; and nothing does or can keep God out of the soul, or
hinder his union with it, but the desire of the heart turned from it. What the
soul desires, that is the fuel of its fire, and as its fuel is, so is the
flame of its life. As we sow we shall reap; if to the spirit, we shall reap
life and peace; if to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap corruption.
Wherever and in whatsoever the will chooses to dwell and delight, that becomes
the soul's food, its clothing and habitation. Since this is the case, let us
stop a while, let our hearing be turned into feeling. Let us consider, whether
there is any thing in life, that deserves a thought, but how to keep in a
continual state of watching and prayer, that we may attain to that purity of
heart, which alone can see, find and possess God.

THOMAS HARLEY IN HIS DISCOURSE ON MISTAKES concerning RELIGION, etc. thus
expresses himself:
WHAT cause shall we assign for the opposition to Gospel Truths that appears
amongst us, and for that dislike to those, who urge the necessity of
regeneration and of the spiritual life? The true reason is nigh at hand, though
others are pretended: Such doctrines are contrary to the maxims and principles
that govern the hearts and conduct of the children of this generation, are at
variance with the false interests of flesh and blood, declare open war against
the kingdom of Self, and strike at every thing that is most near and dear to
corrupt nature; and therefore carnal men of every denomination think themselves
concerned in character to oppose and discredit such a representation of
Christianity. They can be zealous for opinions, forms, and an external worship
of any kind, because they leave them in quiet possession of their ambition,
their covetousness, their love of themselves, and their love of the world: They
can readily take up a profession of faith in a suffering Savior, nay bring
themselves to trust in an outward covering of his Merits and Righteousness for
Salvation, because this costs them nothing; but to be clothed with his spirit
of humility, poverty and self-denial; to renounce their own wills in his
lowliness, meekness, and total resignation to the will of God, to mortify the
fleshly appetites; to be crucified to the world; to strip themselves of all
complacency and satisfaction in those endowments, whether natural or acquired,
which appear great and glorious in the eyes both of themselves and others; and,
in a word, to take up their cross, and nakedly follow a naked Christ in the
regeneration: These are hard sayings, they cannot bear them: But wisdom is
justified of her children; unacceptable as these doctrines are to others, yet
to them, and in them too, they are the power of God, and the wisdom of God. It
was by such foolishness of preaching that Christ's kingdom first prevailed over
the kingdoms of this world; and it must be by the same doctrine, under the
influence of the same spirit, that we can only hope for its continuance to the
end of it.

The way to any good degree of perfection in the divine life, lies through great
mortification and self-denial: Some think it enough to get doctrines into the
head; but till the heart is in some measure purified by faith, nothing is
rightly done: and in order to this, the children of Anak, (those corrupt
passions and inclinations that war against the soul) must be driven out, the
perverseness of the will broken, the understanding simplified, the pride of our
hearts plucked up by the roots, and all the cords that bind us to the world, and
the things of it, untwisted; in a word, our idols must be cast out, and every
cursed thing removed that separates betwixt God and us; for the pure in heart,
and they only, shall see God. It was by this kind of holy violence practiced on
themselves, that the worthies both of the Old and New Testament, in all ages of
the church, have laid hold on the kingdom of heaven, been favored with such
rich communications from God, and enabled to work such wonders as surpass the
belief of many in this degenerate incredulous age: And that a preparatory
discipline of strictness and severity is necessary in order to qualify us for
any extraordinary vouchsafements of illumination and grace, we may learn from
the schools instituted among the Jews for the training up of persons for the
prophetic office, where they were educated in great abstraction from the world,
in the government of their passions, and the mortification of their natural
propensions, that being so disengaged from the common impediments of a holy
life, they might be more at liberty for devotion and the contemplation of
heavenly things, and by such previous exercises become fit instruments for the
Holy Spirit, and more receptive of heavenly wisdom. Thus came they out holy
enthusiasts, men of God furnished to every good word and work, scribes well
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, and fearless of giving offense in the
way of duty, even before kings, being no less qualified for reproof and
correction, than for doctrine and instruction in righteousness: patterns these
for all persons of a religious character, whether they live in colleges or in
kings houses; whether they attend on those who go clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fare sumptuously every day, or are called forth to a more
promiscuous employment of their office; for though the dispensation of prophecy,
as it respects the foretelling future events, has a long time ceased in the
church, yet the character of prophets in the capacity of declarers of God's
word and will, and as denouncers of his judgments on all impenitents, even the
most dignified offenders, is never to cease in it, neither is the Lord's hand
shortened that it cannot extend comfort and courage, light and direction for
these purposes now as formerly: But, alas! our hearts are straightened that they
cannot receive it as they ought, and we are so entangled, as to many of us,
with such an evil covetousness after the things of this life, so studious to
seek the honor that comes of man, more than the honor that comes of God,
that we want boldness to hold the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ without
respect of persons: For let men be never so highly titled or charactered, let
their pretensions to learning be what they will, and their acquaintance with
creeds, canons and commentators never so extensive, yet so long as they
continue men of this world, and follow the things of it, so long as their
affections are set on things beneath, and their hearts unsurrendered to God,
they are not better than dry bones as to the divine life, without marrow or
moisture; and as they cannot in such a state receive the things of the Spirit
of God, not having spiritual senses exercised thereto, so will these things of
course appear foolishness unto them in others, and they will speak evil of that
which they know not. It is from a revival of the spirit of true Christianity in
the hearts of men alone, that we can hope to see peace restored on earth among
the divided churches of Christendom. Whilst religion resides only in the
reasoning part of man, it is tinctured with all the prejudices and passions of
his nature, and his reason will be ready to plead for, or against the truth, as
interest or education sways him -- But the wisdom that is from above is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, full of mercy, and without partiality; for the
fame good spirit that enlightens the understanding, cleanses the heart of all
bitterness, malice, and hypocrisy, and therefore operates by pureness, by
knowbledge, by love unfeigned.

A party-spirit, whether it be in religion or politics, proceeds from
littleness of mind and narrowness of heart, it puts out both the eye of the
judgment and the eye of charity, and so hinders us from seeing the brightest
excellence in our neighbor that is not just as high or low as ourselves; as I
heard a man of learning once say, that he could not allow Milton's Paradise
Lost to be a good book, because written by an Oliverian. But the Christian
knows no such straitness; for his bowels are enlarged toward all that will
come within the embraces of his charity, which is as wide as the east is from
the west. He cannot wrangle and hate about differences of opinion, for he is
got above them; his call, his universal call is love, and he has adopted for
his motto that saying of Luther: In whomsoever I see any thing of Christ, him I
love. In this man, wheresoever he lives, and by what name soever he is called,
the kingdom of Christ is come: and of such heavenly men and women it will
consist in that enlarged glorious state of it which we are given to look for:
And what, if it be already begun on earth!

The one true church of Christ is the communion of saints, and charity; true
charity, i. e. the love of Christ is the life and soul of it: Is then the love
of God shed abroad in our hearts, and have we fervent charity among ourselves?
For, be it known of a truth, that as much as we possess of this heavenly
treasure, so much have we of Christianity, and no more; and that without it,
all zeal for religion is but contention, all modes of worship but formality,
and all orthodoxy but vain opinion."

FINIS.

