A Token for YOUTH, OR Comfort to Children;

Being the LIFE and Christian Experience of the wonderful Workings of the
Spirit of GOD on Cartaret Read.

From her Infancy to her last Moments, as it was faithfully taken from her own
Mouth, by her Mother.

The TWENTY-SEVENTH EDITION.

John iii. 8. The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the Sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: So is every
one that is born of the Spirit. BOSTON, Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, In
Queen Street. 1766.

TO THE Unprejudiced Reader.
THIS following Narrative, when taken was not intended for public View, only
for my own private Satisfaction; but since her Death, showing it to some
Friends, and Relations which so much admired the Grace of GOD to her, that they
earnestly requested it might be printed; some of them having several Children,
made use of it as an Argument to prevail with me; as also that they did hope
the LORD would bless (...) These Desires, with some Scriptures, which the Lord
was pleased to set home upon my Mind, I was made to believe it was my Duty to
publish it; I then laying aside carnal Reason consented it should. It is
chiefly intended for, and adapted to young Ones, it may be also a refreshing
and teaching to older Ones, if GOD pleas;e He has said destroy it not, for a
Belssing is in it; it was His own Work upon her Soul, and not the product of
Nature, nor the strength of Education as some may vainly imagine. but sovereign
and boundless Grace: O may all the Glory be given to God attributing nothing to
second Causes but as Instruments in His Hand, which He sees good in His
Infinite Wisdom, sometimes to make use of, to bring about his own Designs, lest
we rob him of his Honor: it is Grace makes to differ and only the Blood of
Christ that cleanses from all Sin, therefore he should have all the Glory. I
desire it may be made of use to all that read it, but in a peculiar manner to
you, which were related to her in the Bonds of Nature; and although some of you
had no great Kindness for her in her Life, yet now have a care you ^e not found
Mockers lest your Bands be made strong, Isaiah 28.22. That you may be made
Partakers of the same Grace, and be helped to remember your Creator in the Days
of your Youth.; then will your Souls long after this precious Lord Jesus as you
will find here is did; she is now got beyond all Storms, the Lord manifested his
Power in calling her betimes; although she was as much a Child in many Things as
some others, let her Example excite you to begin early to seek after Christ and
his Righteousness* without which you are undone forever; I would hope it shall
not be altogether unprofitable for those of riper Years: I know it is the Lord
must teach to profit, I shall make no Apology for the many Weaknesses the
Reader may find in the following Narrative, the tenderness of her Age claims a
favorable Construction from all; you have it in its native Simplicity as it
dropped from her Mouth without any Variation, as I know of; it might have been
put in a better Method, and perhaps some may wonder it was not; but the awe I
had upon my Spirits, lest self should creep in, I did not dare to alter it,
choosing rather to expose my own Weakness, and bear with the Censures of others,
than of my own Conscience. Much more might be said but I would not be prolix.

I shall only add, that those four Letters were of her own Indicting; and, that
the Lord will be pleased to bless it to every Reader, has been, is, and I hope
shall be the Prayers of her that would rejoice to be made capable of being.

Your Soul's Servant. Sarah Read.

A Token for YOUTH.
Cartaret Read, Daughter of Mr. John Read, late of Potton, Gentleman, near the
City of Sarum, Wiltshire, was born the 7th of January, 1693.
WHEN she was about 4 Years of Age, she being asked who was her greatest Enemy,
she replied SIN was her greatest Enemy. When she was between 4 and 5 Years of
Age, she took great delight in reading the 2d of Luke; and when she read about
Joseph and Mary, that there was no room for them in the Inn, and that the Babe
was laid in a Manger, she burst out into a Passion of Tears, saying, 'What! was
there no room in the Inn for the Lord of Glory, but must He lie in a Manger,
among the Beasts. One Morning when she was no^ well, in Prayer she began thus:
O Lord* look down upon me, and give me the Knowledge, of thy self; take Sin out
of my heart that I may be thy Child' with several other the like Expressions*
When she had done, she said, I have a pretty Lesson in my Book, which is about
GOD'S sending the Lord Jesus Christ to die for poor Sinners, and of his great
Love and Mercy to poor Creatures: Then said she, it may be the Lord may take me
away before my Father and You. I told her she should not spend her Spirit. She
replied, when I am with God and good Angels, I shall want neither Food nor
Raiment, for God will give me all I want. A little while after, she said, Lord
have Mercy upon me? He did restore me one Night, and I hope He will restore me
again. Another time as she sat by the Fire, she said my heart trembles, and
burst out into a Passion of Tears. I asking her what she did a^l, she said I do
offend the Lord in all I do: I took her to me, and told her it was true, she
did Sin, she replied, that Christ Jesus came to save poor Sinners, and with
that seemed to be satisfied: I do believe she was under some Conviction for Sin
at that time.

This Evening being the 5th of Feb School. (...) the Child going to her Aunt that
had been very ill, said, Aunt, I have prayed for you and have prayed to God to
teach me to pray to him.

Feb. 6. In the Evening, the Maid putting on the Child's Linen to go abroad
the next Day, she asked me if she should not learn to dance, to which I
replied, that she should, but that I was afraid it would take up her Mind from
better Things. Then she said I hope the Lord will keep me from Pride and
Vanity; for it is the Lord that must keep me from sinning against him; for we
can do nothing without Him; then she mentioned that Scripture, Let the Sinner
forsake his Ways; and the unrighteous Man his Tho'ts and return to the Lord,
and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
Then said she, I must be more afraid of sinning against God, than being Whipped,
for it is God that gives us every thing, Food and R aiment, all comes from Him
and He has said, Call upon me in the Day of Trouble and I will hear thee, and
deliver thee.

The 14th. Instant in the Evening she cried for something I though it not fit to
give her, fearing it would make her sick; I asked her whether she was ready to
die? she immediately answered Yes, if the Lord will take away Sin from me, then
I shall go to Heaven, for I would not die in my Sins; for if I should, God has
said that such shall depart to the Devil and his Angels: The Lord knows all we
do and say, and our very Thoughts; his Presence is every where; I must meditate
upon God in the Night watches, and if I do, I shall rejoice in him; Then she
menttion'd that Place of Scripture, Isaiah 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be
found.

The 26th Instant, complaining of a pain in her Ear she said it is the Lord
that sends me this pain, I know how I can be saved, only by the Righteousness
of Christ; for he has said, they shall be my People, and I will be their GOD;
her Father being by, said, that if she understood what she spoke, she were fit
for Church Communion; she answered him, I hope God will teach me to understand
what I say, for he has promised me to write his Laws in my heart and put it in
my inward part, and I must pray to him, that I may never depart from him. And
having a little ease, she said, the Lord has eased me, and I must pray to him,
for he has said, Enter into your Closet, and shut your Door and pray to your
Father which is in secret, and your Father which sees in secret shall reward
you openly.

The 27th Instant, having some Friends which came to spend a little time in
Prayer with us, before they entered upon the Duty, the Child of her own accord
went to them, and said, Pray to the Lord for me, that he would make me his
Servant, that I may love, fear and obey him.

March the 9th being speaking of Pride by Way of Discourse, not minding the
Child, she took it up saying, we must not be Proud, for God has said, He
resists the Proud but gives Grace to the Humble. God's ways are ways of
Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace.

March the 11th. She speaking of Faith in Christ. said, none but such as
believe shall be saved, mentioning that Scripture, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. The next
Night she being a Bed, said to her Aunt, I hope God will draw me with Cords of
Love, that I may run after Him. One Evening I being very ill, the Child seemed
much concerned, and said, it may be the Lord may take you away in your Sleep,
for he can do what he pleases; I said so he can, and if he should I hope we
shall meet in Heaven: She said Yes, that was a blessed place to be in, their is
no sorrow nor no darkness, but joy for evermore, Oh! what a Thing it is, that
my Sins should be Pardoned that are so vile? Then I asked her how she knew her
Sins were Pardoned? she said, in and through Christ, God could Pardon her Sins,
for I am nothing of my self, but he can do every Thing Another time she said,
sometimes I do believe that Christ died for my Sins, and rose again for my
Juistfication; but sometimes I am afraid, and do not know whether He did or no.
March 17 she said, as my Father was at Duty, this came into my Mind; that when
Christ shall appear, we shall appear with him in Glory And at another time,
this came into my Mind, that when Christ shall appear, we shall be like him,
and we shall see him as he is. She further said, I can go to God in none but
Christ and his Righteousness, for I have no Righteosusnes but his; the Wicked
eat the Bread of Wickedness, but we must wait for the Salvation of the Lord;
and we must not only speak of the Things of God but we must act them, or else
we mock God; the Lord give me a heart so to do; in Hell there is no rest, but
crying out Day and Night. The Day we left London, I being in a low frame of
Spirit, the Child came to me a little before we took Coach, and said, I Will tell
you what came into my Mind, this Text, And the Lord said unto Abraham, I am thy
Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward, Gen 15 1 I could not but admire the
Goodness of God, to send me such a suitable Word by the Mouth of such a Child.

April the 13th, being at an Inn, the Child awoke very early, speaking to me,
said, these words just now came into my Mind, that God does punish us much less
than our iniquities do deserve: A little after she said, God brings Judgments
upon Men and Beasts. Then I bid her go to Sleep, so she lay still a little
while, and then she said I wish my Brother Charles may mind Faith in Christ,
for every one that is in Christ, is a new Creature: The Lord does trouble us in
this World, but in Heaven we shall have no Trouble.

May the 17th, she said Father, when we are in Heaven, we shall want no Food
but be filled with Righteousness: Then she fetched that place of Scripture
where Christ said to the Young Man, Luke 12. 33. Go sell that thou have and
thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. Yesterday Morning she said to her Father,
pray look me this place of Scripture, which just now came into my Mind, Colos.
3. 4. When Christ who is our life, shall appear, we shall appear with him in
glory.

August the 19th. as I was reading the first of Proverbs Cartaret sitting by,
when, I read the 26th verse, she said I must mind that, that God may not mock
at me when Fear comes, saying, we must not be like the People of Old, to sit
down to Eat and Drink and rise up to play: and speaking of the Power of God,
she said, the Lord can preserve us through the Fire, and through the Water. In the
Evening Cartaret went to her Father and said, Pray for me, that God would
Pardon all my Sins, and that I might not only speak of the things of God, but
be found doing; Pray that I may be with God when I die, and that He would take
away this wicked Heart; And another time, a little time before we went to Duty,
she said, to her Father, I desire you would Pray for me; he said, what shall I
Pray for, for thee? she said, that God would keep me, and that He would give me
a Heart to know Him, love and fear Him, and give me Faith in Christ, that I
might have an Interest in Him; for, said she, He is the Maker of Heaven and
Earth, and the Sea, and all that are therein.

Sept. the 11th in the Evening, as she went up to Bed, she said to me, I
desire, that when You pray to the Lord, you would remember me, and I will pray
my self also; for it is said in Scripture, pray always. When she came up, she
desired me to read her two Hymns, which she looked out her self, about Christ's
Death and Satisfaction, which read, she went to her Father, and said to him, we
have sinful Hearts by Nature, and coming to me again, on a sudden she was
struck with a very great Pain in her Stomach, which caused her to cry out
aloud, Ease me, and lay no more upon me than Thou will enable me to bear.

O said she again, that I could say with David, It is good for me that I have
been Afflicted I may say, it has been good for me; for before I was afflicted,
I went astray. I being much concerned, she perceiving that I wept, she said,
pray don't be troubled for me, you have cause to rejoice; for if I die, I shall
be with God, and never Sin no more; she desired her Father to pray for her, a
little before she was taken ill, she had been at Prayer, amongst other
Expressions she had this; begging God that she might truly Repent, be a true
Believer in Christ, that God would give her a new Heart, and renew a right
Spirit within her: As she went to Bed, she said, the Lord be with You, and keep
you the approaching Day: The next Morning I went to take her up, she said, I
bless God, I am much better; then she mentioned that place, Heb. 10. 37.
saying, He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: but Oh! that he may
not come before I am Converted; for to such as look for him, he shall appear a
second time.

This Day I was speaking of having an Issue made for her, she said, I had
rather not, I would rather die, that I might sin no more. This Evening I went
up with the Maid to put her to Bed, she desired me to bless God on her behalf,
and also to pray for her. Sept. 21st, she said, Father, where are these words?
This is our God we have waited for him, we will joy and rejoice in his
Salvation: he told her where it was, she looking it out read it: then said she,
where is that word, The Earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof? I asked
her why she asked for those places? she said because they came into her Mind.
Sept. 29. she said to me, Mother, when I die I must leave all these Earthly
Things behind me: About an Hour after, she said to her Sister and I, as I was
coming up Stairs, these Words came into my Mind, According to the Day, so shall
thy Strength be; I asked her what she did infer from that place? she said I
shall have strength in my Soul* Some Hours after she mentioned the same place I
asked her what she should have that strength to do? she said to serve the Lord.

October. the 1st, as I took her up, she fell to dicourse of the Things of God,
saying, that they should be saved for whom God has found a Ransom. The 2d Day,
having done some childish Things, being taken soon after with a Pain in her
Teeth; her Father told her the Lord did punish her for being Naughty; she burst
into a Passion of Tears. I could not get from her what was the Matter for some
time, but at last she said, Oh! that God would take this wicked Heart out of
me! I have an abominable wicked Heart; I cannot Repent of my self; if I did
resist the Devil, he would fly from me; I am sorry I have grieved You, pray
forgive me: Just before she was taken ill, she was reading the 55th of Isaiah,
she stopped and said, nothing but the Blood of Christ can cleanse me from Sin: I
said, why so? if you are good, and do good Works, will not your own
Righteousness save you? this I said to prove her, she replied our Righteousness
is a wicked Righteousness, therefore it cannot save us. She and I speaking some
what of the dealings of God, she also said, when I lie a Bed, sometimes I think
how Christ died for my Sins, and rose again for my Justification

October. the 8th, at the Meeting, before the opportunity began, she asked me
where that Place was, Let our Hearts answer, Lord, Thy Face will we seek; the
Lord brought it to my Mind.

October. the 12th, she said to her Father, where is that Passage Fear not little
Flock, it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom* saying it has
been good to me.

The 14th* she asked her Father to look her that Place, Ask, and you shall
have, seek and you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to you: These
Words have been an Encouragement to my Soul to seek the Lord betimes: Oh! that
such an unworthy Creature as I should ask and have.

The 15th, being at the Morning Opporunity, when she came home, she said, these
Words came into my Mind, Yea durable Riches and Righteousness; sometimes I do
think upon that word, where Christ says, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith
fail not.

October. 18th, 1699 As I was putting her to Bed, she said, Oh! when I am
converted to God, I shall not be afraid to die, I shall sing with the Angels
for evermore.

The 21st, she sitting by her Father, said, it is the Blood of Christ that
cleanses from all Sin. Some Hours after she asked her Father where that
Passage was, This is our God, we have waited for him we will joy and rejoice in
his Salvation.

In the Evening I asked her how she came to ask for such a Scripture? she said
the Lord bro't it to her Remembrance. I was reading about the Sins of Israel,
where God says* They shall call, but he will not hear: Oh! said she, what a
dreadful Thing is that, God will not hear when they pray.

Nov. the 2d. I came up into her Chamber, and found her reading Mr. John
Janeway's Life and Death; she was all in Tears, she said to me, Oh! that I were
such a Worm as this was! that God would give me Repentance unto Life! Oh! that
I were in the Bosom of Jesus! Oh! that my Sorrow might be true Sorrow!

Another time she said, I have the Righteousness of Christ to wrap me round, I
shall be saved, I shall appear without spot. This being Sabbath Day, she said,
the Lord make me such an one as may taste His Royal Meat; I hope the Lord will
Convert me to Himself, and will not let me Perish in the State of Sin and
Misery.

Nov. the 20th, she said to her Father, we must prepare for the Coming of
Christ; yes, said her Father, it is our Duty: she said so it is, and we, must
say as Ephraim did, Turn Thou me, and I shall be turned.

The 22d, she said, I wept this Morning for fear the Lord will cast me into
Hell. I said, What dissatisfies you now? what hopes have you that He will not?
she said, He has promised me to change my Heart.

Yesterday Morning I went up to her Chamber, she being in Bed, I found her in a
great passion of Weeping, having a Book in her Hand; I asked her why she wept?
She said, it was that God would make her such a one as he was, she had been
reading o^, for there is a great deal of need of it. This Morning, as soon as
she came down Stairs, she asked her Father where that Scripture was, I will be
their God, and they shall be my People, saying, it was a great Mercy that He
will be the God of such unworthy Creatures. This Evening her Father and I
speaking of the Temptations of the Children of God; she sitting by, said there
are no temptation in Heaven, there is nothing but Joy and praising of God. A
few days since, I being gone from Home, she was in a fault, which I was told
when I came; I laid the Evil of it before her; she burst out into Tears and
earnestly desiring me to forgive her saying, God will forgive me. I heard her
saying, Who shall deliver us from the Body of this Death?

December. the 3d, I took a Book to read a Sermon, the Text being in Canticles,
the Words Draw me, we will run after Thee, which Cartaret took up, saying, it
is as much as if he had said, Lord draw us, we will run after Thee; I hope,
said she the Lord will draw me, and put me among the number of His chosen Ones,
give me a true Heart I asked her what Grounds she had to hope that God would do
thus for her, seeing it was not every one that He gave Grace unto, is was but a
few. Has God at any time given you a Promise that He will do this? She said,
Yes He has; that in St. Luke, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not
and I have taken hold of it*

The 5th in the Evening, having had some Friends at Supper, the Child being
gone up, when I came to her, she said, I have a very suitable Scripture came to
my Mind, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. The 6th Day she was saying, God
will love me, if I do those things which please Him. I said to her, That God
does not love any for what they do, but that it is our Duty to be found doing
the Will of God because he has loved us. She said, Yes: for we loved not him,
but, He first loved us; methinks that Word does. enlighten my Soul, I said,
What does it enlighten your Soul into? Said she, into the Knowledge of Christ.
I said, What Knowledge of Christ? She said, That I might be wholly at the
dispose of God.

Last Lords Day, in the Morning, she said, Father, is there ever such a place,
Hear and your Souls shall live? it came but now into my Mind. This Evening she
said to me Mother, if we fear the Lord and serve him he will exceedingly
multiply us. A little after, she said, Oh! that I may be converted before
Christ comes; if I were converted I did not care if I did die.

December. the 19th, in the Evening, her Father being taken ill, she seemed much
concerned; and going to him, she said, Oh, my poor Father! the Lord, I hope,
will lay no more on you then he will enable you to bear. Her Father saying,
That it was his Duty to watch for his Lord's Coming: she presently quoted that
place where it is said, Watch, for ye know not in what Hour the Lord will come.
About the 12th of January she being very ill of the Toothache, and some what
impatient, I said to her, it was the Lord did afflict, because we did S^^; She
said, the Lord has laid all my Sins upon Christ. A little after, she said, she
must not do as Jonah did, who was angry with God or to this Purpose. This
Morning she said, to me, Oh! that God would give me the Knowledge of Christ, I
do desire nothing else, then should I be willing to die; then you might say in
the day of the Lord, These are the Children which thou have given me.

This Evening I was speaking to my Maid of Christ; the Child standing by, said,
Oh! that I were converted to Christ I long to have Christ. I asked her whether
she would have Him to make her Holy as well as Happy; she said, Yes she would
have him upon his own Terms, for it was the best Marriage to be married to
Christ: Oh! said she, If I had an Interest in Christ, I should be glad to go to
God immediately. And then she kneeled down, and did earnestly beg that God
would reveal Christ to her, using this Expression, My Soul, wait thou only upon
God.

The 21, she said to me, Mother, these Words just now came into my Mind, If a
Child ask his Father Bread, will he give him a Stone; Or if he ask a Fish, will
he give him a Serpent. This Day she came to her Father to look her that
Scripture, Every Plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be
rooted out; Her Father reading that Passage, Have Salt in your selves, stopped,
and speaking somewhat from it, said, What, is it to have Salt in ourselves? The
Child, being by, tho'he had asked her the Question, said, it is ^o have Grace
in our Hearts. The 22d she said, I do dream very frightful Dreams, but I will
trust in God, and believe in him. This Morning as I was dressing her, she said
to me, as soon as I am converted I shall desire to die, and then you will come to
Heaven to me. In Prayer she said, Lord, thou have bid me ask, and I shall have.
Oh! I ask Christ; with many other Expressions, with that, that she might do as
that good Mary did, which chose that good Part: She said also to me, Mother,
pray for me that I may be Converted, a little after, she said, I long for
Christ to love him more, that I may serve him more, that I may serve him better.

March the 1st, Going a Journey, in which we were in great Danger of
over-turning the Child was much frightened, and said, O Lord! I pray Thee
preserve us; Thou can do it, but, not my Will, but thine be done. Some time
after, being past the Danger, she said, this Word just now came into my Mind,
Fear not little Flock, it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the
Kingdom.

Yesterday coming home, she told me, as she was thinking of committing her self
to the Lord, these Words came into her Mind: Commit thy Ways to the Lord, and
he shall bring it to pass: And these Words, Commit thy Ways to the Lord, and he
shall give thee the Desire of thy Heart.

A little Kinswoman told, that as they were at Play, they took an occasion to
fall out; but in a little time, Cartaret recollecting her self, Cousin, don't
we know that Christ died for us, why should we fall out.

Another time, being at Dinner, some body found fault with the Bread; she
replied, It is written Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that
proceeds out of the Mouth of God.

She being abroad at Dinner, hapen'd to bear one of the Servants take the
Lord's Name in vain; Don't ye know God will not hold him Guiltless that takes
his Name in Vain? This was I told by the Daughter of the House that heard her.

[Being from Home, and not having my Writing Book, I have let slip many
precious Expressions without setting them down.]

About July 1700, I being from Home, the Child was taken very Ill, her Aunt put
her to Bed, and her Aunt not being very well, the Child said, pray Aunt go to
Bed; I am loath to leave you alone, for the Lord is with me, and he is the best
Companion. When I came Home, I found the Child very Ill, she said to me, I am
Ill, but these Words came into my Mind; Those that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their Strength; They shall mount up with Wings as Eagles; They shall run
and not be weary; They shall walk, and not faint: And these Words led me to the
Rock that is higher than I; I asked her what that Rock was? She said it is
Christ; I desired he would show memore of my own filthiness,

This Morning, a little after she awoke, she said, I must have Christ, I will
Pray my Heart out but I will have Christ, I cannot be satisfied without I have
Christ.

In the Evening she was earnest with Tears that Christ may be revealed to her:
She said, I must have Christ, I cannot tell what to do without him; I asked her
why she must needs have Christ? ^he replied, I must, because I must utterly
Perish without him. I said, cannot your Prayers save you? being willing to prove
her: She said, Oh! no, nothing but Christ can do it, my Righteousness is dung.
O that my Heart may be affected with what I say: For with the Heart Man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation.

Another time, going to her Chair, she sat and went; I asked her what she
a^^'d? says she, I have offended the Lord, and he is dreadful; but I must pray
to him to make me his Child, for I cannot be so without he makes me so; but he
has promised those that seek him early shall find him; I must pray to God to
teach me to pray, for I have an immortal Soul. A little after, I gave her her
Supper, and told her she must crave a Blessing upon her Food, for it was the
Lord that gives us that Food; she replied, we have more than we deserve; for we
deserve nothing but Hell. Neither must I take God's Name in Vain, for he will
not hold him Guiltless that takes his Name in Vain. Another time she said, I
hope my Sins are pardoned; her Aunt said, we must have Grounds for our Hopes:
What Grounds have you to believe your Sins are pardoned? she replied, because
Christ died for the worst of Sinners, and I believe he died for me.

October the 10th, Cartaret sitting by the Fire, said to me, this Scripture
come just now into my Mind, He that touches one of the Lord's People, touches
the Apple of his Eye. As she was going to Bed, she said the Devil does
sometimes tell me he will appear to me, that makes me so afraid; she said also
that I have dreamed that the Devil was pulling me into Hell, but God kept me
and held me fast, and would not suffer him to do it.

November. the 23d, she having been a long time in a dead frame of Spirit, this
Evening she seem to have some working of Heart; being a Bed, I bid her seek the
Lord; she said she had, and he has heard my Prayer many a time, and answered
me: I said, how has he answered you? She said, by this place of Scripture, I
will be thy God; and I hope God will not take me away before my Work be done:
He has also answered me in this place, I will have Mercy on whom I will have
Mercy; for a small moment he has forsaken me, but with everlasting Kindness
will he gather me. A little after, she said, that place has been very sweet to
me, and comes in sometimes when I am at Play; Riches and Honor are with Me:
Yea durable Riches and Righteousness. Then she was very earnest with me to go
to Prayer by her, before she went to sleep.

Another time she said to me, In Heaven there is nothing but Praises, Praises,
Praises. She would be sometimes desiring she might not be found without the
Wedding Garment, which is the Righteousness of Christ.

A little before she was took sick, she would, speak of that Scripture in Job,
He has found a Ransom. A few days before her Illness, she said to me, This
Scripture is come to my Mind, He will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy,
and he will have Mercy on me.

The Day she was took sick, which was the first of December. 1701, she
rehearsed the sameplace, and said, He has had Mercy upon me; she spoke little
all her Sickness for she seemed to have her Spirits much seized.

The Sabbath day Evening, she said to me, Mother, I hope the Lord will restore
me to do that Work He has for me to do; for he who has began will perfect it;
these Words are come upon my Mind. He that gathered much, had none over; and he
that gathered little, had no lack. Her mentioning that Scripture, has, and does
give me such Satisfaction; for I have been made to see that though she had lived
to gather little Grace, yet she should stand as complete in the perfect
Righteousness of Christ, as if she had lived many Years to bring Glory to God.
From this time to Thursday following, on which she died, she spoke little, but
slept much, till the Wednesday Night: she grew very restless, the Thursday
worse; it was the fourth Day that she had been blind; called to me, and said, I
do begin to see now. Her Eyes being fast, I said to her, What, is it with the
Eyes of your Mind? She replied, Yes it is* I said, What do you see? She
answered, I see Christ hanging upon the Tree: Something she said softly, her
Spirits being spent. A little after I said to her, Does God lift up the Light
of his Countenance upon your Soul? She said, I hope he does. I asked her. Are
you willing to go to Christ? She answered, I hope I am. The Agonies of Death
being upon her, the last sensible Word she spoke to me, was, Pray for me;
desiring also her Father to pray for her, and then had some Flashings of
Lightness as she grew weaker. She lay very still all the while her Father
prayed by her, and about Eleven a-Clock she fell fast asleep, the 7th of
December 1701, aged six Years; 11 Months, and 3 Day.

The following Letters are of Cartaret's own indicting.
Jan. 1699. Dear Miss Gregory,
I Thank you for all your Kindnesses to me when I was in London, desiring that
God would make you to believe that all His Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and
all His Paths are Peace to your Soul; O that God may make you like a watered
Garden that you may say, Come thou South Wind, and come thou North Wind, blow
upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may send forth their smell that my
Beloved may come into His Garden and eat His pleasant Fruits. O that God would
make you to believe that He is not only a God ^earing Prayer, but will deliver
them that call upon Him. He has bid you ask and you shall have; seek and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. O that God would make you
believe that Scripture, The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want, He makes me
to lie down in green Pastures etc. And I beg of God He will make you to
remember your Creator in the Days of your Youth, before your EvilDays come, or
the Years draw nigh, in which you may say, you have no Pleasure in them. O that
you may not transgress against the Lord, for that is abominable. Honor your
Father and Mother, that your Days may be long upon the Earth, that you may mind
Death, and your precious immortal Soul.

Cartaret Read.


Jan. 1699, Dear Miss,
I Write to you a few Lines, desiring the Lord to pardon all your Iniquities,
Transgressions, and Sins; and I hope God will give yuo Grace to believe that
Christ died for your Sins, and rose again for your Justification; that he will
make you good betimes, and give you Spirit of Grace and Supplication, writing
his Law in your Heart, and putting it in your inward Parts. And O that God
would give you a due sight and sense of Sin, and of your undone state without
Christ, giving you Repentance, that He may bring you to Heaven with the Saints,
that your Lines may fall in a good Place, having a pleasant Heritage And so I
remain your Loving Friend,

Cartaret Read.


February, 1699.
Isbel, M Y Brother being come to London, I was willing to write these few
Lines, desiring the Lord to strengthen you, and give you a Spirit of Grace and
Supplication, making you a true Believer in the Lord Jesus Christ. O that God
would give you a Heart to love Him, fear Him, and obey Him as long as you live.
O that God would make you believe that Scripture, I have Prayed for you that
your Faith fail not: that so when the Bridegroom comes, you may be ready, and
may go in with Him to the Marriage. If God please to make you believe the
Scriptures, with what the Prophets has Written, I desire He may make you
believe what a blessed thing it is to be the Lord's.

Carrtaet Read.


March 2. 1699. Dear Brother,
I Thank you for all your Love to me while you were here; I hope the Lord has
been gracious to you in giving you a due sight and sense of Sin, and of your
own corrupt Heart, that He may give you an Inheritance among those that are
sanctified. I hope God will take away that Heart of Stone in you, and give you
an Heart of Flesh, and make you good betimes; for it is a dismal thing to die
in your Sins and go to Hell for ever: O that God would make you fit to die,
that you may have that Sentence pronounced Come ye Blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the Foundation of the World. So
hoping I shall hear from you, Iremain

Your Loving Sister, Cartaret Read.



