Mr. Stillman's SERMON ON THE Repeal of the Stamp Act.

Good News from a far Country.

A SERMON PREACHED at BOSTON, May 17. 1766. Upon the Arrival of the important
News OF THE Repeal of the STAMP ACT.

By SAMUEL STILLMAN, A. M. And Pastor of the first Baptist Church in Boston.

Then was our Mouth filled with Laughter, and our Tongue with Singing. -- The
LORD has done great Things for us: whereof we are glad.

PSALM 126. BOSTON: Printed by KNEELAND and ADAMS, in Milk-Street, for PHILIP
FREEMAN, in Union-Street. MDCCLXVI.

To them who desired the following Publication.
BRETHREN,
THE ensuing Discourse makes its Appearance in Compliance with your repeated
Solicitations; and not from any Fondness in me to commence Author. Neither had
I the most distant Expectation when preparing for the Pulpit, that it would
ever be called for after You had heard it. I therefore thought it necessary, in
transcribing for the Press, to make considerable Enlargements; for which I
persuade myself I need make no Apology.

The Ecstasy which this good News occasioned, among all Ranks of People, as soon
as certainly known; compared with that awful Indifference, with which the glad
Tidings of Salvation are heard by our Inhabitants in general; at once suggested
to me the Expediency of attempting to improve it in this spiritual Manner.

I would therefore with all Humility, lay this small Performance at the Feet of
Jesus, who is exalted as Head over all Things to the Church; and who can, out
of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings perfect Praise. And remain,

Most affectionately Yours In the Gospel of Christ, Samuel Stillman.

Good NEWS from a far Country.
PROVERBS XXV. 25. As cold Waters to a thirsty Soul: So is good News from a far
Country.


SHOULD I serve you a century in the gospel of Christ, I might never again have
so favorable an opportunity to consider this passage. It is a proverb, the
truth of which you are now feeling: Hence great is the propriety of improving
its spiritual meaning. And the preacher will have the advantage, while he
attempts to illustrate the glories of the gospel, by what the people feel. Has
not a general joy diffused itself amongst us? Does not Boston and the country
wear a face of pleasantness? You may read good news in every countenance. How
great the alteration, that has taken place amongst us, in consequence of a late
most interesting decision in our favor! Alluding to the Repeal of the
Stamp Act.
When the news arrived, so as to be confidently believed, there was a universal
shout. -- It now became impossible for every lover of liberty and his country,
to conceal the gladness of his heart: Public and private were the expressions
of joy on this important occasion! Yea your children, yet ignorant of the
importance of this event to these colonies, bear a part in the triumphs of the
day; in imitation, no doubt, of their parents and others, whom they observe
pleased on this happy occurrence. Well thought I, will good news from an
earthly Prince, that brings deliverance, and gives us the prospect of the
continuance of our most dear and invaluable rights and privileges, which we
apprehended on the brink of departing from us; fill us with such a general
gladness, that scarce a tongue will be silent? -- Oh how much more might we
expect that the glad tidings of salvation; salvation from everlasting misery,
to the fruition of endless happiness, would diffuse a universal joy! -- How
justly might we look for the tongue of the dumb to sing -- for the stammerer to
speak plainly; and for the mouths of babes and sucklings, to help on the
exalted tribute of praise to Him, who has committed to men the ministry of
reconciliation; declaring peace on earth, good will toward men? But alas, such
is the carnality of the heart of man, that though soon elated with temporal
deliverance; he is blind to, and too little affected with the great salvation!
What means this strange conduct? The one is believed with a warm heart; the
other seems to the poor sinner as an idle tale, and he believes it not! Surely
"the god of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should
shine unto them." 2 Cor. 4.4.


AGAIN. Do I observe both the righteous, and the wicked rejoicing on this
occasion? Yes: And let me add, good reason they have to do so. But on the
other, though infinitely more important, even the righteous themselves are
shamefully negligent, and lukewarm. -- Do I see the children in the streets
exulting in this good news from a far country? Oh thought I that this news of
redemption through our Lord Jesus Christ, might be so gladly, and generally
received; and become so powerful in its influence on parents and heads of
families, that their lives and conversations, might sweetly constrain their
little ones to join that triumphant "Hosanna to the Son of David," Mat. 21.15.
-- But why should we wonder if the children withhold the tribute of praise,
when the parents themselves are sinfully silent?

ARE we tenacious of our rights and liberties? And do we fear every thing that
looks like an infringment? What think we then of our conduct toward Him, who
is the only Potentate? How often have we been for wresting the government from
Him, and have practically said, "We will not have the Lord to reign over us?"
Is not Jehovah tender of his honor? His glory he will never give to another.
He may say to us, "Ye have robbed me." Mal. 3.8.
Numerous have been our provocations against Him; and if he had entered into
judgment with us, we should have been cut off in our iniquity, and forever
confined with the spirits in prison. But lo, here is good news from a far
country, a "God in Christ reconciling the world to himself!" -- A method of
salvation, exhibited in the gospel, that effectually secures the honors of the
divine government, and the harmony of Jehovah's attributes; while the chief of
sinners are made heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ! "As cold
waters to a thirsty soul: so is this good news from a far country." The
proverbial sense (says Dr. Jermin) is, That what is gotten by hard labor, and
after much time spent upon it, being as it were fetched from a far country, is
most delightful being obtained. But to make use of the verse in a more
spiritual application: The farthest country that lies any where is heaven: And
the good news are the tidings of the gospel. In this spiritual manner, I shall,
through divine assistance, improve the text. And, I. OBSERVE, That we have news
from heaven; a far country. II. CONSIDER by what means this news has been
conveyed to us. III. THAT it is "news" indeed; and emphatically "good news."
IV. THAT this good news from heaven, is more welcome to a heavy laden sinner,
and a true believer thirsting after God, than cold waters are to any one
athirst.


FIRST, We have news from heaven, a far country. It is not uncommon in the
sacred writings, to speak of heaven as a country: "But now they desire a better
country, that is, an heavenly." Heb. 11.16.
In which chapter, the same word is repeated, to signify, that the believing
Hebrews were in the pursuit of the kingdom of heaven.

NOW the news we have from thence, the apostle Paul epitomizes, in writing to
his Son Timothy, of the exceeding riches of the grace of God in his conversion,
and call to the apostleship: "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I
am chief." 1 Timothy 1.15.
I ask you, as Christ did the Jews of John's baptism, Is this news from heaven,
or of men? -- You will readily answer, methinks, from heaven. From heaven it
is, my Brethren.

I. AS it was there this glorious scheme of redemption was concluded on, the
subjects of it chosen, and all the certain means of its execution determined.
There it originated, and from thence it came. The covenant of grace bears an
ancient date, even from eternity: Though the dispensation of it is late, since
man's apostasy. Hence when Paul preached to the Ephesians, the unsearchable
riches of Christ, he lets them know, that his call to the ministry, and the
gospel he delivered, were "according to God's eternal purpose, which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." Ephesians. 3.11.
And in this same epistle, he speaks of our having been "chosen in Christ,
before the foundation of the world." Ephesians. 1.4.
Various are the passages of holy scripture, that lead us to contemplate this
counsel of peace, in eternity; before the world began. Then this everlasting
covenant, was well ordered in all things and sure. Jesus Christ was chosen by
the Father, as the head of it; the heirs of promise were chosen in Him, and
given to him as members of it; the means of their preservation, effectual
calling, and perfect sanctification, were appointed. In short, no part of it
was left precarious; it being an absolute covenant. If the covenant of grace
(says one) were not absolute, salvation would be as difficult by it, as by the
covenant of works; because it is as hard for a natural man to believe and live,
as it is for him to do and live. This great truth, which appears to me to shine
with distinguished brightness, in the holy Bible, is full of solid comfort to
the pious soul; an article of high importance in the church of Christ; and when
rightly understood, has a most powerful influence on the believer's practice.
So far as I have had time, and opportunity to observe, I am led to conclude,
That a deviation from this and the other glorious doctrines, that are connected
with it, has generally been attended with a decay of vital religion. Its having
been opposed is not strange: For you may be confident, that nothing short of
divine influence, can bring a sinner to fall in with, and really to submit to
the sovereignty of God. A maxim that men have adopted, and which they warmly
plead for with regard to themselves; they will not acknowledge when applied to
the God of the spirits of all flesh, viz. "That every one may do what he will
with his own." But notwithstanding the different sentiments of mankind as to
this point; you will bear with me, while I say, That I believe it to be a
doctrine from heaven.

II. IT is from heaven, as the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the author of this
salvation, is from thence. "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world." Joh. 16.28.
Which I suppose is to be understood of Christ, his assuming human nature: Or
his appearing in that body, that had been prepared for him. "A body have thou
prepared me" Heb. 10.5.
And this assumption of our nature was in the fullness of time. Gal. 4.4.
i. e. the time appointed in eternity. This coming forth from the Father, can
only hold true of Christ as mediator; as also where it is said, "That God sent
him." As God, he fills all places at the same time; and therefore can neither
be said to go nor come. Neither as God can he be sent; for then God must send
God. i. e. He must send himself. This is unintelligible. But as mediator, he is
sent: In this character he came forth from the Father, and came into the world,
when he became openly incarnate.

BUT perhaps an objection will be started -- "If the Son of God can only be
said to be sent, as considered in human nature; how is it that the same phrase
is used of the Holy Ghost; who, as you say, is God equal with the Father and
the Son; and never appeared in an assumed nature, but remains a pure, infinite
spirit?" For an answer to this objection, I freely give credit to the learned
and pious Mr. Hussy. The Spirit's mission (says he) is not as the spirit is
God, it is not abstractedly God the spirit; for the Holy Ghost could not be
sent or come from the Father thus, because as an infinite person, he does
together with the Father and the Son, fill all places at once, and so as the
Spirit is God, must not be said to go from one place to another, but it is as
Comforter that he does so. He does not fill all the world as Comforter, but it
is as God the Spirit that he fills all the world. I observe, my hearers, when
Christ promised the Spirit, and said he would send him, it was under the
character of Comforter. "I will send you another Comforter." -- "If I go not
away, the Comforter will not come." Thus making a distinction between his
office, and his essence. As the same author says, He is not given in his
essence, but in his office, as the immediate cause of our obtaining the graces
of the spirit. Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he
has given us, 1 John 3.24. Here is his person in the office of a Comforter.
Again. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given
us of his Spirit, 1 John 14.3. There are the graces of the spirit, and both put
together do make up the full distinction in the two branches of it as laid down
above. Hussey's Glory of Christ unveiled.


THUS the objection is answered, while we distinguish the office of the Holy
Ghost, from his essence as God. He was sent as a Paraclete or Comforter, but
not as God the Spirit.

I MIGHT go on to observe, that Jesus Christ made it evident, that he was from
heaven, by the kingdom he set up in the world. His appearance among men; making
himself of no reputation, and taking upon him the form of a servant: The
company he kept of choice, who were not the rich, and noble, but poor and
despised; oblige us to think "his kingdom is not of this world." If he had had
in view, a worldly kingdom, depend upon it, he would have proceeded according
to worldly maxims. But so far from this, that he treated the riches, the
honors, and glories of this world, with manifest indifference. The meanness of
his birth and parentage, at once rendered him the object of contempt: The men he
chose to be his disciples and followers, were so contemptible in the eyes of
the Jews; that he could expect nothing but indignity in consequence thereof.
Yet this gave him no concern; because he came into the world to establish a
spiritual kingdom. And he had nothing to hope for; neither had he any thing to
fear, from the men of this world, but what he foresaw, and was able to prevent;
provided it would not issue in the advancement of this his kingdom.

HOWEVER the Jews found fault with Christ, despised him and set him at naught
on this account; you christians see a coincidence between every part of his
conduct, and his design to establish a spiritual kingdom. From the beginning of
his life, to the end of it, he constantly convinced us, that he came not to
seek the favor and honors of men. And as to his disciples, they willingly
left all to follow him; risqued their lives in the promotion of his divine
religion; and gave repeated, indisputable evidences that "by patient
continuance in well-doing, they sought for glory, and immortality; eternal
life." "They reckoned that the sufferings of this present time, were not worthy
to be compared with the glory that should be revealed in them." Romans 8.18.


III. WHILE we consider the doctrines themselves; their special influence on
the heart and life; and the glorious prospect they give us beyond the grave; we
are confident they are from heaven.

1. THE doctrines themselves: Such as a Trinity of persons, in the unity of the
divine essence -- The incarnation of Jesus Christ -- Justification by faith: Or
righteousness imputed without works. Romans 4.6.
The descent of the Holy Ghost, and his powerful energy in changing the
sinner's heart, and carrying on the work of sanctification in believers: The
indwelling of this Holy Spirit, together with his bearing witness with the
believer's spirit, that he is a child of God; and thus sweetly sealing him unto
the day of redemption. These, and many other great and precious truths, which
it never en^^^d into the heart of man to conceive, till they were set before us
in the gospel, demand our faith. Their importance, and sublimity, will at once
strike the devout mind; and he readily acknowledge they bear a divine
signature. I think I may safely say, They never would have been thought of by
men, if they had not been revealed in the gospel; it being absolutely
impossible, that man should invent, what he could not afterward fully
comprehend: Which is particularly true of the doctrine of the Trinity, and the
incarnation of the Son of God.

2. THIS gospel has a special influence on the heart, and life. It begins with
the heart; laying the ax to the root of the tree. "It comes with power, the
Holy Ghost, and much assurance." 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
Hence the man becomes a new creature, old things pass away, and all things
become new. The natural enmity is slain, and the image of Christ formed in the
soul. This great change is called regeneration: And in whomsoever it is
wrought, there are new apprehensions of divine things -- new feelings -- "Joy
and peace in believing." -- There will also be a different conduct. "The grace
of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men; teaching us that
denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world." Tit. 2.11, 12.


THERE is no part of a christian's conduct, while he acts in that character,
but what is under the influence of this gospel. It influentially inclines him
to the whole of his duty; to pay an unreserved obedience to every divine
precept: In a word, To do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
God.

ITS special influence also on the believer's mind, at once discovers that it
is of divine origin. How does it raise his affections from this world, and fix
them on things above? He will have his conversation in heaven, and dwell on
high. For this gospel immediately tends to make him spiritually minded. That
high relish, with which he formerly grasped after the things of time, subsides,
in consequence of his feeling the power of the gospel of Christ. Such an one
sees that God is his portion; that Jesus Christ is the Alpha and Omega of his
happiness; that heaven is his home! Here then will his captivated soul rest
infinitely satisfied; and the world appear as a very little thing. For at the
same time that the gospel leads the believer to soar above created good; it
also, in the hands of the divine Spirit, promotes his "meetness for the
enjoyment of the inheritance of the saints in light." And this it does, as it
sets before him the infinite evil of sin; making it appear "exceeding sinful:"
The intrinsic beauty of holiness; which as it is essential to God, so, to every
devout soul, it is a pleasing part of the divine character. The former he
abhors, and groans under; the latter he longs for, and follows after. Yea so
fervent, and incessant are the desires of the heaven-born-soul, that he cannot
be contented while there are the smallest remains of sin in him: Nothing will
satisfy him short of perfect holiness.

WELL my Brethren, as this is the tendency of our gospel, sure we are that it
came down from heaven.

3. WE will add to the above considerations, the glorious prospect the gospel
gives us beyond the grave. Without this "good news" from heaven, death would
indeed be a leap in the dark. "We should, as alas the heathen do, grope for the
wall like the blind, and grope as if we had no eyes; we should stumble at
noonday as in the night; and be in desolate places as dead men." Isa. 59.10.
Consider the present state of the heathen world; which being without the
gospel, is in gross darkness: While to us "the light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon us." Jesus, who came forth from the Father, "has
abolished death, and bro't life and immortality to light through the gospel." 2 Timothy 1.10.
He has, says this apostle, "abolished death." i. e. removed its sting, and
divested the grave of all its horrors, with respect to believers, by dying and
rising again; and by making known to them, a state of immortal life and glory
in the world to come. Revelation informs us that in "God's presence there is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore." Psalm. 16.11.
It gives us a comfortable assurance, that the souls of the righteous upon the
dissolution of the body, do instantly pass to heaven. "Then shall the dust
return to the earth as it was: And the spirit shall return unto God who gave
it." Eccles. 12.7.
In which words take notice, that the spirit's return to God, is connected with
the return of the lifeless body to the earth.

THE view then that the righteous have of death, is no more than a change of
place; a transition from a vale of tears, to the regions of endless bliss;
where "the wicked cease from troubling: and where the weary be at rest" Bless
God, O my soul, for this good news, that gives believers such a transporting
prospect beyond the narrow limits of time! Where they "shall be with Christ, to
behold his glory!" John 17.24.


IV. I MIGHT add, That the manner in which this news has been conveyed to us,
further shows us that it is from heaven, viz. By God Himself -- by immediate
inspiration -- and by the ministry of angels. But here I shall not enlarge,
lest I anticipate what more properly belongs to the next general head. I
therefore pass to consider,

SECONDLY, By what methods the Lord has been pleased to make known to us his
glorious gospel.

1. IT all lay hid in the divine mind till the apostasy. Man's fall introduced
the necessity of the recovery, and opened a door for the revelation of it.
Which was first made to Adam, by God Himself, Genesis 3.15. "And I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: It shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel." These words are to be viewed in a
twofold light, as a threatening to the serpent, and as a promise to Adam. This
may appear by a short comment on the verse. The "seed of the woman" no doubt
designs Jesus Christ, who is said in the New Testament to be "made of a woman."
Gal. 4.4.
As for the enmity spoken of, it has always been obvious, between the "seed of
the woman," Christ, and all his spiritual seed believers; and the old serpent,
the devil, and his seed the children of disobedience. It appeared so early as
the days of Cain, who slew his brother Abel, for no other reason, but because
"his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous." 1 John 3.13.
The same spirit of opposition now reigns in the breasts of the unregenerate.
It follows, "He shall bruise thy head." Christ the "seed of the woman" has
slain the old serpent, "and bruised satan under his feet." Romans 16.20.
-- Note, Christ is to bruise the head of the serpent; which intends nothing
less than his absolute conquest over him Accordingly Paul speaks of his
"destroying him that had the power of death, that is, the devil." Heb. 2.14.


YOU also take notice, that the serpent is to "bruise his heel." To bruise the
heel is not dangerous; life is not at stake. From hence we learn, that at most
satan can only trouble, harass and distress the children of God: Whom he shall
never be able to destroy. "Because I live, said Christ, ye shall live also." I
have considered the heel as designing the members of Christ, who are often
bruised by satan; of whom it is justly said "That he goes about like a roaring
lion, seeking whom he may devour." Though at the same time allowing, That the
heel may rather design the human nature of Christ, which is his inferior and
lowest nature, and who was in it frequently exposed to the insults, temptations
and persecutions of satan, and was at last brought to a painful and accursed
death; though by dying he got an entire victory over him, and all his Enemies,
and obtained salvation for his people. Dr. Gill, in Loc.


THIS was the first intimation of "good news from a far country." It was
afterward repeated to Abraham, Genesis 22.18. "And in thy seed shall all the
families of the earth be blessed." After that to Isaac in the same expressions,
Genesis 26.4. -- Then to Jacob, Genesis 28.14. After which we find it made known to
Judah, by Jacob; when in a spirit of prophecy he blessed his sons, Genesis 49.10.
"The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the lawgiver from between his
feet, until SHILOH come, and unto Him shall the gathering of the people be." So
we might proceed through the whole old testament; showing when, by whom, and how
the Lord has made known to us this "great salvation." But you, who read your
Bibles, cannot, methinks be ignorant that all the prophets bore witness to the
coming of the Messiah," who was to be cut off, but not for himself." David,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Zechariah, Malachi, and the other prophets spoke
concerning Jesus, as they at "sundry times were moved by the Holy Ghost." Heb.
1.1.
David foretold the manner of his death -- "They pierced my hands and my feet."
-- Isaiah is with propriety styled the evangelic prophet." In what moving
language does he, seven hundred years before our Savior's birth, describe his
dolorous sufferings? And the nearer the time approached for the sun of
righteousness to irradiate our benighted world, the clearer did the prophets
express themselves.

II. THIS "good news" was made known to us, not only by clear prophecies, but a
variety of significant types and figures. Such as, The Scapegoat -- the Brazen
Serpent -- the Paschal Lamb -- slaying of Beasts -- many Washings, etc. All
these things had an important meaning to the Jewish worshippers. Some of our
modern Divines, have termed the Ceremonial law, the gospel of the Old
Testament. The Scapegoat was doubtless typical of Christ, and the transferring
of Guilt from the elect to him. And that in so eminent a manner, that he that
runs may read. "And Aaron shall lay his hands upon the head of the live goat,
and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all
their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat,
and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness. And the
goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities, unto a land not inhabited."
Levit. 16.21, 22.
Here Guilt was typically transferred to the goat, which he bore away into a
land not inhabited. This pointed to Christ; concerning whom Isaiah says --
"The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all." Isai. 53.6.
With which agree the words of Peter, "Who his own self bare our sins in his
own body on the tree." 1 Pet. 2.24.


AS for the Brazen Serpent, Jesus Christ accommodates it to Himself; "As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up.
John 3.14.


THE use that was made of the blood of the sacrifices, and their various
washings, all pointed to the "blood of sprinkling;" that precious "blood that
cleanses from all sin." This part of the subject is copious, but I must not
enlarge. Let these hints convince us, that Jesus Christ was held forth to the
Old Testament saints by these types and figures.

III. WHEN Christ had actually come in the flesh, the ministry of angels was
employed to make it known. "And the angel said unto them, fear not: For behold
I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto
you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord. -- And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men." Luke 2.10 -- 15.
See, the angels are in ecstasy at the Savior's birth; though not interested in
it! "This good news from a far country, was more refreshing than cold waters to
a thirsty soul." Good old Simeon was heard to say, "Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy
salvation: Which thou have prepared before the face of all people: A light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel." Stop my soul and
wonder! -- Are angels all in raptures at this good news? Do they willingly
descend to bring the tidings of salvation; when they want no Savior? And what
is the matter with them to whom it is brought; and are concerned in it for life
or death eternal, that they are no more affected with it? -- That they are not
anxious to equal angels in their praises? -- Oh that we had angels tongues, and
the warm heart of Simeon, then should we in heavenly strains sing "glory to God
in the highest!"

IV. WHEN Christ grew up, he entered on the ministry in person; and according to
Isaiah's prophecy, he went about "to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind
up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to them that were bound." Isai. 61.1.
And he engaged many disciples to tread in his steps; to whom he gave
commission to "go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature."
Who after his death, resurrection, and ascension; having received the
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, went forth in his name, declaring with
all boldness, That "He was the true Messiah, whom they with wicked hands had
crucified, and slain." And great was the success that immediately attended
their faithful ministrations. "And the word of God increased; and the number of
the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the
priests were obedient to the faith." Acts 6.7.


AND since the days of the apostles, the Lord has taken care to supply his
churches successively, with a number of faithful men to preach his glorious
gospel. "May the Lord of the harvest, send forth more laborers into his
harvest!" "Faithful men that shall be able to teach others also!"

THUS we see how this good news has been conveyed to us. We joyfully conclude
from these considerations, that it is from heaven. I pass to the

THIRD thing proposed, which is to show that this is news indeed; and
emphatically "good news."

1. IT is news indeed, as it was never heard of, never thought of, by angels or
men, till revealed. The apostle calls it, "the mystery which has been hid from
ages, and from generations." Coloss. 1.26.
Who could have thought of a gracious promise of redemption, and forgiveness,
as soon as man had sinned? -- Had we not just reason to indulge a "fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation?" -- Who could have imagined
that God should "so love this guilty world, as to give his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have everlasting life?"
Who could have believed it, if the report were not divine, that "Jesus Christ
freely gave himself a ransom for us?" -- That he assumed human nature, in order
"that he might have somewhat to offer?" -- That he condescended "to be made
like unto his brethren; that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest,
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people?" -- That he obeyed the law in his life, and became obedient unto death,
"even the death of the cross?" -- That he laid in the grave until the third
day, when he sealed his religion by rising again? -- And finally, that he
ascended up on high; and now, while I am preaching, and you are hearing, he
appears our advocate with the Father. "Where he ever lives to make
intercession. -- Oh love divine! -- Wisdom infinite! Who of you is not lost in
these wonders of redeeming love? It is as high as heaven, what can we do? May
our hearts burn within us, while we contemplate this "news" from heaven; this
revelation that God has given of his Son!

II. This gospel is new always. You that have known the truth, twenty, thirty,
forty years; yet discover fresh wonders in Christ and his salvation. The half
has never been told you, of the Glory, Beauty, Fullness, Love, Compassion, of
this once crucified Jesus. "He is altogether lovely, and the chiefest among ten
thousand." Cant. 5.10.


III. THE saints will find something new in this divine, and inexhaustible
subject, when they arrive at glory. Now they know in part; they see through a
glass darkly; but then they shall know even as they are known; and see face to
face. Then shall they understand infinitely more of the sovereignty, the
justice, the wisdom of God in this economy of redemption; and eternally sing
the "new song."

IT is also emphatically "good news," if we consider who is the author of it.
It is good as to its contents, "peace on earth, and good will toward men." A
Savior born; salvation for the greatest sinners. "A fountain opened to the
house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for
uncleanness:" Pardon of sin: Peace of conscience: Joy in the Holy Ghost --
Support to believers in death; and everlasting life in the future world.

IT is good as it makes men good. Saul no sooner feels the power of this
gospel, than he desists from persecuting, and "preaches the faith which before
he destroyed." Zaccheus is at once inclined, by a secret, but powerful
influence to restore four fold to every one, from whom he might have taken any
thing by false accusation. Magdalene will in a moment forsake her atrocious
iniquities, and follow Jesus. The jailer instantly washes the stripes he had
made, but a few minutes before. In truth, when it comes with power, it makes
great saints of great sinners.

ONCE more. It is good. i. e. it is pleasant, as it brings ease to a guilty
conscience; consolation to them that are cast down. Which naturally leads us to
the

FOURTH general dead: That this good news from heaven, is more welcome to the
heavy-laden sinner, and the true believer thirsting after God, than cold waters
are to any one athirst.

WHAT good news is, my Brethren, you know: You this moment feel. How long have
we anxiously waited the great event, that is now determined in our favor? How
tedious was every day till the interesting news arrived? What gloominess
appeared in every face? How was business stagnated? And how painful were the
exercises of our suspended minds? But the scene is altered; and gladness fills
our breasts; and would soon show itself in every look, did not the solemnity of
this day and place demand a serious countenance. It gives a spring to action --
a pleasure to the man in business; and we hope will speedily revive every
branch of trade. "As cold waters to a thirsty soul: So is this good news from a
far country" -- But infinitely more exhilerating is this good news from heaven;

I. TO the sinner sensible of sin, burdened with it, fearing the wrath of God,
and everlasting misery; ready to give up all hope, lie down and die: For such
an one to be told of a way of recovery to the divine favor -- in which God can
be just, and justify him that believes; how greatly will it encourage him? But
for him to have a believing view of Christ, as the gospel sets him forth, in
the perfection of his divine righteousness -- his infinite atonement -- the
riches -- freeness and sovereignty of his grace; as saving the chief of sinners
-- justifying the ungodly; (which is one of the glories of the gospel) -- How
will he perceive his load of guilt removed; -- be brought to trust his immortal
all in the hands of this divine Redeemer; and have "joy and peace in
believing?" Romans 15.13.
Suppose a criminal at the place of execution, standing on the verge of
eternity;; death staring him in the face, to be presented with a reprieve: How
will it overjoy and melt him down? But how much more so, to be reprieved from
eternal death, from everlasting damnation; and to be made an heir of God, and a
joint-heir with Jesus Christ? Infinitely more transporting is this good news to
such a soul!

II. IT is so to the real believer in all his after life. "He thirsts for God,
for the living God." And the gospel is the medium in which he sees Him. In it
"God is said to be in Christ." 2 Cor. 5.19.
The believer could no more live as a christian, without this gospel; than he
could at first believe without it. It is the joy and rejoicing of his heart. It
is to his soul, what food is to the body. He feeds upon it; hence he grows in
grace. "To know Christ and him crucified," is his invariable resolution. A
crucified Jesus, is to him a theme ever new, and ever welcome. And if at times,
he gets at a distance from God, and sinks into a state of lukewarmness; which
is alas too frequently the case, nothing but a looking to Jesus as exhibited in
this gospel, can restore to him his wonted sense of divine things. "I live,
says Paul, yet not I, but Christ lives in me." Gal. 2.20.


WHAT remains, is an improvement of the subject.

1st. WHAT reason have we to bless God for the gospel? It is an invaluable
blessing. "Blessed, says David, are they that hear the joyful sound." You have
heard of its influence on the heart and life; and have been reminded this day
of the glorious prospect it gives believers beyond the grave. Doubtless every
devout mind will be raised; and every mouth filled with the language of
gratitude, saying, "We thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight." Matthew. 11.25,
26.
Sure such privileges as ours, call for thankfulness. And it might have a
tendency to promote it, were we to consider the happy state of the christian
world, in contrast with that of the heathen. To do this we need not go far.
Behold, my Hearers, with compassion, the Savages on our own continent. They sit
in darkness and have no light. How barbarous, and inhuman are many of their
customs? They are ignorant of the "true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent." While we who are but a few miles from them, are surrounded with the
means of grace. This is a favor we enjoy in a sovereign manner. "Whence is it,
that thou will manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?"

THE gospel has a tendency, even when it does not change the heart, to inform
the judgment; to soften the conscience; and to lay sinners under some
restraints which they cannot easily get over. In this respect it influences the
practice even of the unregenerate. We all know that those impressions, that
were made on the mind in younger life, by a religious education, are not easily
defaced. And if such, when they grow up, would cast off all regard to their
education, and endulge every vicious desire; they find they cannot do it at
once; conscience stands ready to reprove and to condemn. Viewing the gospel
then in this light, we have cause to bless God for it. But when it becomes the
power of God, unto salvation, to us, or ours; we shall have matter of endless
praise.

2dly. IF the gospel is from heaven, and is so important in its nature,
tendency and design; -- if we as poor, sinful, apostate creatures, are so
immediately interested in it; how may we reasonably expect it will be received
and entertained? Surely with the highest gratitude, and the warmest love. But
alas how contrary the treatment it meets with from Infidels and hardened
sinners! The Deist pours contempt upon it, and all its votaries. The secure
sinner turns his back upon it, saying, "What is your Beloved more than another
Beloved?" And many of those who have been favored with the gospel all their
days, remain in a state of obduracy and impenitence; and that too where they
have sat under the most soul-searching ministry.

FROM hence we see the depravity of human nature: And are persuaded that the
success of the gospel now, as well as in the first ages of the Church, depends
absolutely upon the powerful operations of the Holy Ghost.

3dly. HERE the heavy-laden sinner beholds relief. It is this gospel only that
can heal a wounded conscience. "The letter kills, but the spirit gives
life." Cor. 3.6.
All that the law can do, is to show the sinner his danger; that he is in lost
and perishing circumstances; but it neither points to, nor can it administer
any relief. It is the gospel of Christ only, that exhibits a righteousness that
answers to the perfection of the divine law. And sinners in this condition see,
that the holy, perfect law of God, will dispense with nothing less than
perfection. "Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise
pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." Mat. 5.18.
Here then the gospel is more welcome than cold waters to a thirsty soul,
inasmuch as it sets Christ before us, as the "end of the law for
righteousness." Romans 10.4.
This is the balm of Gilead: And Jesus is the divine physician, whose "blood
speaks better things than the blood of Abel," Heb. 12.24.
to every sin-burdened soul.

I SHALL now dismiss you, with an address suited to the present joyful occasion.

MY Brethren, I have long wished for, and now with pleasure embrace the first
opportunity, to congratulate you on a most important event: An event that
spread gladness through Britain (a few excepted) and that cannot fail of
warming every true American's heart. Should I speak more plainly, your joy
might become impetuous; and like the Nile overflow its banks. Look upon it as a
royal confirmation of your civil and religious liberties; -- these stand in
immediate connection with each other: Insomuch that the very act that leaves
you in the enjoyment of the one, may be looked upon as confirming to you the
other.

THIS whole assembly -- yea the whole British America is interested in this
great decision. Great You will readily conclude, from what You have seen during
the last seven months. I can compare our present state to nothing with more
propriety, than a serene sky, and the smiling sun, after a horrid tempest.
Receive it as a favor from the best of earthly Monarchs; and always deeply
impress your minds, with the belief, that our most gracious Sovereign is the
father of his people; and that we, his most faithful subjects in America, have
no small share in his royal affections. Your desire is granted -- your burden
removed; -- and you left to enjoy your privileges.

YOU are flushed with joy: It is a joyful occasion. A propriety of conduct
under this occurrence, I am confident you will all think necessary. And the
more danger we are in of imprudence, as we are almost intoxicated with
gladness. Bear with me, while I say, That first, and supremely you should offer
your unfeigned thanksgivings to the Lord, who reigns in the moral world, in
that He has inclined the King and British Parliament, to deal favorably with
us: -- That He has raised up in his kind providence, Friends to the cause of
liberty and these colonies. In short, that we have obtained redress -- "Let the
people praise thee, O Lord; let all the people praise thee!"

LET us entertain the most dutiful and loyal sentiments with respect to the
King -- rejoice in his upright administration -- the increase of his
illustrious family, as a further security of our happy constitution: And not
fail by words and actions, to discover that the prosperity of his kingdom is a
great part of our happiness.

MAY the British Parliament receive that deference from us that they deserve;
and be convinced by our future conduct, that we aim not at INDEPENDENCY; nor
wish to destroy distinctions, where distinctions are necessary: -- That we
rejoice in being governed according to the principles of that constitution, of
which we make our boast as Englishmen: Yea further, that if it was put to our
choice, Whether our connections with Great Britain should be dissolved? We, the
inhabitants of these Colonies, would rise like a cloud, and deprecate such a
disunion.

LET the names of those Worthies who have openly espoused our cause, be had in
grateful remembrance; not only by the present, but by all succeeding
generations.

BUT I forbear to address you in language that seems to imply any want of
gratitude and affection to them: And with confidence affirm, in the behalf of
You, my Brethren, and the rest of my Countrymen, that your generous hearts
would instantly prompt you, were your abilities sufficient, to erect statues of
Gold, to the memory of the Right Hon. WILLIAM PIT, Esquire and those other worthy
Patriots, who have so eminently interested themselves in the cause of liberty
and these Colonies, on a late occasion.

TO conclude. Be it far from us to triumph on this happy event, as though we had
gained a victory: Or even remotely to hint that our redress is forced. Sensible
we are that some of the friends of these Colonies, have gone so far, as to
risque their reputation on our becoming behavior for the future. May they not
be disappointed! But while we entertain the warmest sense of liberty, may we
act in every instance, in such a manner, that our most subtle enemies may have
nothing to lay to our charge: Unless they may deem it a fault, to be inviolably
attached to his Majesty's most sacred person; and the royal succession in the
illustrious house of Hanover.

IN fine. May our expressions of joy on the day ensuing, be kept within the
bounds of decency -- let us avoid excess, and every unbecoming conduct, lest we
hurt ourselves, and offend the God of salvation. May the whole issue in
unanimity and peace; the firmest connection, and mutual prosperity of
Great Britain and her Colonies. -- May we go on to rejoice in the continuance
of our privileges, and glorify God in the abundance of his mercy.

FINIS.

