Dr. Chauncy's SERMON AT the ORDINATION of the Reverend Mr. Simeon Howard.

A SERMON Preached May 6, 1767. AT THE ORDINATION OF THE REVEREND SIMEON
HOWARD, M. A. TO THE Pastoral Care of the WEST CHURCH in BOSTON. TO WHICH THE
CHARGE, AND RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP, delivered upon the same Occasion, are
added.

By CHALES CHAUNCY, D. D. A Pastor of the FRIST CHURCH in BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by R. DRAPER, EDES and GILL, and T. and J. FLEET. 1767.

AN ORDINATION SERMON.
ACTS XVII. 2, 3. "And Paul, as his manner was, -- reasoned with them out of
the scriptures; opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered, and
risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is the
Christ."
THE apostle Paul (an account of whose preaching is transmitted to us in these
words) was, in point of natural abilities, and humanely acquired
accomplishments, the greatest by far of all the apostles. More than this, he
was exceeded by none of them in gracious qualities as a christian; or
extraordinary gifts as an officer in the kingdom of God, which was now setting
up in the world. Perhaps, we have in him, after due preference to our great
Master and Lord, the most complete pattern of the good man, especially the good
minister. Who, among those, whether inspired or uninspired, that have been
thought worthy to be entrusted with the dispensation of the gospel, were ever
better qualified for their work, spirited to it, or that labored in it with
more prudence, diligence, fidelity, and persevering resolution, amidst the
greatest trials and difficulties? Were directions to be given to form the most
respectable ministerial character, they could not be fetched from a more
striking and instructive example (our Savior's only excepted) than this of the
apostle Paul's, as set forth in the sacred books.

TWO things eminently exemplary in him, and worthy of the particular notice of
all gospel ministers, are recorded in my text, and may employ our present
meditations; the MANNER in which he preached, and the SUBJECTS he preached upon.

AS to his manner of preaching, it was RATIONAL, and SCRIPTURAL. Says the text,
"he reasoned with them out of the scriptures."

HIS preaching was RATIONAL; that is to say, he made use of good arguing in his
discourses. He did not speak to his hearers in a confused, incoherent, way; but
there was a clear and just connection in what he said. One thing depended on
another, was illustrated by it, or deducible from it. He applied to the
understandings of men for their enlightening, to their judgments for their
information, to their consciences for their conviction; and not merely to their
affections and passions to warm and melt them.

THIS was the way in which he preached to the Thessalonian Jews. And it was his
MANNER in preaching at other times, and in the audience of other people. To be
sure, if we may judge of his preaching, either by his epistles, which make so
considerable a part of the new testament; or by his apologies for himself; or
by the gospel he preached, the record of which we have in the book of Acts, it
was not in the way of a loose, unconnected application to the affections of
men; nor in the way of mere authoritative, magisterial affirmation, in virtue
of his apostleship, and extraordinary character as a messenger from God; but by
reasoning upon what he said, by making good what he delivered by proper
inference and deduction. This was his MANNER of preaching. And by it, as one
observes, "he has sanctified reason to the purposes of religion, and showed us
that one sort, and indeed the best sort, of good preaching consists in good
arguing".

SOME there are, I am sensible, who are rather offended than pleased, when
preachers speak to them upon things pertaining to the kingdom of God and Christ
in a way of reasoning; though they herein copy after the example of an inspired
apostle. They have no relish for discourses, unless adapted to excite their
passions. If these are put in motion, they applaud the preacher, and imagine
they have gained spiritual profit: Whereas, if he so opens his subject, by good
reasoning, as to set it before their understandings in a clear and strong point
of view, it is in their account, a poor insipid business, not at all calculated
to the purpose of godly edifying.

BUT they are herein egregiously mistaken. It should always be remembered, the
passions may be moved, when the discourse, far from being instructive, is
crude, rambling, unconnected, and, it may be, inconsistent with itself. The
excitement of sensations that are pleasing may be the effect, not of light
operating in the mind, but of mere sounds modulated in a certain way. And
whenever this is the case, as it too often is in fact, the motion in the
affections is nothing more than the mere working of animal nature. It Is wholly
a mechanical production, and of no service in the spiritual sense: Whereas,
when truth, by just reasoning, is let into the mind so as to be clearly
perceived and well understood, real good is done; yea, good that may, if it be
not our own fault, turn out to saving advantage. The apostle Paul therefore,
who was well acquainted with human nature, reasoned with his hearers, as the
wisest and most effectual method he could take to promote their religious
improvement. He knew that warmth in the passions was, at best, momentary and
vanishing, and would certainly fail of answering any good end, unless light and
truth were first conveyed into the mind. He knew he was speaking to men, who,
as they are endowed with intellectual powers, ought chiefly to be influenced by
their understandings, not their affections, and must be so influenced, if they
are ever influenced to good purpose in the business of salvation. It was
accordingly his main care to reason with them, offering what was proper to open
and enlarge their minds, and "fill them with the knowledge of God's will in all
spiritual wisdom and understanding."

NOT that the passions should be neglected. They have their use in religion, as
well as in common life; and may with pertinency, and to good purpose, be
stirred up. But then care should be taken as to the way in which this is done.
Surely, it ought not to be attempted by a seemingly solemn use of mere words
and phrases, which though pious in their sound, yet have no plain, if
intelligible, meaning; nor by a noisy fervor in speaking that is only
histrionical and affected; nor by that management of voice and gesture which is
nothing more than the effect of worldly policy. This was not the way in which
the apostle Paul endeavored to affect his hearers. He despised the thought of
procuring admiration, or any profitable attendant on it, by crafty addresses,
artfully contrived to please his hearers by tickling their fancies, and raising
a useless motion in their passions. Says he to the christians at Corinth, 1
Cor. ii. 4. "My speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's
wisdom." What does the apostle here mean by "enticing words of man's wisdom"? If
he had any meaning at all, his view was directly pointed at that artful manner
of placing and pronouncing words, by which designing men, in that day, so moved
the affections of the people, as, under this influence, to persuade them to
will and do just as they would have them. And why did he not endeavor, in this
way, to allure those he conversed with, and preached to? Surely, not because he
wanted ability in this kind! His invention was ready, his imagination lively,
he had words at command. Besides, having been educated under the care of the
great Gamaliel, he was learned in "the wisdom of words," that is, in all the
invented arts to work mechanically upon men's passions to lead them blindfold.
But he esteemed it a disgrace to the gospel of the blessed God, a debasement of
its infinitely interesting truths, to deliver them in this worldly-wise manner;
as though they needed the help of man's wisdom to give them force to touch the
heart, and set the affections into all the motion that would serve to any
religious purpose.

NOT that he reasoned with his hearers in a dull, cold, lifeless manner, having
upon his mind no just sense of the important weight of eternal concerns. His
heart was thoroughly warmed when he preached; and he uttered himself, without
all doubt, as one that was in real earnest, and so as that it might be seen
that he was so. The God of nature has so formed us, that we cannot speak upon
matters which lie with weight upon our minds, and greatly affect us, without
the discovery of it in the very manner of our speaking. There are certain
outward signs by which the inward feeling of the heart is indicated; and they
are so obvious, and naturally striking, that they cannot easily be
misunderstood: And they have the strongest tendency to arrest the attention,
and transmit the like sensations to those who are spoken to. In this naturally
and powerfully affecting way the apostle Paul delivered his reasonings with the
people, upon the great affairs of their souls and everlasting salvation; and it
is the best, perhaps the only proper way in which they should be delivered.
Theatrical airs are well enough suited to performances on the stage, where the
putting men's passions and affections into a pleasing commotion for the present
is all that is aimed at. But the pulpit does not seem a fit place for acting a
part. By mimicking nature, if it is done well, or, what means, in this case,
precisely the same thing, by artfully playing the hypocrite, preachers may move
the passions of their hearers: but the emotion, in this way excited, is most
commonly of the same kind with that which is occasioned by "the sounding of
brass, and the tinkling of a cymbol;" and of as little use or profit in the
affairs of religion and salvation. -- But I must not enlarge.

THE apostle Paul's preaching was SCRIPTURAL, as well as rational. The meaning
is, he made use of scripture-arguments in his discourses; in this way
illustrating and confirming the truths he delivered, wherein he could do it
with propriety. Says the text, "he reasoned with them out of the scriptures."
He did not merely cite a passage or two from thence, but argued upon the texts
he had occasion to mention; entering into their true spirit, opening their
sense, and pointing out their pertinency as proofs of this or the other truth
he was upon. And it was his manner to be thus scriptural, when he had to do
with the Jews, as was the case at present.

SOMETIMES his hearers, and the subjects most proper to speak to them upon,
were such, that arguments from reason were the fittest to be used with them.
And, in this case, his arguing was from mere rational principles. Thus, when he
was called to preach before Felix, the Roman governor, considering his
character as an unjust and adulterous man, he "reasoned with him of
righteousness and temperance," as well as "a judgment to come." Acts xxii. 5.
So when he preached to the idolatrous people at Lystra, his subject was,
"their turning from vanities," or idols, "to the living God." And the method of
reasoning he used was, a representation of God to them not only as "the maker
of heaven and earth," but the God who had given to all nations sufficient
evidence of his being and providential government, for that "he had done them
good, and given them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their
hearts with food and gladness." Acts xviv. 15. 18.


BUT whenever he preached to the Jews, who were well acquainted with the
writings of the old testament, and received them as given by inspiration of
God, "he reasoned with them out of these scriptures." And it was his custom to
do so. A notable specimen of this we have in my text, to which I may add that
similar one, in Acts xiii. from the 16th to the 37th verse; where, from the
heads, at least, of a long sermon which he preached, it appears to have been a
chain of scripture-reasoning calculated and intended to prove the necessity of
the death and resurrection of Christ, and upon this basis to publish that most
interesting gospel-doctrine, in the 38th and 39th verses, "Be it known unto you
therefore, men and brethren, that, through this man, is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses."

AND reasoning from the scripture is the best way of preaching. The apostle
Paul should herein be imitated by the present ministers of the gospel. Not that
we may not, as prudence may direct, preach upon subjects that will require
other reasoning. There are truths it may be proper, at certain times, and upon
some occasions, to bring into the pulpit, the knowledge of which is derived
primarily, at least, from reason, not from revelation. And it cannot be
expected that preachers, in regard of these truths, should enlarge on
scripture-arguments, any more than Paul did, when he was proving to the
Athenians a principle of natural religion: Though, even in these points, all
the light should be fetched from the scripture that their nature will admit of.
But the main subjects to be insisted on by gospel ministers are scripture-ones,
"the mysteries that were hid from ages and generations, but have been made
manifest" by Jesus Christ and his apostles. And scripture-reasoning is the
fittest to be used upon these subjects: Nor indeed, without this, will any
other do.

IT may be worth observing here, the distinguishing truths of christianity,
which the apostle Paul preached, he received, not in a way merely human, but by
immediate revelation from God. It is by revelation also that gospel ministers
ever since have derived their knowledge of these truths; but in a different
way. It is not directly communicated to them from the fountain of light, but
mediately by the scriptures, which were "wrote by holy men as moved by the holy
Ghost." This difference between the apostle Paul, and gospel ministers in these
days, obviously points out a difference in that method of reasoning which was
used by him, and that which ought to be used by them. He freely and openly
spoke of the doctrines he delivered as what he had immediately received of the
Lord; which it would be high arrogance in them to presume to do. Not that he
expected, or desired, that his hearers should give credit to his mere
affirmation. He reasoned with them to convince them, upon the foot of just and
solid evidence, that he was authorized by God to be his messenger to make known
the counsels of his will relative to man's salvation. And he reasoned with them
also to show them the consistency of the truths he declared with the
revelations of Moses and the prophets; and not only so, but with the dictates
of right reason, as being worthy of God, honorary to his perfections and
government, and fit to be believed by all who profess to have understanding.
This same way of reasoning is proper for gospel ministers at present, and will
be so in all future time. But besides this, the scriptures being to them the
only true source of knowledge in the christian scheme of doctrine and practice,
these eminently are the source also from whence they should fetch their
reasonings upon this head. They may, in this way, convey to their hearers "the
truth as it is in Jesus;" and it should be their main study to do so. Having,
by a due use of their reasoning powers, always depending upon the divine
guidance and help, collected from the scriptures a clear, distinct, and full
idea of revealed truths, they should, in the same way communicate it in their
preaching. They cannot be too strong and cogent in thus reasoning from the
scriptures, if, at the same time, they reason with perspicuity, and so as to be
readily understood. It is, indeed, the best, the only proper way, in which they
should apply to people to let them into "the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God," as it has been manifested in the gospel-revelation.

SOME there are, I know, who have an ill opinion of the use of reason in
matters of religion. What, say they, has reason to do with revelation? It is
unfit to be employed by gospel-preachers, and not worthy of the notice of
gospel-hearers.

IT is readily acknowledged, it would be a great impropriety in christian
ministers, and justly offensive, if they should substitute reason in the room
of revelation, either by treating chiefly upon mere rational subjects, or by
making reason, not the scripture, the source of their arguings upon revealed
truths. But it must, at the same time, be said, they cannot take a more
effectual method to honor revelation, and render it profitable to their
hearers, than by the help of reasoning to lead them into a clear, just, and
thorough conception of its true meaning. It Is a gross mistake to imagine, that
revelation ever was intended to supersede the use of reasoning in
gospel-preachers with reference to it. How could they satisfy their hearers,
that what they receive as a divine revelation is not an imposition on their
understandings, but by the use of reasoning? Or if they have been before
persuaded, and upon good grounds, that the revelation they receive, really came
from God, how shall they let them into an apprehension of its meaning, but by
still reasoning with them? In what other way can they make it evident to them,
that this, and not that, is its true sense? Nay, if reasoning is to be thrown
by as useless, will not every sense that can be put on the scripture be equally
proper? Yea, may not the most contrary senses be admitted at the same time,
since reason only can point out the inconsistency between them? There is, in
short, no way but this of reasoning to open the scripture, trace out the
connection of its several parts, and ascertain precisely the sense in which
this and the other part ought to be understood. Nor can ministers properly
guard their people against any extravagancies, either in principle or practice,
but by a due application to their understandings. This only will give check to
wantoness in their imaginations; and unless they will hearken to what may be
offered in a way of just reasoning, can they be hindered from following every
idle fancy, till they have lost themselves in the wilds of falsehood and
inconsistency.

MINISTERS, it is true, may, by their reasoning, pervert the scripture; giving
it a wrong sense, or so mixing corruption with the right one, as that the truth
can scarce be discerned. But it will by no means follow from hence, that they
must lay aside reasoning as of no service in things pertaining to God and
religion. The proper improvement of their being thus liable to misuse the noble
power of reasoning is for people, on the one hand, not to esteem them "lords of
their faith," and implicitly give credit to all that they say; but, looking
upon them as frail, imperfect, and falible men, to receive nothing they deliver
for truth, only as they are convinced it is so upon an impartial close
comparison of it with the word of God: And for ministers, on the other hand, to
keep as much as may be from all undue influence in the exertion of their
reasonable powers. In order whereto, they cannot, in too serious and humble a
frame of mind, put themselves under the guidance of the Spirit of truth in
their enquiries into the mind of Christ as revealed in the scripture: Nor can
they be too much upon their guard, either against that "fear of man," on the
one hand, "which brings a snare," or that fondness for praise, and its pleasing
appendages, on the other, which is equally dangerous. They should also beware
of paying an undue regard to venerable names and writings, having recourse to
the BIBLE as their ORACLE, their TOUCHSTONE, their ONLY SURE RULE of judging,
to the exclusion of all other composures of all kinds whatever. And they should
repair to this sacred book with an honest mind, an upright intention to find
the truth; and having so done, they should, in their reasonings, set it before
their hearers in an easy, and yet strong, point of light, as nearly as may be
according to the purity and simplicity in which it lies in the scripture
itself. --

BUT it is time that I pass, from the manner, to the SUBJECT MATTER of the
apostle Paul's preaching. And this was, that "Jesus is the Christ"; that "he
must needs have suffered, and have risen again from the dead."

THE first truth, I would mention as insisted on by Paul in his preaching, was,
that "Jesus is the Christ"; that is, the Messiah pointed out in the writings of
the old testament, and prophesied of as the son of God, and Savior of men. This
was a truth necessary his hearers should know, an essential requisite in order
to their being christians. He accordingly not only alleged, but clearly and
fully proved to them, that that person, who had been spoken of among them by
the name of Jesus, was "the Christ of God."

IT should be remembered here, the apostle Paul was now preaching to Jews, among
whom there might be some proselyted Greeks, that is, Gentiles who had embraced
the Jewish religion so far, at least, as to own the authority of the scriptures
of the old-testement, Moses and the prophets. It was therefore "out of these
scriptures," that he "reasoned with them" in proof that that "Jesus whom he
preached was the Christ." Doubtless, in prosecution of his argument, he pointed
their view to those passages in the sacred books, in which the promised Messiah
was particularly described, and on purpose that he might be known and
distinguished from all others, when he should come; making application of them
to Jesus, and showing their exact and punctual accomplishment in him. And, as
among the descriptive marks given in the old testament of the Messiah, one was,
that, in his day, and upon setting up his kingdom, "the eyes of the blind
should be opened and the ears of the deaf unstopped; the lame man should leap
as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing"; I say, as these miraculous works
were to be wrought in the Messiah's day, we may be sure the apostle Paul
enlarged in his reasoning upon the wonders which had been done by Jesus
himself, and by his apostles in his name, and by power communicated to them
from him, in proof of his being the Christ, "he that was to come," as the
redeemer of Israel. And having made it indisputably evident, that, in
fulfillment of the ancient prophesies, "the blind had received their sight, the
deaf their hearing, the lame their feet, and the dumb their tongues"; and this,
by a touch only of the hand, or the speaking of a word; not in a single
instance or two, but in multitudes; not in the case of friends only, who might
be suspected of design, but of strangers, enemies, any who happened to fall in
the way of Jesus, or his apostles: I say, having clearly pointed out the
fulfillment of the scripture-prophesies, in these miracles which had been
wrought in the times of the gospel, by Jesus, or his apostles, his reasoning
was little short of demonstration; and if his hearers were not convinced, it
could not be for want of evidence, but the perverseness of their minds.

IT would not be misspent labor in the present ministers of the gospel, if they
sometimes reasoned with their hearers in proof that "Jesus is the Christ." The
state of things it is true, is quite different now from what it was in the
apostle Paul's days. Those, he preached to, were, for the generality, strangers
to the religion of Jesus, having scarce ever heard of his name. One of the
first things therefore he had to do was, to convince his hearers, upon the foot
of reasonable evidence, that "Jesus was the Christ." This was "the
cornerstone" he had to lay. And till this was laid, in vain must he have
endeavored to raise the gospel-superstructure. Those we commonly preach to are
christians in name. They profess faith in Jesus as the Christ, and receive his
religion as what came from God. It is not therefore necessary, that, "leaving
the principles of the doctrines of Christ," we should mainly endeavor to "lay
again the foundation of faith" in a proof of the divine mission of that Jesus
whose religion we preach: Though if the evidence for this truth was oftener set in
a clear and full point of light before our hearers it would not be a needless
labor. It could do no hurt to "the strong in faith;" and it might be beneficial
to those of another character. It would happily tend to confirm the weak, and
establish the wavering. Where the faith of any was nothing more than the effect
of education and custom, it might fix it upon its proper basis, and render it
not easily liable to be subverted. And, above all, it might convince
unbelievers, if it may be supposed any such there are among us; at least, it
would make it appear, that the faith of christians was not owing to their
credulity; but that they had good "reason for their hope," as founded on the
gospel-revelation.

ANOTHER truth the apostle Paul enlarged on was, "that Christ must needs have
suffered." The great thing that hindered the Jews, who were now his auditors,
from believing in Jesus as the Christ, was, his having suffered death. "Christ
crucified is accordingly often spoken of, in the new-testament-books, as "a
stumbling block to the Jews." They expected the Messiah would appear a mighty
temporal deliverer; conquering their enemies, and making them the greatest and
most flourishing kingdom in all the world. But, as "Jesus of Nazareth," instead
of assuming the pomp and grandeur of an earthly king, submitted to a suffering
life, and an ignominious death, they were "offended." This was "the stone of
stumbling, and rock of offense," or, in more plain words, the great obstacle in
the way of their faith. The apostle Paul, in order to remove away this ground
of offense, "reasoned with them out of the scriptures" upon the necessity of
the cross of Christ; "opening and alleging, that he must needs have suffered,"
that is, according to the prophesies of the old testament, which could not
otherwise have received their accomplishment. He may be supposed to have
reasoned with them after some such manner as this. It may be stumbling to you
to hear Christ preached as one that has been crucified and slain; but it
"behoved Christ to suffer," it was really a matter of necessity that he should
die. Your own scriptures speak of his sufferings and death. Those very writings
which you own had their original from God, declare, that "the Messiah should be
cut off." He must needs therefore have died. He could not have been the
Messiah, if he had not. This very thing, in the character of Christ, his
suffering death, at which you are offended, is what must have been. The
writings of Moses and the prophets rendered it necessary. Your rulers, it is
true, were instrumental in his death; but they were so "because they knew him
not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day;" yea,
"these they fulfilled in condemning him."

NOT that the apostle Paul contented himself merely with speaking of the
sufferings of Christ as a necessary fact, according to the prophesies of
scripture. He would have been very deficient in his discourse, if he had gone
no further. Without all doubt, he took care to let his hearers into the grand
design of the death of Christ; representing its necessity as an expedient
contrived by the wisdom of God to atone for the sins of men, and in this way to
procure their pardon. For this also was pointed out, though obscurely, in the
old testament books. The sacrifices under the law, the expiatory ones in
special, were, in the view of God, and the design of their appointment,
prefigurations of the death of Christ, as an offering and sacrifice to atone
for transgression. And Paul, as he might with propriety and force, probably
spoke to these Jews concerning the legal sacrifices in their reference to
Christ as types and shadows, which must have been answered in him as the great
propitiation for the sins of men. And, as it was particularly prophesied by the
prophet Isaiah, that "he should be wounded for our transgressions, bear our
iniquities, and make his soul an offering for our sins;" and by the prophet
Daniel, that he should "finish transgression, make an end of sin, and bring in
everlasting righteousness;" he, doubtless, in his reasoning from these texts,
opened to them the great gospel-doctrine of "forgiveness through the blood of
Christ." He did not merely allege and prove, that Christ had "suffered
according to the scripture;" but that he "suffered for sin, the just for the
unjust," that God might, in a way honorary to his perfections and government,
dispense forgiveness to the sinful sons of men. In a word, he so reasoned upon
this subject of Christ's death, and the necessity of it, as to open to his
hearers those great gospel truths which are connected there with, and dependent
thereon, as the basis of our hope in the divine mercy for pardon and salvation.

AND in this way ought gospel ministers in these days to preach upon the
sufferings and death of Christ. It Is not enough to tell people, that he "became
obedient to death, the death of the cross;" or that, by dying, he confirmed the
truth of the christian revelalation, and gave a perfect pattern of suffering
graces. These things, it is acknowledged, are truths, and proper to be
preached, and in their place ought to be preached. But they are truths of small
importance in comparison with the great doctrine of "remission of sins," as
founded on the "propitiation" made for them by the "blood of Christ," when he
was nailed to the cross. This was the grand point aimed at, by the wisdom of
God, in the sufferings and death of his son Jesus. And it is this that takes off
the scandal of the cross, and represents it as the result of the allwise
counsel of the merciful God for the pardon of sinful men.

IN fine, another thing "opened and alleged" by the apostle Paul, in his
preaching was, that "Christ must needs have risen again from the dead." He
probably placed before the view of his present hearers the evidence of the
truth of the fact. This he did, when he preached upon the same subject to the
people at Corinth. We have, from his own pen, a recapitulation of the proofs he
offered for their conviction upon this head; as you may read at large in his
first epistle to them, the fifteenth chapter toward the beginning. But,
besides the truth of the fact itself, he enlarged on the scriptural necessity
of it; making it indisputably clear, by his reasoning, that he "must needs have
risen from the dead," that the ancient prophesies foretelling this event might
have their accomplishment. It would be needless, though it might be easy, to
point out the particular texts, in the sacred books of the old testament, it is
probable he argued from. The sum of his reasoning might be to this effect. Let
it not be thought an incredible thing among you, that Christ, after he had been
dead, was raised again to life. His death and resurrection were inseparably
connected with each other in the plan of God, according to your own scriptures.
The Messiah was "first to suffer, and then," by rising from the dead, "to enter
into glory." He could not have been the Christ of God, the Messiah described in
the writings you acknowledge to be of divine authority, if what I preach to you
is not the truth. By his suffering death, you have a full completion of those
scripture-prophesies, which must have been fulfilled.

NOR did the apostle treat of the resurrection of Christ merely as a fact, or a
fact in completion of the scriptures; but, if we may judge from his preaching
upon this same article at other times, he considered it as a truth essentially
connected with the honor of Christ, and the peculiar important doctrines of his
religion. If Christ is not "risen from the dead," he was not the son of God and
Savior of men in reality and truth, but in pretense only. -- If Christ is not
"risen from the dead," we are "yet in our sins;" as his death was not an
atonement for them, to which God has testified his acceptance. -- If Christ is
not "risen from the dead," he could not be "the first fruits of them that sleep
in him," the given pledge and assurance of their resurrection to a glorious
life that shall never have an end. -- If Christ is not "risen from the dead,"
he is not exalted at the right hand of God in heaven; he does not appear there
as our advocate with the father, whom he hears always; he is not the
authorized king and judge of the world; nor is there any good reason to expect,
that any of the sons of Adam shall be rewarded or punished by him, "according
to their deeds done in the body." In short, if Christ is not "risen from the
dead," the whole gospel-scheme of salvation is a nullity. He "died in vain";
our "faith" in him as the Christ "is vain"; and so is our "faith in any of the
doctrines of his religion.

IT cannot be supposed, that the apostle Paul, an extraordinary messenger of
God, should; in treating on Christ's resurrection from the dead, neglect to
"open" this doctrine in its necessary connection with those great truths of
christianity, which are dependant on it. We may besure, he not only affirmed,
and proved, that that Jesus, who was once dead, is now alive; but that he is
alive in heaven, the approbated Savior, and authorized intercessor, king and
judge of men, by whom they will all be raised from the dead, and made happy, or
miserable, in another world, as their character in this has been either good,
or bad.

AND "Christ risen from the dead," with the great truths comprehended in it,
are still necessary to be insisted on by those who are gospel-preachers: Nor
will they deserve this name, if they seldom, or in a cursory way only, make
them the subject of their discourses. These are doctrines that eminently
reflect honor on Christ, and they enter deep into the scheme of divine mercy as
it relates to man. They ought therefore to be the frequent theme of the pulpit.
It will not suffice, that they are mentioned only now and then, as it were by
the bye; but they should often be enlarged on as truths highly worthy of the
attention of hearers, and that need inculcation that their faith in them may be
well rooted and established. For their redemption is as truly dependent on a "a
risen and glorified" Christ, as a "crucified" one. They could no more have been
saved without the one than the other.

ONE of the brightest patterns of good preaching, both as to its MANNER and
SUBJECT MATTER, has now been plainly, though imperfectly, set before you. And it
would be easy to show, wherein we might all receive benefit from it, whether we
sustain the character of speakers, or hearers. But the time obliges me to
confine what I would further say to the person, who may presently be separated
to the gospel ministry, and to the christian society of which he is to take the
charge.

IT was, Sir, with a more special eye to you, devoting yourself this day to
"the ministry of the word," that I selected for improvement the noble pattern
of good preaching that has been brought to view. Permit me to recommend it to
your imitation. The copy was set by an apostle of Christ, one immediately
commissioned by him, and that all along acted under his extraordinary guidance
and direction. While therefore you conform yourself to it, you will approve
yourself a good minister of Jesus Christ. You cannot, speak to your people upon
more proper subjects than those that were the main scope of Paul's preaching.
Your hearers indeed are christians by profession; for which reason, you may,
ordinarily, in your discourses, take it for granted, that they are believers in
"Jesus as the Christ:" Though, if you sometimes enlarged on the evidences of
this foundation-truth, it might be of good service. But you cannot dwell too
much in your preaching upon the death and resurrection of Christ. They are
truths of essential importance in the religion of Jesus. And they are
comprehensive ones also; for they include in them the whole doctrine of the
gospel. It should be your great business to unfold their meaning in its just
latitude; and if you do this from the scriptures, making them your guide and
rule, in all your reasoning upon them, you will declare to your people "the
whole counsel of God" relative to their salvation; for it is all summarily
contained in these articles; it is all deducible from them, and it has all been
actually deduced by the sacred penman, in the new-testament-books.

You will imitate the great apostle of the Gentiles in the manner of your
preaching also; making it your principal care to apply to the understandings
and consciences of your hearers, and not to their passions and affections. You
possess the intellectual powers in too great a degree to be in danger of
turning them off with loose, unconnected, empty harangues, which, if they
should give heat, can convey little or no light; nor would they be easy under
such preaching: They have been too much used to another and more excellent way
to be so. This may possibly appear a disadvantage; you may be ready to think it
had been better had it been your lot to succeed one not so distinguished as
Doctor MAYHEW was known to be for his talents as a preacher, and that made so
conspicuous a use of them; but it may be of service to you, it cannot fail of
being so, if you improve it as a stimulus to excite your ambition, and animate
your endeavors to excel as he did. With the apostle Paul, he considered his
hearers as intelligent agents, and made it evident he entertained this opinion
of them by forming his discourses so as to enlighten their minds in the
knowledge of what he himself really believed, from the scriptures, to be "the
truth as it is in Jesus" without adulteration. Go you, and do likewise; making
it your care, in preaching, not so much to warm the affections of your hearers,
as to touch their hearts by the light of truth, fetched from the scriptures as
nearly as may be in its original purity. After the example of inspired Paul,
disdain the use of craft to raise a useless, however pleasing, heat in their
passions; and allow not yourself to substitute "wisdom of words," either in
your composures, or the delivery of them, in the room of that scriptural,
rational light, without which heat in the passions will do no good; yea, should
it be raised to too great an height, it would rather tend to make men wild,
than religious; as has too often been the case in fact. Let your "reasonings
out of the scriptures" be delivered from a heart deeply impressed with a
serious sense of the infinite importance of gospel truths; and you will then
naturally speak in the best adapted, and most powerful manner, to excite
affection, so far as it can be serviceable to any of the purposes of real
christianity.

AND you would do well to remember, that the apostle Paul was as bright a
pattern of GOOD LIVING, as of good preaching. Often take a view of his
character in this point of light. And if, by being a "a follower of him as he
was of Christ," your conduct is such as that you may be able to appeal to the
consciences of your people, and say as he could, "you are witnesses, and God
also, how holily, and justly, and unblamably, I have behaved among you," it
would establish in their hearts a reverential love to you, and tend, more
powerfully than you may be ready to imagine, to give life and efficacy to all
your applications to them, whether public or private.

THE effect of your mission this day is a secret "hid in God." It may
eventually turn out an occasion of making "hard hearts harder, and blind eyes
blinder." An affecting thought this! but should not be too discouraging.
Prophets and apostles have mourned, that they should "labor in vain, and spend
their strength for naught:" Yea, our Master and Lord had reason to adopt that
language of the prophet Isaiah, "who has believed our report? and to whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed?" Even an unsuccessful ministry should not
therefore lie with two great weight upon your mind. But our hope is; that you
are sent of God to be his instrument in beginning, and carrying on, in
multitudes, the work of grace in this world, that they may be formed to a
meetness for "the un-incorruptible inheritance reserved in heaven for them."
"For this cause, we bow our knees" in humble prayer "to the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ;" and, I doubt not, this great assembly unite as one in
saying, AMEN, so be it, O Lord! But whether your success in the gospel ministry
is great, or small; whether few are saved by means of it, or many hardened; if
you are faithful to Christ, and to the souls committed to your care, you will
assuredly "be glorious in the eyes of the Lord."

Go forth, my son, in the strength of God. He that sends you has said for your
encouragement, "lo, I am with you always." And if the great Savior is present
with you to support, comfort, and help you, what should dishearten you? Let
nothing move you from the path of duty; yea, "count not your life dear to you,
so you may but fulfill the ministry you have received of the Lord Jesus;" and he
will, in the day of his appearing, pronounce you, before the general assembly
of angels and men, "a good and faithful servant," and "crown you with glory,
honor, and immortality, in the kingdom of his father."

I NOW turn myself to the christian society* who usually worship God in this
house. Brethren, as we lately mourned with you under the rebuke of heaven,
which awfully bereaved you of your pastor, highly esteemed for the eminency of
those gifts with which it pleased the Father of Spirits to furnish him for the
work of the ministry, we now partake of your joy in that goodness of the great
"head over all things," which has given you, with so much unanimity, peace and
love among yourselves, another pastor, as we trust, "after his own heart," one
who is so well qualified to "reason with you from the scriptures" upon the
important concerns of your souls salvation. Receive him as sent to you from
Christ, "not to have dominion over your faith," but to be "the helper of your
joy." Cultivate the affection you bear toward him; and, while he acts in
character, as we trust he will, let it discover its increasing strength and
fervor in those offices of christian kindness, which may render his life
comfortable and pleasant to him. Bear with his infirmities; for, in common with
others, he is a partaker of frail humanity. Cease not to make mention of him in
your applications to the throne of mercy: He needs your prayers, he desires
your prayers. Be upon your guard against evil surmisings against him, taking
rise either from your selves, or others; and keep at the utmost distance from
all needless and unjust prejudices: for nothing will more unhappily tend to
obstruct his usefulness among you. Be constant in your attendance on his public
administrations. Let your ears be ever open to his reasonings with you; but
make it your practice to compare them with the scripture, and do not suffer
yourselves to be influenced by them; only as you perceive their agreement with
that sacred and only test of christian truth. Call neither him, nor any man on
earth, "your master;" for you have "a master in heaven, even Christ:" and he is
the only one you may unreservedly submit to. Above all, let your profiting
under his ministry appear to all around you. Should he perceive no good effects
of his labors among you, it would be an occasion of "great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in his heart;" but should he be able to say, these and those
"I have begotten" to newness of life "through the gospel;" these and those, who
were before born to God, are daily making progress in the life of grace,
growing more and more up to "the fullness of the stature of men perfect in
Christ," it would give him both pleasure and vigor in doing the work, God is
committing to his care. He would, in this case, need no commendation from you;
you would appear in the world living evidences of his serviceableness as a good
officer in the kingdom of God: And what is much more, you would be his "joy,
and crown of rejoicing, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his
coming."

"AND now brethren, we commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified."

AND may "the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make us all perfect in every good work to do his will; working in us that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever,
and ever."

AMEN.
THE CHARGE BY THE Reverend Mr. GAY of HINGHAM.
THE Father of Lights, and God of all Grace, having furnished you, Mr. SIMEON
HOWARD, with ministerial Gifts, and opened to you a Door, great and effectual,
(we hope) for the useful Improvement of them, in the Service of Christ, and of
Souls, to which you have devoted yourself; and your Ordination to the Work of
the Ministry, and pastoral Oversight of the Congregation of the Lord's People,
who usually worship Him in this House, having been solemnized by Prayer, and
the Laying on the Hands of the Presbytery: We of that Order, appointed thereto
by the venerable Council here convened, are openly to declare (which we also
signify by continuing the Imposition of Hands) the awful Charges of God,
contained in his holy Oracles, which are laid upon you, to the faithful
Execution of your sacred and important Trust.

Now, therefore, before God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, -- the elect Angels,
and all this Assembly, we say unto you;

Take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it. Take heed unto thy self, and to the whole Flock, over which the Holy
Spirit has constituted you Overseer, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood. As constrained by the Love of Christ, feed his
Sheep, and feed his Lambs. In doing which, with tender Care, and unwearied
Diligence, the whole Business of the Pastoral Office consists.

More particularly,

We charge you, as Paul did Timothy, to preach the Word; -- be instant in
Season and out of Season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all Longsuffering and
Doctrine. In this Branch of your Duty, study to show thyself approved unto God,
and by Manifestation of the Truth to commend thyself to every Man's Conscience,
in the Sight of God, a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the Word of Truth; and giving to every one his proper Portion. In Doctrine,
show Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that cannot be condemned.
Shun not, through Fear of Man, to declare the whole Counsel of God; that you
may be pure from the Blood of all Men. Warn the Wicked that he turn from his
Wickedness, and live: Warn the Righteous that he turn not from his
Righteousness, and die. Whether they will hear, or whe-they will forbear,
deliver thine own Soul.

GIVE thyself to Prayer, as well as to the Ministry of the Word. Cease not to
pray for your People. Bear them continually on your Heart, in your Addresses to
the Throne of Grace; as Aaron did the Names of the Tribes of Israel on his
Breast before the Mercy-seat. Be their affectionate Intercessor on all
Occasions: And leading and animating the public Devotions, (...) Prayers,
Supplications, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings be made for all Men, and set
forth before the Lord as Incense, which the Priest burned on the Altar.

PRESIDE well in the Exercise of that Spiritual Government and Discipline,
which Christ has appointed in his Church; doing nothing by Partiality: Yet of
some have peculiar Compassion, and others save with fear, pulling them out of
the Fire. Use aright the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; opening the Door of
Entrance into Christian Communion, in the special Ordinances of the Gospel, to
the duly qualified; and shuting it against the profane and unworthy. Administer
the holy Baptism and Supper of the Lord, to all the proper Subjects thereof.
Know how to behave yourself as a wise and faithful Steward in the House of God;
not as Lord over God's Heritage. Usurp Dominion over no Man's Faith, or
Conscience; but be the Helper of your Peoples Joy; and bless the Congregation
in the Name of the Lord.

BE diligent to know the State of thy Flock, that your private as well as
public Ministrations may be suited thereto, in warning every Man, and teaching
every Man in all Wisdom, exhorting, and comforting, and charging every one as a
Father does his Children.

THESE Things observe, without prefering one before another, to the Neglect of
any of them. -- Watch in all Things. Give no offense in any Thing; that the
Ministry be not blamed, and your Usefulness obstructed. In all Things show
thyself a Pattern of good Works. Be thou an Example to the Believers, in Word,
in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

WE give you Charge in the Sight of God, who quickneth all Things, and before
Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed the good Confession; that
thou keep this Commandment, and sacred Depositum, in all its Branches, without
Spot, unrebukeable.

THE Work, Sir, from which the Servant of Christ that was here employed in
before you cease, is now delivered into your Hands. And you may undertake it
with the greatest Concern about your Acceptance and Success in it, because you
come after one so highly and justly esteemed for his excellent Performances of
it; and so dear to his loving, and beloved People, that for their Loss of him
in the midst of his Days, and distinguished Usefulness, the Tears are not yet
dried from their Eyes. But be of good Courage, be strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his Might, of whom is all the ablest Minister's Sufficiency. And
be assured of this, that the greatest Steadiness and Candor are ordinarily to
be found in a well instructed People. The more skilfully and firmly a good
Foundation of Christian Knowledge and Practice has been laid here by a wise
Master Builder; the greater Encouragement you have to build thereupon, to the
further Edification of this Church. But, take heed how you build on the
Foundation, other than which can no Man lay, which is Jesus Christ: And carry
on the Super structure with suitable Materials; not Wood, Hay, Stubble -- the
Doctrines, Commandments and Inventions of Men, nor the unprofitable Niceties of
human Science, that shall be burnt by the Fire which shall try every Man's Work
of what sort it is; and so yourselves should very scarcely be saved, -- but
Gold, Silver, precious Stones, -- the pure unadulterated, substantial Truths of
the Gospel, which will abide the Test, and so you shall suffer no Loss, but
receive a full Reward. You are entered into the Labors of One, who was
exemplarily industrious to cultivate the Minds of his Hearers with Spiritual
and Divine Instructions; and sow in their Hearts the good Seed -- the Word of
the Kingdom, which you being diligent to water, and God gracious to give the
Increase, you will reap that whereon you bestowed not Labor -- have the
Advantage of your Predecessor's faithful and indefatigable Pains, to the
greater Success of your own. And herein that Saying will be found true, One
sows, and Another reapeth. And so both he that sowed, and you that reap may
rejoice together. -- The Souls of this People, by your successive Labors,
gathered in as Fruit unto Life eternal, shall be a Crown of Rejoicing unto both
in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his Coming.

AMEN.
THE Right Hand of Fellowship; By the Rev. Mr. APPLETON.
THE grand Design of the GOSPEL MINISTRY shows it to be an high and honorable,
as well as holy Calling. The Angels in Heaven esteem it their Honor to be
ministering Spirits; and rejoice when they are sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation. And yet, this sacred precious Treasure of the
Gospel we have in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of
God, and not of Man. To some of the sinful Children of Men is this Grace given
to preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

AND when God is pleased to confer this Favor upon any, by putting them into
the Ministry; the Rules of Christianity, as well as of Decency and Civility,
teach us to congratulate them upon the Honor that Christ has done them:
Publicly to own them as his Ministers, and welcome them into the Service of
their Lord: And that such who are in the Ministry before, should take them into
Fellowship with themselves, and publicly receive them as their Brethren and
Companions in the Kingdom and Service of Jesus Christ.

AND the Behavior of the Apostles toward one another was but agreeable hereto:
For when James, Cephas, and John perceived the Grace; that is the Grace of the
Apostleship which was given to Paul. That is, when they perceived that he was
called and commissioned to be an Apostle as much as they themselves; they gave
to him, and Barnabas his Companion in the Ministry, the Right Hands of
Fellowship, as a public Sign and Token hereof.

AND although it is not pretended that this significative Action of the Apostle
amounts to the force of a Precept or Instruction; yet we look upon this
apostolical Precedent as that which very well warrants the Custom of these
Churches upon such an Occasion as this before us.

WHEREFORE, in Conformity hereto let me say, that as the Apostles perceived; so
Dear Sir, we perceive the Grace that is in you. We perceive the Favor of God
in the intellectual Faculties, and mental Powers he has given you. We perceive
the Grace and Favor of God in bestowing a liberal Education upon you; thereby
training you up for the Service of the Sanctuary. We perceive also that by the
unanimous Voice of this People you have been called to the Work of the Gospel
Ministry among them. We also perceive that you have now in a regular solemn
Manner been introduced into that sacred Office by Prayer, and the laying on of
the Hands of the Presbytery.

ACCORDINGLY, I do now in the Name and at the Desire of this venerable Council
convened on this Occasion give you MY RIGHT HAND: Declaring hereby that we look
upon you as a true Minister of Jesus Christ, regularly introduced into that
sacred Office: invested with the same Power: entitled to the same Privileges;
as well as obliged to the same Duties with those of us who are in the Ministry.

AND, Reverend and Dear Sir, We heartily congratulate you upon the Honor that
Christ has done you, in that, having counted you worthy, he has put you into
the Ministry: Rejoicing with you for all those Gifts and Graces we trust you
have received from our ascended Lord; which give us the hopeful and the
pleasing Prospect of your being a faithful Servant in his House.

IN the Name of the Elders more especially let me assure you, that we welcome
you as a fellow Labourer with us in the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts: And we
do with sincere Affection, and fervent Charity, embrace you as a Brother and
Companion in the Gospel Ministry: and promise you all the Love and Respect, the
Counsel and Assistance you can reasonably desire of us: and we depend upon you
to be a Fellow-helper with us in promoting the common Salvation, the grand
Interest and Glory of him who is both your Lord, and our's: and that we may
have great Comfort in you, and Assistance from you as we may stand in need.

BUT, Dear Brother, since you are come among us, and are become one of us, we
will freely declare, and not hide it from you, that there are peculiar
Difficulties, Temptations and Dangers attending the Office you have undertaken.
-- For what is our Business, but to open Men's Eyes and turn them from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God: To reprove Men for their Sins,
to persuade Men in Christ's Stead to be reconciled unto God, to call upon all
to repent of their Sins, and to renounce even their most beloved Lusts? In the
plain and faithful Discharge of these Duties, you may expect great Opposition
from all the Powers of Darkness, as well as from the corrupt and perverse
Tempers of Men, which try your Faith, your Patience, your Prudence and every
Grace within you.

WE tell you this not to discourage you; but, beloved Son, we warn you, that
you may be prepared for the various Trials and Conflicts you may meet with. And
we assure you that we shall be ready to counsel and direct you, to assist and
encourage you as we shall be able. And when we can do no farther, we will with
our fervent Prayers commend you to the Grace of Christ which is sufficient for
us, and you: For greater is he that is with us than all that are or can be
against us.

AND we can assure you further for your Encouragement, That he is a good Master
whom we serve, and who has said, Lo I am with you always; who knows our Work,
our Labor and our Patience; and who will reward, us not altogether according
to our Success; but according to our Diligence and Fidelity. Our Work is with
the Lord, and our Reward with our God.

HERE then we leave you to stand and labor in your Lot, till the End of the
Days appointed for you: sending up our Wishes and Prayers for you that the Hand
of the Lord may be with you, to strengthen your Hands and encourage your Heart*
and succeed your Work. -- And, Dear Brother, if you and we do but obtain Mercy
of the Lord to be faithful unto Death, we shall meet and dwell, and shine
together in the Kingdom of our Father forever. AMEN.

I HAVE nothing further to add; but a short Word to the Church and Christian
Society usually meeting in this Place.

Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ!

WE trust that we sincerely sympathised with you the last Year, in the sore and
grievous Breach that God, in his holy and righteous Providence, made upon you,
in the Death of your late worthy and beloved Pastor. And we now congratulate
you upon the Resettlement of the Gospel Ministry, and Ordinances among you. We
see, that although Ministers are not suffered to continue by Reason of Death; yet
the Redeemer, who is King and Head of the Church, lives: with whom is the
Residue of the Spirit. And he, who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, has
found a Man to set over this Congregation, that he may go in before you, and go
out before you, and lead you out and lead you in; that ye may no longer be as
Sheep without a Shepherd. BEHOLD THE MAN, your Pastor, your spiritual Guide and
Leader! Receive him as we trust and hope he is a precious Gift of our ascended
Savior; and love and honor him as your Minister. -- We beseech you Brethren
to know him who is called to labor among you, and who is set over you in the
Lord to admonish you: and esteem him very highly in Love for his Works Sake;
and be at Peace among yourselves: And the God of Love and Peace be with you
all, AMEN.


