Dr. Chauncy's REMARKS On certain PASSAGES in The Bishop of LANDAFF'S
SOCIETY-SERMON.

A LETTER To a FRIEND, CONTAINING REMARKS on certain PASSAGES in a SERMON
Preached, by the Right Reverend Father in GOD, John Lord Bishop of Landaff,
before the Incorporated Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign
Parts, at their Anniversary Meeting in the Parish Church of St. Mary-Le-Bow,
February 20. 1767. In which the highest Reproach is undeservedly cast upon the
AMERICAN COLONIES.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. Pastor of the first Church of Christ in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed by KNEELAND and ADAMS in Milk-Street, for THOMAS LEVERETT, in
Cornhill. MDCCLXVII.

SIR,
THIS waits upon you with my thanks for sending me the Lord Bishop of Landaff's
sermon, preached last February before the Society for the propagation of the
Gospel in foreign parts; though I am sorry it was accompanied with your desire,
after I had carefully read it, to give you my thoughts concerning those
passages in it which relate to the American Colonies. You could not have
selected a person better fitted to answer your design, so far as a warm
affection for this as well as the Mother Country, and a strong attachment to
the interest and honor of both, may be esteemed requisite qualifications; but
you might, in regard of leisure and abilities, with much more propriety, have
enjoined this service on some others of your acquaintance: However, my
obligations to you are such, that I could not excuse my self from attempting
that, which, I join with you in thinking, justice to the Colonies requires
should be done upon this occasion.

Had the character you mention, as given the British Colonies, been contained
in a discourse delivered by a common Clergyman, before a common audience, it
would, I believe, have given you no uneasiness; as you would not have been
apprehensive of any harm from it: But, as it is exhibited in a sermon, preached
before the incorporated Society for the propagation of the Gospel in foreign
parts, many of whom are high in rank, and sustain the greatest character, no
wonder your concern was moved; especially, as this respectable body of men have
virtually made themselves patrons of the sermon. So we are authorized to think
from their voting the preacher thanks for it, and desiring him to deliver to
them a copy of it for the press; unless it may be said, this was only a matter
of form and ceremony; to suppose which would reflect dishonor on its dignified
author. We, in this part of the world, must be shamefully impious and immoral,
to deserve what is here said of us; or, if we do not, very unhappy to be
publicly placed in so injurious a point of light. Whether we are the one, or
the other, I shall now examine.

His Lordship says, Page 6. "Since the discovery of the new world, the same
provision has not been made of ministers, necessary to the support of
Christianity among those who removed thither; especially in the British
Colonies". If the complaint here made, so far as the Colonies without
discrimination are concerned in it, lies in this, that they have not provided
themselves with ministers episcopally ordained, they readily own the fact. But,
surely, his Lordship does not think, that such ministers are so necessary that
Christianity cannot be supported without them. This doctrine was taught, and
believed, in former times, when bigotry and oppression were the characteristic
of some that were placed in high offices both in church and state; but, in the
present day of enlarged knowledge and freedom of inquiry, it is hoped there is
no Archbishop, or Bishop in England, of such contracted principles. Certainly,
his Lordship is more catholic in his sentiments: Otherwise He might have been
more extensive in his complaint, by taking in Scotland, Holland, and many of
the reformed protestant churches in Europe; for they, as truly as the British
Colonies in America, are not provided with ministers "necessary to the support
of Christianity" among them, if Episcopal ones only are sufficient for the
purpose. It is therefore probable, the meaning of the charge against the
Colonies is, that they had provided themselves with no ministers at all, or had
been so scanty in their provision, that Christianity, on this account, must
sink and die, having no better a support. But this, affirmed of the Colonies
without distinction, or limitation, is so contrary to the truth of fact, and
might have so easily been known to be so, that I cannot but wonder at his
Lordship's charge. It can, with honor to him, be in no way accounted for but by
supposing, that he was some how or other strangely misinformed. Blessed be God,
we in New England, now have, and all along from the first settlement of the
Country have had, a full provision of Gospel Ministers. Within the limits of
New England, there are now, at the lowest computation, not less than five
hundred and fifty ministers, some Presbyterian, mostly Congregational, who have
been regularly separated to the pastoral charge of as many christian societies;
having been first educated, and graduated, at one or other of our colleges.
They may be justly farther characterised as men of a good moral conversation.
For so sacred a regard is paid here to the apostle Paul's directions to Timothy
and Tius, that a minister is surely dismissed from his office, if it appears,
that he is not "blameless as a steward of God, sober, holy, just and temperate
in all things." It has been said by strangers who have come among us, and by
some Church-Clergymen too, that the work of the ministry is not more faithfully
and diligently performed in any part of the christian world.
Had they been consecrated after the mode of the established Church at home,
and his Lordship had known their number and just character, he would, I doubt
not, have reversed what he has here laid, and have spoken largely in
commendation of, at least, these parts of the American world.

The sermon goes on, page ibid. "A scandalous neglect, (this of not making a
provision of ministers) which has brought great and deserved reproach both on
the adventurers, and on the government whence they went; and under whose
protection and power they still remained in their new habitations". How far the
government at home have brought upon themselves "deserved reproach" for this
"scandalous neglect", I presume not to say; but this I will venture to say,
that they were as deficient in "protecting" the adventurers, as in "providing
ministers" for them. It is well known here, if not in England, that it was from
themselves, without any assistance from the government whence they came, that
they founded and settled this new world, amidst a thousand hardships, and in
opposition to the furious malice of the Indian savages, with whom they were at
war, at one time and another, at a vast expense of blood and treasure, as long
as they lived; and their posterity after them were many years exposed to like
difficulties and dangers, and went cheerfully through them without help
afforded to them from the native home of their fathers.

His Lordship proceeds, page ibid. To the adventurers, what reproach could be
cast, heavier than they deserved? Who, with their native soil, abandoned their
native manners and religion; and ever long were found in many parts living
without remembrance or knowledge of God, without any Divine worship, in
dissolute wickedness, and the most brutal profligacy of manners. Instead of
civilizing and converting barbarous infidels, as they undertook to do, they
became themselves infidels and barbarians. And is it not some aggravation of
their shame, that this their neglect of religion was contrary to the pretenses
and conditions under which they obtained Royal grants, and public authority to
their adventures? The pretenses and conditions were, that their design was, and
that they should endeavor, the enlargement of Commerce, and the propagation of
christian faith. The former they executed with sincerity and zeal; and in the
latter most notoriously failed. A stranger to the history of these adventurers
would be obviously and unavoidably led, from the description in this paragraph,
to conceive of them, "in many parts" at least, as impious, profligate and
dissolutely wicked to the highest degree of guilt. A blacker character could
not have been given of them.

But, in "what parts" were the adventurers thus lost to all sense of God and
religion? His Lordship has not told us in direct terms; but he has so clearly
and fully pointed out the adventurers he had in view, by certain descriptive
marks, that we can be at no loss to know his meaning in the limiting words,
"many parts" Such are these that follow, "their not civilizing and converting
the barbarous infidels, as they UNDERTOOK TO DO"; their neglect of this
instance of religion "in contrariety to the PRETENSES and CONDITIONS under
which they obtained ROYAL GRANTS"; and, finally, those pretenses and conditions
declaring, that "their DESIGN WAS, and that THEY WOULD ENDEAVOR, THE
PROPAGATION OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH". There were no adventurers to America, who
undertook to convert the native-barbarians, and to whom Royal grants were made
upon this condition, unless it were those who came into New England. These
therefore must be the adventurers his Lordship had more especially in his eye.

And of these he declares, "that, with their native soil, they abandoned their
native manners and religion". His Lordship could not affirm this from personal
knowledge, as these adventurers were all dead long before he came into being.
And it is difficult to say whence he could collect so astonishing an account.
It is not contained in any history that was ever wrote, either of them, or of
the settlement of the Country by them. No Missionary from the Society, it is
heartily believed, could be so basely wicked, as to transmit it home, it is so
slanderous and false: Nor can it easily be conceived how his Lordship could
come by it, unless from some one, or more, who, being disaffected to the
Colonies, and maliciously set against them, took an unbounded liberty in
speaking evil of them, even from their first beginnings. These adventurers have
sometimes been blamed for having too much religion; but never before, within my
knowledge, for having none, or for having lost what they had in their "native"
land.

It is acknowledged, if their "native religion" lay in a blind submission to
Church Power, arbitrarily exercised, they did "abandon" it; and their virtue
hereby discovered will be spoken of to their honor, throughout all generations,
by those acquainted with it, who really believe, in its just latitude, this
undoubted Gospel Truth, namely, that Jesus Christ only is supreme Head and Lord
of the christian Church.

But if by "abandoning their native religion" is meant, their renouncing the
doctrines of Christianity as held forth in the thirty nine articles of the
Church of England, the reverse of what is here said is the truth. These indeed
are the doctrines that were handed down from them to their children and
children's children; insomuch that they are to this day the standard of
orthodoxy; and there are comparatively few but are orthodox in this sense,
unless among those who profess themselves members of the Episcopal Churches. Or
if by "abandoning their native religion" the thing intended is, "that ever long
they were found without remembrance, or knowledge of God, or any divine
worship", as the charge against them goes on in the next words; it must be
plainly said, it is altogether groundless. There is no fact relative to the
Country more certain, than that these adventurers so far "remembered and knew
God", as to make it one of their first cares to provide for the carrying on,
maintaining and upholding the worship of him, which they did wherever they
extended their settlements; and their posterity have constantly took the like
care all along to the present day. There is therefore no sense in which the
above representation can comport with truth but this, that God cannot be
worshipped, at least so as that it may be proper to say he is, unless the
worship be carried on according to the manner of the established English
Church. Some of the Society's Missionaries, I have reason to believe, are much
inclined to think thus; but I would not supect such a thing of his Lordship.
What he has here said I would rather attribute to misinformation.

It seems to be allowed, that these adventurers had "native manners"; otherwise
they could not, upon leaving their "native soil, "abandon them". But, they must
have abandoned them to an enormous height of guilt, to justify their being
charged "with dissolute wickedness, and the most brutal profligacy of manners".
These words are so grossly reproachful, that I could scarce believe my own eyes,
when I saw them in his Lordship's sermon. He must certainly, however insensible
of it, have corresponded, by word, or writing, with some vile Calumniator.

It would be injustice to the first fathers of New England, if I did not say
upon this occasion, that some of them were exceeded by few, in point of
natural, or acquired accomplishments; and by far the greater part of them were
eminently holy men; pious toward God, jealous of the honor of Christ as sole
head of the Church, sober, just, kind, meek, patient, disengaged in their
affection to things on the earth, and entirely resigned to the alwise righteous
Governor of the universe. And of this they exhibited the strongest evidence by
their truly christian deportment under far greater trials than good men are
ordinarily called to. They forsook every thing near and dear to them in their
native land, from a regard to him who is "King in Sion". And when they removed
to the then American wilds, and found themselves separated from their friends
by a wide Ocean, without the conveniences, and often in want even of the
necessaries of life, surrounded with difficulties, and exposed to all manner of
hardships and dangers, what could tempt them to continue here, if they had been
those "infidels, barbarians, dissolutely wicked and brutal profligates", they
are represented by his Lordship to have been? What, in this case, could have
prevented their return to their friends, and the comforts of their native home?
As they are supposed to have lost all conscience toward God, if they ever had
any, Church impositions could have been no obstacle in their way. They might,
in short, with infinitely more reason, have been spoken of as fools, or
madmen, than irreligious profligates. It may, I believe, be said with strict
truth, there are none, now in England, of any denomination, in high or low
office, or none at all, who are under circumstances that put it in their power
to give such indubitable proof of their being truly upright good men. And I
wish they may never see the time when they will have opportunity, by similar
trials, to give as good evidence of their integrity. The Missionaries from the
Society at home may be esteemed there men of uncommon seize in Christian
piety, discovered in their zeal to promote the cause of Christ; but they never
yet exhibited, and, in all probability, will never be able to exhibit, like
ample proof that this is their real character. No Missionary was ever sent
hither, till the Country, through a vast extent, was subdued, cultivated and
settled, so as to render living here comfortable and pleasant. And as they are
mostly fixed in populous towns, in which they may easily be furnished with
conveniences, and are exposed to no hardships or hazards but what are common to
mankind in general; they can have opportunity to give no other than common
evidence of the goodness of their character; and while they give this, we will
own ourselves satisfied with it, though others should not be satisfied with
that which is much stronger, in regard of much more important men.

I shall only add here, The adventurers to this then inhospitable land, must
have the honor of being owned the original settlers of a Country, which, in
time, if not prevented by oppressive measures, will probably enlarge the
British Empire in extent, grandeur, riches and power, far beyond what has ever
yet been known in the world. It is pity, after such a long course of labors,
hardships, dangers and sufferings, as they heroicly went through, to prepare
the way to what the Country now is, and may be in after times; I say, it is
pity their ashes should be raked into, and their memory treated with reproach,
greater than which was never deserved by any of the sons of Adam, in any part
of the earth. They are gone to receive the reward of their fidelity to their
Savior and Lord; and their reward, it may be, will be inhanced by means of the
undeserved obloquies that have been cast upon them in this sermon.

As to the charge, in the next words that, "instead of civilizing and
converting barbarous infidels, as they undertook to do, they became themselves
infidels and barbarians"; and that it was "some aggravation of their shame,
that this their neglect of religion was contrary to the pretenses and
conditions, under which they obtained Royal grants, and public authority to
their adventures": As to this charge, I say, it would, I believe, if fastened
upon any other body of men, professing godliness, be esteemed highly
unchristian. Had a hint only of this nature been suggested, relative to the
Society in whose audience this censure was delivered, this, and much worse,
would have been said of it, and deservedly too. And yet, that Society have,
without all doubt, been as deficient in their endeavors to propagate the
Gospel in these "foreign parts", where it was most needed, and in contrariety
to the design of their incorporation too, as was ever true of these
adventurers. What has been done by these adventurers may be seen in the general
account that is given of their labors in some following notes. And if the facts
there related should be set in contrast with the abstracts of the Society,
relative to the Indians, it will appear at once, that, from the time of their
incorporation to this day, they have done little, very little, in comparison
therewith. Their principal care has been to propagate the church of England;
and this, not so much in those places, where there was real need of
Missionaries for the instruction of people in the knowledge of Christ, or to
set up the worship of God among them, as where there was a fullness of means
for such instruction, and divine worship was already set up, and as generally
and devoutly attended as in England it self. Many thousands of pounds sterling
have been thus expended, where there was no want of it for the propagation of
the Gospel, unless that means the propagation of the Episcopal mode of serving
God. And what has been the effect of this vast expense? If we look over the
Society's abstracts, we shall find one account from their Missionaries is, "We
have baptized so many within such a time; so many adult, and so many children,
white or black": Every one of which might as well have been baptized without a
shilling of this expense, if it might have been done by ministers not
episcopally qualified for this work. Another account amounts to this, "There is
the prospect of a Church in this and the other place; we have been invited to
preach here and there; so many have professed themselves members of the Church,
and more are inclined this way". But of whom are these declarations made? Not
of those, who were brought up in ignorance of the christian religion; not of
those, who were destitute of the means of salvation; not of those, who had not
the opportunity, and did not in fact make use of it, to attend the public
worship of God: No; but of persons that have only changed, or were inclinable
to change, one mode of religiously serving God for another; and too often,
there is reason to think, without having thoroughly inquired into matters of this
nature. Sometimes an account is given of the "good morals of the people of
their charge". It might, I believe, with exact justice, be said, these were as
good before, as since, their going to Church. The plain truth is, had one half
the money been spared, for other uses, that has been expended upon New England,
those places on the American Continent which need it much more, might have been
better provided with the means of salvation: Without all controversy, the poor
Indians might have had more laborers sent to them, both in the capacity of
ministers and schoolmasters; and, it is probable, a large harvest of souls
would, by this time, have been gathered in for Christ from among them. It is
generally thought here, if a less proportion of this money was employed for the
support of a party, and a far greater for carrying the Gospel to the numerous
aboriginal natives, who are totally ignorant of the true God, and of his son
Jesus Christ, it would be as honorary to the Society, and as "acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth".

I shall not think it unseasonable, or improper, to subjoin here, We are
especially grieved that the Society at home are not more zealous in their
endeavors to propagate the Gospel among the Indian natives, as an effectual
bar, a few years since, was laid in the way of our exerting ourselves to this
purpose, at least by the instrumentality of a Corporation among our selves. The
story is briefly this. Upon the conclusion of the late war, a general spirit
was raised in the people here to endeavor the enlargement of the Redeemer's
kingdom, by sending the Gospel to the Tribes of Indians on our western borders.
They were desirous this affair should be put under the management of some among
our selves of well-established reputation for wisdom, judgment and piety, and
that they should be incorporated by an act of the Government to this end. Two
thousand pounds sterling were, in a few days, subscribed, in Boston only, upon
this condition. An incorporating act was accordingly prepared, and passed by
the whole Legislature of this Province, and sent home for his Majesty's
approbation, without which it could not continue in force. But it soon met with
a negative, by means whereof this whole money was lost, and as much more we had
good reason to expect would have been subscribed, besides the income of many
hundred pounds sterling that had been devoted to the service of the Indians. It
is hoped, the accounts we have had are not true, that the negative upon this
act was principally owing to the influence of some of the most important
members of the Society for the propagation of the Gospel. We are content not to
have the honor of employing our own money in endeavors to Gospelise these
Indians, if the Society will heartily and thoroughly engage in it. We shall
rejoice to find, by their abstracts, that needful Missionaries are sent to
them; and far from throwing any obstacles in their way, we will do all in our
power to encourage and help them.


For, by far the greater part of their money has been expended, if we may judge
by their own abstracts, not in missions to convert the Indiannatives, not in
missions to set up and maintain the worship of God, where he was scarce
worshipped at all; but in missions to those places in which the Gospel was
preached before, as truly and faithfully, as it has been since; if it be only
supposed, that this can be done by ministers, not officiating according to the
order of the church of England. If one were to collect their sentiments from
their conduct, as represented in these abstracts, it must be concluded, that,
with them, the propagation of the Gospel, and the establishment of Episcopacy
in the British Colonies, were convertible terms. But this in transitu.

Our complaint is, that the charge here brought against these adventurers has
really no foundation for its support. It is not pretended, that their
endeavors to convert the natives were unmixed with human frailty. In common
with other good men, in other virtuous undertakings, they had, no doubt, their
failings; but not such as may, with truth or justice, be called notorious ones.
And it is really unkind, I may rather say cruelly hard, to represent them to
the world, as "becoming themselves infidels and barbarians", instead of using
their endeavors to "convert babarous infidels". It is not easily conceivable,
wherein they could have exerted themselves with more zeal, or in more prudent
ways, in endeavoring to enlarge the borders of Christ's kingdom in these
"uttermost parts of the earth", by making the native barbarians the members of
it. It was out of their power to support Missionaries among these heathen; but,
in other ways, they laid themselves out, to the utmost of their power, as they
had opportunity, for their instruction in the "knowledge of God, and Jesus
Christ, whom to know is life eternal". And by their labors, especially as
encouraged and assisted by the London-Society, and more privately, they so far
effected the conversion of them, as that numbers were prepared and disposed to
make an open profession of their faith in Jesus Christ. The sacred books of the
old and new testament were, in their day, by the skill and labor of the
indefatigable ELIOT, He is to this day often spoken of in that honorable style,
THE APOSTLE OF THE INDIANS. It was with great labor he made himself master of
the Indian language; and, as soon as he was thus accomplished, he preached to
them in their own tongue, and in many of their villages: And, by the blessing
of God on his diligent endeavors, "many believed, and turned to the Lord". He
soon had several companions, and afterward successors, who were faithful and
zealous in instructing these savages in the Gospel-method of salvation. Schools
were erected among them, and such books put into their hands, in their native
language, as their edification called for. The consequence was, that, in
several villages, Indians met together every Lord's day for the worship of God
through Jesus Christ, and Churches of them were gathered, who "walked in the
fear of the Lord", and the religious observation of all Gospel Ordinances. To
the BIBLE, our Eliot added a version of the Psalms in Indian Meter, which it
was their practice to sing. This Indian Bible is the only one that was ever
printed in this hemisphere of the universe; as it is expressed in the
attestation whence the above abstract is taken, which I shall have occasion to
mention in the next note. I shall only add here, from Dr. Cotton Mather, in a
sermon printed School, that "there were then in this Province more than thirty
Indian assemblies, and more than thirty hundred christian Indians".
translated into the Indian-language, and dispersed among the natives for their
instruction in things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and of Christ. And
through his assiduous endeavors, with those of the renowned MAYHEW's, Mr.
Thomas Mayhew, son of an excellent man of this name, began, in another part of
the Province, the work of gospelising the infidel-natives, so far back as 1642.
And this good work has been carried on, by one and another of this name and
family, from that day to this. In 1657, many hundred Indian men and women were
added to the christian Societies in this part of the Country, of such as might
be said to be "holy in their conversation", and that did not need, for
knowledge, to be taught "the first principles of the oracles of God"; besides
many hundreds of more superficial professors. In the year 1689, the Indian
church under the care of Mr. John Mayhew, son of the above Thomas, consisted of
an hundred communicants, walking according to the rule of the scriptures. This
is an extract from the Rev. Mr. Thomas Prince's general account of the English
ministers, who presided at Martha's Vineyard.

The Rev. Mr. Experience Mayhew, son of the before mentioned John, and father
of the late memorable Dr. Mayhew, a Gentleman of such superior natural
endowments, that he would, had he been favored with common advantages, have
been ranked among the first worthies of New England; and who spent a life
protracted several years beyond eighty, in the service of the Indians,
published, in the year 1727, an octato volume, entitled Indian Converts; in
which he has given an account of the lives of thirty Indian ministers, and
about eighty Indian men, women, and young persons, within the limits only of
Martha's Vineyard, an Island in Massachusett's-Province. And of these, as he
was a Gentleman of established reputation for both judgment and veracity, it
may be charitably said, they were all real converts to the faith of Christ, and
some of them in a distinguishing degree, clearly evidenced by their manner of
life, which was such as may make many English professors blush, of whom it may
be hoped, that they are christians in truth, as well as name. In the
Attestation to this account, signed by eleven Boston ministers, some of whom
are now alive, it is said, That they who may ignorantly and imperiously say,
nothing has been done, may be confuted; and that they, who are desirous to see
something that has been done, may be entertained and gratified; here is now
exhibited a collection of examples, wherein the glorious grace of our great
Redeemer has appeared to, and on, the INDIANS of New England. It must not be
imagined, these are all that could have been collected; for all these are
selected only from one Island. -- It is said farther, "the author of this
history, Mr. Experience Mayhew, is a person of incontestible veracity: -- We
again say, his truth may be relied on, his fidelity is irreproachable".


and other worthies, a considerable number of churches, under the divine
blessing, were gathered, consisting of INDIAN members, many of whom gave proof
of the reality of their conversion, by their walking in the faith and order of
the Gospel, so as to adorn the doctrine of him, whom they now called their only
Savior and Lord. Some of these churches have continued in succession even to
this day, with English, or Indian Pastors at their head. There are, at this
day, within the Province of the Massachusett's-Bay only, sixteen ministers,
English and Indian, statedly laboring, either as Pastors of so many Indian
churches, or as Preachers to assemblies of Indians that meet together for
divine worship; nine English Lecturers, and seven stated Schoolmasters,
besides occasional ones: All which are under the care of Commissioners here
from the honorable Company for the propagation of the Gospel in NEW ENGLAND,
and parts adjacant in AMERICA. The above account was handed to me from the
records of these Commissioners. There are, at the settlement called Mashpe, two
hundred Indians, under the care of the Rev. Mr. Hawley, who know no God besides
the ever-living Jehovah, and statedly pay worship to him through the one
Mediator Jesus Christ.
The above representation is so generally known here to contain the real truth,
that it was greatly surprising to many, to see his Lordship so imposed upon by
such as were either grossly ignorant of what had been done by these adventurers,
or wicked enough, in opposition to their knowledge, to give him an account that
was odiously false and injurious.

His Lordship proceeds, the pretenses and conditions were, that their design
was, and that they should endeavor, the enlargement of commerce, and the
propagation of christian faith. The former they executed with sincerity and
zeal; in the latter most notoriously failed. He then adds in the immediately
following paragraph, Their failure herein might well have been expected.
Religion and traffic, their two professed objects, are but ill yoke-fellows,
being apt to draw quite different ways: And men who with desperate hardiness
invade unknown difficulties and dangers in quest of gain, could not be supposed
to be much concerned about spiritual interests. Religion is but an impediment
in the way of avarice: Many things thereby prohibited, are deemed allowable,
and stick close to traffic. Some of the adventurers to this part of the world
might have the affair of commerce principally in their view; but,
notwithstanding their "sincerity and zeal", they soon found their mistake in
woeful disappointment, and mostly returned home. The settlers of this part of
America were men of another turn. Liberty to worship God agreably to the
dictates of conscience was the grand motive to their removal hither; and the
enjoyment of this liberty at so great a distance from oppressive power was
their support under heavier trials than can easily be conceived of by those who
have never been in a wilderness-country. It might therefore be well expected of
such men, if of any in the world, that they should not be guilty of "notorious
failures"; as it is certain they were not. It is acknowledged, if "religion and
traffic" had been their "two professed objects", they would have been "but ill
yoke-fellows", for the reasons his Lordship assigns. And may it not be said,
for the like reasons, with equal propriety and truth, that worldly dignity,
riches and power, conjoined with a profession and design to advance the
interest of "a kingdom that is not of this world", are as ill-matched
companions. Good may be, has been, and, I trust, is now done by those, in whose
view there was a regard to the honors and riches of this world, as well as the
promotion of Christianity; and the same may be said of others, in whose design
the objects united were religion and traffic. An illustrious instance we have
of this in Mr. Thomas Mayhew, the first of this name in America. He came over
as a merchant to the Massachusetts, in the early times of that plantation, and,
meeting with disappointments in his business, he procured, in 1641, a Grant or
Patent of Sir Ferdinando Gorges, the Earl of Sterling's agent, for Martha's
Vineyard, Nantucket, and Elisabeth Isles, to make an English settlement. He was
Governor as well as Patentee of these Islands. This led him, though now about 55
years of age, to learn so much of the language of the natives as was needful to
understand and discourse with them. And as he grew in this acquirement, he was
greatly helpful to his son Thomas, now a preacher to them, in the pious work of
making them Christians. Upon the loss of this his excellent and only son in
1657, though now in the 70th year of his age, an holy zeal for the glory of
God, and a most compassionate charity for the souls of the perishing Indians,
kindle up in his breast. They raise him above all those ceremonies, forms and
distinctions that lay in the way, and which he accounted as nothing in
competition with their eternal salvation; and he thereupon resolves, having no
prospect of a regular minister, to do his utmost to carry on the good work that
had been begun among them, notwithstanding all external difficulties and
discouragements. He frequently visited, conversed with, and instructed this
poor people. He went once a week to some of their plantations. At so advanced
an age, he set himself with unwearied diligence to perfect himself in their
difficult language; and, though a Governor, yet was not ashamed to become a
preacher among them. He ordinarily preached to some of their assemblies one day
every week as long as he lived. And his heart was so exceedingly engaged in the
service, that he spared no pains, nor fatigues at so great an age therein;
sometimes traveling on foot nigh twenty miles through the woods to preach and
visit, where there was no English house near to lodge at in his absence from
home. In a few years time, with the assistance of those religious Indians who
taught on the Lord'-day, he persuaded the natives on the west end of the Island
to receive the Gospel, who had many years been obstinately resolved against it;
so that now the Indians on the Isles of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket might
justly bear the name of Christian. The number of their adult, on both these
Islands, was then about three thousand. He went on laboriously in this noble
work of promoting the salvation of the souls of these Indians to the 93d year
of his age, when he died to the great lamentation both of the English and
Indians. -- When the incorporated Society at home shall see fit, in their pious
zeal for the propagation of the Gospel, to employ Missionaries, as they might
easily do, among the Indian heathen settled all over this Continent, who shall
exert themselves with like resolute diligence and fidelity, to "turn th^^ from
darkness to light", in opposition to all the difficulties and hardships they
may be called to contend with, we will "highly esteem them in love for their
work's sake"; and, instead of treating their names with reproach, we will
greatly "honor them in the Lord".
But these are cases not very common; as we shall soon see, if we only look
into past history. By so doing it will perhaps be found, that the connection of
honors, riches and power, with employments that are spiritual, has been as
fruitful an occasion of pride, haughtiness, tampering with Princes, and
advising and helping forward oppressive tyranny over conscience, as the mixture
of "traffic with religion" has ever been of those deceitful fraudulent acts the
latter prohibits.

It follows in the next words, Commerce indeed has been the occasion of
communicating the knowledge of Christ from nation to nation; but persons
engaged therein have not been the communicators of it: Their business is of
another fort. But this has been done by other men, detached from worldly
affairs, and zealous and skilful in divine knowledge; who, taking the advantage
of the intercourse opened by them with other views, have preached the gospel
where it was before unknown. In this way our Planters have excelled, having
given double occasion of propagating christianity among the native heathen of
these regions, and among themselves also, who soon became heathen.

By the first recited words in this passage, the idea obviously and
intentionally conveyed to the world is, that our Planters, being engaged in the
business of traffic, might be the occasion of communicating the knowledge of
Christ to the barbarians here, but that they were not themselves the
communicators of it. This was done by others, no doubt, the worthy missionaries
from the Society at home; who, being detached from worldly affairs, and zealous
and skilful in divine knowledge, took occasion, from the intercourse that had
been opened with those to whom the Gospel was unknown, to preach it to them. So
that it should seem, these Missionaries, not the Planters, were the only
persons who had any hand in propagating Christianity in these parts of the
world. A goodly account truly! Nothing could have been said more honorary
either of the Society, or their Missionaries; and the glory reflected on them
shines the brighter, as it is contrasted with the highest reproach that could
be cast on the Planters. The good people in England, who are unacquainted with
the transactions in this new world, may be led, from the above representation,
into exalted apprehensions of the pious endeavors both of the Society and
their Missionaries. It is indeed well adapted to open their hearts and hands in
contributions to carry on what they have so hopefully begun. But the
unhappiness is, heaven and earth are not more distant from each other, than
this account is from the truth of the case; as We, who live here, do certainly
know: For which reason, to say nothing more harsh, we are really astonished.

By the latter ones, a great mystery is opened It always appeared to us an
unaccountable thing, that the Society for propagating the Gospel in these
foreign parts should lay out such vast sums of their money in supporting
Missionaries, especially in places that were most populous, and had, as we
imagined, the least need of them; but the difficulty is now unravelled. We had
given "DOUBLE OCCASION of propagating Christianity"; that is, OCCASION "AMONG
OUR SELVES WHO SOON BECAME HEATHEN", as well as "among the native heathen of
these regions". It is easily perceivable, from what is here said, that not only
his Lordship, but the incorporated Society before whom he preached, unless
their vote of thanks was a mere compliment, look upon us as having made
ourselves "Heathen". And, if this is our just character, proper occasion was
offered for the "propagation of Christianity" among us; and they have kindly
pitied our wretched case, and sent a vast supply of help to deliver us out of
it. We are heartily sorry so very respectable a body of men should entertain
such a bad opinion of us. It can be owing to one or other of these two causes
only. They either think, with some they have sent to us, that we have no true
ministers, no acceptable worship, no valid administration of sacraments, and,
in a word, no religion of ciny value; as our ministers have not had the hands
of some Bishop, in a lineal succession from the Apostles, imposed on them, and
our religious services are performed conformably to the dictates of our
consciences, and not that decent form which has been established by the
Government at home: Or they have been led, by cruelly hard and notoriously
false representations of us, to imagine, that we are become like to the native
barbarous heathen themselves; ignorant of God and our obligations to him;
without any sense of religion, or practical regard to it; and given up to
commit all uncleaness and wickedness with greediness. We would not think so
reproachfully either of his Lordship, or the Society, as to attribute the ill
opinion they have conceived of us to the first of these causes: Nor shall we be
brought to it by any thing short of their plain affirmation in the case. We
cannot therefore but suppose, that the Colonies have been set before their view
in an horribly abusive light, by some secret back-biters and revilers, through
bigotry, prejudice, malice, interest, or some other lust of the flesh or mind.

His Lordship, in the next paragraph, having reflected blame upon the
Government in these times for the "defection" he had charged the Colonies with,
and aggravated this blame by several weighty considerations, expresses himself,
page 10. in these words, Now this great evil, irreligion, might at first have
easily been prevented growing in our Colonies; but the same evil, having been
suffered to grow, has been found so hard to expel, that now, after more than
60 years diligent endeavor, it is very far from being eradicated. If by
irreligion, the great evil spoken of, is meant, the great impiety of serving
God, without doing it after the mode of the established Church at home, it is
acknowledge, its "growth was not prevented at first", if it might have been;
and it has been "suffered to grow" ever since, without interruption, until
about the time of the Revolution in England, and since then by the Society for
the propagation of the Gospel in foreign parts. And it is hoped, by at least
twenty nine in thirty throughout New England, that it will, instead of being
eradicated, go on to grow, even to the end of time, notwithstanding all efforts
that may be made to the contrary. If this be "irreligion", we are not ashamed
to glory in it, though we should be accounted "fools for thus glorying"; nor are
there wanting those here, who would esteem it "better to die than that any
man", or body of men, "should make their glorying void" in this respect. But if
by the "growth of irreligion" his Lordship would be understood to mean, the
increase of irreverence toward God, expressed in an unbecoming treatment of
his name, perfections, and governing authority; unrighteousness toward men,
discovered in the various ways of fraudulent and oppressive dealing; and a
disregard to the great christian law of sobriety, made manifest by an
indulgence to pride, luxury, extravagance, uncleaness, and those other lusts
which argue the want of due self-government: I say, if this is what his
Lordship means, by "the growth of irreligion", he had no need to have looked so
far for it as these distant regions. Unless the land which gave our
forefathers birth is greatly abused, both by its own inhabitants, and others
who have been there, it does not come at all behind the Colonies in this kind
of growth, even heightened in malignity: While yet, the whole body of duly
authorized Clergymen, superior and inferior, have, if they have done their
duty, been diligently employing their time and pains, for more than 60 years
many times told, to give check to it; and under the advantage too of that
established mode of performing divine service, which, for a long time, was not
in use here. And if the abounding growth of iniquity could not be prevented at
home by the united force of so many regularly ordained ministers, high and low,
faithfully laboring to promote so good a design, and in conformity to the
prescribed order of the best religious establishment in the world; why should
it be thought strange, if there was the growth of like bad fruit in the
Colonies, which could not have been so fully favored with the enjoyment of
these advantages?

What the true state of the southern Colonies is, The present Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his society-sermon, preached, in 1741, when he was Bishop of
Oxford, speaking of more of the British Colonies than one, says, page 5. There
were scarce any footsteps of Christianity left, beyond the mere name. No
Teacher was known, no religious assembly held; the Lord's Day distinguished
only by more general dissoluteness; the sacrament of baptism not administered
for near twenty years together, nor that of the Lord's supper for near sixty,
among many thousands of people, who did not deny the obligation of these
duties, but lived notwithstanding in a stupid neglect of them. The more
southern Colonies, it is supposed, are here held forth to view; as the
description cannot, with so much as the shadow of truth, be applied to any
other. And according to this representation of them, they were certainly fit
objects of the Society's compassionate regards; especially as they were
incorporated principally with a design to extend their care to such of the
Plantations, whose state was thus deplorably sad. One would therefore naturally
think that, in proportion to their ability, and the need of these places, they
would have sent Missionaries to perform the offices of religion among them. And
yet, if we look over their abstracts, we shall find, that their pious zeal has
chiefly discovered it self in missions to other Colonies, where Teachers
abound, the worship of God on Lord's-days is generally and religiously
attended, and the sacraments of baptism and the Lord's supper are as duly
administered as in England itself; and this to the COMPARATIVE NEGLECT of the
above described places, where there was scarce any sense or appearance of
Christianity. What is here said of the Society's conduct is as true a fact, as
that their abstracts relate the truth. It can, as I imagine, be accounted for
upon no principle but this, that they think they shall better answer the great
design of their incorporation by zealous endeavors to make converts from
Presbyterianism and Congregationalism to Episcopacy, than by propagating the
gospel in places that have no Teacher, no public worship of God, no sacraments,
nor any footsteps of Christianity beyond the mere name. If this is really their
principle, it is hoped they will not be averse openly to avow it in words, as
they virtually do in their practice.

Those places are then spoken of, page ibid. where the state of things was "a
little better", but still" lamentably bad". The more northern Colonies must be
here intended. But why are they represented as in circumstances lamentably bad?
For no reason that we know of here that could move the compassion of the
Society, but this, that EPISCOPACY had not got such strong footing here as they
might desire. And however "affecting representations might be made" of our
deplorable condition by "the inhabitants in these parts, by Governors, or
principal persons of note", to use the language of the sermon, a becoming
regard to their honor as men of truth, obliges us to say, that their
representations must respect our state chiefly in this point of view, viz. the
non-pervalence of the Church among us. This, I know, is, in the judgment of
some, the most deplorable state a people can be in, however highly favored they
may be with the means of grace, under another mode of administration, though
more agreeable to the purity and simplicity of the gospel.


I leave to be described by those who are better acquainted with them than I
can pretend to be. But, as to the more northern ones, those particularly that
are comprehended under the name of New England, it is acknowledged, they have
too far departed from the simplicity, piety, and strict virtue of their
fathers. There may be some infidels within these limits; but their number, I
believe, is very small. Those that are so came to us from abroad, or were
corrupted by books wrote at home, and imported from thence. There are also to
be found, in these parts, men of no conscience, dissolute in their manners, and
accustomed to do evil; ordering their conversation by fleshly wisdom, not by
the grace of God. But this notwithstanding, I will be bold to say, true
Christianity is not more generally better practiced in any part of the world.
There is not a town, or village, within these largely extended Colonies,
(Rhode Island Colony excepted) unless so lately settled as not to have had time
for it, but is furnished with a house for the worship of God, and a minister
set apart for the administration of Gospel Ordinances in it; and, at these
houses, there is every Lord's Day, and at other times also, a general resort of
the people to attend on the public services of religion. I should not wrong the
truth, should I say, that neither the Lord's Day, or his worship on that day,
are more universally and devoutly regarded by any people on the earth. And as
to the moral and christian virtues of faith in the being, perfections,
revelations, and government of God, love to him, an holy fear of him, trust in
his all sufficiency, and subjection to his will, however made known, whether in
his word, or providential conduct, they are as generally possessed here, and
thrown out into exercise upon proper occasions, as in any part of the known
world. And it would be a wrong to these Colonies, should a contrary
representation be given of their character.

I shall add here, whatever growth of vice there may be in these parts, it is
as visible in the cures of the Missionaries from the Society, as where they are
neither employed, or desired. And from hence it may be justly concluded, as
these Missionaries, through the pious care of the Society, are as numerous here
as any where on the American Continent, that this growth, in whatever degree it
may prevail, is not owing to the want of validly ordained ministers, or any
special mode of performing divine worship; but to other causes. What these are
it would be easy, were it needful, to point out. They have operated, it may be,
more powerfully in corrupting the nation at home, than its dependant Colonies.
Whenever they are removed, religion, in unstained glory, will more universally
take place both there and here; but not till then.

His Lordship speaks, a few pages onwards, of several things that obstruct the
Society's endeavors to eradicate irreligion, the inveterate evil, so widely
diffused over this vast tract of Country.

One is, to use his own words, page 19. The want of Seminaries in these parts,
for the education of persons to serve in the ministry of the Gospel: A great
disadvantage; so great, that there is reason to apprehend, it may one day undo
all that the Society have been for many years laboring to do. Had his Lordship
thought it worth while to have more fully informed himself of the state of
things in this part of the world, he would have found no reason for complaint
upon this head. Seminaries for the education of persons to serve in the
ministry, or any other calling that would make a learned education proper, are,
it may be, rather too numerous in the Colonies. They are more multiplied here,
in proportion, than in England; though there may be no comparison between their
endowments. We have no less than six public Seminaries in North America. Two of
them, one at Virginia, the other at New York, are Episcopal colleges; and a
third, that at Philadelphia, has an Episcopal Clergyman at its head. The other
three are open to the sons of Churchmen, in common with the sons of others;
and they are admitted with the same freedom, and, I may add, without any
previously required oaths, or subscriptions. The most respectable of these
Colleges for long standing, and endowments, is that at Cambridge in the
Massachusetts-Province. This was the first College in the American world. So
far back as 1636, the Massachusetts General Assembly gave L400 toward it is
rise. In the next following year but one, the memorable John Harvard left, by
his last will, one half of his estate to carry on the same good design. And
this year, 1638, gives date to the foundation of this College. It has ever
since been known by the name of HARVARD COLLEGE. It was errected principally
for the Education of our sons to serve in the work of the Ministry, that, as
Churches were multiplied, there might be no want of sutably qualified persons
to take the pastoral care of them. And from hence only they were supplied much
the greater part of a century; and with more than a few of such as made a
shining figure in their day. Most of the best character in the Country for
acquired accomplishments, who have served either in Church or State, were
educated here, at least until other Colleges were erected. It may be said of
this, without reflection, that, in consequence of donations, in former days and
more lately, from our own people, and from abroad, it is the best endowed of
any College on the American Continent, though it may be below all comparison
with the Colleges in Europe. That excellently good and catholic Gentleman, Mr.
THOMAS HOLLIS of London, ought always to be mentioned with honor as one of its
greatest benefactors. His liberal hand, besides kindly benefiting the College
other ways, was stretched out to establish two professors in it; the first, in
1722, for instruction in Divinity; the other, in 1727, to teach the
Mathematics and Philosophy: Both which establishments have been greatly
conducive to the good education of the Students here. His worthy Nephew, and
Heir, of the same name, and the like benevolent Spirit, has, for many years,
made this College the special object of his generous bounty; and it still keeps
flowing in upon it, as from a never-failing fountain. No one can enter the
College-Library-Chamber, but he will have full in his eye a large collection of
very valuable and curiously chosen books, and be told in golden characters that
they are his gift. I would yet say here, as this College has shown so much
candor and catholicism in its sentiments and conduct toward the Church of
England; and as it has been so helpful to the Society at home in supplying them
with most of their Missionaries for the northern Colonies, it would have been
but a decent compliment, if it had been accounted worthy of some small part of
the large sum lately collected throughout England for the benefit of Seminaries
in these parts of the world. Such as were of Church-principles might have been
educated for the Indian-service with as much freedom here as elsewhere; and,
probably, as many might have gone from hence upon the noble design of carrying
the Gospel to the barbarous natives.
There is scarce a Churchman, in this Province, of any figure, but has had one
or more of his sons educated here; and it is from hence, that the Society at
home have had, perhaps, the most of those they have employed in the New England
Colonies, which have been the greatest sharers in their pious care to propagate
the Gospel. It may be farther said to the honor of this College, and in proof
of their being actuated, not by a spirit of bigotry, but the noble spirit of
true christian liberty, that, far from obliging their youths of
Church-principles to join in public worship, where it is carried on after the
Congregational mode, they have excused them from it by a standing law made on
purpose: Only, by the same law, they are laid under obligations not to neglect
divine service performed in the Episcopal Church near the College; and in case
of absence, without sufficient reason, they are subjected to the same fine the
other youths are, if they groundlesly absent themselves from the place where
God is worshipped in our way. I shall only add here, all the churches of every
other denomination receive constantly a full supply for the ministry from this
and the other Seminaries; and so might the church of England, if they pleased.
There is no obstacle in the way, unless from themselves. If therefore it has
happened, that "several Churches have stood vacant, because none could be found
to officiate in them", and that the "same want has been an hinderance to the
proper work of the Society, and must needs prove an effectual bar to any
farther considerable progress in it", as his Lordship speaks, page 20. it must
be ascribed, not to the "want of Seminaries" here, of which there are enough
already; but to some other cause. The Church-interest can be in no danger from
this quarter.

Another disadvantage, attending the propagation of the Gospel in these foreign
parts, his Lordship takes notice of, page 21. in the following words, What
encouragement have the inhabitants of these regions to qualify themselves for
holy orders, while, to obtain them, they lie under the necessity of crossing an
immense Ocean, with much inconvenience, danger and expense; which those who
come hither on that errand can but ill bear. And if they have the fortune to
arrive safe, being here without friends, and without acquaintance, they have
the sad business to undergo, of presenting themselves unknown to persons
unknown, without any recommendation or introduction, except certain papers in
their pocket. Are there not circumstances in this case, sufficient to deter
every ordinary courage, and to dampt the most adventurous spirit.

It is acknowledged, it would be a great discouragement to the sons of the
Church from qualifying themselves for holy orders, and I may say to others also
educated in the principles of the Country from taking them, if, in order to
obtain them, they must cross a wide ocean at THEIR OWN EXPENSE. But this, I
presume, is rarely, if ever the case. They are, as we suppose upon good
information, freed from this discouragement by being well provided for, if not
by the Society in part at least, by those who expect the benefit of their
labors. As for my self, was I a candidate for holy orders, I should esteem it a
happy circumstance in the case, to have so fair an opportunity to visit the
land of our fore-father's nativity. And I believe there are few but are
encouraged by this very thing that is represented as a matter of so great
discouragement. Their "being there without friends, and without acquaintance",
is a difficulty made by imagination only. As they go from hence upon the nobly
professed design of taking holy orders, that they may be validly commissioned
to propagate the Gospel, it is impossible they should long want "friends or
acquaintance", if it were only among the members of the Society, they are so
numerous, and, at the same time, so earnestly engaged in promoting this pious
design. It is true, the "business of presenting themselves unknown to those
unknown friends would be sad", if they had no "recommendation except certain
papers in their pocket". It is fit they should have these papers in readiness
to be seen. Their moral qualifications can be known, at such a distance, only
in this way. But it is as proper they should have knowledge in their heads, as
papers in their pockets. And it is hoped, the Society send no Missionaries but
such as are able to recommend themselves in the former, as well as the latter
of these ways.

His Lordship now comes to the last and greatest inconvenience, "the want of
Bishops in our Colonies". "This", says he, page 22. Besides other disadvantages
attending it, appears, in particular, to be the fundamental cause of the want
of native Ministers. The one removed; the other, it seems, would cease of
course. For can it be imagined, could orders be had on the same terms there as
elsewhere, that a number of the natives sufficient for the service of the
Church, would not offer themselves in those, as they do, in all other parts of
Christendom.

The want of "native ministers", if this is really the case, is not, I believe,
owing to any of the causes his Lordship has mentioned, not excepting that of
there being "no Bishops in the Colonies". If I may speak here with the same
freedom that I think, I would say, there is, in one respect, an obvious
difference between our people, and those who profess themselves Churchmen. The
former generally send their sons to one or other of our Colleges with a view to
their being educated for the ministry; this is rarely done by the latter.
Should any ask the reason of this; -- it must be plainly said, our Churches are
numerous for a new Country, many of them large, and well capable of providing
for their ministers; and, by a swift increase of inhabitants and
new-settlements, they are daily growing both in number and ability to support
their Clergy. There is herefrom the prospect of a tolerable provision for our
sons, if educated to serve in the ministry. Whereas, there are very few
Episcopal churches that "stand upon their own legs"; -- and by far the greater
part of the other are small in number, weak in ability, and insufficient to
maintain their own ministry, unless assisted by the Society at home. It is this
that discourages the Church-people from bringing up their sons for Clergymen.
They choose rather to provide for them some other way. And as to proselytes from
us, the temptation ordinarily is so small, that few are overcome by it until
they have found there was little or no prospect of their being employed to
greater advantage. No one need now be at a loss to assign the true cause of the
"want of native ministers".

But if Bishops should be sent to the Colonies, the people would generally turn
Churchmen; -- the Ecclesiastical state of things would soon be inverted; --
Episcoparians would quickly exceed the other denominations of Christians, as
much as they now exceed them.

This, without all doubt, is the grand point aimed at; and there may be some,
both at home and here, who really think all this would speedily come into
event. But those who are best acquainted with the genius, temper and principles
of the Colonists, at least in those parts where they are most numerous, have
not the least motion of fear excited in them from the prospect of any such
effect of the mission of Bishops. They are rather concerned, least it should be
the occasion of hurtful consequences both to them and us. Such consequences
would certainly be the effect, if these Bishops should make use of their
SUPERIORITY, as most probably they would, sooner or later, to influence our
great men here, and much greater ones at home, to project, and endeavor to
carry into execution, measures to force the growth of the Church. It may be
relied on, our people would not be easy, if restained in the exercise of that
"liberty wherewith Christ has made them free"; yea, they would hazard every
thing dear to them, their estates, their very lives, rather than suffer their
necks to be put under that yoke of bondage, which was so sadly galling to their
fathers, and occasioned their retreat into this distant land, that they might
enjoy the freedom of men and christians.

His Lordship speaks, page ibid. of the want of Bishops, as the "more heavily
lamentable", because "all sects of Protestant christians at home, and all save
one (meaning the Church of England) throughout the Colonies, have the full
enjoyment of their religion".

A stranger to the Colonies would be apt to think, from this cause of
lamentation, that the Episcopal Churches here, instead of enjoying the liberty
that is common to the other denominations of christians, were in a state of
religious oppression: Whereas the real truth is, not the least restraint is
laid upon their christian liberty. They worship God when, where, and how they
please, without hindrance or molestation: Yea, they are distinguished from all
other denominations in this respect, that they are the only objects of the
pious charitable help of the richest Society in all England incorporated upon a
religious design. And they are besides, within the Massachusetts Province, [how
it is in the other Colonies I know not] favored by a standing law that excuses
them from paying toward the support of any ministers but their own.

But they have "no Bishops". Very true; and they have no just reason for
complaint upon this head. For, let it be considered,

Throughout an extent of territory more than 500 miles in length, comprehending
seven Provinces, the four New England ones, and those of New York, the Jersies,
and Pensylvania; I say, throughout these largely extended Provinces, so well
inhabited that they contain more than a million of souls, there are not, by the
best information I can get, more than eight or nine Episcopal churches that
support themselves. All the rest, to the amount of about sixty, more or less,
chiefly made up of converts from the other denominations of Christians, are so
far upheld in their existence by the Society at home, at the expense of not
less than some thousands sterling per annum, that, should this be withdrawn,
they would soon sink away for want of needed assistance. Instead now of being
contented with the receipt of so much pious charity, they think it hard, and
complain of it as a most lamentable thing, that as many thousands sterling more
are not annually laid out for the maintenance of Bishops among them. Is this
reasonable? Would Churchmen themselves think it so in regard of other
denominations of christians besides themselves? Should any of these
denominations, in like circumstances, make the like complaints, insisting that
they were not suffered "fully to enjoy their religion", none, it may be, would
treat their complaints with more contempt, than those who are themselves so
loud in making them. And yet, I know not, in regard of real merit, but other
denominations would have as good a right to complain, as those who profess
themselves members of the Church of England. For they are the descendants from
ancestors, who subdued and cultivated this rude wilderness, amidst a thousand
difficulties and hazards, so as to make it the pleasant fruitful land we now
behold it; hereby adding to the extent, strength and glory of the British
Crown: Nor has that sacred Majesty who wears it more loyal subjects, even in
England itself: And as they are far more numerous than the Episcoparians, they
are in proportion more able, and I am sure they would be as willing, to exert
themselves, if called to it, at the peril of their lives, in defense of his
Person and Dominions.

His Lordship farther mentions it as an aggravating circumstance attending the
want of Bishops, that "even the Romish superstition within a Province lately
added to the British Dominions, is completely allowed in all points; it has
Bishops and Seminaries".

It is presumed, if Bishops are allowed in that Province, they are provided for
by establishments within itself, when the inhabitants were subjects of the King
of France; not at the expense of the British Crown or Nation, as it must be if
Bishops are sent to super-intend the Episcopal churches in the Colonies; which
makes a wide difference betwixt the two cases. But be this as it may, the fact
itself may be esteemed certain, as it is affirmed by his Lordship, whose
situation leaves no room to suspect a mistake in a matter of this nature. And
an astonishing one it is to us in these parts of the world! THE ROMISH
SUPERSTITION COMPLETELY ALLOWED IN ALL POINTS! What more surprising! What more
opposite to one of the great ends proposed by King William IIId, in
incorporating the Society for the propagation of the Gospel in these foreign
parts! What could more powerfully obstruct one main branch of their proper
business, the prevention, or extirpation, of Popery in the Colonies! We may
reasonably suppose, his Lordship, and the whole incorporated body of which he
is a member, are strongly affected with grief at this COMPLETE ALLOWANCE; and
that they will unite in all proper remonstrances upon so important an occasion.
How far articles of capitulation may have made way for such an allowance, I
pretend not to judge; but if, in virtue of any of them, it was made necessary,
a consent to them was highly impolitic, and may be of dangerous consequence to
the British interest, more especially in that part of America.

His Lordship concludes what he had to say upon the head of Bishops with these
words, page 25. "This point obtained, [the mission of Bishops to the Colonies]
the American Church will soon go out of its infant state; be able to stand upon
its own legs; and without foreign help support and spread itself. THEN THE
BUSINESS OF THIS SOCIETY WILL HAVE BEEN BROUGHT TO THE HAPPY ISSUE INTENDED."

The conduct of the Society has, for many years, given us reason to suspect
their MAIN VIEW was to EPISCOPISE the Colonies; but we were never before, that
I know of, told so in direct terms. His Lordship, in the presence of the
Society themselves, has not only specified their BUSINESS, but in plain words
declared, that it will be brought to its INTENDED HAPPY ISSUE, if they may "but
have Bishops, and the Church go out of its infant state so as to support and
spread itself". We are firmly persuaded, if their proper business is here
pointed out, and they prosecute it with the greatest vigor, the "happy issue
they intend" will never take place, according to their desire, at least in the
New England Colonies. These, for scores of years, have been the special object
of their sollicitous care; and may have cost them, from first to last, more a
great deal than thirty thousand pounds sterling. And what has been the effect?
There has gradually been the rise of about thirty three Episcopal churches, by
far the greater part of which are so small in number, and to this day so
insufficient for their own support, that, should the Society's pious charity
toward them be discontinued, there would be no probable hope of their long
continuance in being: Whereas, the Congregational and Presbyterian churches
only, without any charitable help from abroad, and in opposition to all efforts
to prevent it, have increased to the number of 550; and they go on increasing,
as much in proportion beyond the Episcopal churches as they exceed them in
number and ability. Why then should the Society expect "the happy issue they
intend"? There is no reasonable room for hope in the case: Especially, if it be
remembered, that we, in these parts, not only know the ERRAND of our
forefathers into this Country, but have been well indoctrinated in the
PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. "Old grudges and jealousies" are no
"obstacles" in the way of our going over to the Church; and as to "obsolete
piques and groundless fears", they are as fully "extinguished" here as in
"England". We prefer our own mode of worship and discipline to that of the
English church; and we do it upon principle, as really believing that it comes
nearer to the purity and simplicity of Gospel- direction. And as these are the
generally prevailing sentiments in New England, and their conduct has all along
been generally conformable hereto, we have no fearful apprehensions of a
departure herefrom; but are rather fully persuaded, they will stand fast: to
their principles, and closely adhere to that mode of worship which has hitherto
been in use among them, whatever attempts may be made to turn them aside.

You see, Sir, I have endeavored to comply with your desire. I hope your
expectations will not be disappointed. Possibly, your view may be to publish
these remarks. As to this, you may do as you please. No one is better able to
judge of the propriety or truth of the facts above related; and I may depend,
if they will not bear your scrutiny, they will have your perusal only.

I am, with great Respect, Your obliged, obedient, and humble Servant, CHARLES
CHAUNCY.
Boston, Dec. 10. 1767. P. S.
AS you said nothing to me of the Society-sermon, preached by Dr. Warburton,
Lord Bishop of Gloucester, in 1766, I conclude you had not seen it. While I was
finishing the foregoing remarks, his Lordship's third vol. of sermons on
various occasions, in which this was contained, was put into my hands. It will
not, I believe, be unacceptable, if I transcribe two or three passages in it
for your perusal.

Page 65. But though the zeal of the first Colonists (rekindled by this violent
remove to the other Hemisphere) kept religion alive and active, yet their
poverty disabled them from supplying fuel to the vital flame; I mean, provision
for A PREACHING MINISTRY. Insomuch, that without the kindly assistance of their
Mother Country, this new christian Commonwealth had been, as the Roman
historian expresses it of the imperial City in it is cradle, Res unius Aetatis.
Against this danger, a timely aid was to be provided. And the Founders of our
Society, etc. We doubt not his Lordship's through acquaintance with the history
of other more important Countries, even from their first rise; but the story of
this has certainly been below his notice. Otherwise, he would have known, that
some of the "first Colonists" were men of ample fortunes for that day. -- He
would have known also, if it was their unhappiness to be poor, that,
notwithstanding their poverty, they did in fact "supply fuel to the vital
flame", that is, make provision for a PRECHING MINISTRY; insomuch, that,
"without any kindly assistance of their Mother Country", they had a sufficiency
of Ministers for the performance of the public offices of religion, wherever
they extended their settlements. He would have known farther, that there had
been nearly the revolution of an age, if a century may be so called, and an
increase of Churches to some hundreds, with Pastors at the head of them, before
the existence of that incorporated body which was to supply a preaching
Ministry, without which religion could not be kept alive. And He would have
known moreover, that, since the incorporation of this Society, the growth of
Churches, and their supply with Ministers, at least in the New England
Colonies, has been much more than ten times greater without any help from them,
than where they have afforded it at an immense expense.

Page 67. Here then we might well leave these contentious people to themselves,
did not a miserable circumstance still call for our rejected charity: I mean,
the spreading GENTILISM in the Colonies themselves. Not a brutal ignorance of
God, as among the Savage natives; but a BLASPHEMOUS CONTEMPT of his holy
dispensations, among our Philosophic Colonists". With what truth, or justice,
this reproach is cast upon the Colonies may be seen in the foregoing remarks.
Only it may be said here, if there are any "Philosophic Colonists" who
"blaspheously contemn God's holy dispensations", they are not confined to the
descendants from "Fanatics"; but may as well be looked for in the Church, that
has been the special object of the Society's care; they themselves being judges.

It follows in the next words, The origin of which folly was, however, no more
than this. -- The rich product of the Plantations soon supplied the Colonists
with all the conveniences of life. And men are no sooner at ease, than they are
ready addressed to pleasure. So that the second venture of our Colonists was
for the luxuries of social life: Among which the commodity called FREE-THINKING
was carefully consigned to them, as that which gave a relish and seasoning to
all the rest. -- Thus it came to pass, that the VERY PEOPLE, whose fathers were
driven for conscience sake into the waste and howling wilderness, is now AS
READY TO LAUGH AT THAT BIBLE, the most precious relict of their ruined
fortunes, as at their ruffs and collarbands. Surely, his Lordship would not
have said this, had it not been told him by some, professing an acquaintance
with the posterity of those, who were driven into this wilderness. But be they
who they may, "the truth was not in them". -- They could not more basely or
falsely have spoken evil of them.

I shall only add, the reproachful light in which the Colonies are placed, more
especially in the two last Society-sermons, may possibly tend to move the
compassion of serious good people at home, and enlarge the exercise of their
pious charity toward us; but the growth of the Church here, the great thing in
view, will rather suffer than gain by it. Were these, and a few more sermons
breathing the same Spirit, to be reprinted and dispersed among the Colonists,
it would, I am persuaded, disserve the Church much more, than the mission of as
many Bishops as could be wished, would serve it.

Yours as above, C. C.




