COLLECTION OF SOME WRITINGS Of the most noted of the People called QUAKERS, in
their Times. Collected together, in order that such who profess that Way now
may compare their Sentiments with those of their Forefathers, as they term
them, or such as were deemed worthy Ancients, whose Writings have been approved
of by the Society in general.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed for the COMPILER, 1767.

INTRODUCTION BY WAY OF PREFACE.
HAVING lived for diverse Years amongst Friends, and frequently read diverse of
their Epistles and other Writings, and seeing several of their Practices
Correspond, caused me to think they were nea^ly the People they pros^ssed
themselves to be; and thereupon having contracted a particular Acquaintance
with their Forms and Customs, could not but he in Love with the Principle by
them prosessed, when as it were of a sudden, there appeared something of a
Usurpation, I believe I may call it, though I would Term it in the most moderate
way I could, be it what it may; it appeared in so strange a Dress and Language,
that it was immediately taken Notice of, and although several very well minded
Persons kept their Places, yet it was near causing a Change in this so valuable
a Government for its happy Privileges; at which Time there was a concern on my
Mind to revive some of the following Collection; (but just at the same Time, as
I make no doubt, there were diverse concerned for the welfare of the People, and
the valuable Constitution, there appeared a small Tract entitled, The
Christians Duty, to render unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's) which
appeared to have been so well penned, that I imagined it would be almost
needless for any Thing more to have been said.

But as in most Cases, those who prosess a Scheme, especially if they be such
as look upon themselves as of the foremost Rank, don't care to see or hear of
any Thing, which they apprehend will diminish or lessen the Credit of their
Proposals, wherefore diverse of those that had undertaken the Schism, neglecting
no Opportunity of cultivating their Schismatical Proposals, were very
industrious in urging their own Opinions, and there it reason to believe, being
Conscious, that whosoever read and considered the aforesaid Christian Duty,
must be of Opinion, that to d^vi^^ therefrom, would look like joining with the
Seeds of Sedition. I say from those Considerations, its likely those who had
undertaken the Usurpation, might e^deavour to secret the aforesaid small Tracts
that were published, as they appeared to be very much unkno^n for some Years in
diverse Places, scarcely any in many Parts of the Country who knew of any such
Thing, and being repeatedly, urged to comply with the (...) modelled
Injunctions; which being taken Notice of by some Well wishers of the common
Wealth, they promoted the Re printing of the said Christians Duty to render
unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, which now indeed is more Public; yet
nevertheless by their Vigilance, Industry, and boldly appointing, and as
rejolutely pursuing their Scheme, diverse weak People have been drawn into a
Compliance in Part of their Notions; and others there are who are, as may be
termed, Lukewarm in those Cases, and rather than contend, will hold their
Peace, whereby those that have undertaken thus to usurp the Authority of
introducing new Mattters and Forms, have so far encouraged themselves, as in
Effect to presume an Alteration in the civil Government Affairs.

Oh! I wish this may be well considered; its not my design to write my
Sentiments on this Subject at this Time, but cannot help observing that it
seems a most unhappy Time: Well, under the Consideration of those Things, and
for the good Will and Esteem I have bad, and still retain for those People, and
the many inestimable Privileges we have enjoyed in this Province, owing
chiefly to the happy Constitution and good Government thereof, I wish we may
sufficiently Prize it.

Well, as diverse Friends have wrote sufficiently clear, both in respect of
Government, and in regard of Customs and Tribute, I have taken the pains to
collect some few out of such unexceptionable Authors, and I flatter myself you
will not think your Time ill spent, in comparing their Sentiments with those of
the present high Professors, and consider the Authorities, and examine whether
there is not some Inconsistencies, and see whether you can reconcile the
Matters; if not, which must be received, and which rejected, for I would not
that any People should be so unsettled in Matters of Faith, as to be ready to
follow every new Opinion let it come under ever such a sanctified Appellation,
remembering the Words of the Apostle Paul in that Case.

If the Professors of that Society, will candily consider the following
Collection, and govern themselves accordingly, it will I presume redound to
their Peace of Mind, and Satisfaction of the Public, and be a sufficient
Recompense to a Friend and Wellwisher of this once happy Constitution, and
Mankind in General.

M. M.

A COLLECTION, etc.
From a FRIEND in a neighboring Government.
Dear FRIEND,
AS my Heart has been often pained with the Prospect of Things, which are
likely to hu^t us as a religious Society, and most deeply so at hearing that
some Friends in Pennsylvania assert, that they cannot, for Conscience Sake pay
the present Tax; I take the Freedom to commit some Thoughts to Writing on the
Subject, which thou may (if thou think thee may be of any Service in it)
communicate to some who are said to be the Leaders in that Sentiment, for
several of whom I have a most sincere Regard. I persuade myself neither thou
nor they will expect a finished Essay, where the Intention is simple and
honest. A few Mistakes (if such should appear) will, by the Candid, meet with a
favorable Construction. Truth will bear the Test of a few and impartial
Enquirers; and those who seek it sincerely will be pleased to meet with any
Objections which carry Light and Information in them. And as on one Hand all
sitting and due Regard ought to be paid to conscientious Scruples, so on the
other Hand, the utmost Care should be taken, that nothing is received in the
Church as a Matter of Faith and Practice, or be approved by the Society as
such, without proper Evidence and Demonstration; otherwise the Church or
Community may espouse Articles of Faith which cannot be supported, neither the
Members be able to render a Reason of the Hope that is in them.

The first Law was for raising 55000 L. for the King's Use; the next, for the
further Sum of 100,000 L for the same Use: But let it first be considerd, what
can be advanced as sufficient Reasons for us to pay all Taxes for the Support
of Government, and then the Objections that are made to these.

The first in Course is that in Mat. xxii. 17. and Mark xii. 14. etc. a
memorable Passage related by several of the Evangelists when the Herodians and
Pharisees joined in putting the Question to our Lord, What think thou? is it
lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar or not? It appears from the Account that
Josephus gives of the State of the Jews at that Time, that those two Parties,
Herodians and Pharisees, included almost the whole Nation; one of them
alleged, that they were forbid by God to acknowledge any Sovereign Power but
God only; and that it would be therefore very wrong in them to pay Tribute to
an Heathen Emperor: The other Party alleged, that as they were brought under
the Roman, Yoke, it would be the wisest Course they could take to submit
patiently thereto. This religious Dispute ran very high with them on their
putting the aforesaid Question to our Lord. He bid them show him the Tribute
Money, and asked whose Image and Superscription it had? They say unto him
Caesar's. Then faith he unto them, Render unto Caesar the Things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the Things that are God's. That this was clearly the
Will of our Lord, appears by his own Practice when at Capernaum, where he
wrought a Miracle to enable Peter to pay Tribute for them both, and gives a
weighty Reason, left we should offend them. And that the Apostles, immediate
Followers of our Lord, understood this indisputably to be his Mind, appears
from their being uniformly in the same Practice; for there is not (or I have
not met with) one Instance of their being charged with the contrary: And the
Apostle Paul, in the 13th Chapter of Romans, is very clear in several Verses,
particularly the 6th, "For this Cause pay we Tribute." Heretofore the Example
and Precepts of our Lord have appeared so strong, that I should not have
scrupled, saying with the Apostle, "If any Man teach otherwise, and consent not
to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about Questions and Strifs of Words, etc." But as
I believe some concerned in the present Matter are desirous of discharging a
good Conscience, I servently desire to treat them with Gentleness. It is well
known to all who are acquainted with the Roman History, that the Government to
which our Lord paid Tribute was a military Government, with indeed all that was
left of the civil Power, which was but a Shadow included in one Season, for it
was an usurped absolute Monarchy at that Time, possessed by Tiberius, one of
the most wicked Men that ever reigned. -- But let us come to our Brethrens
Objections. The Gospel Dispensation, say some, was not commenced, the Son of
God not being offered up, and therefore his paying Taxes may be answered as
fulfilling the Law, or being under the legal Dispensation. If it be considered,
that the Tribute was paid to an Heathen, and that no such Payment was never
derived by the Law of Moses; our Lord's Conduct cannot, with any Propriety, be
understood to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, because, in this Instance,
it was no ways relative thereto. Our ancient Friends, those Glorious Sons of
the Morning, in London, have, from time to time, frequently published to the
World, That they were a People that freely pay all Taxes for the Support of
Government; and usually, in Addresses to the King, or Applications to the
Parliament, have set Faith out cheerfully, paying their Duties, Custom, and
Taxes to the Crown, by which, having demonstrated their Loyalty and Subjection,
thought themselves entitled to the Indulgence and protection of the Crown. It
has been said, that Friends in England refused to pay Trophy Money, and that
the Tax here is more like that than Government Taxes. This naturally led me to
enquire into the Nature of the Trophy Money; as the Intelligence was conveyed
in Writing, and contains several (...) Distinctions, I subjoin it in my
Friend's Words, "We as a Christian Society, gathered into the true Spirit of
the Gospel, and under the blessed Government of the Prince of Peace, whose
Kingdom is not of this World; we have a clear and strong Testimony to bear
against Wars and Bloodshed; we cannot appear ourselves in Person, as Soldiers,
Military Men, nor can we hire one another to go or serve to our stead, neither
comply with the Payment of any Fine to procur^ another Man to supply our Place,
for these Things being personal, would, we conceive, be an indirect Violation
of the Precepts of the Gospel, and contrary to the Spirit thereof; and for the
same Cause, we have not complied with that Tax called a Trophy Tax, that Tax
being instead of, or to supply the Difficiency in former Laws relative to the
Militia, which had not made due Provisions for supplying the Officers with
Guns, Drums, Colors and other Military Attire, but was to empower or authorize
Towns, Boroughs, (...), to raise up Militia in Case of a Rebellion or
Insurrections; and the Trophy Tax was imposed to raise Money to purchase Guns
and Drums for the Militia, which being personal, and not a Tax for the support
of Government, the Society has always bore a Testimony against the Payment
thereof."

That it is not a Public Tax for the support of Government is clear, no
Account is ever rendered thereof to the King's Ministry, nor the Parliament; it
is not paid into the Treasury, nor raised annually in the Nation, but in
particular Places as Occasion may require, and relates to the Militia only. --
But to proceed with our Bretherns Objections, when the Matter was under
Consideration, at the Time an Epistle on the Subject was Signed by several
Friends, it was urged as the Principal Inducement to that Step, by those who
had the greatest Weight in that Conference, that the Members of our Society
were a Majority in the Assembly, and ought not to have voted Money for Warlike
Purposes, but to have stood firm to the Testimony, and not deviate therefrom;
and our freely paying that Tax would be joining with them in that Defection:
This had great Weight with Friends on that Occasion, who had been long pained
in Mind, on Account of the Conduct of some Friends in the Assembly; but is it
not evident that this Objection against paying the first Tax is removed,
respecting the second, viz. a Majority of our Profession in the Assembly, and
the last being laid by other People; and though it may be called a Supplement, or
Graft on the old R^ot, yet that Supplement or Craft was not made by those who
profess with us, nor can it be proved that the first was a Cause of, or
produced the second; there being no Room to suppose; but the late Money Bill
would have passed, had there been none before, the Crown having demanded that
Provision should be made, for the defense of the Province. The Appropriating
any Part of this Money, by those who are entrusted with it, to Purposes we do
not approve of, cannot I think be insisted on as an Argument against our paying
it, at least not by those who allow the Example of our Lord and his Followers
to be of any Weight. They did not, that we have any Information of at all,
enquire into the Uses, which the Governor would make of their Money; and it
never can be applied to worse Purposes than was common in those Governments. If
it be granted (as it readily will) that the Legislator have Power to levy
Taxes, or alienate a Part of the Estate of the Subjects to the Use and Purposes
of the Crown; and when they have so done, Is not so much Caesar's Due, or Right,
and the legal Property of the Crown? the Subject says no, it is yet his. Does
not the Subject who so refuses, depart from his Allegiance, and deny
Subjection, contrary to the Apostolic Injunction? But to this may be objected,
we don't pay Tithes, and they are enjoined by Law. Tithes were originally said
to be given to God, and the Holy Church, not by civil, but by ecclesiastic
Power, and were claimed as due by Divine Right, and are for the support of an
Antichristian Ministry, and were afterward only confirmed by Law; they were
not given to Caesar nor claimed by him, being deemed to relate to Spiritual
Things; and as Spiritual Things, or Matters relating to the Church of Christ,
are not in the Power of the civil Magistrates, but appertain to God only, so
there is no Parity between the Payment of Taxes for the Support of Government,
and the Payment of Tithes for the Support of an Hireling Minister: by the first
we comply with what is in the Power of the civil Magistrates to enjoin as God's
Ministers, but a Compliance with the latter, would be to give him God's Due,
which is Addoration and Worship; and Caesar is not to have them both, but one
only, viz. his Custom, his Tribute. Thus we may render to Caesar the Things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the Things that are God's. Seeing then all
outward Evidence, both Precept and Example, favor the Payment of Taxes, for
the Support of Government, upon what Foundation can the Scruple arise? Why, say
some, we are not easy to pay the Present Tax: We should bring a Load on our
Minds if we did; and we apprehend we have a Revelation of some Things more than
has heretofore been discovered, or a Call to bear a clearer Testimony against
War than was ever yet Done. But would it not be Prudent in these Friends to
consider, that as this Manner of Scrupling is not warranted by Scripture
Reason, nor the Practice of the faithful in all Ages, it calls for a serious
Re-consideration, in what Manner their Mission can be proved. New Revelation,
if it be received by others, must carry new Evidences, and very strong Ones
these ought to be to convince honest Minds, that they may safely leave the
Example of their Lord and Master, and act directly contrary thereto: And may
not, by the same Means now proposed, I mean Pretenses to further Light, the
most absurd Opinions be introduced into the Society, as Articles of Faith, if
the Precept and Practice of Christ, and his immediate followers, and our worthy
Elders, are not to be admitted as sufficient Bars to such Pretenses.

My Desires are so earnest, that what I look upon as an Extreme in those our
Brethren may be stoped, that it occasions much Matter to flow into my Mind, to
offer to their Consideration; but Time at Present will not admit of much
further.

And Oh! that I could hope there may never be Occasion to say more on the
Subject; but however that may be, I cannot conclude without this Remark, Ought,
or is it consistent for any Member of our Society to embrace any Thing, or
practice any Scruple, whereby the whole Body may be affected, without first
consulting, or having the concurrent Sentiment of their Brethren in Society, (I
mean the whole Society) as we are one People, and profess one Universal Spirit
the World over? May not a Practice, contrary to this, by a Person in the
Society, under any Pretenses whatsoever, promote Independency, and introduce
Anarchy, whereby the Body may be split into Parties; which is contrary to the
true Nature and End of the Society.

By a FRIEND to true Quakerism.

To which are added several Passages out of our Ancestors Writings, concerning
their Duty to Magistrates, in rendering to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's,
etc. -- Life of THOMAS STORY, Page 123.
"AT this Time Peter the Great, Czar of Muscovy, being in London, incog and
Gilbert Mollyson, (Robert Barclay's Wife's Brother) having heard that a Kinsman
of his was in the Czar's Service, and being desirous to increase the Knowledge
of the Truth, requested me to go with him, in Quest of his Kinsman, to the
Czar's Residence, a large House at the Bottom of York Buildings, in order to
present him with some of Barclay's Apologies in Latin, hoping that by that
means they might fall under the Czar's Notice, and be subservient to the end
proposed. Accordingly we went one Morning, and when we came to the Place,
Gilbert enquired of the Porter after his Cousin, but could not hear any Thing
of him in the lower Appartment, but was desired to stay till further enquiry
was made in the House, and a Servant went up Stairs to that End, and when
returned, invited us up. The head of the Staircase, on the first Floor,
brought us to the Entrance of a long Passage, which went through the middle of
the House, and there stood a single Man at a large Window, at the farther End
next the River Thames, to whom we ^re directed for Intelligence; and as we
walked a long, we observed two tall Men walking in a large Room on the right
Hand, but we did not stop to look at them, only transiently as we moved,
supposing one of them to be the Czar, of whom I had heard that he was not
willing to be looked upon; and careful not to offend him, behaved with Caution,
and went directly to the Person stand^ at the Window, of whom Gilbert Mollyson
enquired after his Kinsman, and he told us, that such a Person had been in the
Czar's Service, but was dead. In the mean Time came the Czar and the other to
us; the other I suppose was Prince Menzicoff, his General; our Backs were
toward them, and our Hats on, and when they approached, the Person with whom
we had conversed looked down upon the Floor with profound Respect and Silence,
but we stood in our first Posture, with our Faces toward the Window, as if we
had not taken any Notice of them; the Person we had conversed with was an
Englishman, a Muscovy Merchant, known to the Czar in his own Country,
understood his language, and was his Interpreter: Then the Czar spoke something
to him which we did not understand, upon which he asked us why do you not pay
respect to great Persons when you are in their Presence? I answered, so we do,
when we are fully sensible of it, especially to Kings and Princes; for though
we have laid aside and decline all vain and empty Shows of respect and Duty,
and flattering Titles, whereby they are generally deceived, by insincere and
designing Men, who seem to admire them for their own Ends; yet we yield all due
and sincere Respect and Duty to such, and all in Authority under them, by
giving ready Obedience to all their lawful Commands: But when at any Time any
of them, either through Tyranny or Ignorance, or ill Counsel, happens to
Command any Thing contrary to our Duty to the Almighty, or his Christ our Lord;
then we offer our Prayers and Tears to God, and humble Addresses unto such
Rulers that their Understandings may be opened, and their Minds changed toward
us.

The Czar gave no reply to this, but ^alked with his Interpreter again, who
then asked of what Use can you be in any Kingdom or Government, seeing you will
not bear Arms and fight? To this I replied, that many of us had borne Arms in
Times past, and been in many Battles, and fought with Courage and Magnanimity,
and thought it lawful, and a Duty then, in Days of Ignorance; and I myself have
worn a Sword, and other Arms, and knew how to use them: But when it pleased God
to reveal in our Hearts the Life and Power of JESUS CHRIST, his SON, our LORD,
who the Prince of Righteousness and Peace, whose Commandment is Love, we were
then reconciled unto God one unto another, unto our Enemies, and unto all Men;
and he that Commands that we should love our Enemies, has left u^ no right
to fight and destroy, but to convert them, and yet we are of Use, and helpful
in any Kingdom or Government; for the Principle of our Religion prohibits
Idleness, and excites to Industry, as it is written, they shall beat their
Swords into Plowshears, and their Spears into Pruninghooks; and we being
Husbandmen, concerned in all Manner of Husbandry and improvements, (...)
likewise in Manufactories and Merchandising, with the blessing of Heaven upon
our Labors, do not want, but rather abound. And though we are prohibited Arms,
and fighting in Person, as inconsistent (we think) with the Rules of the Gospel
of Christ; yet we can and do, by his Example, readily and cheerfully pay unto
every Government in every Form, where we happen to be Subjects, such Sums and
Assessments as are required of us, by the respective Laws ander which we live.
For when a general Tax was laid by the Roman Czar upon his extensive Empire,
and the Time of Payment came, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom is not of
this World, demanded of Peter, of whom do the Kings of the Earth take Custom or
Tribute? Of their own Children or of Strangers? Peter says unto him, of
Strangers: Jesus says unto him, then are the Children free; notwithstanding,
lest we should offend them, go th^^ to the Sea, and cast an hook, and take up
the Fish that first comes up, and when thou have opened his Mouth, thou shall
find a Piece of Money; that take and give unto them (the Tribute gatherers) for
me and thee: Thus working a Miracle, to Pay a Tax, where it was not strictly
due, we by so great an Example, do freely pay our Taxes to Caesar, who of
right, has the Direction and Application of them, to the various Ends of
Government, to Peace or to War, as it pleases him, or as need may be,
according to the Constitution or Laws of his Kingdom, and in which we, as
Subjects, have no Direction or Share; for it is Caesar's Part to Rule, in
Justice and in Truth, but ours to be Subject, and mind our own Business, and
not to meddle with his."

The Second Passage, in Page 269 of same Book, is what passed between THOMAS
STORY and a Judge, in a Court at New England; which is as follows.
"THE Prisoners being at the Bar, the Judges asked them the reason of their
obstinacy, (as he called it) running again into several high and undue Charges
against us as a People; the young Men modestly replied, it was not obstinacy,
but Duty to God, according to their consciences and religious Persuasions,
which prevailed with them to refuse to bear Arms or learn War; but the Judge
would not, by any Means, seem to admit there was any Conscience in it, but
Ignorance, and a perverse Nature, accounted it very irreligious in any who were
personally able, and legally required, to refuse their help now in time of War,
against Enemies so potent and barbarous as the French and Indians, with
repeated false Charges against us as a People, saying, since we could pay to
Public Taxes, which we know were to be applied to the Uses of War, why could
we not pay those which were by Law required of us, instead of our personal
Service and to excuse us? Then I stood up and desired leave of the Court to
speak, which was granted, and said, if the Judge pleased to keep to the present
Business of the Court, concerning the Prisoners, I would, with leave, speak to
the Point of Law in the Case; but if he thought fit to make it his Business to
continue to Charge us as a People with Errors in Matters of Religion, not
properly before him, I should think it mine to answer him in the Face of the
Court, Public and undue Charges, laying a necessity for, and excusing as
Public answers; added, that though what he had said of our paying one Tax, and
refusing to pay another, was gratis dutum, yet I could give the Court a full
Distinction and Reason, why we could pay the one, and yet not the other, which
the whole Court, except the Judge, was desirous to hear, and he (...) kept
Silent. I began with the Example of Christ himself, for the Payment of a Tax,
though applied by Caesar unto the Use of War, and other Exigencies of his
Government; and was going on to show a difference between a Law that directly
and principally affects the Person in War, requiring personal Service, and a
Law which only requires a general Tax, to be applied by Rulers as they see
cause, and affects not the Person: For though we as a People readily pay such
Taxes, impartially assessed, yet as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World,
his Servants will not fight, though they may and ought to pay Taxes, according
to the Example of Christ their Head".

Thus far Thomas Story, a wise Author, and true Christian Quaker.
An Epistle out of George Fox's Select Epistles, Page 137.
ALL Friends every where, who are dead to all carnal Weapons, and have beaten
them to Pieces, stand in that which takes away the occasion of War, in the
Power, which saves Men's Lives, and destroys none, nor would have others; and as
for the Rulers, that are to keep Peace, for Peace's Sake, and the Advantage of
Truth, give them their Tribute; but to bear and carry carnal Weapons to fight
with, the Men of Peace (which live in that, which takes away the Occasion of
Wars) they cannot act of such Things, under the several Powers, but have paid
their Tribute, which they may do still for Peace Sake, and not hold back the
Earth, but go over it, and in so doing, Friends may better claim their Liberty.

GEORGE FOX.

From George Fox's Select Epistles, Page 363. To Friends in Nevis and the
Carribee-Islands.
Dear Friends,
TO you all in Nevis, and the Carribee-Islands thereabouts. I have seen a
Letter from some of you, wherein I understand that there has been some Scruple
concerning watching or sending forth Watchmen in your own Way.

Truly, Friends, this I declare to you, that it is a great Mercy of the Lord,
to subject the Governor's Mind so much by his Power and Truth, that he will
permit you to watch in your own Way, without carrying Arms, which is a very
civil Thing, and to be taken Notice of. For could Friends obtain the same in
Jamaica, and other Places, they would willingly have done it, and did proffer
themselves for to do it to the Governors; but because that they would not bring
Swords and Guns, and other Arms, to watch against the Spaniards as they
pretended, their standing Fine was about Seventeen Shillings each Man's
Neglect, but they took often Thirty Shillings Worth for it, and tied some of
them Neck and Heels besides, till the Blood has come forth at their Mouths,
Nose and Ears; and this I have seen upon Record, who freely proffered to watch
in their own Way, but it would not be accepted, and in other Places it has
been the same.

And now, as for watching in itself, Don't you watch your Plantations against
Thieves in the Night? And are not common Watches set to discover Thieves in the
Towns, or House-breakers, or such as might wickedly Fire Houses? Such civil
Things we were subject to, and do submit ourselves for Conscience Sake, unto
every such Ordinance of Man, which are for the Punishment of evil Doers, and
for the Praise of them that do well.

Now those evil Doers, that may rob your Plantations or Houses, you complain to
the Magistrates for the Punishment of them, though you cannot swear against them;
or if the Indians come to rob your Plantations or Houses, you complain to the
Magistrates for the Punishment of such evil Doers, to stop them, which
Magistrates are for the Praise of them that do well; so this watching is for
the preventing Thieves and Murderers, and stoping burning of Houses: So we do
submit to every such Ordinance of ^len for the Lord's Sake. For the Apostle
Exhorts to Submi^ (...) whether it be to King as Supreme, or Governors, as
unto ^^em that are sent by him, for the Punishment of the evil Doers, and for
the Praise of them that do well; for so it is the Will of God, that with
well-doing you might put to Silence the Ignorance of foolish Men, as free, not
using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as Servants of God; so
that Justice, Truth and Righteousness may be set upon the Unrighteous and
Unjust, not using this Liberty for a Cloak of Unrighteousness to any one, but
as Servants in the Righteousness of the Righteous God, as you may see in 1
Peter 2, 13. and in Titus 3, 1. Put them in mind to obey Magistrates, and to be
ready to every good Work. Mark (every good Work) that is against the evil, as
Drunkenness, Murder, Whoredom, these and all Manner of Uncleanness; so far we
can obey them, in the Lord's Power and Truth, as they act against the evil, and
that which Dishonours God: And if they act against the good; or if they would
Compass as to those Things, which is Matter of Conscience in us toward God, we
resist not, but suffer under them; for Rulers are not to be a Terror to the
good Workers, but to the evil, and will thou then not be afraid of the Power;
do that which is good, and thou shall have Praise of the same, for he is a
Minister of God to thee for good, for he should ke^^ down the evil, but if thou
do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain, for
he is a Minister of God, to revenge and execute Wrath upon him that does evil.
So he is the Revenger and Executioner of the Wrath upon the evil Doer, as God
has placed him upon the Adulterer, and him that steals or kills, and bea^
false Witness, etc. But when the Magistrate turns his Sword backward upon the
Just and Righteous, then he abuses his Power, and therein the Just suffers
under him; and therefore, such has been warned by the Just, as you may see
through the Scriptures. So you are not to be the Revengers, but he is the
Revenger; and to that Power that executes the Revenge, and brings the Sword
upon the Adulterer, Murderer, Thief, false Witness, and other evil Doers, we
must be subject to that Power, and own that Power; not only for Wrath, but for
Conscience Sake; which is for the Punishment of the evil Doers, and the Praise
of them that do well. For if any should come to burn your House, or rob you, or
come to ravish your Wives or Daughters, or a Company should come to fire a City
or Town, or come to kill People, Don't you watch against all such Actions? And
will not you watch against such evil Things, in the Power of God, in your own Way?
You cannot but discover such Things to the Magistrates, who are to punish such
Things: And therefore the W^tch is kept and set to discover such to the
Magistrates, that they may be punished; and if he does it not, he bears his
Sword in Vain. So if thou watches thy own Plantation against Thieves in thy own
Way, which thou art desired, for the good of thyself and Neighbors, against
such as would burn thy Plantation, and thy Neighb^ur'^, and destroy and rob
you; Wilt not thou discover this to the Magistrates, to punish such evil Doers,
who is set for the punishing of the evil Doers, and executing Wrath upon them,
and for the Praise of them that do well? Surely yes. And for this Cause we pay
Tribute to them, and gives Caesar his Due, that we may live a godly and
peaceable Life under them, as they are God's Ministers, attending upon this
very Thing, to wit, the punishing of the evil Doers, and the Praise of them
that do well; for the Law was not made for the Righteous; but for the Sinner
and Disobedient, which is good in its place.

Now if they do not do their Duty, we are clear in giving them their Tribute or
Customs; I say, if they do not do their Duty to keep down evil Doers, and be
for the Praise of them that do well, God Almighty will turn against them. But
if the Magis^ra^e would have all, both God's Due and Caesar's too, that we
cannot give, for God must have his Worship, his Praise, his Honors, and his
Due; and Caesar must have his Due, his earthly Custom and Tribute; and so
herein, we render unto God the Things which are God's, and unto Caesar the
Things which are his. And whereas some may say, that the Apostle, would not eat
Flesh, lest he should ^fend his Brother; that was upon a religious Account, and
not to give Offense to the Magistrate, who is set for the punishing of the evil
Doers, and for the Praise of them that do well.

And whereas the Apostle says, Col. 2. Wherefore if you be dead with Christ,
from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are ye
subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to
perish with the using, after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men? Now these
Ordinances, these Doctrines, these Commandments, were concerning Religion and
Worship: And that was another Thing, where the Apostle says, be subject to
every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's Sake, which was for the Praise of them
that do well, and for the Punishment of the evil Doer. So he makes Distinction
here. And you know that Masters of Ships, and Friends have their Watches all
Night long; and they watch to preserve the Ship, and to prevent any Enemy or
Hurts that might come to the Ship, by Passengers or otherwise.

And Christ came in the fourth Watch of the Night, walking on the Sea, etc. And
Peter was in the Ship, and his Disciples, as you may see i^ Matthew 14, and in
Mark 6, and 48. And Simon Peter had Part of the Ship, as you may see in Luke 5.
And so it was, that James and John, Sons of, Zebedee, were Partners with Simon.
And Christ says, Luke xii. 38, 39, speaking of his coming, and exhorting to
watch, if he ( to wit, the Master) should come in the 2d or 3d Watch, and find
them watching, blessed are these Servants. So this watching was for Christ, an^
against Sin and Evil in their own Hearts. And then he brings a Comparison; And
this know, that if the good Man of the House, said he, had known, what Hour the
Thief would come, he would have watched, and not suffered his House to be
broken (...). And so here is the good Man's watching against Sin and Evil
without, and the Spoiler and Thief without, whom the Magistrate is to revenge,
and to lay his Sword upon. And here is also a watching against Sin and Evil
within, and a waiting to receive Christ the Lord at his coming.

And as there is a shutting the outward Doers, to keep out the Murderers and
the Thieves, and a bolting and locking them out; so there is a shuting up, and
locking the Door of the Heart, to keep out the Adulterer and Murderer, and all
that is deceitful, from coming within into the Heart.

And Friends, the Priests and Professors used to bring this Scripture, "You
must be subject to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's Sake, to the end that
we should pay them their Maintenance, and hold up their Worship. -- And when
the Magistrates brought that Scripture for these Ends, we could not obey them
in these Things, nor touch, nor taste their Ordinances, Doctrines nor
Commandments; but to be subject to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's Sake,
which was for the Punishment of evil Doers, as Drunkards, Thieves, Murderers,
Adulterers, and such like, and to keep down such evil Doers, and that we might
live a godly and peaceable Life under them, which was for the Praise of them
that do well, this we always owned, and were subject to, and watched against,
and declared against in our own Way, and laid such Actors and Actions before
the Magistrates, for them to punish, and keep down with their Power, which is
their Sword of Justice; but if they would compel us to Things that we could not
do, contrary to our Conscience, for the Lord's Sake, we suffered for it. So
where Friends has the Government, as in Rhode Island, and that Province,
Friends was willing to watch, in their own Way; and they made a Law that none
should be compelled to take Arms. So Friends have always proffered the
Magistrates, though they could not join with them in carrying Arms, Swords and
Pistols; yet to watch in their own Way, against the evil Doers.

And this they have proffered in Barbados, as I have heard, to discover if
Negroes should rise up to burn Plantations, or steal, or do any hurt, or other
Indians invading their Land.

And so if the Foreign Indians should come to steal your Goods, or to kill; for
you to be left to your Freedom to watch in your own Way, and to discover to the
Magistrate such as would destroy your Lives or Plantations, or steal, let them
come from at home, or come from abroad, such evil Doers the Magistrate is to
punish, who is for the Praise of them that do well; so that you may live and
lead a godly and peaceable Life under them: And you that are Righteous, your
watching, discovering and declearing against such evil Doers, and Things, you
clear yourselves, and demonstrate that your Testimony is against such Things;
and if the Magistrates should be evily inclined, and God should bring the evil
Doers as a Rod upon them, yet you are clear in your Testimony, that knows
Truth, and are in your Duty, and in your Obedience; and for this Cause he has
his Tribute, and his Custom, and his Due, and double Honor, if he rules well;
and God has his Praise and his Honor, and in that Power and Truth of God,
which is against Untruth and the Power of Darkness; and in the Light which is
against Evil, and in the Life which is against Death; you discover the bad to
him, for him to punish them upon true Evidence, and if he does not do it, it
will lie upon him. And if he be a Praise to the Evil, and a discouragement to
the Good, then the Lord will deal with him; and though to such for Conscience and
for the Lord's Sake, we cannot be subject to the evil, but ^ather suffer
thereby, and are subject to that which punishes and keeps down the evil, and
are glad of it; and we desire that Justice were uppermost in all Magistrates,
that they would hear Friends at their Yea and Nay, that do come to them, and
discover to them the evil, and that they might see what they should do, and
what they should not do; so Friends may discover all that which is evil, which
comes to devour and destroy, both within and without, both within the Island
and without, to them that should keep it down. And so in the Lord's everlasting
Power, in which Freedom is and Dominion, the Lord God Almighty keep you in his
Power and Life in the Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light in
you, that you may see over the Devil that had darkened you, and kept you in a
Separation from God; so that by his Gospel, the Power of God, which was before
the Devil was, and will be when he is gone, who was the Author of Strife, that
in that Power you may all freely approach to God, and in it feel nothing
betwixt you and the Lord of hindering your Passage unto him; so that in this
Gospel, the Power of God, in which Life and Immortality is brought to Light,
you may keep and feel your Everlasting Fellowship and Order of the Gospel;
which is not of Man nor by Man.

So with my Love to all Friends in all those Parts, as though I named them; and
be at Peace one with another, neither judge one another about such Things, but
live in Love, which does edify. And in the Power of God, that your Hearts and
Souls, and Minds may unite together in it, and all to walk as becomes the
Gospel; and let your Lives and Conversations Preach that with a Measure of the
Spirit of God, you may reach to that of God in all; so that his Name may be
glorified, and he honored, in your bringing forth much heavenly Spiritual
Fruit, from the heavenly Seed, that Christ the heavenly Seed's-man has sown in
your Hearts; that so an hundred fold of Holiness, Righteousness, Godliness,
Virtue and Piety, from this heavenly Seed you may bring forth and increase in
this Life time, and in the World ^o come, reap Life everlasting.

And give no Occasion to your Adversaries, neither in your Lives ^or Words; but
that you may all serve God in the new Life, showing forth that you are new Men,
and that you are renewed ^n the Image of God, and that you are born again of
the Immortal heavenly Seed, by the Eternal Everlasting Word, that lives and
abides, and endures for ever; and that you do seed upon the heavenly Milk and
Bread from above, and that your Conversation is in Heaven, and that you are
clothed with the fine heavenly Linen, which is the Righteousness of Saints,
which is Christ's (the heavenly and Spiritual Man's) Livery, by which his
Servants are known by his Badge of Righteousness and distinguished from all the
Servants of old Adam, Egypt, Sodom and Babylon, with their Badge of
Unrighteousness.

And so be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and spread it abroad: Preach
Christ and his Kingdom, his Light, his Grace and Truth to Men, that all should
walk in it, and his dreadful Day upon all the Talkers of God, Christ, his
Prophets and Apostles Words, that do not walk in the same Power, Spirit and
Life, Grace and Truth, as they walked in.

I say, Preach this to the Magistrates, and amongst the Heathen Men, and show
yourselves to be quickened (by Christ) who have been dead in Sins and
Trespasses; but that you are now made alive by him, and show forth his Light,
Life and Truth, and that you are awake^ed to Ri^^^eousness; and therefore show
it forth to them that are a Sleep in the Unrighteousness; so that the Lord's
Glory, and Righteous Power, Truth, Light and Life, may flow over all, to the
Glory over all, for ever, Amen.

And much I could write to you concerning these Things; but I have not been
very well; but blessed be the Lord God, his Everlasting Seed is over all, which
Reigns from Everlasting to Everlasting, and my Life is in it.

And therefore, stand and live in the Lord's Name and Power, which is against
all Manner of Unrighteousness; and in the Light which is against Darkness, and
all the Works thereof, and in the Life, which is against Death, and over Death,
and all the Actors of i^; and in the Truth, that is over all Evil, and against
all the Doers thereof, within and without. And, so that in the Light, Life,
Power and Truth of God, and in his holy Spirit, you may live in Fellowship, and
in the Unity of the Spirit, which is your Bond of Peace; Yea even of the Prince
of Princes Peace, which the World cannot take away from you.

Swarthmore, the 5th of the 9th Month, 1676. G. F.

Likewise, one or two Paragraphs out of the Ancient Testimony of the People
called Quakers, revi^ed. Printed at Philadelphia, in the Year, 1723.
Now, before we go further, we think proper to give some Account of our
Principles and Practices, concerning those mutual Relations or Ranks of Men.
"And first of Kings, Rulers and Magistrates; as it is our Belief that the
Powers and Government we live under are of the Lord; so we acknowledge, that
Fidelity and Subjection is due to those who are in Authority over us, expecting
only the Benefit of those good La^ which are deemed our Birthright, as English
Subjects, and not the Protection by Gun and Sword, which others makes the Terms
of their Allegiance; and we faithfully own, that Magistra^y is an Ordinace of
God, and those who rule well are worthy of double Honor, and deserve to be
really valued and much esteemed, not by giving them vain Appellations or
slattering Titles, nor by bowing the Body, or uncovering the Head, nor by
feigned Words called Compliments; but by obeying their just and lawful
Commands, wherein the true Honor and Subjection due to them does chiefly
consist.

And it has been and is our frequent concern, according to pure Leadings and
Dictates of God's holy Spirit, in our nearest Approaches to the Throne of his
Grace, to make Supplication, Prayer, Intercession, and giving of Thanks for
Kings, and all that are in Authority. And we have not been wanting in our
respective Places and Stations, to put People in Mind, as the Apostle exhorted,
to be subjected to Pri^^ipalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to
submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake; whether it be to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him for the
Punishment of evil Doers, and the Praise of them that do well; for so the
Magistrates are Ministers of God to us for good, bearing not the Sword in Vain,
being Revengers to execute Wrath upon him that does evil; and for this Cause
pay we Tribute also, for they are God's Ministers, attending continually on
this very Thing. Yet when Laws and Statutes were made, requiring certain
Conformities, which for Conscience Sake could not be complied with, by our
faithful Friends; some Magistrates, instead of the Sword of Justice, took up
the Sword of Persecution against them; Nevertheless they did not resist, but
patiently suffered the spoiling of their Goods, grievous Imprisonments,
Scourging and Banishment from their tender Families, Friends and Relations,
choosing, as the holy Apostles did in the like Case, to obey God rather than
Men. For they could not but speak the Things which they had seen and heard; and
for all this cruel Usage and Sufferings, they paid their Taxes and Tributes,
rendering to Caesar the Things which were his, and to God the Things that were
his; for so was the Will of God, that with well-doing, they should put to
Silence the Ignorance of foolish Men.

An Observation that a wise Author (William Penn) made on the Frame of
Government.
HE ^aith, "When the wise and great God had made the World, of all his
Creatures, it pleased him to choose Man his Deputy to rule it; and to fit him
for so great a Charge and Trust, he did not only qualify him with Skill and
Power, but with Integrity to to use them ju^^y. This native Goodness was
equally his Honor and his Happiness. And whilst he stood here, all went well;
there was no Need of coercive or cumpulsive Means; the Precept of divine Love
and Truth, in his Bosom, was the Guide and Keeper of his I^^ocency: But Lust
prevailing against Duty, made a lamentable Breach upon it; and the Law, that
had before no Power over him, took Place upon him and his disobedient
Posterity, that such as would not live conformable to the holy Law within,
should fall under the Reproof and Correction of the just Law without, in a
judicial Administration.

This the Apostle teaches in diverse of his Epistles: The Law, says he, was
added because of Transgression. In another Place, Knowing that the Law was not
made for the Righteous Man, but for the Disobedient and Ungodly, for Sinners,
for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers, for Whoremongers, for them that defile
themselves with Mankind, and for Men-stealers, for Liars, for perjured Persons,
etc. But this is not all, he opens and carries the Matter of Government a
little further; -- let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is
no Power but of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God: Whosoever
therefore resists the Power resists the Ordinance of God; for Rulers are
not a Terror to good Works but to Evil: Will thou then not be afraid of the
Power? Do that which is good and thou shall have Praise of the same; he is the
Minister of God to thee for Good: -- Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake.

This settles the divine Right of Government beyond Exception, and that for two
Ends: First, to terrify evil Doers. Secondly, to cherrish those that do well;
which gives Government a Life beyond Corruption, and makes it as durable in the
World as good Men shall be; so that Government seems a Part of Religion itself,
a Thing sacred in its Institution and End: For if it does not directly remove
the Cause, it crushes the Effects of Evil, and is as such (though a lower yet)
an Emanation of the same divine Power, that is both Author and Object of pure
Religion; the Difference lying here, that the one is more free and mental, the
other more corporeal and compulsive in its Operations; but that is only to evil
Doers, Government itself being otherwise as capable of Kindness, Goodness and
Charity, as a more private Society. They weakly err, that think there is no
other Use of Government than Correction, which is the coarsest Part of it.
Daily Experience tells us, that the Care and Regulation of many other Affairs,
more soft and daily necessary, make up much the greatest Part of Government;
and which must have followed the peopling of the World, had Adam never fell,
and will continue amongst Men on Earth, under the highest Seize they may
arrive at, by the the Coming of the blessed Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven.
Thus much of Government in general, as to its Rise and ^^nd. For particular
Frames and Models, it will become me to say little; and comparatively I will
say nothing. My Reasons are, First, that the Age is too nice and difficult for
it, there being nothing the Wits of Men are more busy and divided upon. It Is
true, they seem to agree in the End, to wit, Happiness; but in the Means they
differ, as to divine, so to this human Felicity; and the Cause is much the
same, not always want of Light and Knowledge, but want of using them rightly.
Men side with their Passions against their Reason, and their sinister Interests
have so strong a Biass upon their Minds, that they lean to them against the
Good of the Things they know. Secondly, I do not find a Model in the World,
that Time, Place, and some singular Emergencies have not necessarily altered;
nor is it easy to frame a civil Government that shall serve all Places alike.
Thirdly. I know what is said by the several Admirers of Monarchy, Aristocracy
and Democracy, which are the Rule of one, a few, and many, and are three common
Ideas of Government, when Men discourse on that Subject. But I choose to solve
the Controversy with this small Distinction, and it belongs to all three. Any
Government is free to the People under it (whatever be the Frame) where the
Laws Rule, and the People are a Party to those Laws; and more than that is
Tyranns, Oligarchy, or Confusion. But, lastly, When all is said, there is
ha^^lly one Frame of Government in the World so ill designed by its first
Founders, that in good Hands would not do well enough; and Story tells us, the
best in ill Ones can do nothing that is great or good: Witness the Jewish and
Roman States. Governments, like Clocks, go from the Motion Men give them; and
as Governments are made and moved by Men, so by them they are ruined too;
wherefore Governments rather depend upon Men, than Men upon Governments. Let
Men be good, and the Government cannot be bad; if it be ill, they will cure it:
But if Men be bad, let the Government be never so good, they will endeavor to
warp and spoil it to their Turn. I know some say, Let us have good Laws, and no
Matter for the Men that execute ^h^m: But let them consider, that though good
Laws do well, good Men do better; for good Laws may want good Men, but good Men
will never want good Laws, nor suffer ill Ones. It Is true, good Laws have some
Awe upon ill Ministers, but that is where they have no Power to escape or
abolish them, and the People are generally wise and good; but a loose and
depraved People (which is to the Question) love Laws and an Administration like
themselves. That, therefore, which makes a good Constitution, must keep it,
viz. Men of Wisdom and Virtue; Qualities that, because they descend not with
worldly Inheritances, must be carefully propagated by a virtuous Education of
Youth, for which, after Ages will owe more to the Care and Prudence of
Founders, and the successive Magistracy, than to their Parents for private
Patrimonies.

These Considerations of the Weight of Government, and the nice and various
Opinions about it, made it uneasy to me to publish the ensuing Frame, and
conditional Laws, foreseeing both the Censures they will meet with from Men of
differing Humors and Engagements, and the Occasion they may give of Discourse
beyond my Design. But next to the Power of Necessity (which is a Solicitor that
will take no Denial) this induced me to a Compliance, that we have (with
Reverence to God, and good Conscience to Men) to the best of our Skill,
contrived and composed the Frame and Laws of this Government, to the great End
of all Government, viz. To support Power in Reverence with the People, and to
secure the People from the Abuse of Power; that they may be free by their just
Obedience, and the Magistrates honorable for th^^ (...) j^^^d (...) for
Liberty without Obedience is Confusion, and Obedience without Liberty is
Slavery. To carry this Evenness is partly owing to the Constitution, and partly
to the Magistracy; where either of those fail, Government will be subject to
C^avulsions; but where both are wanting, it must be totally subverted: Then
where both meet, the Government is likely to endure. Which I humbly pray, and
hope God will please to make the Lot of this of Pennsilvania.

WILLIAM PENN.

And I think the Author to the useful Miscellanies, has these Words (in Page
25.) It is the undoubted Prerogative of Princes to Command, and the Duty of
Subjects to obey. It Is better to be a Daniel in Disobedince to Men, than a
Judas in Rebellion to God; yet no Disobedience to Princes is to be cloaked
under the Pretexture of Sanctity, without a Conscientious Persuasion grounded
upon a Foundation of holy Writ.

And when King Charles asked our Friend, Richard Hubborthorn, (Sewel's History,
Page 249) How do you own Magistrates or Magistracy? R. H. answered, Thus we do
own Magistrates: Whosoever is set up by God, whether King as Supreme, or any
set in Authority by him, who are for the Punishment of evil Doers, and the
Praise of them that do well, Such we shall submit unto, and assist in Righteous
and Civil Things, both by Body and Estate. And though I judge it not lawful for
them to make War, and for all that they think that they may very safely be
tolerated by the Civil Government, not only because they are willing and ready
to pay Taxes to Caesar. And again, Sewel has these Words, concerning the Sword
of Magistracy; They do in no wise assert, ( e. i. F -- ds.) that it is unlawful
for some Christians to be Magistrates; for to say so, what does it imply but
the unchristianing of Magistrates, whom they truly honor; Magistracy being the
Ordinance of God. They believe this Office to be consistent with Christian
Religion, etc. And in an Address to King William the Third, Friends expressed
themselves thus. We are also engaged to bless the Lord, for that he has
manifestly frustrated the mischievous, and treacherous Designs of thine and the
Nations's Adversaries, both against the lawful establishment of thy Throne, and
the true Interest of thy Protestant Subjects: And we beseech Almighty God, to
bless the good Designs, and just Undertakings of the King, and his great
Council, for the good of his People, and for obtaining to Europe a firm and
lasting Peace; and continue Thee, O King, a blessing to these Nations,
establish thy Throne in Mercy and Truth; give to thee a long and prosperous
R^g^^ over us, and hereafter a glorious Immortality, is, and shall be the
fervent Prayer of us thy true and faithful Subjects. Again, our worthy Friend
Francis Howgils's Answer to Judge Turner, on his Trial at the Assizes held at
Appleby, is worthy of our Notice, when the Judge asked him, "Why do you not
come to Church, and hear Service, and be subject to the Law, and to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake? (Answered) We are subject, and for that
Cause we do pay Taxes, Tribute and Custom, and give unto Caesar the Things that
are his, and unto God the Things that are his, to wit, Worship etc."

To which may be added two or three Passages out of Arscotts Works, Page 251,
and 52. "And in Regard we have been favored by the Government, with the
Enjoyment of our religious Liberties in common, with other Protestant
Dissenters, and in an especial Manner relieved, by the Legislator in several
Cases, which peculiarly concerns us as a People, We therefore think ourselves
obliged earnestly to advise all Friends, that they be particularly careful to
behave with all Dutifulness and Gratitude, and especially to discountenance
every the least Appearance of indecent Freedom, or Mark of Dissatisfaction in
Word or Writing, relating to the Government".

And in the Epistle for 1732, is the following Clause, "It is acceptable to us
to find by the Accounts from the several Parts of the Kingdom, that (according
to former Exhortation of the Meeting) Friends continue generally careful not to
defraud the King of his Customs, Duties or Exercises; and so far to discourage
such Practices, as to avoid dealing in Goods, reasonably suspected to be run.
This is a Care highly commendable, and no doubt very incumbent on every honest
Subject: But as the Government has signally favored us in our religious
Liberties, we are under the greater Obligation of Gratitude, as well as Duty,
to manifest that we are as truly Conscientious to render to Caesar the Things
that are Caesar's, as to support any other Branch of Christian Testimony."

Also in the yearly Meeting Epistle for 1733, the Duty is again recommended in
these Words, "The good Account we have received of Friends Care in general, to
keep themselves clear of defrauding the King, in any of his Customs, Duties and
Excise, are very acceptable to us, and we do, as formerly, so now again,
recommend the Continuance of a Duty so necessary and incumbent on every good
and faithful Subject, being expressly Commanded by Christ himself; Render
therefore unto Caesar the Things which are Caesar's, Matthew xxii Chap. 21
Verse."

And our Friend Joseph Besse, in his Defense of Quakerism, in answer to Patrick
Smith, Vicar of Great Paxton, in Hunterdonshire, where he accuses Friends of
holding unreasonable and seditious Principles, highly destructive of
Government, has these Words, in Page 135.

"The paying of our Taxes, imposed by Law, for the Service of Government, is
consistent with the Precept of Christ, Render unto Caesar the Things that are
Caesar's, to which we yield a ready Obedience; nor does it concern us, what
Purposes Caesar shall apply these to; but the Case of paying Tithes is quite
different, where the Law, as we think, enjoins us to do what Christ has
prohibited; therefore, choose therein to obey God rather than Man.

This is a Principle neither unreasonable nor seditious, unless the prefering
Christ's Precepts to Men's Injunctions can merit those Epithets." Again, in
Page, 217, answers thus, "This Tale has no more Weight than the former. Was not
the Government there (meaning Pennsylvania) always subject to the Government
here, from whence they received their Authority? And were they not as Subjects
obliged in Duty to supply the Government here with such Sums of Money as should
be equally laid upon them, for the common Good and Security of the Plantations
there? In finding Money therefore for the Service of the Government, they
performed but that which all Quakers hold to be their Duty. viz. Rendering to
Caesar the Things that are Caesar's; they must then have been very inconsistent
with themselves, to have disowned a Man for acting agreeable to their
Principles."

And I think that worthy Minister of the Gospel, Robert Barclay, has these
Words in Page 486, concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate, in Matters
purely religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.

"Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it; therefore it is not lawful for
any whosoever, by Virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the
Government of this World, to force the Conscience^ of others; and therefore all
killing, banishing, fining, imprisoning and other such Things, which are
inflicted upon Men for the alone Exercise of their Conscience, or difference in
Worship or Opinion, proceeds from the Spirit of Cain, the Murderer, and is
contrary to the Truth; providing always, that no Man under the Pretense of
Conscience, Prejudice his Neighbor in his Life or Estate, or do any Thing
destructive, or inconsistent with human Society; in which Case the Law is for
the Transgressor, and Justice is to be administered upon all, without Respect of
Persons." I shall conclude with the Advice of the Apostles, "Let all your
Things be done with Charity; put on therefore, as the Elect of God, holy and
beloved, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Longsuffering, forbearing one with another, and forgiving one another, etc. And
above all Things put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness; and above
all Things nave fervent Charity among yourselves, for Charity shall cover a
multitude of Sins.

The Authority and Government which Christ excluded out of his Church, etc.
Matt xx. Verse 25 to the 29th.
BUT Jesus called them unto him and said, Ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
Authority upon them; but it shall not be so among you: But whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister. And whosoever will (...) chief among
you, let him be your Servant. Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many.

Here Christ cuts off that Power and Authority which grows up in the corrupt
Nature of Man, which was ever and anon springing up even in the Disciples. Here
he wholly excludes it out of his Church, and says, expressly, he would have no
such Thing among them; no such Kind of Greatness, nor no such Kind of
Authority. Among the Gentiles there are great Ones, there are Princes; and
these great Ones, these Princes, they lord it over the inferior Ones,
exercising Authority and Dominion over them; but it shall not be so among you.

The Gentile State was a Shadow, even as the Jews State was a Shadow, the one
of Death, the other of Life, the one of Darkness, the other Light; the one was
the Image of Satan, the Prince of Wickedness, the other of Christ, the Prince
of Righteousness and Peace; they were both Vails, under which the two Kingdoms
were hid.

Now in this Gentile State there were Nations, Princes, Laws, Governments,
Dominions, Authorities, etc. But all in the Past, all in the Darkness, all in
the Transgression from the Life, the whole State was corrupt, and there must be
no Imitation from hence, no Likeness of any such Thing in the Kingdom of
Christ, no such Kind of Law, no such Kind of Government, no such Kind of
Authority, no such Kind of Anger with Persons that Transgress, no such Kind of
Dealing with any, no such Kind of Detriment or Hurt to any Thieves, nothing to
hurt in the Mountains of God's Holiness; but there is a righteous Scepter, a
sweet Scepter, a spiritual Scepter, which Preaches the Spirit in the Power of
Life, but touches not the outward Man.

Two Things are here excluded by Christ, from whence all the Mischief arises
in the Church (all the Tyranny and Oppression of Men's Consciences, and of
their Persons, Estates and Liberties for Conscience Sake) first, Greatness;
secondly, the Exercising Dominion and Authority by those that would be Great
therein.

Such a Kind of Greatness as is in the World, its the Destruction of the Life
of Christ, and such a Kind of Dominion and Authority as is among the Nations,
is the direct Overturning of the Kingdom of Christ: It sets up another Power
than Christ's, another Grea^ness than Christ's, another Kind of Authority than
Christ's, and so it eats out the Virtue and Life of his Kingdom, and makes it
just like one of the Kingdoms of this World. It shall not be so among you. This
Spirit must be kept out from among you: This aspiring Spirit, this lofty ruling
Spirit, which loves to be great, which loves to have Dominion, which would
exalt itself, because of the Gifts it has received, and would bring others
into Subjection, this Spirit must be subdued amongst Christ's Disciples, or it
will ruin all. The Lord gives Grace and Knowledge for another End than for Men
to take upon them to be great, and rule over other because of it. And he that,
because of this, thinks himself fit to rule over other Men's Consciences, and
to make them bow to what he knows or takes to be Truth; he loses his own Life
hereby, and so far as he prevails upon others, he does but de^y their Life too;
for it is not so much speaking true Things that does good, as speaking them
from the Pure, and convey^ t^em to the Pure; for the Life runs along from the
Vessel of Life in one, into the Vessel of Life in another; and the Words
(though never so true) cannot convey Life to another, but as the Living Vessel
opens in the one, and is opened in the other.

Question. But how shall this Spirit be kept out, or kept down, that it may not
hurt the Disciple in whom it arises, or if it do, that the Hurt may remain to
himself, and may not prejudice the Church? Answer. When this Spirit begins to
arise up in any, so soon as ever he perceives it in that, that discovers it, he
is to fight against it: Laying himself so much the lower, by how much he finds
this evil Spirit raising him up; he is to hearken to that wh^^ presents the
Cross to it, and so to come down and subject himself in serving and ministering
to those who are little in his Eyes, instead of reinging over them: Let him lie
beneath them; let him watch and know the Life even in the meanest, and serve
it, for that is his Place. That which would Rule is to serve, that which would
be great is to be little, and the little One is to become a Nation; that which
is low is to rise, and thou art not fit to rise with it, further than thou
can serve it, both in thyself and others. Therefore if ever thou be'st
aspiring, if ever thou have amind to rule, if ever thou think thyself fit to
teach, because of what thou^ have received; sink down, lie low, take up the
Cross to that proud Spirit, make it bend and serve, let the Life in every one
rise over it, and trample upon it; and afterward, that in thee may arise,
which is fit to teach, yea, and to rule in the Lord, and so long as that has
the Dominion, thou may be serviceable to the Lord, and to his Truth and
People; but if ever the other get up again, thou must presently come down
again, or the wrong Spirit will get Dominion over thee, which with force and
cruelty will rule over the Life, both in thyself and others. Thus, if a Man be
faithful to Christ, this evil aspiring Spirit, at its first Appearance may be
dealt with, and kept down; but if it be cherished, given way to, and once let
up, it will be hard bringing of it down afterward; therefore the Disciples, or
the Church of Christ, they are to watch over every such Spirit, to beat it
down, to testify against it, to turn from it, to lay it flat, to put it in its
proper Place, that is beneath all, to minister to all, and so not suffer it to
rise; see Verse 26th, Let him be your Minister: This is his Place, this is his
Work, by the Authority of Christ; he that would be great, he that would rule,
let him minister; own him there if he will lie low there, if he will be
faithful there, ye may have Unity with him; but in that his aspiring Temper, in
his ruling, in his teaching by what he has gained, or what has been given to
him formerly (if out of the present Life) he is to be denied and turned from.

If this Rule of Christ had been kept to, Antichristian Power could never have
got up, nor the poor innocent Lambs so often have been worried by the Wolves.
Ah, poor Hearts, how simply (...) they come thither, where they once tasted
Refreshment, to find wholesome Advice, not suspecting what is got up there
since! but give the Dominion to a wrong Thing, and so take Directions from a
wrong Spirit, and betray their own Simplicity.

Christ urges this upon his Disciples from his own Pattern, Even as the Son of
Man came not to be ministered unto, but etc. Verse 28th. If any had right to be
great, surely Christ; if any had right to exercise Authority, surely Christ; if
any was to be advanced because of any Gift received, or because of any Presence
of the Spirit with him, surely Christ. Yet Christ took not upon him this Kind
of Greatness, nor did exercise this Kind of Authority, but he was a Servant, he
made use of the Gift of the Spirit, of the Power of Life wherewith the Father
filled him, to minis^^ and serve with; he did never lord it over the
Consciences of any of his Disciples, but did bear with them, and pity them in
their Infirmities: (What can ye not watch with me one Hour? The Spirit (said
he) is willing, but the Flesh is weak.) He did not hold forth to them whatever
he knew to be Truth, requiring them to believe it, but was content with them in
their State, and waited till their Capacities were enlarged, being still
satisfied with the Honesty and Integrity of their Hearts in their present State
of Weakness. Nor did he strive to reign over the World, or call for Fire from
Heaven, when they would not receive him or express Indignation when they
desired him to depart out of their Coasts; or pray for twelve Legions of Angels
when they came to betray him, and most unrighteously sought his Life; but the
Life he had received of his Father, he gave up as a Ransom for his Disciples,
yea, and for his Enemies. Mark, he did not make use of what was given to him,
to raise himself up above others, to make his Word to stand for a Law, and be
received, but he waited till that was opened in his Disciples, and in People
which was able to receive his Testimony; and he made use of his Power of Life,
and the Fullness of the Spirit, to enable him the more abundantly to serve and
to wait in Patience, for the fulfiling of the Will of the Father. And though
Israel was not gathered by him, yet was he me^^, and patient, and at rest in
the Will of him that sent him; and instead of reigning over all, could serve
all, and give that Life (whose Due it was to reign) a Ransom for many. Verse
28th.

His Kingdom was not of this World, nor did he seek any Greatness or Authority
according to this World, neither over the Jews, nor over the Gentiles, nor over
his own Disciples; but he served all, he sought the Good of all, the Life in
him which was to reign over all, yet he reserved all, suffered for all, and
from all and that was his Way to his Crown; who having finished his Course,
fulfiled his Service, perfected his Sufferings, is set down on the right Hand
of the Majesty on high, where now he Reigns over all, and is made a King by God
in Righteousness. And this is the Pattern, which all his Disciples are to Walk
by; the more Life they receive, the more they are to minister; the more they
are to serve, they must not lift up themselves by their Gifts; they ^ust not
hereupon lord it over others, or hold forth their Knowledge or Doctrines, and
think to make others bow thereto, but wait in their Service, till the Lord make
way into Men's Hearts, and pla^t his Truth there, and upon him also must they
wait for the Watering and Growth of it.

Question. But is there to be no Greatness, no Authority amongst the Disciples
of Jesus, or in the Church of Christ; is every one to do what he will, to be
subject to his own Fan^ies and Imaginations, to the Inventions of his own
corrupt Heart? what a confused Building will this be. Sure this will not long
remain a Zion, but soon become a Babylon, even a Heap of Disorder and Confus^^^.

Answer. There is to be no such Kind of Greatness, no such Kind of Authority;
yet there is both Greatness and Authority, suitable to the State of Disciples,
suitable to that Kind of Kingdom whereof they are. There are Laws, there are
Governments, there are Governors, there is ruling, and there is subjecting, but
all in the Spirit, all suitable to that which is to be governed; but no
Government of or according to the Flesh; as Christ's Kingdom is not as this
World, so the Government of his Church and People is not according to this
World, but that which gathers is his Spirit, and that which is gathered is
Spiritual; so that which is governed is the Spirits of his People, and they are
to be governed by his Spirit, and Spiritually, and not after a fleshly Manner.

Thus Christ himself, though he ministered to his Disciples, yet he also was
their Lord and Master, and in the Spirit and Life of the Father, ruled over
them; and thus the Apostles and other Ministers of Christ, had likewise, in the
Spirit, the Care of the Churches, and Authority in the Lord, by his Spirit, to
govern the Spirits of his People; not to govern after a fleshly Manner, by
their own Wills; not to prescribe them in a lordly Way, either what they should
believe or practice, but in the Light, and in the Power of the Spirit, to make
their Way into every ones Conscience in the Sight of God, ministering to every
one in the Spirit, according to their Capacity and Growth, and waiting
patiently for God, to convey the Food and Nourishment, and to build their
Spirits up in the Faith thereby.

The Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets.

Here is the Government, here is the Law of Rule and Subjection in the Life:
Every one feeling a measure of the Spirit in himself, is thereby taught to own
and subject to a greater Measure of the same Spirit in another. He that has no
Measure of the Spirit of God, he is not of God, he is none of Christ's; and he
that has received a Measure of the Spirit, in the same Spirit, s^eleth
another's Measure, and owneth it in its Place and Service, and knows its
moving, and cannot quench it, but gives way to it with Joy and Delight. When
the Spirit moves in any one to speak, the same Spirit moves in the other to be
subject and give way; and so every one keeping to his own Measure in the
Spirit, here can be no Disorder, but true Subjection of every Spirit; and where
this is wanting, it cannot be supplied by any outward Rule, or Order, set up in
the Church by common Consent; for that is fleshly, and lets in the Flesh, and
destroys the true Order, Rule and Subjection.

The Apostles and Ministers of Christ, come from Christ with a Message of Life
and Salvation, with a Testimony concerning the good Will of God, and his Love
to Mankind, pointing out the Way from Death to Life, from Bondage to Liberty,
from W^^th and Destruction, to Peace and Salvation. What they have seen, what
they have felt, what they have tasted, w^^t they have handled, what they have
found, redeem and deliver them, that they Declare abroad to others, as they are
moved, as they are sent, as they are guided and assisted.

Now, that which they Preach to, is Men's Consciences in the Sight of God. They
open the Truth which they know, they give their Testimony in the moving,
leading and Power of the Spirit, and they leave it to the same Spirit, ^o
demonstrate it to Men's Consciences, as it pleases. They are nothing, they can
do nothing, they cannot convert any Man to God; but the Power that speaks by
them, the same Power works in other Men's Consciences, at its Pleasure. And
here is the Beginning of the Government of Christ in the Heart, when his Truth
carries Conviction with it to the Conscience, and the Conscience is drawn to
yield itself up to him; then he lays his Yoke upon it, and takes upon him the
guiding of it; he cherishes it, he cleanses it, he comfort it, he orders
it at his Pleasure, and he alone preserves it pure, chaste, gentle, meek and
pliable to the Impressions of his Spirit; and as the Conscience is kept single
and tender to Christ, so his Government increases therein; but as it becomes
hard, or subject to Men's Wills, so another Spirit gets Dominion over it.

Thererefore the great Work of the Minister of Christ, is to keep the
Conscience open to Christ, and to preserve Men from receiving any Truths of
Christ's, as from them, further than the Spirit opens, or to imitate any of
their Practices, further than the Spirit leads, guides and persuades them. For
Persons are exceeding prone to receive Things as Truths from those whom they
have an high Opinion of, and to imitate their Practices, and so hurt their own
Growth, and endanger their Souls. For if I receive a Truth before the Lord
makes it Manifest to me, I lose my Guide, and follow but the Course of the
Flesh, which is exceeding greedy of ^^eving Truths, and running into religious
Practices without the Spirit; therefore the main Thing in Religion is, to keep
the Conscience pure to the Lord, to know the Guide, to follow the Guide, to
receive from him that Light whereby I am to walk, and not to take Things for
Truths, because others see them to be Truths, but to wait till the Spirit makes
them Manifest to me; nor to run into Worships, Duties, Performances or
Practices, because others are led thither, but to wait till the Spirit lead me
thither. He that makes haste to be rich, even in Religion, running into
Knowledge, and into Worships and Performances before he feel a true and clear
Guidance, shall not be innocent, nor the Lord will not hold him guiltless, when
he comes to visit for spiritual Adultery and Idolatry. The Apostles were
exceeding tender in this Point, for though they certainly and infallibly knew
what was to be believed, yet they were not Lords over Men's Faith, but waited
till he who is Lord of the Faith, would open the Way into Men's Consciences.
They did not take upon them to be able to turn the Key, to let in Truth and
Conviction into Men's Spirits (as Men in these Days have been too apt to
undertake) but directed them to him who had the Key, there to wait for the
Conviction and Illumination of their Minds, and so to receive in as they found
him give forth to them.

Let every Man, says the Apostle, be fully persuaded in his own Mind. Take
heed of receiving Things too soon, take heed of running into Practices too
soon, take heed of doing what ye see others do, but wait for your own
particular Guidance, and for a full Persuasion from God what is his Will
concerning you; though I know this to be a Truth, yet do not ye receive it,
till God make it Manifest to you; receive Truth from his Hand; stay till he
give it you. Indeed the main Matter in Religion, is to keep out the wrong Part,
the forward Part, the bastardly Birth from running into Duties, catching of
Op^ni^^s, and laying hold of Promises; and to feel the Heir born of the
Immortal Seed, to whom all belongs, and that the other Birth never afterward
get up above him, but be subdued and brought into Subjection.

Again, says the Apostle, take heed of doing any Thing doubtingly, be not
forward, be not hasty, wait for the leading, wait for the Manifestation of the
Spirit; be sure thou receives what thou receives in the Faith, and practice
what thou practices in the Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, being
an Error from the Principles of Life, which is to Guide; and thereby thou
losest Ground, and Dishonourest Christ, and comes under Condemnation.

And so the Apostle Warns Believers, to take heed of drawing one another on too
fast, or of judging one another in such Tnings as some of them might have light
in, others not. He that eats, not to judge him that did not eat; and he that
did not eat, not to judge him that did eat. Yea, in Matters of Worship, he that
observed a Day, and kept a Sabbath, not to judge him that observed not a Day,
or kept not a Sabbath; for the Jews, which were truly converted, yet were hard
to be drawn off from the Observation of their Sabbath, could hardly bear with
the believing Gentiles, who were never taught to keep their Sabbath with them,
but were taught to esteem every Day, and sanctify it to the Lord, Romans 14th
Chap. 5th Verse. And these who esteemed every Day, and dedicated it to the
Lord, (ceasing from Sin, and resting in him, for under the Gospel we are not to
set up a new Type, but to enter by Faith into the true Rest, which is the
Substance of wh^^ the other signified) could hardly bear with them who observed
a Day; even in the Apostles Days, Christians were too a^^ to strive after a
wrong Unity, and Uniformity in outward Practices and Observations, and to judge
one another unrighteously in these Things. And mark, It is not the different
Practice from one another, that breaks the Peace and the Unity, but the judging
of one another because of different Practices. He that keeps not ^ Day, may
unite in the same Spirit, in the same Life, in the same Love, with him that
keeps a Day; and he who keeps a Day, may unite in Heart and Soul with the same
Spirit and Life in him who keeps not a Day; but he that judges the other
because of either of these, e^rs from the Spirit, from the Love, from the Life,
and so breaks the Bond of Unity. And he that draws another to any Practice,
before the Life in his own Particular lead him, does, as much as in him lies,
destroy the Soul of that Person, Verse 15. This was the Apostles Rule, for
every one to perform singly to the Lord, what he did, and not for one to meddle
with the Light or Conscience of another (undervaluing his Brother, or judging
him because his Light and Practice differed from his, Verse 10th of that 14th
Chap.) but every one to keep close to their own Measure of Light, even to that
Proportion o^ ^aith and Knowledge which God of his Mercy has bestowed on them;
and here is the true Unity in the Spirit, in the inward Life, and not in an
outward uniformity; that was not necessary in the Apostles Days, nor is it
necessary now: And that Eye which so dotes upon it, overlooks the one Thing
which is necessary; Men keeping close to God, the Lord will lead them on fast
enough, and give them Light fast enough, for he takes Care of such, and
knows what Light and what Practices are most proper for them; but for Men to
walk on faster than the Lord holds forth his Light to them, this overturns
them, raising up a wrong Thing in them, and the true Birth hereby comes to
suffer, to shrink, and be drawn back. And, O! how sweet and pleasant is it to
the truly spinitual Eye; to see several Sorts of Believers, several Forms of
Christians in the School of Christ, every one learning their own Lesson,
performing their own peculiar Service, and knowing, owning, and loving one
another in their several Places, and different Performances to their Master, to
whom they are to give an Account, and not to quarrel with one another about
their different Practices, Romans xiv. 4. For this is the true Ground of Love
and Unity, not that such a Man walks and does just as I do, but because I feel
the same Spirit and Life in him, and in that he walks in his Rank in his own
Order, in his proper Way and Place of Subjection to that; and this is far more
pleasing to me, than if he walked just in that Track wherein I walk: Nay, so
far as I am spiritual, I cannot so much as desire tnat he should do so, until
he be particularly led thereto, by the same Spirit which led me. And he that
knows what it is to receive any Truths from the Spirit, and to be led by the
Spirit, and how prone the fleshly Part is to make haste, and how dangerous that
haste is, will not be forward to press his Knowledge or Practices upon others,
but rather wait patiently till the Lord fit them for the receiving thereof, for
fear, lest they should receive and Practice too soon, even in that Part which
cannot serve the Lord. And this I can truly say, concerning myself, I never
found my Spirit forward to draw any, either to any Thing I believed to be true,
or to any Practice or Way of Worsnip I observed or walked in, but desired that
the Power and Leadings of Life might go before them; and was afraid lest Men
should receive Things from my Hand and not from the Lord's. Yea, and this I
very well Remember, that when I walked in the Way of Independency (as it has
been commonly called) I had more Unity with, and more Love toward such as were
single hearted in other Ways and Practices of Worship (whose Spirits I had some
feeling of in the true Simplicity, and in the Life) than with diverse of such,
who were very knowing and zealous in that Way of Independency, in whom a wrong
Thing in the mean time had got up, which had caused them to swerve from the
Life and from the Simplicity.

So that the true Church Government being in the Spirit, and over the
Conscience, as in the Sight of God, the great Care must be to keep it within
its Bounds, that nothing else govern but the Spirit, and that the Government be
extended only unto that which is to be governed.

First, Care must be had that nothing govern in the Church of Christ but the
Spirit of Christ; that nothing else teach, nothing else exhort, nothing else
admonish and reprove, nothing else cut off and cast out. Every Minister in the
Church is to watch over his own Spirit, that it intrude not into the Work of
God, that it take not upon it to be the Teacher, Exhorter, the Reprover, etc.
And every Member is to wait in that Measure of the Spirit which he has
received, to feel the goings sorth of the Spirit, in him who teaches and
governs, and so to subject, not to Man, but to the Lord, to receive from the
Lord, to obey the Lord. Not to know any Minister, according to the Flesh, but
to receive and submit to what comes from the Spirit, in the Spirit. Not to know
Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, but the Spirit ministering in them. Paul may err;
Apollo may err; Peter may err (And did err, where he compelled the Gentiles to
live as the Jews, Gal. ii. 14. For which Paul withstood him to the Face, Verse
11.) And Barnabas also did err, Verse 13. But the Spirit cannot err: And he
that keeps to the Measure of the Spirit in himself, cannot let in any of thoir
Errors, if they should err, but is preserved. For the least Measure of the
Spirit is true, and gives true Judgment: But he that receives never so great a
Measure of the Spirit, yet if he keep not low therein, but lifts up himself
because thereof above his Brethren, may easily err himself, and draw aside
others into his Error.

Secondly, Care must be had that the Conscience be kept tender, that nothing be
received but according to the Light in the Conscience. The Conscience is the
Seat of Faith, and if it be not kept close to the Light which God lights
there, Faith is soon made Shipwreck of^ Christianity is begun in the Spirit,
which keeps out the flleshly Part, with all its fleshly Wisdom and Reasonings
about spiritual Things: And as the Beginning is in the anointing, so must the
Progress be; as the Spirit begins in the Conscience by convincing that, by
persuading that, by setting up his Light there, and leading the Soul by that
Light; so that Light must still be eyed, and acording to its Growth and
Manifestation in the Conscience, so must the Soul stand still, or go on.

The great Error of the Ages of the Apostasy has been to set up an outward
Order and Uniformity, and to make Men's Consciences bend thereto, either by
Arguments of Wisdom, or by force, but the Property of the true Church
Government is, to leave the the Conseience to its full Liberty in the Lord, to
preserve it single and entire for the Lord to exercise, and to seek Unity in
the Light and in the Spirit, walking sweetly and harmoniously together in the
midst of different Practices. Yea, and he that has Faith, and can see beyond
another, yet can have it to himself, and (...) his Brother with it, but can
desc^d and walk with (...) ording to his Measure, and if his Brother have any
heavy (...) upon him, can lend him his Shoulder, and bear Part of his Burden
with him. O! How sweet and lovely is it to see Brethren dwell together in
Unity, to see the true Image of God raised in Persons, and the knowing, and
loving one another in the same Image, and bearing with one another through
Love, and helping one another under their Temptations and Distresses of Spirit,
which every one must expect to meet with.

If thou art a Christian in Deed, and in Truth, preserve thy Conscience pure
and tender toward God; do not defile it with such religious Practices, Duties,
Ordinances, etc., as thou do not feel the Spirit leading thee into; for all
such are Idols and exceedingly pollute thee. And be tender also of thy
Brother's Conscience, and be not an Instrument to draw him unto any Thing which
the Lord leads him not into, but rejoice if thou find him in Simplicity of
Heart, startling at any Thing; for if he abide here faithful, his Guide will in
due Season appear to him, and clear up his Way before him; but if he be too
hasty he may follow a wrong Guide, and that Guide will never lead him aright
toward the Kingdom, but entangle him further and further from it.

O how many have run a Whoring from the Lord! How many have first lost the
Guidance of his Spirit, and then drowned their Life in religious Performances!
How many have drunk of the Cup of Fornication from the Life; at the Hands of
the fleshly Wisdom! How many have filled their Spirit with New Testament Idols
and Images! How many have even hardened their Hearts and Consciences, by
following the Doctrines of Men, their imaginary Meanings of Scriptures, and the
Imaginations and Dreams of their own Hearts! Is it not time for Men at length
to turn back toward the Lord, to wait for the Visitation and Light of his
Spirit, from whom they have gone a Whoring, and whom in all these Things they
have grieved? And if ever any feel and enjoy the Guidance of God's Spirit,
their Conscience must be ke^^ tender to it, and ready to hear and follow his
Voice, who speaks in Spirit to that which is born of him, which infallibly
knows his Voice, and being kept clear, cannot doubt concerning it. My Sheep
hear my Voice, says Christ, they know it; and the Voice of the strange Spirit
they know not, so as to follow it, but turn from it both in themselves and
others: But that which is not the Sheep, but has only the Sheep's Clothing,
cries out, how shall we know the Voice of the Spirit? We may be deceived. Nay,
that which is born of God, that which is the Elect of God, cannot be deceived.
Wait therefore for the Birth of the Spirit, to which the Spirit is given for a
Guide, who infallibly guides it out of Deceit. All Deceivers are out of this
Birth, out of this Spirit, perhaps in some Birth or other, framed from the
letter, and living in the Imitation of some Practices and Ordinances from the
letter (under which Cover they lie in wait to deceive) but Strangers to the
Life and Power, and to that Wisdom which begets and bears to God. Thus the Jews
erred, and deceived their Proselites before the coming of Christ. Thus the
Christians (in Name) have generally erred all along the Apostasy, and indeed
(for the Generallity) have not been true Christians, but only a persecuted
Remnant amongst them, whose Life has been nourished and preserved, not by
Doctrines and Observations which they have been taught by the Precepts of Men,
nor by the Knowledge which they themselves have gathered; but by a little Bread
daily handed to them from the Father of Mercies out of the Wilderness: That was
the Thing which nourished their Souls up to God, though many of them knew not
distinctly what it was that nourished them, nor how they came by it.

Objection. But is not Uniformity lovely, and does not the Apostle exhort
Christians to be of one Mind, and were it not a sweet Thing if we were all of
one Heart and one Way?

Answer. Yea, Uniformity is very lovely, and to be desired and waited for, as
the Spirit of the Lord which is one, leads and draws into one. But for the
fleshly Part (the wise reasoning Part of Man) by fleshly Ways and Means to
strive to bring about fleshly Uniformity which ensnares and overbears the
tender Conscience, this is not lovely, nor spiritual, nor Christian like. And
the Apostle, who exhorts Christians to one Mind, yet does not bid them force
one another into one Mind, but walk together sweetly so far as they had
attained, and wherein they were otherwise minded, God in his due Time would
reveal more to them, Philip iii. 15, 16. He that has, to him it shall be
given; and the Intent and Work of the Ministry (with the several Ministrations
of it) is to bring into the Unity, Ephesians. iv. 13. as Persons are able to
follow, and not to force all Men into one Practice or Way; that is the Way to
destroy the Faith, and the true Unity, and at best can Introduce but a fleshly
Appearance of Unity in such a Form of Worship and Godliness, as eats out the
Power. And for being of one Heart and one Way, blessed be the Lord, this is in
a Measure known and witnessed; the Way is one Christ, the Truth of God; and he
that is in the Faith, and in the Obedience to that Light which shines from his
Spirit into the Heart of every Believer, has a taste of the one Heart, and of
the one Way, and knows that no Variety of Practices (which is of God) can
make a Breach in the true Unity. This is the one Way, for every one to be
subject to that Light of Christ's Spirit which he has received from Christ;
and every one keeping here, there is also one Heart kept in the midst of all
the Variety, and Diversity of Practices. And the Unity being thus kept, all
will come into one outwardly; also at length, as the Light grows in every one,
and as every one grows into the Light; but this must be patiently waited for
from the Hand of God (who Has the right Way of effecting it, and who alone can
do it) and not harshly and cruelly attempted by the rough Hand of Man.

FINIS.

