Mr. Bridge's ELECTION-SERMON, May 27, 1767.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY FRANCIS BERNARD, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR, HIS
HONOR THOMAS HUTCHINSON, ESQUIRE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, THE HONORABLE His MAJESTY'S
COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE PROVINCE OF THE
Massachusetts Bay in New England, May 27th, 1767.

BEING the Anniversary for the ELECTION of His MAJESTY'S COUNCIL for the
PROVINCE.

BY EBENEZER BRIDGE, A. M. Pastor of the Church in CHELMSFORD.

BOSTON: Printed by GREEN and RUSSELL, Printers to the Honorable HOUSE of
REPRESENTATIVES.

MDCCLXVII.

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES. May 28, 1767.
REsolved, That Col. Stoddard, Capt. Sheaffe, and Col. Bowers, be a Committee
to wait on the Rev'd Mr. Bridge, and return him the Thanks of this House for
his Sermon preached before the General Assembly Yesterday; and to desire a Copy
for the Press.

A true Copy, Samuel Adams, Cl.

AN ELECTION-SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXIII. 29. Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people
saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! --
THE great God who is the sovereign of the universe, is the fountain and source
of happiness: As he has given existence to societies and public bodies of men,
as well as to individuals, so all the happiness which they have shared in, and
enjoyed, has come from him, the divine benefactor.

This every thoughtful person must be sensible of: especially they who have
been elevated above the common level of mankind, and have been capable of
taking notice of the wonderful operations, in the course of divine providence,
which have tended to the good of societies, whose history they have been
acquainted with -- and such as they have lived in, and to whom in some sphere
they have ministered -- and more especially yet, if they have been, or are,
persons of religion and piety.

Through the great and distinguishing goodness of the most high God the people
of Israel, who descended from the good patriarch Jacob and in Egypt grew, to be
a great people, were at length delivered from thence by a mighty hand, and were
formed into a civil society, or body politic.

This society was specially and peculiarly happy and blessed: And the words of
our text are a high encomium on the happiness and felicity of that people,
uttered by Moses, who had a perfect knowledge of their state and condition, who
had been the instrument of their deliverance from the oppressions of a proud,
despotic, cruel, prince, and who under God was the founder of their state,
their chief magistrate, king and ruler.

At a convention of the heads of the people, and of the tribes of Israel, he
pronounced a blessing upon each tribe, and by the spirit of prophecy, he
foretold the peculiar blessings, which in some future periods should come upon
them. Having done thus, he pronounces the whole Hebrew nation, or the whole
Israel of God, blessed: and more than intimates the special and peculiar favor
of God, which they should experience in the promised land, the land of Canaan,
which they were then upon the borders of, and which they should speedily pass
over to possess.

But, as if all this should be considered in a prophetic light and view only,
or as relating to the special tokens of the divine favor to them, in time to
come; he speaks in our text of their then happy state and condition.

He had been with them as a faithful guardian, as a good servant of God; as a
kind father, as a great benefactor -- He had been witness to all that the Lord
had done for them -- how that the Lord had delivered and defended them from
their enemies, and in every respect had provided for, and supported them -- and
therefore he declared them happy and blessed; eminently and distinguishedly so,
in the favor of the Lord Jehovah: Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto
thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword
of thy excellency! The shield and the sword are here used figuratively, and
denote the divine care, the goodness and beneficence of the God of Israel, in
protecting and defending his people from the designs and attacks of their
enemies, in giving them victory over them, and establishing them as a society,
over which God himself was their immediate ruler and governor. So that all
their deliverances, all their greatness, all their power and authority, all
their safety, in a word all their excellency of every sort, is here attributed
to God, by this his faithful servant. A pattern this, worthy the imitation of
the greatest potentates and legislators on earth!

But it is worthy our notice, with what a sensible pleasure, and real
satisfaction, Moses the chief magistrate of the Hebrew commonwealth speaks of
the happiness of his people. Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the Lord, etc. What people in the whole world have been so
distinguished by the God of Heaven as thou art? what favors have been bestowed
on thee? how art thou saved from out of the hands of thine enemies? and how art
thou raised to a peculiar pitch of honor and greatness, beyond all the nations
and people in the world? Surely thou art highly favored by the most high God,
who is eminently the God of thy salvation.

Let it be observed yet further, that Moses was about to leave them, and to
leave the world too, and to give up his account to God, the judge of all the
earth. He had met, indeed, with many great and sore trials and conflicts in the
course of his administration of government among them. For though they were
distinguished greatly by the favors of Heaven, yet they had not been the most
tractable; yea they had been a rebellious people, and had provoked him, so that
he had spoken unadvisedly with his lips. And, being provoked by them, he
offended God, and was debarred an entrance into the land of Canaan, and was
called to resign up his commission, his civil power and dignity, into the hands
of another, who was appointed by God to be his successor, and to partake of
mortality, the common lot of all the children of men. Yet for all this, he
discovers a peculiar satisfaction, a heartfelt joy and gladness, in seeing and
beholding their present, as well as their future happiness -- neither the
contradictions of a stiff-necked people, nor the views and prospects of a
speedy dissolution, could abate, much less annihilate, the love he bare to
them, or the delight and satisfaction he enjoyed on account of that singular
pitch of glory and grandeur, which they had arrived unto.

Surely then, this great and good ruler, must have had some noble and excellent
principles operating in him, exceedingly differing from those which have
operated in many, since him, who have assumed to themselves the character of
patriots, and benefactors of mankind; which, however for a time, disguised
under a ^air show, or some plausible colorings, have frequently discovered
themselves in the end, to be but low and mercenary and selfish. I say these
principles which operated in the Hebrew lawgiver, must have been truly
religious ones, and therefore noble and generous and disinterested; such, as
were worthy of God, by his grace, to inspire him with, and such as were
productive of the most excellent and beneficent actions.

In fine, he considered his people as beings of the same species with himself,
as entitled to many great and special rights and privileges, yea as the people
of God -- himself as the servant of God, his minister, raised up by him, and
clothed with his authority, not merely that he might be elevated above the
multitude of his brethren, or that he might avail himself of the honors and
emoluments of his high office, but that he might act for God, and as far as
should be in his power, promote their good and happiness.

A ruler possessed of, and actuated by, such noble principles as these, must
needs have had an eye, as to the will of his master in his conduct, in the
course of his administration, so to the reward of his services in a future
state, or in a better world, and thus Moses is said by the Apostle, to have had
a respect to the recompense of reward. This, as it was consistent with truly
generous principles, was the effect of faith in God, and his word and promise.
If this excellent ruler had not had a firm faith in God and a solid hope as to
futurity, and of his being graciously accepted of God and rewarded in the
heavenly world, he could not have so willingly and heroically resigned up his
authority, and so readily have embraced death, as he did, or at least, not with
so calm a mind, notwithstanding he had as great a love to his people, and
delight and satisfaction in their happiness, as he possibly could have had,
upon the principles of reason only.

But if I discourse further, let it be upon these topics, which I think fairly
present themselves to us, from what we have already said, by way of explanation
of, or remark upon our text, -- viz.

The happiness of a people -- the governing principles of a good ruler -- and
the satisfaction which such a ruler feels in his own breast, in seeing the
prosperity and happiness of his people, in the course of his administration,
and in closing the scene of his action.

In the first place then, I would say something further concerning the
happiness of a people.

When we speak of a people, we would be understood as meaning a society of men,
in a civil relation to each other. The great God, who gave to man his being,
has made him capable of social duties, and social comforts; yea, according to
his nature and constitution, he is formed for many important services, which he
owes to beings of the same rank and species with himself, and which he ought to
yield, in some particular sphere, according to his ability -- and unless he
partakes of, and shares in, a variety of services and benefits of his fellow
creatures, he in no wise partakes of that happiness which he is capable of in
the present world.

Solitude is a state incompatible with the benevolent designs of Heaven toward
mankind, and repugnant to their natural notions and desires. Hence it is, that
although there is a natural equality and independency among men, yet they have
voluntarily combined together, and by compact and mutual agreement, have
entered into a social state, and bound themselves to the performance of a
multitude of affairs, tending to the good; and to the avoiding of a multitude
of injuries tending to the hurt and damage of the whole. And hence arises order
and government, and a just regulation of all those matters which relate to the
safety of the persons, lives, liberties, and property of individuals.

Thus, the happiness of men is better promoted and secured, than it would be,
if every one was to indulge himself in an absolute independency and made his
own will the rule of his actions. And hence also it may be said, that
government originates in the will of God, and the necessities of mankind.

If we let our thoughts run a little further upon civil government, we shall
see, that it is a merciful institution or ordinance of Heaven, to the lapsed
world of mankind -- The powers that be are ordained of God.

The supreme ruler and governor of the universe has so adjusted things in the
moral world, as that order and government are necessary for the advancing his
own glory, and the promoting the good of his rational, intelligent creatures --
and it is very obvious that anarchy and confusion, must terminate in the
destruction of men's lives, as well as of their liberty and property.

The form of civil government is not of divine appointment; this is left by God
very much to the will and determination of men, and depends upon a people's
temper, genius, situation and advantages or disadvantages of various kinds. But
yet that form of government which is adopted and established by the consent and
agreement of the body of the people, and which is found by experience to be
conducive to the common good and interest of the society, is that which seems
to be agreeable to the divine will -- Though perhaps some particular forms of
government may look as if they were repugnant to the will of Heaven, inasmuch
as they tend to the enslaving and abusing of the subject, Yet (at least) these
are permitted by him, who does his will in the army of Heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth.

And indeed this difference or variety relative to the forms of civil
government, which have been, and which do now exist in the world, affords a
very good reason why one nation and people, is said to be more happy as to the
constitution of civil government, than another. From hence it follows, that no
people have been perfectly and completely happy in this respect; because no
people have as yet had such a perfect form of government, as has admitted of,
and been attended with no inconveniences, (unless you will except the
theocracy of the Hebrews) and, it is probable, an absolutely perfect form of
civil government is inconsistent with the present state of things, and with the
state and condition of man, the administrator of it, in this world of sin and
imperfection.

In a word here, a good constitution of government, such an one as secures the
mutual dependence of the sovereign or ruling powers, and the people on each
other, and which secures the rights of each, and the good of the whole society,
is a great blessing to a people.

Having said this of government, I would go on, and say, that the happiness of
a people depends very much upon their having good laws.

Now laws may be said to be good, when they are such as tend to the promoting
of the good of the society, and of individuals in it -- or, they are good, when
they tend to the securing and establishing the liberties and privileges of men;
which are derived to them in the nature and reason of things; which they are
entitled unto, by the constitution of the government they have voluntarily
engaged to submit to; and which are confirmed to them by the revealed will of
God.

And I will add here, that only such laws as these, are fit for the government
of rational, intelligent, moral agents, all equal and upon a par, antecedent to
any political combinations among men; and after all, entitled to certain
immunities and benefits, as members of the body politic; so that they are not
only good, but the best which answer these great ends in the best manner.
Accordingly, a people are happy when the end of these laws, is in a good or
great measure answered: that is, when government is exercised upon a just and
reasonable, and proper basis, and is not abused by serving the purposes of
ambition, usurpation and tyranny. -- when the true honor of government is
supported, and the people are submissive, quiet, free from uneasiness and
tumult, peaceable and prosperous. -- But I must not enlarge.

In the next place I would say, that good rulers are conducive to the happiness
of a people, or civil society -- As the laws must be good, so must they who are
more especially entrusted with the laws, be good.

Now as some laws, or rules of right conduct, are necessarily supposed to
exist, prior or antecedent to the existence of particular societies; which laws
have their foundation, in the reason of things, the nature of man, and above
all the will of God, the supreme lawgiver; so these laws are above, or superior
unto the greatest Sovereigns or rulers in the world, as well as their subjects.
-- This I presume will justify me, in saying something of those laws before I
spoke of them, who are specially concerned with the laws.

Indeed sovereigns, and some subordinate rulers, have a share in the power of
legislation; that is, as the circumstances and exigences of the state require,
and as experience elucidates their necessity and utility, they may make, and
they must make new laws -- but then they must be such, as are couched in, and
entirely consistent with those laws, which had an existence prior to the
existence of the state, and those upon which the state was founded, if rightly
founded, or else the constitution will be receeded from, and altered -- and
this cannot be done justly or righteously, without the voice and consent of the
people.

The good ruler then is one, who has a knowledge and understanding of the
nature true of the constitution of the government of the civil body he belongs
to, and is a member of -- It is to be presumed that he prefers this form of
government before another form, yea, before all others, that he will be
concerned to maintain and support the constitution by preserving, as much as in
him lies, the rights and prerogatives of the sovereign or ruling power, and
the liberties and privileges of the people. That he will show a tender regard
to the laws which already are -- and if he has a share in the legislative
power, he will be concerned to frame and establish such laws, as are consistent
with the principles and interest of the whole society -- He will never aim at
establishing tyranny, or at promoting despotic and arbitrary measures,
subversive of the rights and liberties of the people, though it were to the
aggrandizing Majesty or sovereignty itself -- nor on the other hand at the
degrading of government by unreasonable oppositions thereto, or by unjust
aspersions or reflections, upon sovereigns or subordinate magistrates, or by
promoting the things which terminate in licentiousness, though thereby he could
render himself popular. If he has a share in the executive power, he will set
himself to enforce the laws, and to cause them to operate to the good ends for
which they were designed, that is, the restraining and reforming all
irregularities and disorders, by punishing (in a due proportion) the lawless
and disobedient; by promoting the peace and prosperity and happiness of the
whole and of individuals -- by protecting and supporting the innocent, and them
who are good subjects, as also by conferring honors and bestowing rewards (in a
due proportion also) upon them who distinguish themselves by some important
services, to their king and country.

In these respects a people may be said to be happy, to what they are, who live
in and under governments entirely monarchical, or under princes or sovereigns,
who are despotic and tyrannical; and who make their own corrupt wills the rule
of their conduct toward their subjects, or rather their slaves and vassals --
The state and condition of such people is abject and servile, they in no wise
enjoy that freedom which all men, as the offspring of God have a natural right
unto -- Their rulers are scourges, not benefactors to them; and they, that is
the people, are made to feel innumerable troubles and infelicities which their
brethren under a more happy constitution of civil government know nothing of --
But perhaps I may suggest something further concerning the good ruler, when I
come to speak of the governing principles of such an one.

Furthermore -- Religion or the fear of God, prevailing in the minds, and
influencing the lives and practices of all orders and degrees of persons in
society, tends vastly to the happiness of a people. God is the Lord -- as his
glory ought to be the main end, so his will ought to be the chief rule, of the
conduct of all men in the world, whether they be in higher or lower spheres of
action.

Religion is absolutely necessary, to the well-being or happiness of the state;
or it is highly adapted to answer the best interests of society.

The most sensible among men have concluded that a people cannot be happy
without the practice of religion and virtue -- and though infidels have
objected against it, as the contrivance of magistrates and legislators, or
rather of designing politicians, yet in this very objection, they have tacitly
acknowledged its high advantage to society and government. But the best men see
and acknowledge that it results from the relation between God the creator and
governor of the world and men, his reasonable creatures, his right of governing
them, and their duty to submit to, and obey him -- And these sentiments are
founded not only upon the reason of things, but also upon the solemn
declarations of God himself, in his own injunctions upon men, in his holy word.

As religion and virtue then, or vice and wickedness, do affect individuals or
particular persons, the practicing of the one tending to their present and
future happiness, and of the other, to temporal and eternal ruin; so are
societies or public bodies of men affected thereby, saving that societies exist
only in this world, and are capable of only temporal rewards and punishments.

In a word, if religion has its genuine influence in and upon the hearts of
men, then they will act, in some good measure, agreeable to the will of God, in
their several departments.

Rulers will consider themselves as raised up in the providence of God, to
their respective dignified stations, and will be concerned to rule for God, his
glory, and the good of their people; and people will fear God and honor the
king, and subordinate rulers, and pray for them, that under them they may lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. The smiles of heaven
will then be seen upon such a people, in the indulgence and continuance of
their civil and religious liberties, in the increase of their commercial
interests, in the bestowment of peace and plenty. But on the other hand, if a
people should value themselves ever so much upon the goodness of their civil
constitution, and there should be ever so great exertions in support of the
civil rights and liberties of mankind; yet if vice and wickedness should
abound, and men in general should indulge the lusts or desires of the flesh and
of the mind, if no proper means should be used for the reforming men's lives and
manners; or if they should obstinately persist in their wickednesses, they may
justly fear, that a holy, sin-hating God, will sooner or later make them feel
the weight of his anger, in depriving them of the blessings which they have
been favored with, and bringing upon them the sorest of his judgments.

I will add but this one word here: When a people are favored with such
blessings as we have recited, and God is present with them, in the smiles of
his providence, and in the tokens of his special favor, and they not only enjoy
civil but religious liberties and privileges, health and peace and plenty; then
have they a large share of happiness indeed; then may we say as the devout king
of Israel, Happy is that people who is in such a case: yea, happy is that
people whose God is the Lord. Thus as to the happiness of a people. But as I
have said that good rulers are conducive thereto, and as they are in a peculiar
manner concerned with and about the other things relative to this happiness. --
So I would in the

Second place, say something of the governing principles of such.

Good rulers -- The term may be understood in a relative or more proper sense
-- In a relative sense, rulers are good when they conform themselves to the
fundamental constitutional laws of the society they live in, and have authority
over; preserving on the one hand, the prerogatives of the sovereign; and
vindicating on the other hand, the rights and liberties of the subjects.

In a more proper sense, good rulers, are good men, acting upon religious which
are the most solid principles; aiming at the advancement of the glory of God,
and the good and happiness of mankind; especially the happiness of them over
whom they exercise authority.

A good degree of knowledge of the various principles of the different forms of
civil government; their agreement or disagreement with the laws of nature,
established by the will of God: also a knowledge of the law of nations, and the
usages and customs of civilized people; together with a good degree of
knowledge of the political, the commercial, as well as religious interests of
their own people; and I must add, a good degree of moral honesty and integrity,
of manly generosity, prudence, and discretion, may procure a ruler the
character of a good ruler, in the first sense of the term. But it is the grace
of God, sanctifying these various gifts and talents, which forms the character
of a good ruler in the latter sense: So that, it is not sufficient, or all that
is necessary, that a man is a gracious good man, that he may be qualified for
rule and government; nor is it all that is necessary, that a man has many
natural and acquired accomplishments therefore; the effects of a good natural
genius, or of the best education: but these things, together with a
conscientious endeavor to answer the ends proposed by the great Governor of
the moral world; that is, his own glory, and the good of societies and
individuals; or a sincere upright regard to the will of God, revealed in his
word, in all their conduct and behavior, in their places and stations, whether
they be higher or lower. I say these things most of all, entitle such to the
character of good rulers; yea, to the style and character of gods, inasmuch as
they hereby resemble the great God, the sovereign of the world, and imitate the
incarnate son of God, the great savior of a lost and ruined world, who
manifested the greatest benevolence to mankind, and contrived and laid himself
out to the uttermost, to promote their temporal as well as their eternal
happiness and felicity.

Such a ruler, possessed of such noble principles, and acting upon such
excellent motives, must really prove the greatest and best patriot: He will
disdain the sordid maxims, the deep-laid intrigues, the little arts of
designing politicians: Next to the divine approbation, and the approbation of
his own conscience, he will strive to approve himself to the consciences of
men, especially good men, real lovers of their country. And a constant run of
beneficent actions, indicating a paternal tenderness toward the various orders
of men who are under his authority, and a disinterested aim to promote their
welfare, and to secure their rights and liberties, both of a civil and
religious nature, and a multitude of good offices, will gain him the love,
respect and confidence of an obliged people.

I say not, that such a ruler shall never be looked upon in a false point of
light; or that he shall never meet with those who shall misinterpret his
actions, and draw up a conclusion against him as an enemy to his country; and
so think and speak reproachfully of him, and ungratefully and evilly requite
his services sincerely intended, and done with a view to promote the best good
of the society. This cannot be said -- for sometimes it so happens that the best
rulers, the greatest benefactors in the world, meet with very hard and
unreasonable treatment; and this is occasioned sometimes by the weakness, and
sometimes by the wickedness of men. Such is the imperfection of the present
state, that men are frequently mistaken as to the principles which influence
the great, in their conduct and actions, and no wonder, since the actions of
all men are though it differently of by different persons, differently affected
toward them.

And to be sure this will give an opportunity to the wicked, (I would here
intend the politically wicked) to raise a clamor against such faithful
servants of the public; and under the pretense of securing public liberty, such
often gratify their own resentment, or pursue their own schemes, at the expense
of wounding the best characters.

It is most sure and certain, that some have looked upon their own friends and
benefactors, and that not seldom, as their enemies. On the other hand, it must
be acknowledged, that the best of men, and they who have deservedly obtained
the character of good rulers, great friends and benefactors of the public; as
they have their remaining weaknesses and imperfections, and are liable to
imprudencies, mistakes and errors; so they do that, at times, which is
sufficient to rouse the attention of the public, and to put persons of a truly
patriotic spirit, who have some share in government, yea, and all men too, who
have wisdom and ability to serve the public, upon using their endeavors to
point out such errors, and to make a stand against those things, which, it is
probable or certain, would tend to the hurt and damage of the community.

But then the happiest and justest way of dealing in such a case, and most for
the benefit of the public, is to observe not only the laws and rules of the
government men live in, but also and above all, the laws of God, which enjoin
justice, righteousness, truth and charity, and the like moral or rather
christian duties and virtues, and those which forbid the indulgence and
gratification of the human passions, wrath and malice, and envy, and the like.

After all, the good ruler conscious to his integrity and uprightness in the
sight of God, and finding in his heart no real oblique intention, and yet
seeing his conduct in one particular case and another disapproved of; yea, and
meeting with many things reproachful and trying, and that too sometimes through
the intrigues of a party: he notwithstanding having a good conscience,
possesses his soul in patience; and so far at least submits to his fate, as not
to do or design any thing against the real good of the society which before he
has endeavored to serve, and which nevertheless he ought still to endeavor
to serve. And ordinarily such honest good rulers as these, when men's passions
subside, and things are properly adjusted, shine with a greater luster and
glory than ever. Nothing so uncertain or fluctuating as popular opinion,
relative to the great ones of the earth, except it be the conduct of mere
politicians or courtiers.

In fine here -- the ruler who endeavors to conform himself to the will of God,
and to act in his sphere upon such principles and motives as are suggested and
enjoined in the gospel, and which make a part of the christian religion, is
certainly the best ruler, the most to be confided in; his principles lead above
a base fawning flattering conduct in regard to them who are above or below him;
yea they influence him to a suitable becoming carriage toward all men, in
whatever relations and stations. His main ends are the glory of God, and the
good of mankind, all with whom he has to do; especially all who are entitled
to his labors and services. And whatever the world thinks of him, he has vast
pleasure in his own breast, and that satisfaction, which none but the good man,
the christian ruler, can know any thing of.

But I pass on to the

Third thing I proposed to speak about. And that is the satisfaction which the
good ruler feels in his own breast in seeing the happiness and prosperity of
his people, in the course of his administration, and when closing the scene of
his action.

And this must be great, real and solid. For a ruler to see his people, risen
to a good degree of glory, possessed of many invaluable liberties and
privileges both of a civil and religious nature, to behold them flourishing in
trade and commerce, every man protected in his just rights, sitting under his
own vine, and under his own fig tree, and quietly enjoying the blessings
bestowed upon him, in and by the providence of God, and none to make him
afraid; Yea to behold his people peaceable, quiet, prosperous, and rising yet
higher or making way to a greater pitch of grandeur; and to have reason to hope
that his services in his sphere of action have (by the blessing of Heaven)
contributed in some good measure thereto; This must afford real pleasure to the
mind of such a one, seeing that he has not lived in vain, has not contented
himself with only the honors and profits of his station, but has been honored
by his maker in being made an instrument of serving his purposes in the world,
and in the society, in which his Lord has cast his lot. This must be a
constant support to him while he lives, and is employing his talents and his
services for the still greater benefit of his people -- yea amidst all his
fatigues and labors, and notwithstanding the contradictions he meets with, and
the reproachful speeches, and high insults, from men, who oppose themselves to
him, whether with or without a regard to the public good.

But most certainly the heart of the good and pious ruler must dilate with joy,
when he sees that the scene of his action is drawing to a close, when he sees
himself about to resign up his high office and his peculiar betrustments to
others, who shall come after him, and under God conduct the great affairs of
government, and the things which belong to the peace and happiness of his
people.

None of the rulers of this world, may presume upon it, that they are
immovable, or that they hold their high offices by a right, or tenure, which
can never be taken from them. Princes there have been, who have pretend-to a
divine hereditary indefeasable right to their sovereignty (and they have had
enough to flatter them, and as far as they could to confirm them in such a
notion) but some such have found themselves deprived of this their supposed or
imaginary right, to rule and govern. And others who are carried away with these
imaginary notions, and who rule with arbitrary, despotic sway, are not sure
that a righteous God will not suffer such mutations in the world, as shall
occasion their being tumbled down from their thrones, and their being stripped
of their diadems, and their being reduced to the estate of men of low degree.
Yea, no one knows what may befall such sovereigns, whose thrones, at present,
seem to be established by righteousness, nor such subordinate rulers, in the
best framed governments, who have ruled in righteousness. Should any such be
called, in the changes of providence, (for it is the most high God who in his
providence puts down one, and sets up another) I say, should such rulers
be called to quit their stations, and that at any time of life -- if they have
been good rulers and have acted from good principles and motives, a desire to
promote the glory of God, and the best good of his people -- they will do so
with a humble submission to the will of God, and a real pleasure, in seeing the
good, the prosperity, and the happiness of the people over whom they have
ruled, though they should not approve of the conduct of all sorts of persons
toward themselves. But upon supposition a good ruler should, through the favor
of God, and with the approbation and high esteem of his people, continue in his
office or station serving God and his people, and deriving every good which he
could rationally expect, in a long course of services, yet he should consider
that the scene must close, necessarily and unavoidably, sooner or later.

Though rulers are styled gods, they must die like men. The greatest potentates
on earth, are no more exempted from the stroke of death than the meanest of
their subjects. The most active, and the most serviceable, and the most
faithful, in the societies they live in, have but their day allotted to them by
the God of their lives, to work, and labor, and act in. By and by they must
quit not only their posts and stations, but this world too, and go to give up
the account of their conduct and behavior to him who sits on the throne,
and who will judge the world in righteousness.

A firm belief hereof, and of the other doctrines of the gospel of the glorious
God, our Savior, with a good hope resulting from the testimony of a good
conscience, that they have uprightly and faithfully served God, and his people,
and that they are, and shall be, accepted of God, through Jesus Christ, and are
going to receive the gracious rewards of their services, in the heavenly
kingdom, is enough to fill their hearts with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Allowing therefore that the first and greatest occasion of joy and gladness to
good rulers in the near views and prospects of Death, is their hope of
acceptance with their divine master, and of the gracious rewards to be bestowed
upon them, in the heavenly world -- we may well presume, that the secondary
occasion of their heartfelt joy, is the happiness of the people, to whom, as
kind parents, true benefactors, faithful friends, they have been ministering,
and which their services, by the blessing of Heaven, have contributed somewhat
and perhaps, not a little unto -- and verily happy and blessed are such
servants of the public -- for when they shall have done serving God on earth,
they shall receive the blessed ^uge from the mouth of Christ the judge, each
one for himself -- Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord

And now upon a little reflection on what has been said, we must see something
of the great happiness of the British nation, through the favor of the God of
Heaven -- A people highly distinguished; if not as Israel of old in every
respect, yet exceeding greatly, by the mercies of divine providence, so that,
in some respects, she is made to resemble that people, and perhaps more than
any other nation in the world. As in the goodness of the constitution of her
civil government which is acknowledged by the greatest and most sensible men,
to be the best form now existing in the world, as also in the goodness of the
laws, preserving a proper medium between the prerogatives of the sovereign, and
the liberties and privileges of the people -- and further, in the goodness of
our civil rulers -- Blessed be the Lord of Heaven and of earth, who though in
former times he suffered our nation to groan under the arbitrary and tyrannical
measures of some despotic popish princes, whose principles as well as conduct
led directly to enslave their subjects, yet has for a great number of years,
especially since the revolution, and the establishing King William and Queen
Mary on the British throne, favored us with protestant Kings and Queens, whose
principles have corresponded with the principles of the British government, and
who have proved nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, having made the laws of
the realm the rule of their conduct.

More especially yet, have we cause to bless God, that at this day, and this
time, we are highly favored of God with a King, whose throne is established by
righteousness -- who has made the laws of the nation the rule, and the
happiness of his people the end of his government -- who has the hearts and
the confidence of his people at home and abroad; and upon every occasion has
given them the greatest cause to rejoice in his paternal care of and goodness
to them.

May the most high God, the King of Kings, bless his servant, in his government
-- in his person, in his royal consort the Queen and their offspring, and give
unto them long life and prosperity -- and so order things in his wise and good
providence, as that there may never want one of that illustrious house to sit
upon the British throne, and to sway its scepter in righteousness.

How happy our nation also, in having in her, some raised up by God from time
to time, and by divine providence put in places of the greatest importance, who
have proved true to her liberties and interests -- As, patriotic ministers,
noble counselors and statesmen, upright and impartial judges, wise and
faithful senators -- and a parliament, which, though liable to mistakes, has yet
been attentive to the good of the nation and kingdom, and her colonies and
dependencies.

And as to religion, and religious liberties and privileges, what people in the
whole world so highly favored as our nation? We have the gospel, the freest
use and the fullest enjoyment of it; all the ordinances of the gospel --
liberty of conscience -- every man protected in his religious rights, as well
as civil -- every one allowed to worship God in that way and manner he judges
best, and most agreeable to the word of God. No menaces from the civil power to
compel men, in matters of religion, no impositions from authorized
ecclesiastical tyrants, no persecution for religious sentiments or practices,
if they are such as consist with the peace and safety of the state.

These things have been long exploded and contemned, by rulers in church and
state, as well as by people in general -- and it conduces much to our
happiness, as well as to our honor, and the honor of God, that they be so.

Indeed it is to be wished that our nation was more religious, really and
practically, amidst all her religious liberties and privileges, than she is;
that men of all persuasions, and of all ranks and orders would fear and
reverence the Majesty of Heaven more; that they aimed to advance the honor and
glory of God, and of the Redeemer more -- In a word, that they were more holy,
just, good, righteous, honest, temperate, chaste and virtuous; more conformable
to the precepts of the gospel, and the example of christ; more consistent in
word and deed with the high name and character by which they are called -- and
that she might yet further prosper in all her interests, and in all respects
see the salvation of God.

As to the British colonies in North America, whose respective governments are
modelled conformably to the government of the nation, all under the same
sovereign -- how happy are they, in the enjoyment of the same liberties and
privileges, as our brethren, in our mother country? what a lasting foundation
is hereby laid for continual union and harmony, and a mutual dependence between
the parent, and her children? may there never more, be any attempts from any
quarter, or by any means or instruments to divide them, who are so nearly
connected in affection and interest -- and I believe, all the people, in all
the colonies, will heartily say -- Amen.

When we reflect upon some late transactions, which were so alarming to the
colonies, as well as to the nation itself -- we have reason to bless God, and
to adore the divine goodness, which prevented things proceeding to that
extremity which many feared, and which would have terminated in the dishonor
and damage of the nation, as well as the ruin of the colonies; and which
directed and brought things to such an issue, as that the rights and privileges
of the colonies are established, perhaps, upon a better basis than ever.

In a word, the nation with her dependencies in this part of the world, have
been and are exceeding happy, in that they are a people saved by the Lord.
Great have been their enemies, and great have been their dangers, and great
have been their deliverances which God has wrought for them, and to this day
it must be said that God is the shield of their help and the sword of their
excellency.

As to this province, we are happy, as we have been, in sharing with others in
the blessings of civil government -- civil and religious liberty -- the best
laws -- and I believe I may say with propriety, with as good rulers as any
people whatever.

Great and good were many of our forefathers, who were leaders among them who
first came over into this inhospitable wilderness, who were then so in love
with the constitution of civil government, from under which they came (for it
was not on account of civil affairs, that they left their brethren, In their
native land, nor any thing else, save unscriptural impositions upon their
consciences, touching their religious liberties) I say they were so in love
with the constitution of civil government of the nation, that they willingly
adopted the same form, and set it up here: And these leaders became rulers, and
continued so, for many years, and most of them during their lives; and that by
the free election of the people; and they did worthily for God and his people
in their day; and some of the descendants from such, have continued, in
succession from one generation to another down to our own day; and perhaps none
have been more capable of doing service, or have done more, or have been more
honorable and respectable, than they.

Not but that, through the favor of heaven, and our gracious sovereigns, we
have also had men of eminent characters and distinguished abilities, set over
us, in the highest seats of government, who have done worthily, and been
fathers to this people: And besides, by the smiles of heaven upon us, and by
the means of education enjoyed by this people, there have been of the sons of
New England, who have filled the chief chair of government, and other
subordinate posts and stations, with great honor, and to the great benefit and
satisfaction of the people. These are great blessings which we have enjoyed, by
the good providence of God; and at this very time, perhaps we are more happy in
these respects, than some are willing to allow.

His Excellency, who fills the chief chair of government in this province, is
raised by God and the King, to this high and dignified station. A gentleman
capable of discharging the high trusts reposed in him, one who well understands
our constitution of civil government; and therefore we presume, he will always
study and endeavor to preserve the royal prerogative on the one hand, and the
precious liberties and privileges of the loyal people he has the government
of, on the other.

His Excellency's lot has fallen in a very difficult day among us -- Such
convulsions there have been, as have shaken the very foundations of government
-- but through the merciful interposition of Heaven, and the favor of our
gracious King, things have been in a good measure appeased -- And it is our
hearts desire that his Excellency will, as a true servant of God and the King,
exert himself yet to serve this people committed to his charge; that he will
endeavor to act under the influence of the best, yea the most religious
principles, approving himself to his royal master, who has the good of these
colonies, and of this province in particular, at heart; above all, to God his
maker and his judge; to his own conscience, and to the consciences of this
people, especially such as have opportunity to observe his conduct, in the
nearest and closest view.

If his Excellency is enabled uprightly to pursue the good of this province
(and we wish him the divine grace and assistance that he may be so) he will be
engaged in a service we trust agreeable to the will of God; he will have the
prayers and thanksgivings of an obliged people, the comforts of a good
conscience, the approbation of Heaven, and finally, the rewards of a good and
faithful servant.

And now, I would address my self to the honorable his Majesty's Council, and
the honorable House of Representatives, who are this day to transact a great
and important affair agreeable to our charter privileges; and which concerns our
good, in a great and eminent degree: I mean the choosing his Majesty's Council
for the year ensuing. Through the good hand of God upon us, this privilege is yet
continued to us; and it is no small one.

Gentlemen, we justly conclude you are all truly attached to the happy
constitution of the civil government of the nation, and of the province.

Your betrustments are great, and you are under great obligations to God, and
this people -- you are obliged to act for his glory, and their good.

From the character of the good ruler as has been exhibited to you (though very
imperfectly) in a former part of my discourse; you see what sort of men you are
to make choice of, to take a part in the legislative authority of this loyal
and respectable province.

Men who have a good degree of knowledge and understanding in civil, and
political, and commercial affairs -- Men who value our constitution upon
principle -- Men knowing in the times, what Israel ought to do -- Men who shall
be true to their principles, and who shall strive to support the king's
prerogative, and the true liberties and privileges of the people -- Above all,
men of religion and piety, of integrity and uprightness, of prudence and
discretion, of calmness and moderation -- and yet men of courage and resolution.

Suffer me to say, these are the men you ought to look for, and to give your
votes for. It is to be presumed, Gentlemen, that you are men of so much honor,
and of so much real goodness and faithfulness, as that you will act in this
important affair, upon true and solid principles -- that you will not be
governed by a party spirit -- that you will not suffer your own private views
to influence you -- that you will not prefer this man who is a favorite of
yours or of your party, before another who perhaps is a better man; and yet
because he is not just of your cast of mind, the object of your displeasure and
resentment.

Pray Gentlemen do but consider how much you are and ought to be concerned to
act this day, for the public good; and therefore how jealous you need be, lest
you are swayed and influenced by such motives as have no relation thereto, and
are entirely inconsistent therewith.

Calmness and composedness of mind, a sincere desire and endeavor to answer a
good conscience in the sight of God, in this important affair, will, we hope be
attended with happy consequences; and may you be the instruments in the hands
of God, of placing such men at the council board, and only such as shall be
deserving of so much honor and confidence, as will thereby be shown to and put
in them -- In a word, men who shall fear God and hate covetousness, and men who
shall have courage so to act upon their own principles, as to despise any
menaces from any quarter whatever.

I believe I may say, it will rejoice the hearts of all true lovers of their
country, all sober, considerate men in the government, to see and behold this
important matter managed in a cool dispassionate manner by all persons
concerned in it; and that the council board might be filled with such good men
as shall have a real concern for the civil and religious liberties of the
people, the good of the churches in the land, and the good of the college, the
fountain from which, (by the blessing of heaven) both church and state may yet
be abundantly supplied and replenished.

And when the elections of this day are over, and the General Court shall
proceed to the business which shall lie before them, may each branch thereof be
enabled to consider and bear it in mind from day to day, That God stands in
the congregation of the mighty and that he judges among the gods.

And may they religiously act, through the whole year, with a sincere desire
and design to promote the glory of God, who in his providence has put them
into a capacity to act in such important spheres, to preserve our excellent
constitution of civil government, the rights both of the Sovereign and the
people; and to promote the happiness of the community in the best manner.

Will my Fathers in the civil government, bear with me while I offer a few
things further, consistent with my character (however unworthy) as a minister
of Christ.

May we not justly expect, Gentlemen, that you will show a special regard to
the religion of Jesus Christ (the religion we trust you all profess to have a
regard for) in all your conduct and behavior?

As you ought to be the protectors of religious professors in their just rights
and liberties, so it would be vastly ornamental and becoming, for you to be
examples of all christian graces and virtues in your public as well as private
conduct.

Christianity, the excellency of it, exemplified in the words and actions of
them who are in elevated or conspicuous stations, is never more beautiful,
perhaps never so engaging and attracting.

You will let me then urge it upon you, to endeavor to cultivate in you the
christian temper, and to evidence it in your whole deportment. This will have a
tendency to conciliate matters in society, and be very promotive of love and
Harmony. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity.

Is christianity inconsistent with patriotism? God forbid that any should
imagine such a thing. -- The true christian is the best qualified to act the
part of a patriot, if he has other qualifications also which are requisite.
What a glorious example has he in his view, in the temper and conduct of
Christ, the greatest personage that ever was in this world, and who loved the
world so as to lay down his life to redeem and save it -- The more you imitate
him, the more faithful will you be in your places; the more just and righteous
in your words and actions, the more resolute in pursuing the glory of God, and
the best good of mankind.

Was there ever a time, my fathers, when you needed more the divine grace and
assistance, to enable you to conduct toward all men, in a way and manner, as
shall do honor to your characters as christians, as well as patriots? Strive to
be possessed of the meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of
great price. Think and speak and act of and toward others, as you would think
would be just and right for you to expect from them, were they in your
circumstances, and you in theirs. This rule, I humbly conceive, should be
observed and acted up to, in the most respectable assemblies, and by the most
respectable persons, as well as among christians in general, in their private
transactions.

Men may be bold in the cause of God and his people, and may use great
exertions in the defense and securement of their rights and privileges -- and
at the same time be just and righteous, merciful and charitable, good and
benevolent, civil and courteous to all, whether superiors, inferiors or
equals. And it may be justly concluded, that that man's principles are the
best, and he will prove the best friend to the community, who shall most
conform himself in his words and actions, to the commandments of his God, and
his Savior.

And may I not with propriety urge you to have a special regard to the truest
interests of the people, conformably to the will of Christ, both your Lord and
theirs -- and that you labor in your places to reform whatever is amiss in
their moral conduct -- It is too obvious that there are many vices and
immoralities abounding in the midst of us.

There is therefore great need of a reformation among us -- you ought, not only
to regard the civil and commercial interest, but the best good of the society,
knowing, that prevailing and growing iniquities provoke God to bring his
judgments upon a (...), and that the practice of virtue and piety renders a
people the favorites of Heaven.

I would here take the liberty of mentioning some moral disorders, or sins and
transgressions, rife and growing in the midst of us -- were it not that they
have been mentioned already (for they are no new things, though perhaps they are
grown greater) I say mentioned already to former assemblies upon this
anniversary, with great faithfulness and the truest concern.

You only need to recollect them, and to inquire whether there have been such
proper exertions by the legislative body of the people, for the
discountenancing and suppressing such vices and wickednessess as should have
been -- if there have been, and these disorders and wickednesses cannot be
reformed, we are in the sure way to be wretched and miserable, though in all
other respects, we are for the present, in a good degree happy -- but if there
have not been proper endeavors used -- by our fathers in the government, in
times past, yet there may be, for the time to come -- and let me say, God and
this people demand it of you, that you do exert yourselves in this matter to
your utmost -- that you see to it, that the laws which already are, are duly
executed -- and that others may be made which may be found necessary, for the
accomplishing so desired an end -- as a reformation. And this my fathers, allow
me without giving offense to say it, is the least, we who are the ministers of
Christ, and look upon ourselves as in duty bound to obey you, when you order us
into the desk upon this occasion, can expect of you.

But I beg leave also just to say, that the poor of the people, and the
children of the poor, that they may be kept from idleness, one of the banes of
society -- and trained up in industry and virtue -- and the well ordering and
regulating public houses or taverns in the towns of the province, too much the
nurseries of vice and wickedness, as they have been managed, and in which too
many do impoverish themselves and their families, are things which in a special
manner deserve your close attention, and your vigorous exertion.

In a word, we wish you, Gentlemen, the divine presence and assistance in all
you may engage in -- that you may be instruments of promoting the public
happiness in all respects -- yea, that you may be so happy yourselves as to
have and enjoy the comforts of a good conscience, hope and confidence toward
God, while you live, and in the end, the most ample and the most gracious
rewards in the happiest state of all.

My reverend fathers and brethren in the ministry will always feel great joy and
satisfaction, in seeing the prosperity and happiness of the Israel of God, or
the people of whom they are a part, and to whom they minister in holy things --
for this they will continue to pray both publicly and privately, this they will
lay themselves out, in their places to promote and further, and by the blessing
of Heaven, upon their upright and faithful endeavors they also may be
instrumental of great good -- Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand
of Moses and of Aaron. But the Sermon to the Ministers, expected to morrow,
renders it needless for me to enlarge here --

Therefore shall conclude when I have addressed myself to all the people. We
certainly must be sensible in some degree of the great happiness we enjoy as a
people -- through the smiles of Heaven upon us, we are blessed with the
greatest and best liberties and privileges, with a good measure of peace of
quietness, with health and plenty -- God has saved us wonderfully from the
hands of our enemies -- he extends and enlarges our borders, he increases our
commerce, he gives us occasion for joy and gladness of heart -- we want nothing
so much as the fear of God to prevail in our hearts and minds, and in the
hearts and minds of all sorts of people, to influence them to the practice of
virtue and piety, and to keep us from licenciousness of every kind -- let us
therefore make it our prayer to God, that he would continue his favors to us --
that he would bless, assist and strengthen our civil rulers and his ministers,
and pour out his spirit upon the whole body of the people, and his blessing
upon their offspring.

May every o^^ study to be quiet and to do his own business, in his particular
department -- let us guard against envy and detraction, and keep as much as
possible from wrath and clamor -- let us render to Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.

Let us be careful to walk before God in our houses after a godly sort. Family
religion, if it is revived, and if it prevails as it should, will tend much,
not only to the happiness of particular families, but to the good of the
community also.

Finally -- every one ought to consider himself as capable of infinitely
greater happiness in the heavenly world and state, than he can possibly attain
unto in this world of sin and death -- Christ has purchased this happiness for
all who believe in, and love and obey him -- It is but a little time at the
longest, and the scene must close with us all -- We must quit our posts and
stations, be they higher, or be they lower, bid adieu to this world, and enter
upon an eternal state of existence.

Happy, inexpressibly happy and blessed will they be, who have acted their part
well, and have served God and their generation according to the will of God, in
their day.

Let us therefore exert ourselves, see that our principles, ends and aims be
right, and that we act as far as we can, agreeable to the will of God, and so
as that we may at last give up our account with joy and not with grief, and be
completely happy in the kingdom of Heaven; which God grant unto us all, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory on earth and in heaven, now and forever,

AMEN.

