THE COMMERCIAL CONDUCT Of the PROVINCE of NEW YORK CONSIDERED, AND The True
Interest of that Colony attempted to be shown.

In a LETTER to The SOCIETY of ARTS, AGRICULTURE, and ECONOMY.

I will make my Kingdom so rich, that there shall be Occasion neither of
Hospitals or Prisons. AURENGZEBE. Printed for the Benefit of the Society of
Arts, Agriculture, and Economy, of New York. 1767.

To the SOCIETY of ARTS, AGRICULTURE, and ECONOMY.
GENTLEMEN,
TRADE being always entered into with a View to Gain, but Experience has
evinced that it has not answered that End in this Province; for notwithstanding
that our Productions amount annually to a very considerable Sum, we have found
Means not only to get rid of it, but also to have an immense Balance against
us; the Distresses in consequence of which being taken by you into
Consideration, and having proved that you follow a losing and ruinous Trade,
this Situation of Affairs pointed out the only Means that could extricate and
deliver you, which was to form yourselves into a Society to encourage Arts,
Agriculture, and Economy, the rapid Progress and Success of which has
surpassed your most sanguine Expectations.

And as you are by this patriotic and noble Institution rearing to yourselves a
Monument of Fame; permit me to endeavor to give Stability and Firmness to the
Pedestal, in supporting your laudable Undertaking in the following Pages, with
such poor Remarks and Reasoning as my Experience has furnished me with; and if
they be found consistent with Truth, they claim your Patronage to render them
as diffusive throughout the Province as in your Power; if otherwise, I desire
they may be suppressed, since my Intention, I am sure, was not to propagate
Error, but to remove it; and if I have failed in my Design, I at least have the
Pleasure that I meant well, and to assure you that I am, with the greatest
Respect,

GENTLEMEN, Your most obedient Humble Servant, A Linen Draper.

THE COMMERCIAL CONDUCT, etc.
THE many Difficulties and Distresses that this Province labors under, our
Prisons crowded with Debtors, the Estates of many selling by Execution from
under their Feet, to satisfy very trifling Debts, and the Cries of all Ranks of
People among us for Money, from whence such a Complication of Misery and
Misfortune is derived to the unhappy Sufferers of this Province, is a Matter
that I have thought worthy of Inquiry; as also to consider of, and to endeavor
to point out, a Remedy for those Evils: But if I fail in the Attempt, I shall
have the pleasing Testimony, that I wrote with a good Intention, being no other
than that of serving my Country.

First, then, I would observe, that it is generally laid down as a self-evident
Proposition, that Trade is the Road to and Fountain of Riches. Of this very few
among us ever so much as doubted, and therefore every Man that has it in his
Power turns Merchant; but whether, in such their Commercial Pursuits, they
serve themselves and their Country, or whether it has not a direct contrary
Effect on both, is what I also mean to consider in the following Pages.

We have many Merchants among us whose Trade is altogether to Europe, from
whence they import every Kind of its Manufactures, of which I have known above
Forty Thousand Pounds Sterling arrive more than once in a single Ship from
London; but, taking in all the Ports of Great Britain, and those of foreign
Countries, New York has for several Years past received from Three to Four
Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling in British and Asiatick Manufactures annually.
In this vast Importation the People rejoice, upon the same Principle that the
Portuguese do, who think that their great Importation is a Mark of their great
Riches; when it is Exports alone that makes a Country rich, and Imports that
impoverish it. And that all our Bread and Flour, Beef and Pork, Horses, Lumber,
Fur, etc. are not able to keep us out of Debt, I think every Merchant among us
must be fully convinced of, or we should not be so many Hundred Thousands in
Debt to Great Britain as we are. And this is the Reason we are not able to keep
any Money among us: for Silver and Gold imported for our Provisions cannot stay
here, whilst there is so great a Balance against us in England, it not being
made ours, and therefore is no Increase of our Wealth. The only way of keeping
Silver and Gold among us, is by consuming less of Foreign Commodities than what
our own Commodities amount to, for then, whatever the Balance is, it is
certainly our own, and will stay in the Province; but our Provisions, and other
Produce, not being by any Means equal to our vast Imports, our Money must go;
and this is the real and only Cause of the Distress which we labor under. But
I will, with a little Variation, better illustrate this by a Quotation from Mr.
Lock.

Let us suppose Staten Island one Farm, and that the Owner, besides what serves
his Family, carries to New York, Beef, Pork, Corn, Butter, Cheese, and Wool,
all Commodities produced from his Farm, to the Value of One Thousand Pounds a
Year; and for this brings home from New York, in Rum, Sugar, Wine, Cloth, Silk,
Muslin, and Tea, to the Value of Nine Hundred Pounds, and the remaining One
Hundred Pounds in Money, it is evident he grows every Year One Hundred Pounds
richer; but if the Owner be a better Husband, and, contenting himself with his
native Commodities, buys no Rum, Silk, and Muslin, he will bring home Five
Hundred Pounds yearly; and instead, as in the first Instance, of having saved
in Ten Years One Thousand Pounds, he will now in the same Time have saved Five
Thousand.

He dies, and his Son succeeds to the Estate; but being a fashionable
Gentleman, he must have Claret and Madeira; he cannot drink his own Malt
Liquor, but must have it from England; the Linen made of his own Flax is
homespun, he therefore cannot endure it, but supplies himself with that of
Holland and Ireland. He cannot sleep in a Bed with his own Linen, or Stuff
Furniture, but must have that of Chintz, which are more genteel; and nothing
but a China Damask is fit for a Morning-Gown for him to wear. By this Means he
soon spends the ready Money his Father had saved; the Produce of his Farm still
goes to Market, and though it sells for a Thousand Pounds, that will not supply
his luxurious Wants; he brings home Fifteen Hundred Pounds in Rum, Sugar,
Spice, Raisins, Silk, and a great Variety of India Goods; he lives with the
Appearance of Splendour, but grows every Year Five Hundred Pounds poorer; he is
arrested, Judgment and Execution is awarded against him, his Farm is sold, and
his Body shut up in a Prison.

The Conduct of a single Farmer and a Province in this respect differ no more
than greater and less; for it is certain, as in the above Instance, that we may
trade, and be busy, and grow poor by it, unless we regulate our Expenses; but
if the virtuous and provident Way of Living of our Ancestors, who were content
with our native Conveniences of Life, without the costly Itch after the
Materials of Pride and Luxury from Abroad, were brought in Fashion and
Countenance among us, this alone would do more to keep and increase our Wealth,
than all the Helps that Paper-Money can afford us. It is with a Province as
with a Family, spending less than our Commodities will pay for, is the sure and
only Way for us to grow rich; and when that is once seriously considered and
set about, we certainly shall have no need of Paper-Money, our Commodities will
soon bring us a Balance of Gold and Silver. But till this be done our
Misfortunes will not only continue, but increase; for Money that is brought in
among us for our Provisions, can stay by no other Means than by consuming fewer
foreign Commodities; but by spending or consuming more than our Productions can
pay for, brings on Poverty and Ruin.

Foreign Commodities, which by us ought to be looked upon as Luxuries, most
certainly impoverish us, by being brought in; but that is the Fault of our
Importation, and there the Mischief ought to be cured. Vanity and Luxury spend
them, and our Merchants having imported and vended them, our Money must go to
pay for them; but as that alone will not do, our Lands are every Day sold to
make up the Deficiency.

The American, says Mr. Lock, who are rich in Land, are poor in all the
Comforts of Life, whom Nature, having furnished as liberally as any other
People with the Materials of Plenty, a fruitful Soil, apt to produce what ought
to serve for Food, Raiment and Delight, yet for want of Improvement have not
the Conveniences we in England enjoy.

This he said of the Native Indians of America, who had never had the
Opportunity of Knowledge, or the Use of Iron; but that Britons, who have
transplanted themselves thither, and who carried with them Arts and Sciences,
should not be able, in one of the most fertile Countries on the Globe, situated
in the most desirable Climate under Heaven, whose very Forests abound with
Natural Plenty, whose luxuriant Soil refuses not to yield any Fruits that its
Owner demands, and is actually capable of every Production that any Part of the
World is known to afford, and which in a great Measure Experience has
demonstrated; for this we can venture to assert, that whatever has been
introduced, either from Europe, or from under the Tropic, to that Continent,
flourish there: That such a Country, then, should have Recourse to Europe, and
even to some of the most despicable Corners of it, and through them to Asia, in
order to clothe themselves, is such a Conduct of its Inhabitants, that a
Stranger, unacquainted with these Facts, would pronounce it incredible. But
would he not be astonished when he was told, that the Colonies of North America
were near Five Millions (according to the best Calculation) in Debt to Great
Britain, not only for British Goods, but for Silks, Chintz, Callico, Muslin,
Tea, etc. from Asia, and even for Linen from Silesia and Austria, via London,
Hamburgh, and Amsterdam; Hemp, Diaper, and other Linen, through England from
Russia, and even from Archangel, when they have under their Feet a Country
whose natural Fertility surpasses any in the World?

But they prefer ploughing the Ocean, from the Torrid to the Frigid Zone,
rather than their Fields, and to supply a whole Kingdom with Flax-seed, and
afterward involve themselves in Debt to that very People for Linen; a People
oppressed by their Lords for their Lands with extreme heavy Rents, whilst the
American pays no Rent at all; but, notwithstanding this, they rather choose to
be in Debt, and to have their Land taken from them, than make their own Linen.

The Kingdom of Scotland, which is by no means famous for its Fertility, having
found that their Imports greatly exceeded their Exports, and that in
Consequence they grew poor, did so late as 1746 establish at Edinburgh, a
British Linen Company, which in 1766 stamped for Sale Twelve Million Seven
Hundred and Forty Six Thousand Six Hundred and Fifty Nine Yards of Linen of
their own Manufactory; the Value of which was Five Hundred and Seventy Thousand
Two Hundred and Twenty Seven Pounds Sterling. This they export, and which not
only pays for their Foreign Wants, but leaves them a Balance. All this they
have done in Twenty Years, though most of their Flax they buy from Russia, an
Article which we have of our own.

Will not this great Example, as well as the much greater one from Ireland,
animate every Friend of this Province to exert himself in the Deliverance and
Salvation of his Country, by the Establishment of Manufactures, and in Earnest
to set their Faces against the Importation of every Species of Foreign Linen
and Asiatick Goods, as well as against those of any other Country that are
hurtful to us? For Charity begins at Home; nor is it any Service we do
Great Britain, in taking her Luxuries, which we are unable to pay for.

But as to the great Staple of our mother Country, the Woollen Manufacture,
those are useful Goods, and therefore a moderate Importation of them would be
perhaps mutually beneficial, and she alone ought to have a Right to supply us,
until we become wise enough to make our own; for that only can deliver us from
our Distresses, and keep Silver and Gold among us; but Men being brought up to
a Foreign Trade, they think there is no way to Fortune but that, and therefore
to their Country's Ruin have and do import such immense Quantities of Goods,
that they have thereby not only stripped us of every Farthing of our Money, but
have reduced us to the greatest Distress; and though a few of them get rich by
such pernicious Trade, they should remember that it is at the Expense and Ruin
of the Province; for a Merchant may, and often does, get rich by a Trade that
makes his Country poor. As a Proof of it we have only to look round us, to see
some rolling triumphantly in their Coaches on the Profits gotten by a foreign
Trade, out of the Unthinking and Unwary, whose Paternal Estates they have
seized by the Law, and the Bodies of those who have none crowd our Prisons,
which of late Years have been obliged to be enlarged, whilst the Din and Noise
of Prosecutions even tire our Courts of Justice.

All these Evils are derived from no other Cause but that our Imports exceed
our Exports, the Balance of which is the Cause of all our Calamity; for a
Country, says Montesquieu, that constantly exports fewer Commodities than it
receives, will soon find the Balance sinking. It will receive less and less,
till, falling into extreme Poverty, it will receive none at all. But neither
his Opinion, nor that of Mr. Lock, and both confirmed by our own Conviction
that we follow a losing and destructive Trade to Europe, is sufficient to
determine us to set ourselves in Earnest about curing the Evil, and thereby to
prevent the total Ruin of our Country, many of whose unfortunate Inhabitants
are prevailed on to buy the Toys and Trifles of other Countries, which they
soon find themselves unable to pay for by any other Means than the Sale of the
best Estates in the World, their Lands.

I will, said Aurengzebe, make my Kingdom so rich, that there shall be Occasion
neither of Hospitals or Prisons. This indeed was a Resolution becoming a good
and a great Prince, who, though he ruled over Realms burnt up by the Sun, in
great Measure effected it.

Is it not then a Reproach to us, who are not only blessed with the finest
Climate, but the most fertile Soil under Heaven, to have Occasion of either
Hospitals or Prisons, in a Country whose Extension knows no Bounds? But our
Distresses beginning to operate, they point out to us our mistaken Pursuits, we
begin to be alarmed, and, in order to prevent and put a Stop to the Evils that
an imprudent Foreign Trade has involved us in, what is the Remedy that we mean
to apply? I answer, it is a Paper-Currency. This every Man is anxious about,
and solicitous for, because they think it would be a sovereign Remedy for all
their Evils; but in this I beg leave to differ from them, because I think the
Remedy would be worse than the present Disease. My Reasons for thinking so are,
That it carries no intrinsic Value, that it is exposed to Depreciation; but
above all, if it be emitted by Way of Loan, the People, who are so extremely
fond of Trade, will obtain such Paper on the Security of their Lands, which
being set afloat, many of them, either for want of Experience, or Misfortune,
would soon find themselves either without Land or Paper-Currency. Nor have I
ever heard of a Man in Europe parting with a landed Estate in order to turn
Merchant; but, on the contrary, Merchants always have a View to quit that
uncertain Profession, in order to invest their Property in Lands. Emissions
therefore of Paper-Currency appear to me to be the most mistaken and most fatal
Measure that we can possibly take, and which will by no means remedy but
increase our Evils. And in this Opinion I am supported by Mr. Lock, who says,

That a Law cannot give to Bills that intrinsic Value which the universal
Consent of Mankind has given to Silver and Gold, which Writing cannot supply
the Place of, because Bills are liable to unavoidable Doubt, Dispute, and
Counterfeiting, and require other Proof to assure us that they are true and
good Security than our Eyes or a Touchstone; and at best this Course of using
Paper, if practicable, will not hinder us from being poor, but may be suspected
of helping to make us so, by keeping us from feeling our Poverty, which in
Distress will be sure to find us with greater Disadvantages.

This has been fatally experienced in most of the Colonies on the Continent,
and Europe has by no means escaped the Evils of too much Credit given to Paper;
witness the South Sea Stock in England, Anno 1720, where though it was not a
Tender, yet the Kingdom went into that Bubble to such a Degree, that it ruined
near half the Nation; and the Year before, the famous Mr. Laws formed the
Missisippi Company in France, where Billets de Bank, or Bank Notes, were
emitted. The People, who had been told of Mines not inferior to those of
Petosi, swallowed the gilded Bait, and paid in their Silver and Gold to the
Exchequer for Stock or Bank-Notes, but in Nine Months Time they found
themselves stripped of all their Money; in Exchange for which they had Paper,
which depreciated to such a Degree, that, in a few Months, One Hundred Livres
would purchase but Eight Livres in Silver. At present it is not worth a
Farthing.

A precious Metal, therefore, says one of their Countrymen, ought only to
represent the Value of all other Things; and in this all Nations have agreed,
that Silver and Gold shall be the Sign of it, because it is durable, and little
liable to be counterfeited.

But there are many People among us, who, being intoxicated with an Excess of
Trade, say that the Trade of England is extended by the immense Emissions of
Bank-Notes; and therefore, considering them as a Paper-Currency, allege their
Utility. To which I answer, 1st, That they are payable on Sight at the Bank in
Gold or Silver, which for want of Ability is not proposed in the American
Emissions; and, 2dly, Although they are payable at Sight, I am far from thinking
that they are of so great Use as is imagined. My Reason is, that People who are
embarassed, in consequence of their having over-traded themselves, and who are
often on the Brink of Ruin, make promissory Notes, payable to their Friend, a
Man of Credit. This he indorses, the Paper is taken to the Bank, and there
discounted on the Credit of his Friend, whom he thereby plunges in the same
Ruin with himself. Thus the Bank, which is continually discounting at 5 per C.
Annum, and which always takes Care to have a good Indorser: they, therefore, by
this pernicious temporary Succor, are so far from giving Aid to the
Adventurous and Enterprising, that, on the contrary, I think they contribute
greatly to their Ruin.

Paper-Emissions therefore in New York will not only have a similar Effect, but
a much greater; for in England, if a Man possesses an hereditary Estate, and if
he be apt to build Castles in the Air, they in their Fall will only overwhelm
himself; but in his Ruin his Successor cannot be involved, the Estate remains
entire, and goes to the next Heir. But this is not the Case in New York and the
other Colonies; for our Lands, by an Act of Parliament, are considered and put
on the same Footing with Chattels. Thus, for the Mistakes and Transgressions of
the Fathers, the Sons are visited and punished.

This Consideration alone ought to operate on our Minds, and the Minds of the
Legislature, not to wish for an Emission of Paper-Currency, great Part of which
would be invested to gratify a Trade of Luxury at the Expense of the only
intrinsic valuable permanent Wealth in the Universe, our Lands, which will
forever give us both Food and Raiment; and who on Earth has more? This is
really and truly Riches, that will never depart from us; and this Opinion is
confirmed by the ingenious Baron Montesquieu, who says, that is a bad kind of
Riches which depends on Accident, (meaning Trade), and not on the Industry of a
Nation, on the Number of its Inhabitants, and above all on the Cultivation of
its Lands.

Great Britain, since the Reign of Henry the Seventh, has had an increasing
Trade; but whether it has done it any Good or not, I shall neither consider,
nor take upon me to determine. But this I will venture to say, that the
greatest part of the One Hundred and Forty Six Millions National Debt derives
its Origin from Commercial Wars; and the Legislature has long been convinced,
that it is possible to have too much Trade, and therefore have and are
continually making Laws, to prevent the Importation of the Luxuries of Europe.
And in this they are so determined, that the Silks of France, when seized, are
burnt. But the Colonists not having it in their Power to prevent by Law the
Importation of Luxuries, and useless Goods, or to impose any Duty on them, are
therefore in a more particular Manner called on, for their own and their
Country's Good, not to encourage their Importation, and thereby to avoid the
Evils above described, and which not only this Province but the whole Continent
has fatally experienced.

Having thus considered, and, as I think, clearly shown, that from our Imports
infinitely exceeding our Exports is derived all our Calamities, and from which
Paper-Money cannot deliver us; nor can they be removed by any other Means
whatever, but that of establishing Manufactures, and for which we have almost
every Material, such as Flax, Hemp, Leather, Fur, Iron, etc. But
notwithstanding this we are poor, with a Profusion of natural Wealth in our
Possession; our Conduct at present being very similar to that of Great Britain,
in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, when the Wool of England was sent to
Flanders, there manufactured, and the Cloth returned and sold to the English,
whose true Interest was not understood or pursued, till the Persecution in the
Low Countries by the Duke de Alva; in Consequence of which Thousands of
Manufacturers fled to England, where they were received with open Arms; from
which Time Manufactures increased, improved, and drew Wealth from all Parts of
the World. Let us then avoid the former Ignorance of Britain, and adopt her
present Policy, in giving Protection, Countenance, and Encouragement, to
Manufactures (always avoiding such as interfere with those of our Mother
Country,) and to render them cheap, nothing is wanted but Experience and a
thorough Knowledge of them, since the Mechanic of every Denomination, can live
better for half the Money here, than another of the same Profession does in
England, where Beef, Pork, Mutton, Veal, are on an Average Sixpence Sterling a
Pound.

But, notwithstanding this, we are not without some Persons among us, who
assert that we can import Manufactures cheaper than we can make them, and
therefore conclude it to be our Interest to continue such Importation. But, in
order to convince them of their dangerous Mistake, I will suppose a Piece of
Dutch or Irish Linen costs in Europe Forty Shillings, which must be paid either
in our Money or Produce; but if a Piece of equal Quality be our own
Manufacture, and although it should cost more per Yard, it nevertheless is so
much clear Gain to the Province, because the Flax and Labor of which it is
composed are our own, but in the first Case neither one or the other; and this
being equally true in all other Goods, most of which are made by Women and
Children, it is therefore so much clear Gain.

But if we possessed an inhospitable Climate and sterile Soil, which refused us
either the Necessaries or Conveniences of Life, the Arguments of such
Advocates for a Foreign Trade would have some Foundation to stand on; and in
such Case it would be prudent in us to follow the Example of the Dutch, in
becoming the Carriers to other Nations, and with such Gain to procure the
Necessaries that we stand in need of. But as we are blessed with a Country
excelled by none, and equalled but by few, our real intrinsic Wealth therefore
lies in our Soil: Provisions we have enough; we ought therefore to turn our
Attention to the Growth of Flax and Hemp, and they, with our other raw
Materials well-manufactured, will supply all our Wants. But, instead of such
Domestic Trade, which would be attended with Peace, Plenty, Happiness, and
Independance on other Countries; I say, rather than do this, we choose to
ransack almost half the Globe, and often contrary to the Laws, in pursuit of
such Things as we might produce in our own Country. We should not then have
need to fear severe commercial Laws, for our great Trade would be interior.
But, in order the better to illustrate my Meaning, I will suppose you, Sir, to
be a Manufacturer in this Province, by which you have the Pleasure of employing
and giving Bread to Combers, Spinners, Weavers, etc. your Affairs would all be
under your Eye, and in a narrow Compass, which every wise Man would choose. You
would lead a tranquil unembarassed Life, and could not fail of getting rich.

I will now suppose myself a Merchant in New York, with a Warehouse full of
European Goods, which are loaded with Commissions, Freight, Insurance, and many
other Charges; these Goods I sell, and, in order to make Payment, build Sloops
to Trade to the West Indies for Molasses; this I distill, and send the Rum to
Newfoundland, exchange it for Fish, and send that to Spain, in Order from
thence to make Payment to England. Or I send the Rum to Africa, and exchange it
for unhappy Slaves, and send them to the Islands in order to obtain a Bill, to
remit home. It does not require much Sagacity to see that all these Adventures
are full of Anxiety, Risque, and Disasters, my Vessels are exposed to
Huricanes, Fish is a very perishable Commodity, and Slaves often rise on the
Coast, or die in the Passage if any one of these Misfortunes happens, I am
unable to pay my British Creditors. Now, would not any Man who will allow
himself a Moment's Reflection, choose to avoid such a precarious Profession, and
embrace that of a Manufacturer, which would not only be attended with more
Peace and Serenity, and a much greater Probability of Fortune too, but he would
acquire great Honor, as being an Encourager of Arts, and the Author of Plenty?
In short, our Conduct is not unlike that of the Butcher, who run about in
Search of his Knife, when he had it in his Mouth.

To conclude, if from what has been said it appears, that we have in our
Commercial Pursuits been very much mistaken, and if we choose to continue
indulging ourselves with the Luxuries, and expensive Goods of China, India, and
Europe, only because they come from far, and at dear Rates, nothing but
inevitable Ruin will be the Consequence. In order to avoid which we have no
other effectual Means but that of becoming Manufacturers, and more especially
Linen. This alone can reduce our Imports, and increase our Exports, this is the
only effectual Remedy for all the Evils we labor under; and which properly
encouraged will not only prevent the Seizure and Sale of our Estates,
Bankruptcies, and Ruin, but it will restore Liberty, Plenty, and Happiness, to
every Part of this Province, by making it so rich, that we shall have Occasion
neither of Workhouses, Hospitals, or Prisons.


